Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Political history Toggle Political history subsection 1.1 Origins and the early Frankish period 1.2 Merovingian period 1.2.1 Merovingian rise and decline, 481–687 1.2.1.1 Clovis's sons 1.2.1.2 Chlothar 1.2.1.3 Francia split into Neustria, Austrasia, and Burgundy 1.2.1.4 Rule of Chlothar II 1.2.1.5 Dagobert I 1.2.2 Dominance of the mayors of the palace, 687–751 1.2.2.1 Death of Pepin 1.2.2.2 Umayyad invasion 1.3 Carolingian period 1.3.1 Carolingian Empire, 751–840 1.3.2 Divided empire, after 840 2 Social history Toggle Social history subsection 2.1 Law 2.2 Church 2.3 Society 2.4 Currency 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Francia 80 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Rumantsch Русский Seeltersk Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 West-Vlams 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Western European kingdom (c. 481–843) This article is about the geographical and political development of the lands of the Franks. For the Frankish people and society, see Franks . For other uses, see Francia (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with France or Kingdom of France .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( May 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may require copy editing for grammar, style, cohesion, tone, or spelling .

You can assist by editing it .

( July 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Kingdom of the Franks Regnum Francorum ( Latin ) c.

481–843 Expansion of the Frankish Kingdom, 481–870 Religion Catholicism (official) Demonym(s) Frank , Frankish Government Monarchy King • c.

509–511 (first) Clovis I • 840–843 (last) Contested between Lothair I , Louis the German and Charles the Bald [ a ] Historical era Early Middle Ages • Clovis I becomes king of the Salian Franks c.

481 • Clovis I unites all Franks c.

481 • Charlemagne crowned Emperor of the Romans 25 December 800 • Death of Louis the Pious 20 June 840 • Treaty of Verdun 10 August 843 Area 814 (peak) [ 1 ] 1,200,000 km 2 (460,000 sq mi) Currency Denier [ b ] Succeeded by Middle Francia East Francia West Francia The Kingdom of the Franks ( Latin : Regnum Francorum ), also known as the Frankish Kingdom , or just Francia , was the largest post-Roman kingdom in Western Europe . It was established by the Franks , one of the Germanic peoples . Its founder was king Clovis I (481–509), who united Frankish tribes, and expanded the Frankish realm into the Roman Gaul . During the Early Middle Ages , the Kingdom was ruled by the Merovingian and Carolingian dynasties. In 800, it evolved into the Carolingian Empire , thus becoming the longest lasting Germanic kingdom from the era of Great Migrations .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Originally, the core Frankish territories inside the former Western Roman Empire were located close to the Rhine and Meuse rivers in the north, [ 4 ] but Frankish chiefs such as Chlodio would eventually expand their influence within Roman territory as far as the Somme river in the 5th century.

Childeric I , a Salian Frankish king, was one of several military leaders commanding Roman forces of various ethnic affiliations in the northern part of what is now France. His son, Clovis I , succeeded in unifying most of Gaul under his rule in the 6th century by notably conquering Soissons in 486 and Aquitaine in 507 following the collapse of the Western Roman Empire, as well as establishing leadership over all the Frankish kingdoms on or near the Rhine frontier; thus founding what would come to be known as the Merovingian dynasty. The dynasty subsequently gained control over a significant part of what is now western and southern Germany. It was by building upon the basis of these Merovingian deeds that the subsequent Carolingian dynasty— through the nearly continuous campaigns of Pepin of Herstal , his son Charles Martel , grandson Pepin the Short , and great-grandson Charlemagne — secured the greatest expansion of the Frankish state by the early 9th century. Charlemagne also received the Roman imperial crown in 800, thus creating the Frankish-Roman Empire , [ 5 ] which is also referred to as the Carolingian Empire , or just the Frankish Empire ( Latin : Imperium Francorum ).

During the reign of the Merovingian and Carolingian dynasties, the Frankish realm was one large polity , generally subdivided into several smaller kingdoms ruled by different members of the ruling dynasties. Whilst these kingdoms coordinated, they also regularly came into conflict with one another. The old Frankish lands, for example, were initially contained within the kingdom of Austrasia , centred on the Rhine and Meuse , roughly corresponding to later Lower Lotharingia . The bulk of the Gallo-Roman territory to its south and west was called Neustria . The exact borders and number of these subkingdoms varied over time, until a basic split between eastern and western domains became persistent.

After various treaties and conflicts in the late-9th and early-10th centuries, West Francia came under control of the Capetian dynasty , becoming the Kingdom of France , while East Francia and Lotharingia came under the control of the non-Frankish Ottonian dynasty , becoming the Kingdom of Germany (which would conquer Burgundy and Italy to then form the medieval Holy Roman Empire ). Competing French and German nationalisms in later centuries would claim succession from Charlemagne and the original kingdom, but nowadays both have become seen by many as Pan-European symbols.

[ 6 ] Political history [ edit ] The partition of the Frankish kingdom among the four sons of Clovis with Clotilde presiding, Grandes Chroniques de France (Bibliothèque municipale de Toulouse) Origins and the early Frankish period [ edit ] Main article: Franks The term "Franks" emerged in the 3rd century AD as a term for several Germanic tribes who settled on the northern Rhine frontier of the Roman Empire , including the Bructeri , Ampsivarii , Chamavi , Chattuarii and Salians . While all of them had a tradition of participating in the Roman military, the Salians were allowed to settle within the Roman Empire. In 358, having already been living in the civitas of Batavia for some time, Emperor Julian defeated the Chamavi and Salians, [ 7 ] allowing the latter to settle further away from the border, in Toxandria .

[ 8 ] Some of the early Frankish leaders, such as Flavius Bauto and Arbogast , were committed to the cause of the Romans, but other Frankish rulers, such as Mallobaudes , were active on Roman soil for other reasons.

[ clarification needed ] After the fall of Arbogastes, his son Arigius succeeded in establishing a hereditary countship at Trier and after the fall of the usurper Constantine III some Franks supported the usurper Jovinus (411). Jovinus was dead by 413, but the Romans found it increasingly difficult to manage the Franks within their borders.

[ further explanation needed ] The Frankish king Theudemer was executed by the sword, in c. 422.

Around 428, the king Chlodio , whose kingdom may have been in the civitas Tungrorum (with its capital in Tongeren ), launched an attack on Roman territory and extended his realm as far as Camaracum ( Cambrai ) and the Somme river . Though Sidonius Apollinaris relates that Flavius Aetius defeated a wedding party of his people (c. 431), this period marks the beginning of a situation that would endure for many centuries: the Germanic Franks ruled over an increasing number of Gallo-Roman subjects .

[ who?

] The Merovingians , believed by some in the latter half of the 6th century to be relatives of Chlodio as reported by Gregory of Tours (although, he himself did not share this belief), [ 9 ] [ 10 ] arose from within the Gallo-Roman military, with Childeric and his son Clovis being called "King of the Franks" in the Gallo-Roman military, even before having any Frankish territorial kingdom. Once Clovis defeated his Roman competitor for power in northern Gaul, Syagrius , he turned to the kings of the Franks to the north and east, as well as other post-Roman kingdoms already existing in Gaul: Visigoths , Burgundians , and Alemanni .

The original core territory of the Frankish kingdom later came to be known as Austrasia (the "eastern lands"), while the large Romanised Frankish kingdom in the west came to be known as Neustria .

Merovingian period [ edit ] Merovingian rise and decline, 481–687 [ edit ] See also: Merovingian dynasty The political divisions of Gaul at the inception of Clovis 's career (481). Note that only the Burgundian kingdom and the province of Septimania remained unconquered at his death (511).

Chlodio's successors are obscure figures, but what can be certain is that Childeric I , possibly his grandson, ruled a Salian kingdom from Tournai as a foederatus of the Romans. Childeric is chiefly important to history for bequeathing the Franks to his son Clovis , who began an effort to extend his authority over the other Frankish tribes and to expand their territorium south and west into Gaul . Clovis converted to Christianity and put himself on good terms with the powerful Church and with his Gallo-Roman subjects.

In a thirty-year reign (481–511) Clovis defeated Syagrius in the Franco-Roman War and conquered the Kingdom of Soissons , defeated the Alemanni ( Battle of Tolbiac in 496) and established Frankish hegemony over them. Clovis defeated the Visigoths ( Battle of Vouillé in 507) and conquered all of their territory north of the Pyrenees save Septimania , and conquered the Bretons (according to Gregory of Tours ) and made them vassals of the Franks. He also incorporated the various Roman military settlements ( laeti ) scattered over Gaul: the Saxons of Bessin , the Britons and the Alans of Armorica and Loire valley or the Taifals of Poitou to name a few prominent ones. By the end of his life, Clovis ruled all of Gaul save the Gothic province of Septimania and the Burgundian kingdom in the southeast.

The exact date on which Clovis became "king of all Franks" is not known, but it happened sometime after the Battle of Vouillé , which is securely dated to 507.

[ 11 ] One year after this battle, Clovis made Paris his capital, [ 12 ] and in the Christmas Day of the same year he converted to Catholicism , [ 13 ] and some time later he orchestrated the murders of Frankish kings Sigobert and Ragnachar , uniting all Franks under his rule.

[ 14 ] The sole source for this early period is Gregory of Tours , who wrote around the year 590. His chronology for the reigns of the early kings is almost certainly fabricated, often contradicting itself and other sources.

[ 15 ] Clovis' baptism, traditionally dated to 496, is now believed to have taken place in 508.

[ 16 ] [ 15 ] The Merovingians were a hereditary monarchy . The Frankish kings adhered to the practice of partible inheritance : dividing their lands among their sons. Even when multiple Merovingian kings ruled, the kingdom—not unlike the late Roman Empire —was conceived of as a single realm ruled collectively by several kings and the turn of events could result in the reunification of the whole realm under a single king. The Merovingian kings ruled by divine right and their kingship was symbolised daily by their long hair and initially by their acclamation, which was carried out by raising the king on a shield in accordance with the ancient Germanic practice of electing a war-leader at an assembly of the warriors.

Clovis's sons [ edit ] At the death of Clovis, his kingdom was divided territorially by his four adult sons in such a way that each son was granted a comparable portion of fiscal land , which was probably land once part of the Roman fisc, now seized by the Frankish government.

The division of the Frankish kingdom on Clovis 's death (511). The kingdoms were not geographic unities because they were formed in an attempt to create equal-sized fiscs. The discrepancy in size reveals the concentration of Roman fiscal lands.

Clovis's sons made their capitals near the Frankish heartland in northeastern Gaul.

Theuderic I made his capital at Reims , Chlodomer at Orléans , Childebert I at Paris , and Chlothar I at Soissons . During their reigns, the Thuringii (532), Burgundes (534), and Saxons and Frisians (c. 560) were incorporated into the Frankish kingdom. The outlying trans-Rhenish tribes were loosely attached to Frankish sovereignty, and though they could be forced to contribute to Frankish military efforts, in times of weak kings they were uncontrollable and liable to attempt independence. The Romanised Burgundian kingdom, however, was preserved in its territoriality by the Franks and converted into one of their primary divisions, incorporating the central Gallic heartland of Chlodomer's realm with its capital at Orléans.

The fraternal kings showed only intermittent signs of friendship and were often in rivalry. On the early death of Chlodomer, his brother Chlothar had his [ clarification needed ] young sons murdered in order to take a share of his kingdom, which was, in accordance with custom, divided between the surviving brothers. Theuderic died in 534, but his adult son Theudebert I was capable of defending his inheritance, which formed the largest of the Frankish subkingdoms and the kernel of the later kingdom of Austrasia .

Theudebert was the first Frankish king to formally sever his ties to the Roman Emperor in Constantinople by striking gold coins with his own image on them and calling himself magnus rex (great king) because of his supposed suzerainty over peoples as far away as Pannonia . Theudebert interfered in the Gothic War on the side of the Gepids and Lombards against the Ostrogoths , receiving the provinces of Raetia , Noricum , and part of Veneto .

Chlothar [ edit ] His son and successor, Theudebald , was unable to retain them and on his death all of his vast kingdom passed to Chlothar, under whom, with the death of Childebert in 558, the entire Frankish realm was reunited under the rule of one king.

The division of Gaul on Chlothar I 's death (561). Though more geographically unified realms were created out of the second fourfold division, the complex division of Provence created many problems for the rulers of Burgundy and Austrasia .

In 561 Chlothar died and his realm was divided, in a replay of the events of fifty years prior, between his four sons, with the chief cities remaining the same. The eldest son, Charibert I , inherited the kingdom with its capital at Paris and ruled all of western Gaul. The second eldest, Guntram , inherited the old kingdom of the Burgundians, augmented by the lands of central France around the old capital of Orléans, which became his chief city, and most of Provence .

The rest of Provence, the Auvergne , and eastern Aquitaine were assigned to the third son, Sigebert I , who also inherited Austrasia with its chief cities of Reims and Metz . The smallest kingdom was that of Soissons, which went to the youngest son, Chilperic I . The kingdom Chilperic ruled at his death (584) became the nucleus of later Neustria .

This second fourfold division was quickly ruined by fratricidal wars, waged largely over the murder of Galswintha , the wife of Chilperic, allegedly by his mistress (and second wife) Fredegund . Galswintha's sister, the wife of Sigebert, Brunhilda , incited her husband to war and the conflict between the two queens continued to plague relations until the next century. Guntram sought to keep the peace, though he also attempted twice (585 and 589) to conquer Septimania from the Goths, but was defeated both times.

All the surviving brothers benefited at the death of Charibert, but Chilperic was also able to extend his authority during the period of war by bringing the Bretons to heel again. After his death, Guntram had to again force the Bretons to submit. In 587, the Treaty of Andelot — the text of which explicitly refers to the entire Frankish realm as Francia — between Brunhilda and Guntram secured his protection of her young son Childebert II , who had succeeded the assassinated Sigebert (575). Together the territory of Guntram and Childebert was well over thrice as large as the small realm of Chilperic's successor, Chlothar II . During this period Francia took on the tripartite character it was to have throughout the rest of its history, being composed of Neustria, Austrasia, and Burgundy.

Gaul as a result of the Treaty of Andelot (587). The treaty followed the division of Charibert I 's kingdom between the three surviving brothers. It gave Guntram 's portion with Poitou and Touraine to Childebert II in exchange for extensive lands in southern and central Aquitaine .

Francia split into Neustria, Austrasia, and Burgundy [ edit ] When Guntram died in 592, Burgundy went to Childebert in its entirety, but he died in 595. His two sons divided the kingdom, with the elder Theudebert II taking Austrasia plus Childebert's portion of Aquitaine, while his younger brother Theuderic II inherited Burgundy and Guntram's Aquitaine. United, the brothers sought to remove their father's cousin Chlothar II from power and they did succeed in conquering most of his kingdom, reducing him to only a few cities, but they failed to capture him.

In 599 they routed his forces at Dormelles and seized the Dentelin , but they then fell foul of each other and the remainder of their time on the thrones was spent in infighting, often incited by their grandmother Brunhilda, who, angered over her expulsion from Theudebert's court, convinced Theuderic to unseat him and kill him. In 612 he did and the whole realm of his father Childebert was once again ruled by one man. This was short-lived, however, as he died on the eve of preparing an expedition against Chlothar in 613, leaving a young son named Sigebert II .

During their reigns, Theudebert and Theuderic campaigned successfully in Gascony , where they had established the Duchy of Gascony and brought the Basques to submission (602). This original Gascon conquest included lands south of the Pyrenees , namely Biscay and Gipuzkoa , but these were lost to the Visigoths in 612.

On the opposite end of his realm, the Alemanni had defeated Theuderic in a rebellion and the Franks were losing their hold on the trans-Rhenish tribes. In 610 Theudebert had extorted the Duchy of Alsace from Theuderic, beginning a long period of conflict over which kingdom was to have the region of Alsace, Burgundy or Austrasia, which was only terminated in the late seventh century.

During the brief minority of Sigebert II, the office of the Mayor of the Palace , which had for sometime been visible in the kingdoms of the Franks, came to the fore in its internal politics, with a faction of nobles coalescing around the persons of Warnachar II , Rado , and Pepin of Landen , to give the kingdom over to Chlothar in order to remove Brunhilda, the young king's regent, from power. Warnachar was himself already the mayor of the palace of Austrasia, while Rado and Pepin were to find themselves rewarded with mayoral offices after Chlothar's coup succeeded and Brunhilda and the ten-year-old king were killed.

Rule of Chlothar II [ edit ] Immediately after his victory, Chlothar II promulgated the Edict of Paris (614), which has generally been viewed as a concession to the nobility, though this view has come under recent criticism. The Edict primarily sought to guarantee justice and end corruption in government, but it also entrenched the regional differences between the three kingdoms of Francia and probably granted the nobles more control over judicial appointments.

By 623 the Austrasians had begun to clamour for a king of their own, since Chlothar was so often absent from the kingdom and, because of his upbringing and previous rule in the Seine basin, was more or less an outsider there. Chlothar thus granted that his son Dagobert I would be their king and he was duly acclaimed by the Austrasian warriors in the traditional fashion. Nonetheless, though Dagobert exercised true authority in his realm, Chlothar maintained ultimate control over the whole Frankish kingdom.

The Frankish Kingdom of Aquitaine (628). The capital of Aquitaine was Toulouse . It included Gascony and was the basis of the later Duchy of Aquitaine .

During the joint reign of Chlothar and Dagobert, who have been called "the last ruling Merovingians", the Saxons, who had been loosely attached to Francia since the late 550s, rebelled under Berthoald, Duke of Saxony , and were defeated and reincorporated into the kingdom by the joint action of father and son. When Chlothar died in 628, Dagobert, in accordance with his father's wishes, granted a subkingdom to his younger brother Charibert II . This subkingdom, commonly called Aquitaine, was a new creation.

Dagobert I [ edit ] Francia and neighbouring Slavic peoples c. 650 Dagobert, in his dealings with the Saxons, Alemans, and Thuringii, as well as the Slavs beyond the borders of Francia, upon whom he tried to force tribute but who instead defeated him under their king Samo at the Battle of Wogastisburg in 631, made all the far eastern peoples subject to the court of Neustria and not of Austrasia. This, first and foremost, incited the Austrasians to request a king of their own from the royal household.

The subkingdom of Aquitaine corresponded to the southern half of the old Roman province of Aquitania and its capital was at Toulouse . The other cities of his kingdom were Cahors , Agen , Périgueux , Bordeaux , and Saintes ; the duchy of Vasconia was also part of his allotment. Charibert campaigned successfully against the Basques, but after his death they revolted again (632). At the same time the Bretons rose up against Frankish suzerainty. In 635 an army sent by Dagobert subdued the Basques, while threats of military action induced the Breton leader Judicael to relent, make peace with the Franks, and pay tribute.

Meanwhile, Dagobert had Charibert's infant successor Chilperic assassinated and reunited the entire Frankish realm again (632), though he was forced by the strong Austrasian aristocracy to grant his own son Sigebert III to them as a subking in 633. This act was precipitated largely by the Austrasians' desire to be self-governing at a time when Neustrians dominated at the royal court. Chlothar had been the king at Paris for decades before becoming the king at Metz as well and the Merovingian monarchy was ever after him to be a Neustrian monarchy first and foremost.

Indeed, it is in the 640s that "Neustria" first appears in writing, its late appearance relative to "Austrasia" probably due to the fact that Neustrians (who formed the bulk of the authors of the time) called their region simply "Francia".

Burgundia too defined itself in opposition to Neustria at about this time. However, it was the Austrasians, who had been seen as a distinct people within the realm since the time of Gregory of Tours, who were to make the most strident moves for independence.

The young Sigebert was dominated during his minority by the mayor, Grimoald the Elder , who convinced the childless king to adopt his own Merovingian-named son Childebert as his son and heir. After Dagobert's death in 639, the duke of Thuringia , Radulf , rebelled and tried to make himself king. He defeated Sigebert in what was a serious reversal for the ruling dynasty (640).

The king lost the support of many magnates while on campaign and the weakness of the monarchic institutions by that time are evident in his inability to effectively make war without the support of the magnates; in fact, he could not even provide his own bodyguard without the loyal aid of Grimoald and Adalgisel . He is often regarded as the first roi fainéant : "do-nothing king", not insofar as he "did nothing", but insofar as he accomplished little.

Clovis II , Dagobert's successor in Neustria and Burgundy, which were thereafter attached yet ruled separately, was a minor for almost the whole of his reign. He was dominated by his mother Nanthild and the mayor of the Neustrian palace, Erchinoald . Erchinoald's successor, Ebroin , dominated the kingdom for the next fifteen years of near-constant civil war. On his death (656), Sigbert's son was shipped off to Ireland, while Grimoald's son Childebert reigned in Austrasia.

Ebroin eventually reunited the entire Frankish kingdom for Clovis's successor Chlothar III by killing Grimoald and removing Childebert in 661. However, the Austrasians demanded a king of their own again and Chlothar installed his younger brother Childeric II . During Chlothar's reign, the Franks had made an attack on northwestern Italy, but were driven off by Grimoald, King of the Lombards , near Rivoli .

Dominance of the mayors of the palace, 687–751 [ edit ] Gaul at the death of Pepin of Heristal (714). At this time the vast duchy of Aquitaine (yellow) was not a part of the Frankish kingdom.

In 673, Chlothar III died and some Neustrian and Burgundian magnates invited Childeric to become king of the whole realm, but he soon upset some Neustrian magnates and he was assassinated (675).

The reign of Theuderic III was to prove the end of the Merovingian dynasty's power. 
Theuderic III succeeded his brother Chlothar III in Neustria in 673, but Childeric II of Austrasia displaced him soon thereafter—until he died in 675, and Theuderic III retook his throne. When Dagobert II died in 679, Theuderic received Austrasia as well and became king of the whole Frankish realm. Thoroughly Neustrian in outlook, he allied with his mayor Berchar and made war on the Austrasian who had installed Dagobert II , Sigebert III's son, in their kingdom (briefly in opposition to Clovis III ).

In 687 he was defeated by Pepin of Herstal , the Arnulfing mayor of Austrasia and the real power in that kingdom, at the Battle of Tertry and was forced to accept Pepin as sole mayor and dux et princeps Francorum : " Duke and Prince of the Franks ", a title which signifies, to the author of the Liber Historiae Francorum , the beginning of Pepin's "reign". Thereafter the Merovingian monarchs showed only sporadically, in our surviving records, any activities of a non-symbolic and self-willed nature.

During the period of confusion in the 670s and 680s, attempts had been made to re-assert Frankish suzerainty over the Frisians, but to no avail. In 689, however, Pepin launched a campaign of conquest in Western Frisia ( Frisia Citerior ) and defeated the Frisian king Radbod near Dorestad , an important trading centre. All the land between the Scheldt and the Vlie was incorporated into Francia.

Then, circa 690, Pepin attacked central Frisia and took Utrecht . In 695 Pepin could even sponsor the foundation of the Archdiocese of Utrecht and the beginning of the conversion of the Frisians under Willibrord . However, Eastern Frisia ( Frisia Ulterior ) remained outside of Frankish suzerainty.

Having achieved great successes against the Frisians, Pepin turned towards the Alemanni. In 709 he launched a war against Willehari , duke of the Ortenau , probably in an effort to force the succession of the young sons of the deceased Gotfrid on the ducal throne. This outside interference led to another war in 712 and the Alemanni were, for the time being, restored to the Frankish fold.

However, in southern Gaul, which was not under Arnulfing influence, the regions were pulling away from the royal court under leaders such as Savaric of Auxerre , Antenor of Provence , and Odo of Aquitaine . The reigns of Clovis IV and Childebert III from 691 until 711 have all the hallmarks of those of rois fainéants , though Childebert is founding making royal judgements against the interests of his supposed masters, the Arnulfings.

Death of Pepin [ edit ] When Pepin died in 714, however, the Frankish realm plunged into civil war and the dukes of the outlying provinces became de facto independent. Pepin's appointed successor, Theudoald , under his widow, Plectrude , initially opposed an attempt by the king, Dagobert III , to appoint Ragenfrid as mayor of the palace in all the realms, but soon there was a third candidate for the mayoralty of Austrasia in Pepin's illegitimate adult son, Charles Martel .

After the defeat of Plectrude and Theudoald by the king (now Chilperic II ) and Ragenfrid, Charles briefly raised a king of his own, Chlothar IV , in opposition to Chilperic. Finally, at a battle near Soisson , Charles definitively defeated his rivals and forced them into hiding, eventually accepting the king back on the condition that he receive his father's positions (718). There were no more active Merovingian kings after that point and Charles and his Carolingian heirs ruled the Franks.

After 718 Charles Martel embarked on a series of wars intended to strengthen the Franks' hegemony in western Europe. In 718 he defeated the rebellious Saxons, in 719 he overran Western Frisia, in 723 he suppressed the Saxons again, and in 724 he defeated Ragenfrid and the rebellious Neustrians, ending the civil war phase of his rule. In 720, when Chilperic II died, he had appointed Theuderic IV king, but this last was a mere puppet of his. In 724 he forced his choice of Hugbert for the ducal succession upon the Bavarians and forced the Alemanni to assist him in his campaigns in Bavaria (725 and 726), where laws were promulgated in Theuderic's name. In 730 Alemannia had to be subjugated by the sword and its duke, Lantfrid , was killed. In 734 Charles fought against Eastern Frisia and finally subdued it.

Umayyad invasion [ edit ] In the 730s the Umayyad conquerors of Spain , who had also subjugated Septimania , began advancing northwards into central Francia and the Loire valley . It was at this time (circa 736) that Maurontus , the dux of Provence, called in the Umayyads to aid him in resisting the expanding influence of the Carolingians. However, Charles invaded the Rhône Valley with his brother Childebrand and a Lombard army and devastated the region. It was because of the alliance against the Arabs that Charles was unable to support Pope Gregory III against the Lombards.

In 732 or 737—modern scholars have debated over the date—Charles marched against an Arab army between Poitiers and Tours and defeated it in a watershed battle that turned back the tide of the Arab advance north of the Pyrenees . But Charles's real interests lay in the northeast, primarily with the Saxons, from whom he had to extort the tribute which for centuries they had paid to the Merovingians.

Shortly before his death in October 741, Charles divided the realm as if he were king between his two sons by his first wife, marginalising his younger son Grifo , who did receive a small portion (it is unknown exactly what). Though there had been no king since Theuderic's death in 737, Charles's sons Pepin the Younger and Carloman were still only mayors of the palaces. The Carolingians had assumed the regal status and practice, though not the regal title, of the Merovingians. The division of the kingdom gave Austrasia , Alemannia , and Thuringia to Carloman and Neustria, Provence, and Burgundy to Pepin. It is indicative of the de facto autonomy of the duchies of Aquitaine (under Hunoald ) and Bavaria (under Odilo ) that they were not included in the division of the regnum .

After Charles Martel was buried, in the Abbey of Saint-Denis alongside the Merovingian kings, conflict immediately erupted between Pepin and Carloman on one side and Grifo their younger brother on the other. Though Carloman captured and imprisoned Grifo, it may have been enmity between the elder brothers that caused Pepin to release Grifo while Carloman was on a pilgrimage to Rome. Perhaps in an effort to neutralise his brother's ambitions, Carloman initiated the appointment of a new king, Childeric III , drawn from a monastery, in 743. Others have suggested that perhaps the position of the two brothers was weak or challenged, or perhaps there Carloman was merely acting for a loyalist or legitimist party in the kingdom.

In 743 Pepin campaigned against Odilo and forced him to submit to Frankish suzerainty. Carloman also campaigned against the Saxons and the two together defeated a rebellion led by Hunoald at the head of the Basques and another led by Alemanni, in which Liutfrid of Alsatia probably died, either fighting for or against the brothers. In 746, however, the Frankish armies were still, as Carloman was preparing to retire from politics and enter the monastery of Monte Soratte . Pepin's position was further stabilised and the path was laid for his assumption of the crown in 751.

Carolingian period [ edit ] Carolingian Empire, 751–840 [ edit ] The growth of Frankish power, 481–814, showing Francia as it originally was after the crumbling of the Western Roman Empire . It was located northeasterly of that during the time of Constantine the Great .

Frankish expansion from the early kingdom of Clovis I (481) to the divisions of Charlemagne's Empire (843/870) Main articles: Carolingian Empire and Carolingian dynasty Pepin reigned as an elected king. Although such elections happened infrequently, a general rule in Germanic law stated that the king relied on the support of his leading men. These men reserved the right to choose a new "kingworthy" leader out of the ruling clan if they felt that the old one could not lead them in profitable battle. While in later France the kingdom became hereditary, the kings of the later Holy Roman Empire proved unable to abolish the elective tradition and continued as elected rulers until the empire's formal end in 1806.

Pepin solidified his position in 754 by entering into an alliance with Pope Stephen II , who presented the king of the Franks a copy of the forged " Donation of Constantine " at Paris and in a magnificent ceremony at Saint-Denis anointed the king and his family and declared him patricius Romanorum ("protector of the Romans"). The following year Pepin fulfilled his promise to the pope and retrieved the Exarchate of Ravenna , recently fallen to the Lombards , and returned it to the Papacy.

Pepin donated the re-conquered areas around Rome to the Pope, laying the foundation for the Papal States in the " Donation of Pepin " which he laid on the tomb of St Peter. The papacy had good cause to expect that the remade Frankish monarchy would provide a deferential power base ( potestas ) in the creation of a new world order, centred on the Pope.

Upon Pepin's death in 768, his sons, Charles and Carloman , once again divided the kingdom between themselves. However, Carloman withdrew to a monastery and died shortly thereafter, leaving sole rule to his brother, who would later become known as Charlemagne or Charles the Great, a powerful, intelligent, and modestly literate figure who became a legend for the later history of both France and Germany. Charlemagne restored an equal balance between emperor and pope.

From 772 onwards, Charles conquered and eventually defeated the Saxons to incorporate their realm into the Frankish kingdom. This campaign expanded the practice of non-Roman Christian rulers undertaking the conversion of their neighbours by armed force; Frankish Catholic missionaries, along with others from Ireland and Anglo-Saxon England , had entered Saxon lands since the mid-8th century, resulting in increasing conflict with the Saxons, who resisted the missionary efforts and parallel military incursions.

Charles's main Saxon opponent, Widukind , accepted baptism in 785 as part of a peace agreement, but other Saxon leaders continued to fight. Upon his victory in 787 at Verden , Charles ordered the wholesale killing of thousands of pagan Saxon prisoners. After several more uprisings, the Saxons suffered definitive defeat in 804. This expanded the Frankish kingdom eastwards as far as the Elbe river, something the Roman Empire had only attempted once, and at which it failed in the Battle of the Teutoburg Forest (9 AD). In order to more effectively Christianize the Saxons, Charles founded several bishoprics , among them Bremen , Münster , Paderborn , and Osnabrück .

At the same time (773–774), Charles conquered the Lombards and thus included northern Italy in his sphere of influence. He renewed the Vatican donation and the promise to the papacy of continued Frankish protection.

In 788, Tassilo III, Duke of Bavaria rebelled against Charles. Crushing the rebellion incorporated Bavaria into Charles's kingdom. This not only added to the royal fisc , but also drastically reduced the power and influence of the Agilolfings (Tassilo's family), another leading family among the Franks and potential rivals. Until 796, Charles continued to expand the kingdom even farther southeast, into today's Austria and parts of Croatia .

Charles thus created a realm that reached from the Pyrenees in the southwest (actually, including an area in Northern Spain ( Marca Hispanica ) after 795) over almost all of today's France (except Brittany , which the Franks never conquered) eastwards to most of today's Germany, including northern Italy and today's Austria. In the hierarchy of the church, bishops and abbots looked to the patronage of the king's palace, where the sources of patronage and security lay. Charles had fully emerged as the leader of Western Christendom , and his patronage of monastic centres of learning gave rise to the " Carolingian Renaissance " of literate culture. Charles also created a large palace at Aachen, a series of roads, and a canal.

On Christmas Day, 800, Pope Leo III crowned Charles as " Emperor of the Romans " in Rome in a ceremony presented as a surprise (Charlemagne did not wish to be indebted to the bishop of Rome), a further papal move in the series of symbolic gestures that had been defining the mutual roles of papal auctoritas and imperial potestas.

Though Charlemagne preferred the title "Emperor, king of the Franks and Lombards", the ceremony formally acknowledged the ruler of the Franks as the Roman Emperor, triggering disputes with the Byzantine Empire , which had maintained the title since the division of the Roman Empire into East and West. The pope's right to proclaim successors was based on the Donation of Constantine , a forged Roman imperial decree. After an initial protest at the usurpation, the Byzantine Emperor Michael I Rhangabes acknowledged in 812 Charlemagne as co-emperor, according to some. According to others, Michael I reopened negotiations with the Franks in 812 and recognized Charlemagne as basileus (emperor), but not as emperor of the Romans. The coronation gave permanent legitimacy to Carolingian primacy among the Franks. The Ottonians later resurrected this connection in 962.

Upon Charlemagne's death on 28 January 814 in Aachen , he was buried in his own Palace Chapel at Aachen .

Divided empire, after 840 [ edit ] The Carolingian Empire at its greatest extent, with borders displaying the three territorial divisions of 843, from left to right: West Francia or the West Frankish Kingdom: Charles the Bald , King of the West Franks.

Middle Francia or the Middle Frankish Kingdom: Lothair I , King of the Middle Franks, nominally titled Emperor. This kingdom lasted only until 869.

East Francia or the East Frankish Kingdom: Louis the German , King of the East Franks.

Charlemagne had several sons, but only one survived him. This son, Louis the Pious , followed his father as the ruler of a united empire. But sole inheritance remained a matter of chance, rather than intent. When Louis died in 840, the Carolingians adhered to the custom of partible inheritance , and after a brief civil war between the three sons, they made an agreement in 843, the Treaty of Verdun , which divided the empire in three: Louis's eldest surviving son Lothair I became Emperor in name but de facto only the ruler of the Middle Frankish Kingdom , or Middle Francia, known as King of the Central or Middle Franks. His three sons in turn divided this kingdom between them into Lotharingia (centered on Lorraine ), Burgundy , and Lombardy . These areas with different cultures, peoples and traditions would later vanish as separate kingdoms, which would eventually become Belgium , the Netherlands , Luxembourg , Lorraine , Switzerland, Northern Italy and the various departments of France along the Rhône drainage basin and Jura massif .

Louis's second son, Louis the German , became King of the East Frankish Kingdom or East Francia. This area formed the kernel of the later Holy Roman Empire by way of the Kingdom of Germany enlarged with some additional territories from Lothair's Middle Frankish Realm: much of these territories eventually evolved into modern Austria, Switzerland and Germany. For a list of successors, see the List of German monarchs .

His third son Charles the Bald became King of the West Franks, of the West Frankish Kingdom or West Francia. This area, most of today's southern and western France, became the foundation for the later Kingdom of France under the House of Capet . For his successors, see the List of French monarchs .

Subsequently, at the Treaty of Mersen (870) the partitions were recast, to the detriment of Lotharingia. On 12 December 884, Charles the Fat (son of Louis the German ) reunited most of the Carolingian Empire, aside from Burgundy . In late 887, his nephew Arnulf of Carinthia revolted and assumed the title as King of the East Franks. Charles retired and soon died on 13 January 888.

Odo, Count of Paris was chosen to rule in the west, and was crowned the next month. At this point, West Francia was composed of Neustria in the west and in the east by Francia proper, the region between the Meuse and the Seine . The Carolingians were restored ten years later in West Francia, and ruled until 987, when the last Frankish King, Louis V , died.

West Francia was the land under the control of Charles the Bald . It is the precursor of modern France. It was divided into the following great fiefs: Aquitaine , Brittany , Burgundy , Catalonia , Flanders , Gascony , Gothia , Paris & Blois, and Toulouse . After 1180 and Phillip II , the kingdom came to be known as France, because the new ruling dynasty (the Capetians ) were originally Counts of Paris.

Middle Francia was the territory ruled by Lothair I , wedged between East and West Francia. The kingdom, which included the Kingdom of Italy , Burgundy, the Provence , and the west of Austrasia , was an unnatural creation of the Treaty of Verdun, with no historical or ethnic identity. The kingdom was split on the death of Lothair II in 869 into those of Lotharingia , Provence (with Burgundy divided between it and Lotharingia), and north Italy.

East Francia was the land of Louis the German . It was divided into four duchies: Swabia ( Alamannia ), Franconia , Saxony and Bavaria ; to which after the death of Lothair II were added the eastern parts of Lotharingia . This division persisted until 1268, the end of the Hohenstaufen dynasty.

Otto I was crowned on 2 February 962, marking the beginning of the Holy Roman Empire ( translatio imperii ). From the 10th century, East Francia became also known as regnum Teutonicum (" Teutonic kingdom" or " Kingdom of Germany "), a term that became prevalent in Salian times. The title of Holy Roman Emperor was used from that time, beginning with Conrad II .

Social history [ edit ] Law [ edit ] The different Frankish tribes, such as the Salii, Ripuarii , and Chamavi, had different legal traditions, which were only later codified, largely under Charlemagne. The Leges Salica , Ribuaria , and Chamavorum were Carolingian creations, their basis in earlier Frankish reality being difficult for scholars to discern at the present distance. Under Charlemagne codifications were also made of the Saxon law and the Frisian law .

It was also under Frankish hegemony that the other Germanic societies east of the Rhine began to codify their tribal law, in such compilations as the Lex Alamannorum and Lex Baiuvariorum for the Alemanni and Bavarii respectively. Throughout the Frankish kingdoms there continued to be Gallo-Romans subject to Roman law and clergy subject to canon law . After the Frankish conquest of Septimania and Catalonia , those regions which had formerly been under Gothic control continued to utilise the Visigothic law code .

During the early period, Frankish law was preserved by the rachimburgs , officials trained to remember it and pass it on. The Merovingians adopted the capitulary as a tool for the promulgation and preservation of royal ordinances. Its usage was to continue under the Carolingians and even the later Spoletan emperors Guy and Lambert under a programme of renovation regni Francorum ("renewal of the Frankish kingdom").

The last Merovingian capitulary was one of the most significant: the edict of Paris , issued by Chlothar II in 614 in the presence of his magnates, had been likened to a Frankish Magna Carta entrenching the rights of the nobility, but in actuality it sought to remove corruption from the judiciary and protect local and regional interests. Even after the last Merovingian capitulary, kings of the dynasty continued to independently exercise some legal powers. Childebert III even found cases against the powerful Arnulfings and became renowned among the people for his justness. But law in Francia was to experience a renaissance under the Carolingians .

Among the legal reforms adopted by Charlemagne were the codifications of traditional law mentioned above. He also sought to place checks on the power of local and regional judiciaries by the method of appointing missi dominici in pairs to oversee specific regions for short periods of time. Usually missi were selected from outside their respective regions in order to prevent conflicts of interest. A capitulary of 802 gives insight into their duties. They were to execute justice, enforce respect for the royal rights, control the administration of the counts and dukes (then still royal appointees), receive the oath of allegiance, and supervise the clergy.

Church [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Merovingian Gaul and Gregory of Tours Further information: Christianity in the 6th century , Christianity in the 7th century , Christianity in the 8th century , and Christianity in the 9th century The Frankish Church grew out of the Church in Gaul in the Merovingian period, which was given a particularly Germanic development in a number of "Frankish synods" throughout the 6th and 7th centuries, and with the Carolingian Renaissance , the Frankish Church became a substantial influence of the medieval Western Church .

In the 7th century, the territory of the Frankish realm was (re-)Christianized with the help of Irish and Scottish missionaries . The result was the establishment of numerous monasteries, which would become the nucleus of Old High German literacy in the Carolingian Empire .

Columbanus was active in Frankish lands from 590, establishing monasteries until his death at Bobbio in 615. He arrived on the continent with twelve companions and founded Annegray, Luxeuil , and Fontaines in France and Bobbio in Italy. During the 7th century the disciples of Columbanus and other Scottish and Irish missionaries founded several monasteries or Schottenklöster in what are now France, Germany, Belgium, and Switzerland.
The Irish influence in these monasteries is reflected in the adoption of Insular style in book production, visible in 8th-century works such as the Gelasian Sacramentary . The Insular influence on the uncial script of the later Merovingian period eventually gave way to the development of the Carolingian minuscule in the 9th century.

By the end of the 8th century, under the influence of some earlier Visigothic practices, various Church leaders in Frankish Kingdom have developed an erroneous notion that the Filioque clause was an authentic part of the original Creed , and those views were further expanded by the Libri Carolini , thus provocing the Roman popes of that time ( Hadrian I and Leo III ) to intervene against the Filioque interpolation, but with no result, and thus the interpolated Creed became common throughout the Frankish realms.

[ 17 ] Society [ edit ] See also: Slavery in Merovingian Francia Immediately after the fall of Rome and through the Merovingian dynasty, trading towns were re-established in the ruins of ancient cities. These specialised in exchange of goods, craft and agriculture, and were mostly independent of aristocratic control.

[ 18 ] Carolingian Francia saw royal sponsorship for the construction of monastic cities, built to showcase a revival of the architecture of ancient Rome.

[ 19 ] Administration was conducted by bishops. The old Gallo-Roman aristocrats had survived in prestige and as an institution by taking up the episcopal offices, and they were now put in charge of fields such as justice, infrastructure, education and social services. Kings were legitimized by their links with the religious institutions. Episcopal elections became supervised by the kings, and royal confirmation helped to strengthen the bishops' authority as well.

[ 20 ] There were improvements in agriculture, notably the adoption of a new heavy plough and the growing use of the three-field system .

Currency [ edit ] Byzantine coinage was in use in Francia before Theudebert I began minting his own money at the start of his reign. Theudebert's successor restored the Byzantine Emperor's image on the coinage, and the Byzantine emperors continued to be depicted on some Frankish coins until the reign of Emperor Heraclius , before disappearing in 613.

[ 21 ] The solidus and triens were minted in Francia between 534 and 679. The denarius (or denier ) appeared later, in the name of Childeric II and various non-royals around 673–675. A Carolingian denarius replaced the Merovingian one, and the Frisian penning , in Gaul from 755 to the eleventh century.

The denarius subsequently appeared in Italy issued in the name of Carolingian monarchs after 794, [ 22 ] later by so-called "native" kings in the tenth century, and later still by the German Emperors from Otto I (962). Finally, denarii were issued in Rome in the names of pope and emperor from Leo III and Charlemagne onwards to the late tenth century.

[ 23 ] See also [ edit ] Carolingian Empire List of Frankish kings Notes [ edit ] ^ All three were sons of Louis the Pious .

^ After c.673 References [ edit ] ^ Taagepera, Rein (1997).

"Expansion and Contraction Patterns of Large Polities: Context for Russia" .

International Studies Quarterly .

41 (3): 475– 504.

doi : 10.1111/0020-8833.00053 .

JSTOR 2600793 .

^ Griffith, Michael (19 May 2021).

"Carolingian Dynasty" .

World History Encyclopedia . Retrieved 15 December 2023 .

^ Mark, Harrison W. (13 March 2023).

"Merovingian Dynasty" .

World History Encyclopedia . Retrieved 15 December 2023 .

^ Uehlinger, Urs; Haartmut, Arndt; Wantzen, Karl; Leuven, Rob (2009).

"The Rhine River Basin" .

Deutsche National Bibliothek .

^ Watts 2021 , p. 165-166.

^ "The legacy of Charlemagne: how the king of the Franks continues to cast a shadow over Europe" .

History Extra . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ Ammianus Marcellinus Res Gestae (late 4th century), XVII.8 ^ Bijsterveld, Arnoud-Jan A.; Toorians, Lauran (29 June 2018).

"Texandria revisited: In search of a territory lost in time" .

Rural Riches & Royal Rags?: Studies on Medieval and Modern Archaeology, Presented to Frans Theuws . SPA-Uitgevers: 35 – via Academia.edu .

^ Gregory of Tours was apparently skeptical of Childeric's connection to Chlodio, and only says that some say there was such a connection. Concerning Belgica Secunda , which Chlodio had conquered first for the Franks, Bishop Remigius, the leader of the church in the same province, stated in a letter to Childeric's son Clovis that "Great news has reached us that you have taken up the administration of Belgica Secunda . It is no surprise that you have begun to be as your parents ever were." (Epistolae Austriacae, translated by AC Murray, and quoted in Murray's "From Roman to Merovingian Gaul" p. 260). This is normally interpreted to mean that Childeric also had this administration. Both the passage of Gregory and the letter of Remigius note the nobility of Clovis's mother when discussing his connection to this area.

^ Wood 1994 , p. 41.

^ Mathisen, Ralph W.; Shanzer, Danuta (2012).

The Battle of Vouillé, 507 CE: Where France Began . Walter de Gruyter.

ISBN 978-1-61451-099-4 .

^ Boucheron, Patrick; Gerson, Stéphane (2019).

France in the World: A New Global History . Other Press, LLC. pp.

81– 86.

ISBN 978-1-59051-942-4 .

^ Danuta, Shanzer (March 1998).

"Dating the baptism of Clovis: the bishop of Vienne vs the bishop of Tours" .

Early Medieval Europe .

7 (1): 29– 57.

doi : 10.1111/1468-0254.00017 .

S2CID 161819012 .

^ Gregory of Tours , Book II 38-43 .

^ a b Mathisen, Ralph W.; Shanzer, Danuta (2012).

The Battle of Vouillé, 507 CE: Where France Began . Walter de Gruyter. pp.

xiii– xv.

ISBN 978-1-61451-099-4 .

^ Heiks, Heidi (2011).

AD 508 Source Book . TEACH Services, Inc. pp.

xv– xxx.

ISBN 978-1-57258-631-4 .

^ Siecienski 2010 , p. 90-93.

^ Joachim Henning (2007).

Post-Roman Towns, Trade and Settlement in Europe and Byzantium: The heirs of the Roman West . Walter de Gruyter. p. 29.

ISBN 978-3110183566 .

^ Hendrik W. Dey (2015).

The Afterlife of the Roman City . Cambridge University Press. pp.

219– 222.

ISBN 978-1107069183 .

^ Kreiner, Jamie. "About the Bishop: The Episcopal Entourage and the Economy of Government in Post-Roman Gaul.", vol. 86, no. 2, Medieval Academy of America, 2011, pp. 321–60, http://www.jstor.org/stable/41105589 .

^ Herman Fischer (1925). "The belief in the continuity of the Roman Empire among the Franks of the fifth and sixth Centuries".

The Catholic Historical Review .

10 (4): 536– 553.

^ "Charlemagne and the Carolingian coinages" .

Britanica . Retrieved 5 July 2021 .

^ Spufford, Peter (1989) [1988]. "Appendix I".

Money and its use in medieval Europe . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp. 398, 400– 402.

ISBN 978-0-521-30384-2 .

Sources [ edit ] Primary sources Ammianus Marcellinus .

Roman History . trans. by Roger Pearse. London: Bohn, 1862.

Procopius .

History of the Wars . trans. by H. B. Dewing.

Fredegar .

The Fourth Book of the Chronicle of Fredegar with its Continuations . trans. by John Michael Wallace-Hadrill . Connecticut: Greenwood Press, 1960.

Fredegar .

Historia Epitomata . Woodruff, Jane Ellen. PhD Dissertation, University of Nebraska–Lincoln, 1987.

Gregory of Tours .

Historia Francorum .

Gregory of Tours .

The History of the Franks . trans. by Ernest Brehaut . 1916.

Excerpts here Gregory of Tours .

The History of the Franks . 2 vol. trans.

O. M. Dalton . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1967.

Bachrach, Bernard S.

(trans.) Liber Historiae Francorum . 1973.

Scholz, Bernhard W., ed. (1970).

Carolingian Chronicles: Royal Frankish Annals and Nithard's Histories . Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 0-472-06186-0 .

Secondary sources Bachrach, Bernard S.

(1972).

Merovingian Military Organization 481–751 . Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 978-0-8166-5700-1 .

Bowlus, Charles R. (1995).

Franks, Moravians, and Magyars: The Struggle for the Middle Danube, 788-907 . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 978-0-8122-3276-9 .

Collins, Roger.

Early Medieval Europe 300–1000 . London: MacMillan, 1991.

Fouracre, Paul. "The Origins of the Nobility in Francia." Nobles and Nobility in Medieval Europe: Concepts, Origins, Transformations , ed. Anne J. Duggan. Woodbridge: The Boydell Press, 2000.

ISBN 0-85115-769-6 .

Geary, Patrick J.

Before France and Germany: the Creation and Transformation of the Merovingian World.

New York: Oxford University Press, 1988.

ISBN 0-19-504458-4 James, Edward .

The Franks . (Peoples of Europe series) Basil Blackwell, 1988.

ISBN 0-631-17936-4 Lewis, Archibald R. " The Dukes in the Regnum Francorum, A.D. 550–751.

" Speculum , Vol. 51, No 3 (July 1976), pp 381–410.

McKitterick, Rosamond (1983).

The Frankish Kingdoms Under the Carolingians, 751-987 . Harlow: Longman.

ISBN 978-0-582-49005-5 .

McKitterick, Rosamond (2008).

Charlemagne: The Formation of a European Identity . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-139-47285-2 .

Murray, Archibald C. and Goffart, Walter A.

After Rome's Fall: Narrators and Sources of Early Medieval History . 1999.

Nixon, C. E. V. and Rodgers, Barbara.

In Praise of Later Roman Emperors . Berkeley, 1994.

Riché, Pierre (1993).

The Carolingians: A Family Who Forged Europe . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 0-8122-1342-4 .

Reuter, Timothy (2013) [1991].

Germany in the Early Middle Ages c. 800–1056 . London and New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-87239-9 .

Laury Sarti, "Perceiving War and the Military in Early Christian Gaul (ca. 400–700 A.D.)" (= Brill's Series on the Early Middle Ages, 22), Leiden/Boston 2013, ISBN 978-9004-25618-7 .

Schutz, Herbert .

The Germanic Realms in Pre-Carolingian Central Europe, 400–750 . American University Studies, Series IX: History, Vol. 196. New York: Peter Lang, 2000.

Siecienski, Anthony Edward (2010).

The Filioque: History of a Doctrinal Controversy . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-537204-5 .

Wallace-Hadrill, J. M.

The Long-Haired Kings . London: Butler & tanner Ltd, 1962.

Wallace-Hadrill, J. M.

The Barbarian West . London: Hutchinson, 1970.

Watts, Edward J. (2021).

The Eternal Decline and Fall of Rome: The History of a Dangerous Idea . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-007671-9 .

Wood, Ian N.

(1994).

The Merovingian Kingdoms 450-751 . London and New York: Longman.

ISBN 978-1-317-87116-3 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Francia .

Table. Capitals of the Frankish Kingdom according to the years, in 509–800.

v t e Barbarian kingdoms established around the Migration Period Alamannian kingdom Anglo-Saxon kingdoms Burgundian kingdom Frankish kingdom Frisian kingdom Gepid kingdom Hunnic empire Kingdom of Altava Kingdom of Odoacer Kingdom of the Aurès Lombard kingdom Mauro-Roman kingdom Ostrogothic kingdom Rugian kingdom Samo's Empire Sub-Roman Britain Suebian kingdom Vandal kingdom Visigothic kingdom v t e Germanic peoples Ethnolinguistic group of Northern European origin primarily identified as speakers of Germanic languages History Nordic Bronze Age Germania Pre-Roman Iron Age Roman Iron Age Romano-Germanic culture Germanic Iron Age Viking Age Early culture Architecture Art Calendar Clothing Family Festivals Folklore Proto-Germanic folklore Anglo-Saxon mythology Continental Germanic mythology Norse mythology ) Funerary practices Anglo-Saxon Norse Law Anglo-Saxon Norse Literature Anglo-Saxon Norse Names Gothic Numbers Paganism Anglo-Saxon Gothic Norse Rings Scripts Gothic alphabet Runes Sippe Symbology Warfare Anglo-Saxon Gothic and Vandal Viking Languages Germanic parent language Proto-Germanic language East Germanic languages North Germanic languages West Germanic languages Groups Alemanni Brisgavi Bucinobantes Lentienses Raetovari Adrabaecampi Angles Anglo-Saxons Ambrones Ampsivarii Angrivarii Armalausi Auiones Avarpi Baemi Baiuvarii Banochaemae Bastarnae Batavi Belgae Germani cisrhenani Atuatuci Caeroesi Condrusi Eburones Paemani Segni Morini Nervii Bateinoi Betasii Brondings Bructeri Burgundians Buri Cananefates Caritni Casuari Chaedini Chaemae Chamavi Chali Charudes Chasuarii Chattuarii Chatti Chauci Cherusci Cimbri Cobandi Corconti Cugerni Danes Dauciones Dulgubnii Favonae Firaesi Fosi Franks Ripuarian Franks Salian Franks Frisiavones Frisii Gambrivii Geats Gepids Goths Crimean Goths Greuthungi Gutones Ostrogoths Thervingi Thracian Goths Visigoths Gutes Harii Hermunduri Heruli Hilleviones Ingaevones Irminones Istvaeones Jutes Juthungi Lacringi Lemovii Lombards Heaðobards Lugii Diduni Helisii Helveconae Manimi Nahanarvali Marcomanni Marsacii Marsi Mattiaci Nemetes Njars Nuithones Osi Quadi Reudigni Rugii Rugini Saxons Semnones Sicambri Sciri Sitones Suarines Suebi Sunici Swedes Taifals Tencteri Teutons Thelir Thuringii Toxandri Treveri Triboci Tubantes Tulingi Tungri Ubii Usipetes Vagoth Vandals Hasdingi Silingi Vangiones Varisci Victohali Vidivarii Vinoviloth Warini Christianization Gothic Christianity Christianization of the Franks Christianisation of Anglo-Saxon England Christianization of Scandinavia Christianization of Iceland Category v t e Empires Ancient ( colonies ) Akkadian Armenian Urartu Orontid Ancient Assyrian Middle Assyrian Neo-Assyrian Babylonian Old Babylonian Kassite Neo-Babylonian Chinese Qin Han Jin Dʿmt Egyptian Old Kingdom Middle Kingdom New Kingdom Goguryeo Harsha Hellenistic Macedonian Seleucid Ptolemaic Bactrian Indo-Greek Hittite Hunnic White Xiongnu Iranian Median Achaemenid Parthian Sasanian Kush Kushan Magadha Haryanka Shaishunaga Nanda Maurya Shunga Gupta Phoenician Carthaginian Roman Western Eastern Satavahana Neo-Sumerian Xianbei Rouran Post-classical Angevin Aragonese Armenian Bagratid Vaspurakan Artsakh Cilician Zakarid Ayyubid Aztec Benin Bornu Bruneian Bulgarian First Second Burmese First Calakmul Caliphate Rashidun Umayyad Abbasid Fatimid Chalukya Western Eastern Chinese Sui Tang Liao Song Jīn Yuan Chola Ethiopian Aksum Zagwe Solomonic Genoese Georgian Huetar Inca Kannauj Pala Gurjara-Pratihara Rashtrakuta Iranian Tahirid Saffarid Samanid Buyid Japanese Yamato Kamakura Muromachi Edo Kanem Khmer Latin Lithuanian Grand Duchy Commonwealth Majapahit Mali Mongol Yuan Golden Horde Chagatai Khanate Ilkhanate Berber Almoravid Almohad Norwegian North Sea Oyo Polish Kingdom Commonwealth Roman Byzantine Nicaea Thessalonica Trebizond Epirus Morea Romano-Germanic Carolingian Holy Roman Serbian Singhasari Songhai Srivijaya Tibetan Tikal Tiwanaku Toltec Turco-Persian Ghaznavid Great Seljuk Khwarezmian Timurid Turkic First Western Eastern Second Türgesh Uighur Kyrgyz Venetian Vietnamese Dinh Early Le Ly Tran Ho Later Tran Later Le Vijayanagara Wagadou Wari Modern Afghan Ashanti Austro-Hungarian Brazilian Burmese Second Third Central African Chinese Ming Qing China Manchukuo Contemporary Ethiopian Haitian First Second French First Second German German Empire Nazi Germany Indian Indo-Persian Mughal Sikh Iranian Safavid Afsharid Zand Qajar Pahlavi Japanese Korean Maratha Mexican First Second Mongol Oirat Khoshut Dzungar Kalmyk Bogd Moroccan Saadi 'Alawi Polish Russian Tsarist Imperial Contemporary Sokoto Somali Isaaq Warsengeli Ajuran Geledi Swedish Tongan Vietnamese Mạc Revival Lê Tay Sơn Dainam Vietnam Colonial American Austrian attempts Belgian British English Scottish Chinese Danish Dutch French German attempts Italian Venetian Genoese Maltese attempts Japanese Mongol Norwegian Omani Ottoman Polish–Lithuanian Couronian attempts Portuguese Russian Spanish Catalan-Aragonese Basque Swedish Lists Empires largest Ancient great powers Medieval great powers Modern great powers European colonialism African empires Miscellaneous Academic Anti-imperialism Cultural Ecological Green Media Nuclear Liberal Linguistic Social Soviet Theories U.S.

v t e European Middle Ages Early Middle Ages Migration Period Decline of the Western Roman Empire Barbarian kingdoms Late antiquity Decline of Hellenistic religion Christianity in the Middle Ages Christianization Rise of Islam Papal States First Bulgarian Empire Frankish Empire Principality of Serbia Duchy of Croatia Kingdom of Croatia Anglo-Saxon England Viking Age Carolingian Empire Old Church Slavonic Rise of the Venetian Republic Civitas Schinesghe Kievan Rus' Growth of the Eastern Roman Empire Reconquista High Middle Ages Norman Conquest Holy Roman Empire Second Bulgarian Empire Georgian Empire Kingdom of Poland Croatia in personal union with Hungary Kingdom of Serbia Feudalism Rise of the Republic of Genoa Great Schism Investiture Controversy Crusades Republic of Florence Scholasticism Capet–Plantagenet feud Monasticism Communalism Manorialism Medieval Warm Period Mongol invasion of Europe Kingdom of Portugal Late Middle Ages Hundred Years' War Wars of the Roses Hussite Wars Burgundy Milan France England Serbian Empire Castile Western Schism Fall of Constantinople Rise of the Ottoman Empire Swiss mercenaries Chivalry Renaissance Humanism Universities Crisis of the late Middle Ages Great Famine Little Ice Age Culture Agriculture Architecture Art Church and State Cuisine Crusading movement Dance Demography Domes Hastilude Household Hunting In popular culture Itinerant court Literature Medicine Minstrel Music Instruments Philosophy Poetry Science Slavery Technology Theatre Warfare Women Related Medieval anthropology Dark Ages Disability in the Middle Ages Basic topics list Land terms Medievalism Medieval reenactment Medieval studies Misconceptions Neo-medievalism Peasant Wars Post-classical history Timeline Historiography in the Middle Ages Medieval archaeology Portal Category WikiProject v t e European Middle Ages by region Medieval histories of current political units Western and Northern Europe Corsica Denmark England ( Early , High , Late ) France Germany Ireland ( 400–800 , 800–1169 , 1169–1536 ) Italy Scotland ( Early , High , Late ) Spain Sweden Wales ( Early , High , Late ) Central, Eastern Europe and Near East Albania Armenia Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Czech lands Georgia Greece ( Byzantine and Ottoman ) Hungary ( High Medieval Kingdom and Late Medieval Kingdom ) Poland Romania Serbia Anatolia ( Byzantine , Seljuk - Rum and Ottoman ) Medieval territories Western and Northern Europe Frankish Empire Holy Roman Empire ( Kingdom of Bohemia , Kingdom of Italy , Swiss Confederacy ) Papal States Kingdom of Sicily Kingdom of Naples Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Duchy of Burgundy ( Burgundian Netherlands ) Crown of Castile ( Kingdom of Asturias , Kingdom of León , Kingdom of Castile , Kingdom of Galicia ) Crown of Aragon ( Kingdom of Aragon , Principality of Catalonia , Kingdom of Valencia , Kingdom of Majorca ) Kingdom of Navarre Portugal ( County and Kingdom of Portugal ) Kingdom of England Kingdom of Scotland Lordship of Ireland al-Andalus ( Caliphate of Córdoba , Taifa , Almoravids , Almohads , Emirate of Granada ) Hereditary Kingdom of Norway Central, Eastern Europe and Near East Byzantine Empire Bulgarian Empire First Second Croatia ( Dalmatia , Pannonia , Kingdom of Croatia ) Crusader states ( Cyprus , Tripoli , Antioch , Edessa , Jerusalem ) Bosnia and Herzegovina ( Banate of Bosnia , Kingdom of Bosnia ) Ukraine ( Kievan Rus' , Kingdom of Rus' , Principality of Chernigov ) Russia ( Rus' Khaganate , Novgorod Republic , Ryazan , Moscow ) Serbia ( Principality , Grand Principality , Kingdom , Empire , Lordship , Despotate ) v t e History of Europe Prehistory Paleolithic Europe Neolithic Europe Bronze Age Europe Iron Age Europe Classical antiquity Classical Greece Roman Republic Hellenistic period Roman Empire Early Christianity Christianity in late antiquity Crisis of the Third Century Fall of the Western Roman Empire Late antiquity Middle Ages Early Middle Ages Migration Period Christianity in the Middle Ages Christianization Francia Anglo-Saxon England Byzantine Empire Papal States Bulgarian Empire First Second Maritime republics Venice Genoa Pisa Amalfi Viking Age Kievan Rus' Crown of Aragon ( Aragon , Catalonia , Valencia , Majorca ) Holy Roman Empire High Middle Ages Republic of Florence Feudalism Crusades Mongol invasion Serbian Empire Late Middle Ages Black Death Hundred Years' War Kalmar Union Modern period Renaissance Early modern Christianity in the modern era Reformation Age of Discovery Baroque Grand Duchy of Tuscany Thirty Years' War Absolute monarchy Ottoman Empire Portuguese Empire Spanish Empire Early modern France Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth Cossack Hetmanate Swedish Empire Dutch Republic British Empire Habsburg monarchy Russian Empire Age of Enlightenment Great Divergence Industrial Revolution French Revolution Napoleonic Wars Nationalism Revolutions of 1848 World War I Russian Revolution Interwar period World War II Cold War European integration Euro area crisis COVID-19 pandemic Russian invasion of Ukraine See also Art of Europe Bibliography of European history Genetic history of Europe History of Christianity History of the Mediterranean region History of the European Union History of Western civilization Maritime history of Europe Military history of Europe Crusading movement Portals : Europe Middle Ages Monarchy Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Czech Republic Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐k2zwx
Cached time: 20250817043707
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.208 seconds
Real time usage: 1.474 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6803/1000000
Revision size: 67380/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 238963/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12785/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 26/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 167118/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.733/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20635017/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1128.356      1 -total
 28.13%  317.416      1 Template:Infobox_former_country
 18.81%  212.233      2 Template:Reflist
  9.78%  110.347      4 Template:Cite_journal
  9.45%  106.610     17 Template:Cite_book
  9.01%  101.664      8 Template:Navbox
  8.61%   97.167      1 Template:Native_name
  6.65%   75.001      1 Template:ISO_3166_code
  6.41%   72.379      1 Template:Early_Germanic_Kingdoms
  5.75%   64.907      1 Template:Multiple_issues Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:303481:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043707 and revision id 1305581461. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Francia&oldid=1305581461 " Categories : Francia Barbarian kingdoms Former monarchies of Europe States and territories established in the 500s States and territories disestablished in the 840s Former empires Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2016 All articles lacking in-text citations Wikipedia articles needing copy edit from July 2025 All Wikipedia articles needing copy edit Articles with multiple maintenance issues Use dmy dates from August 2020 Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2024 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 22:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Francia 80 languages Add topic

