Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Taxonomy Toggle Taxonomy subsection 1.1 Relationship to spermatophytes 2 Description 3 Other modern adaptations 4 Habitat 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Archaeopteris 19 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar 日本語 Português Русский Simple English Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Extinct genus of Devonian vascular plants This article is about the ancient plant. For the ancient bird-like dinosaur, see Archaeopteryx .

Archaeopteris Temporal range: Late Devonian – Early Carboniferous PreꞒ Ꞓ O S D C P T J K Pg N Archaeopteris hibernica Scientific classification Kingdom: Plantae Clade : Tracheophytes Class: † Progymnospermopsida Order: † Archaeopteridales Family: † Archaeopteridaceae Genus: † Archaeopteris Dawson (1871) Species Archaeopteris fissilis Archaeopteris gaspiensis Archaeopteris halliana Archaeopteris hibernica Archaeopteris macilenta Archaeopteris notosaria Archaeopteris obtusa Archaeopteris sphenophyllifolia Archaeopteris is an extinct genus of progymnosperm tree with fern -like leaves. A useful index fossil , this tree is found in strata dating from the Upper Devonian to Lower Carboniferous ( 382 to 323 million years ago ), the oldest fossils being 385 million years old, [ 1 ] and had global distribution.

Until the 2007 discovery of Wattieza , many scientists considered Archaeopteris to be the earliest known tree. Bearing buds, reinforced branch joints, and branched trunks similar to today's woody plants , it is more reminiscent of modern seed-bearing trees than other spore -bearing taxa . It combines characteristics of woody trees and herbaceous ferns, and belongs to the progymnosperms, a group of extinct plants more closely related to seed plants than to ferns, but unlike seed plants, reproducing using spores like ferns.

A reconstruction of Archaeopteris macilenta from the Late Devonian, Walton Formation of Hancock, New York A polished round of permineralised wood of Callixylon whiteanum from the Late Devonian Woodford Shale of Ada, Oklahoma Taxonomy [ edit ] John William Dawson described the genus in 1871. The name derives from the ancient Greek ἀρχαῖος ( archaīos , "ancient"), and πτέρις ( ptéris , "fern").

Archaeopteris was originally classified as a fern , and it remained classified so for over 100 years. In 1911, Russian paleontologist Mikhail Dimitrievich Zalessky described a new type of petrified wood from the Donets Basin in modern Ukraine . He called the wood Callixylon , though he did not find any structures other than the trunk. The similarity to conifer wood was recognized. It was also noted that ferns of the genus Archaeopteris were often found associated with fossils of Callixylon .

In the 1960s, paleontologist Charles B. Beck was able to demonstrate that the fossil wood known as Callixylon and the leaves known as Archaeopteris were actually part of the same plant.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] It was a plant with a mixture of characteristics not seen in any living plant, a link between true gymnosperms and ferns.

The genus Archaeopteris is placed in the order Archaeopteridales and family Archaeopteridaceae . The name is similar to that of the first known feathered bird, Archaeopteryx , but in this case refers to the fern-like nature of the plant's fronds .

Relationship to spermatophytes [ edit ] Archaeopteris is a member of a group of free-sporing woody plants called the progymnosperms that are interpreted as distant ancestors of the gymnosperms .

Archaeopteris reproduced by releasing spores rather than by producing seeds, but some of the species, such as Archaeopteris halliana were heterosporous , producing two types of spores. This is thought to represent an early step in the evolution of vascular plants towards reproduction by seeds, [ 4 ] which first appeared in the earliest, long-extinct gymnosperm group, the seed ferns ( Pteridospermatophyta ). The conifers or Pinophyta are one of four divisions of extant gymnosperms that arose from the seed ferns during the Carboniferous period.

Description [ edit ] A. halliana A. macilenta A. notosaria The trees of this genus typically grew to 24 m (80 ft) in height [ 5 ] with leafy foliage reminiscent of some conifers. The large fern-like fronds were thickly set with fan-shaped leaflets or pinnae. The trunks of some species exceeded 1.5 m (5 ft) in diameter. The branches were borne in spiral arrangement, and a forked stipule was present at the base of each branch.

[ 5 ] Within a branch, leafy shoots were in opposite arrangement in a single plane. On fertile branches, some of the leaves were replaced by sporangia (spore capsules).

Other modern adaptations [ edit ] Aside from its woody trunk, Archaeopteris possessed other modern adaptations to light interception and perhaps to seasonality as well. The large umbrella of fronds seems to have been quite optimized for light interception at the canopy level. In some species, the pinnules were shaped and oriented to avoid shading one another. There is evidence [ citation needed ] that whole fronds were shed together as single units, perhaps seasonally like modern deciduous foliage or like trees in the cypress family Cupressaceae .

The plant had nodal zones that would have been important sites for the subsequent development of lateral roots and branches. Some branches were latent and adventitious, similar to those produced by living trees that eventually develop into roots. Before this time, shallow, rhizomatous roots had been the norm, but with Archaeopteris , deeper root systems were being developed that could support ever higher growth.

Habitat [ edit ] Evidence indicates that Archaeopteris preferred wet soils , growing close to river systems and in floodplain woodlands. It would have formed a significant part of the canopy vegetation of early forests. Speaking of the first appearance of Archaeopteris on the world-scene, Stephen Scheckler, a professor of biology and geological sciences at Virginia Polytechnic Institute , says, "When [ Archaeopteris ] appears, it very quickly became the dominant tree all over the Earth. On all of the land areas that were habitable, they all had this tree".

[ 6 ] One species, Archaeopteris notosaria , has even been reported from within what was then the Antarctic Circle: leaves and fertile structures were identified from the Waterloo Farm lagerstätte in what is now South Africa.

[ 7 ] Scheckler believes that Archaeopteris had a major role in transforming its environment. "Its litter fed the streams and was a major factor in the evolution of freshwater fishes, whose numbers and varieties exploded in that time, and influenced the evolution of other marine ecosystems. It was the first plant to produce an extensive root system, so had a profound impact on soil chemistry. And once these ecosystem changes happened, they were changed for all time. It was a one-time thing." [ 8 ] Looking roughly like a top-heavy Christmas tree , Archaeopteris may have played a part in the transformation of Earth's climate during the Devonian before becoming extinct within a short period of time at the beginning of the Carboniferous period.

See also [ edit ] Paleontology portal Calamites Glossopteris Lyginopteris References [ edit ] ^ Fossilized Roots Are Revealing the Nature of 385-Million-Year-Old Forests ^ Beck, CB (1960). "The identity of Archaeopteris and Callixylon ".

Brittonia .

12 (4): 351– 368.

Bibcode : 1960Britt..12..351B .

doi : 10.2307/2805124 .

JSTOR 2805124 .

S2CID 27887887 .

^ Beck, CB (1962).

"Reconstruction of Archaeopteris and further consideration of its phylogenetic position" (PDF) .

American Journal of Botany .

49 (4): 373– 382.

doi : 10.2307/2439077 .

hdl : 2027.42/141981 .

JSTOR 2439077 .

^ Bateman, R.M.; W.A. Dimichele (1994).

"Heterospory - the most iterative key innovation in the evolutionary history of the plant kingdom" (PDF) .

Biological Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society .

69 (3): 345– 417.

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-185x.1994.tb01276.x .

S2CID 29709953 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-04-15 . Retrieved 2010-12-30 .

^ a b Beck, C. (1962). "Reconstructions of Archaeopteris , and further consideration of its phylogenetic position".

American Journal of Botany .

49 (4): 373– 382.

doi : 10.1002/j.1537-2197.1962.tb14953.x .

hdl : 2027.42/141981 .

JSTOR 2439077 .

^ Nix, Steve.

"Archaeopteris - The First "True" Tree" .

Forestry.about.com . Archived from the original on 2016-06-16 . Retrieved 2014-10-05 .

^ Anderson, H. M., Hiller, N. and Gess, R. W.(1995). Archaeopteris (Progymnospermopsida) from the Devonian of southern Africa. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 117, 305–320.

^ Virginia Tech, "Earliest Modern Tree Lived 360-345 Million Years Ago," ScienceDaily , 22 April 1999 External links [ edit ] History of Paleozoic Forests: the Early Forests and the Progymnosperms Consequences of Rapid Expansion of Late Devonian Forests, by Stephen E. Scheckler Archived 2012-07-16 at the Wayback Machine Walker, Cyril and David Ward .

Fossils . Smithsonian Handbooks. Dorling Kindersley, Inc. New York, NY (2002).

Mayr, Helmut.

A Guide to Fossils . Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ (1992).

Introduction to the Progymnosperms Davis, Paul and Kenrick, Paul; Fossil Plants . Smithsonian Books (in association with the Natural History Museum of London), Washington, D.C. (2004).

ISBN 1-58834-156-9 v t e Geology of South Africa Geological formations List of fossiliferous stratigraphic units in South Africa Palaeoarchaean Bushveld Igneous Complex Fig Tree Formation Komatii Formation Moodies Group Onverwacht Group Transvaal Supergroup Paleozoic Carboniferous Dwyka Group Ganigobis Formation Waaipoort Formation Devonian Bokkeveld Group Table Mountain Sandstone Waterloo Farm lagerstätte Permian Abrahamskraal Formation Balfour Formation Dwyka Group Ganigobis Formation Teekloof Formation Whitehill Formation Ordovician Soom Shale Mesozoic Cretaceous Uitenhage Group Buffelskloof Formation Enon Formation Kirkwood Formation Sundays River Formation Kalahari Deposits Jurassic Drakensberg Group Enon Formation Uitenhage Group Karoo Supergroup Beaufort Group Abrahamskraal Formation Balfour Formation Katberg Formation Middleton Formation Teekloof Formation Dwyka Group Ecca Group Whitehill Formation Stormberg Group Bushveld Sandstone Clarens Formation Elliot Formation Triassic Elliot Formation Katberg Formation Molteno Formation Normandien Formation Cenozoic Algoa Group ‎Tectonics and orogeny Algoa Basin Cape Fold Belt Ellisras Basin Gondwanide orogeny Kaapvaal Craton Kalahari Craton Makhonjwa Mountains Tectonic evolution of the Barberton greenstone belt Terra Australis Orogen Transvaal Basin Witteberg Witwatersrand Basin Volcanism List of volcanoes in South Africa Pilanesberg Pilanesberg Game Reserve Prince Edward Islands Diatremes Big Hole Finsch diamond mine Jagersfontein Mine Koffiefontein mine Barberton Greenstone Belt Drakensberg Karoo-Ferrar Earthquakes 1620 Robben Island earthquake 1969 Tulbagh earthquake 2006 Mozambique earthquake 2014 Orkney earthquake Impact craters Kalkkop crater Morokweng impact structure Tswaing crater Vredefort impact structure Meteorites Bellsbank meteorite ‎Mineral deposits Kimberlite Merensky Reef Witwatersrand Banket (mining term) Coal in South Africa Iron ore in Africa Platinum in Africa Titanium in Africa Uranium in Africa Minerals Council South Africa Department of Mineral Resources (South Africa) Department of Mineral Resources and Energy Paleontology‎ List of fossiliferous stratigraphic units in South Africa Archean life in the Barberton Greenstone Belt Ordovician Keurbos Notiodella Onychopterella Promissum Soomaspis Devonian Africanaspis Angelacanthus Antarctilamna Bainella Deltacephalaspis Gondwanascorpio Priscomyzon Serenichthys Tutusius Umzantsia Carboniferous Dadoxylon Dwykia Hibbertopterus Lepidodendron Sundayichthys Permian Abdalodon Alopecognathus Anomocephalus Basilodon Bulbasaurus Charassognathus Cistecephaloides Crapartinella Cynosaurus Dicynodontoides Diictodon Dinanomodon Dinogorgon Dwykaselachus Endothiodon Eunotosaurus Galechirus Glanosuchus Glossopteris Hofmeyria Ictidognathus Ictidosuchoides Lepidodendron Lycosuchus Mesosaurus Moschops Odontocyclops Procynosuchus Scylacosaurus Scymnosaurus Simorhinella Stereosternum Theriognathus Thliptosaurus Trochosaurus Youngina Beaufort Group Aelurosaurus Anomocephalus Basilodon Blattoidealestes Brachyprosopus Broomistega Cistecephaloides Choerosaurus Clelandina Colobodectes Compsodon Cryptocynodon Cynariognathus Cynosaurus Diictodon Dinanomodon Eodicynodon Eohyosaurus Emyduranus Euchambersia Homodontosaurus Icticephalus Ictidochampsa Ictidodon Ictidodraco Ictidostoma Lanthanostegus Leontosaurus Lepidodendron Lycideops Macroscelesaurus Moschorhinus Paliguana Pelictosuchus Polycynodon Pristerodon Pristerognathoides Pristerognathus Procolophon Promoschorhynchus Scalopocephalus Silpholestes Tamboeria Uranocentrodon Assemblages Cistecephalus Assemblage Zone Daptocephalus Assemblage Zone Eodicynodon Assemblage Zone Pristerognathus Assemblage Zone Tapinocephalus Assemblage Zone Tropidostoma Assemblage Zone Triassic Batrachosuchus Blikanasaurus Bolotridon Cynognathus Diademodon Dinanomodon Elliotherium Ericiolacerta Erythrosuchus Erythrotherium Eucnemesaurus Euskelosaurus Galesaurus Howesia Ictidosuchoides Kannemeyeria Lepidodendron Lydekkerina Lystrosaurus Melanorosaurus Mesosuchus Microgomphodon Micropholis Myosaurus Noteosuchus Olivierosuchus Orosaurus Pentasaurus Plateosauravus Platycraniellus Procolophon Progalesaurus Prolacerta Proterosuchus Ptychoceratodus Regisaurus Scaloposaurus Scymnosaurus Shansiodon Tetracynodon Thrinaxodon Trirachodon Ufudocyclops Zorillodontops Assemblages Cynognathus Assemblage Zone Lystrosaurus Assemblage Zone Jurassic Aardonyx Abrictosaurus Antetonitrus Arcusaurus Coelophysis Coelophysis rhodesiensis Dracovenator Eocursor Erythrotherium Fabrosaurus Geranosaurus Gigantoscelus Gryponyx Gyposaurus Heterodontosaurus Ledumahadi Lesothosaurus Litargosuchus Lycorhinus Massospondylus Ngwevu Pegomastax Ptychoceratodus Pulanesaura Sefapanosaurus Sphenosuchus Tritheledon Cretaceous Acanthohoplites Algoasaurus Baculites Kangnasaurus Macroscaphites Nqwebasaurus Paranthodon Ptychoceratodus Paleogene Nummulite Neogene Africanacetus Nummulite Pleistocene Boskop Man Homo naledi Panthera shawi Vulpes skinneri Other Cradle of Humankind Planolites Scylacorhinus West Coast Fossil Park Waterloo Farm lagerstätte Research and administration‎ Council for Geoscience Evolutionary Studies Institute Geological Commission of the Cape of Good Hope Geological Society of South Africa Geologists Hans Merensky Paleontologists Andrew Geddes Bain Lieuwe Dirk Boonstra Charles Kimberlin Brain Robert Broom Alfred Brown Anusuya Chinsamy-Turan H. Basil S. Cooke Alfred W. Crompton Daniel Rossouw Kannemeyer Andre Keyser James Kitching John Talbot Robinson George William Stow Eduard Meine van Zinderen-Bakker Regional articles Geology of Cape Town Other Pothole (geology) Steep structure Swazian Geology portal South Africa portal Category Glossary Taxon identifiers Archaeopteris Wikidata : Q134691 Wikispecies : Archaeopteris GBIF : 4891133 IRMNG : 1373332 Open Tree of Life : 4738368 Paleobiology Database : 249678 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Archaeopteris&oldid=1276237305 " Categories : Late Devonian plants Carboniferous plants Late Devonian first appearances Mississippian genus extinctions Fossil taxa described in 1871 Paleozoic life of Alberta Paleozoic life of Nunavut Paleozoic life of Quebec Prehistoric plant genera Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2015 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 17 February 2025, at 18:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Archaeopteris 19 languages Add topic

