Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In republics Toggle In republics subsection 1.1 In ancient Greece and Rome 1.2 During the Medieval Age and the Renaissance 1.3 During the Enlightenment 1.4 In the republican revolutions of the 18th century 1.5 19th to mid-20th century 1.6 In later times 2 Comparable ideas in non-Western societies 3 Related concepts 4 See also 5 Footnotes 6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Civic virtue 9 languages Български Català Español Euskara Français Português Română Русский Simple English Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of moral qualities that promote the common good This article is about the concept. For the sculpture in New York, see Civic Virtue .

Jacques-Louis David 's 1786 painting The Oath of the Horatii , illustrating a dramatic moment from Livy 's history of Rome , embodies 18th-century ideas about civic virtue.

Civic virtue refers to the set of habits , values , and attitudes that promote the general welfare and the effective functioning of a society. Closely linked to the concept of citizenship , civic virtue ( virtus ) represents, therefore, the disposition of citizens to put the common good ( bonum commune ) before special interests. The identification of the character traits that constitute civic virtue has been a major concern of political philosophy . The term civility refers to behavior between persons and groups that conforms to a social mode (that is, in accordance with the civil society ), as itself being a foundation of society and law .

In republics [ edit ] Civic virtues are historically taught as a matter of chief concern in nations under republican forms of government, and societies with cities . When final decisions on public matters are made by a monarch , it is the monarch's virtues which influence those decisions. When a broader class of people become the decision-makers, it is then their virtues which characterize the types of decisions made. This form of decision-making is considered superior in determining what best protects the interests of the majority.

Aristocratic oligarchies may also develop traditions of public lists of virtues they believe appropriate in the governing class, but these virtues differ from the general civic virtues; for example, ruling class virtues stress martial courage over commercial honesty .

Constitutions became important in defining the public virtue of republics and constitutional monarchies. The earliest forms of constitutional development can be seen in late medieval Germany (see Communalism before 1800 ) and in the Dutch and English revolts of the 16th and 17th centuries.

In ancient Greece and Rome [ edit ] Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e See also: Arete (moral virtue) and Virtus (virtue) In the classical culture of Europe and those places that follow its political tradition, concern for civic virtue starts with the oldest republics of which we have extensive records, Athens and Rome . Attempting to define the virtues needed to successfully govern the Athenian polis was a matter of significant concern for Socrates and Plato ; a difference in civic vision ultimately was one of the factors that led to the trial of Socrates and his conflict with the Athenian democracy . The Politics of Aristotle viewed citizenship as consisting, not of political rights , but rather of political duties . Citizens were expected to put their private lives and interests aside and serve the state in accordance with duties defined by law.

Rome, even more than Greece , produced a number of moralistic philosophers such as Cicero , and moralistic historians such as Tacitus , Sallust , Plutarch and Livy . Many of these figures were either personally involved in power struggles that took place in the late Roman Republic , or wrote elegies to liberty which was lost during their transition to the Roman Empire . They tended to blame this loss of liberty on the perceived lack of civic virtue in their contemporaries, contrasting them with idealistic examples of virtue drawn from Roman history, and even non-Roman " barbarians ".

During the Medieval Age and the Renaissance [ edit ] This section may be confusing or unclear to readers .

Please help clarify the section . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( June 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Texts of antiquity became very popular by the Renaissance . Scholars tried to gather as many of them as they could find, especially in monasteries, from Constantinople, and from the Muslim world. Aided by the rediscovery of the virtue ethics and metaphysics of Aristotle by Avicenna and Averroes , Thomas Aquinas fused Aristotle 's cardinal virtues with Christianity in his Summa Theologica (1273).

Humanists wanted to reinstate the ancient ideal of civic virtue through education. Instead of punishing sinners, it was believed that sin could be prevented by raising virtuous children. Living in the city became important for the elite, because people in the city are forced to behave themselves when communicating with others. A problem was that the proletarianization of peasants created an environment in cities where such workers were hard to control. Cities tried to keep the proletarians out or tried to civilize them by forcing them to work in poor houses. Important aspects of civic virtue were: civic conversation (listening to others, trying to reach an agreement, keeping yourself informed so you can have a relevant contribution), civilized behavior (decent clothing, accent, containing feelings and needs), work (people had to make a useful contribution to the society). Religion changed. It became more focused on individual behavior instead of a communion of people. The people who believed in civic virtue belonged to a small majority surrounded by "barbarity". Parental authority was popular, especially the authority of the monarch and the state.

[ 1 ] During the Enlightenment [ edit ] Civic virtue was very popular during the Enlightenment but it had changed dramatically. Parental authority began to wane. Freedom became popular. But people can only be free by containing their emotions in order to keep some space for others. Trying to keep proletarians out or putting them in a poor house was not done anymore. The focus was now on educating. Work was an important virtue during the Middle Ages and the Renaissance, but the people who worked were treated with contempt by the non-working elite. The 18th century brought an end to this. The advancing rich merchants class emphasized the importance of work and contributing to society for all people including the elite. Science was popular. The government and the elites tried to change the world and humanity positively by expanding the bureaucracy. Leading thinkers thought that education and the breach of barriers would liberate everybody from stupidity and oppression. Civic conversations were held in societies and scientific journals.

[ 2 ] In the republican revolutions of the 18th century [ edit ] Civic virtue also became a matter of public interest and discussion during the 18th century, in part because of the American Revolutionary War . An anecdote first published in 1906 has Benjamin Franklin answer a woman who asked him, "Well, Doctor, what have we got – a Republic or a Monarchy?" He responded: "A Republic, if you can keep it." [ 3 ] The current use for this quotation is to bolster with Franklin's authority the opinion that republics require the cultivation of specific political beliefs, interests, and habits among their citizens, and that if those habits are not cultivated, they are in danger of falling back into some sort of authoritarian rule, such as a monarchy.

American historian Gordon S. Wood called it a universal 18th-century assumption that, while no form of government was more beautiful than a republic, monarchies had various advantages: the pomp and circumstances surrounding them cultivated a sense that the rulers were in fact superior to the ruled and entitled to their obedience, and maintained order by their presence. By contrast, in a republic, the rulers were the servants of the public, and there could therefore be no sustained coercion from them. Laws had to be obeyed for the sake of conscience, rather than fear of the ruler's wrath.  In a monarchy, people might be restrained by force to submit their own interest to their government's. In a republic, by contrast, people must be persuaded to submit their own interests to the government, and this voluntary submission constituted the 18th century's notion of civic virtue. In the absence of such persuasion, the authority of the government would collapse, and tyranny or anarchy were imminent.

Authority for this ideal was found once more among the classical, and especially the Roman, political authors and historians. But since the Roman writers wrote during a time when the Roman republican ideal was fading away, its forms but not its spirit or substance being preserved in the Roman Empire, the 18th-century American and French revolutionaries read them with a spirit to determine how the Roman republic failed, and how to avoid repeating that failure. In his Reflections on the Rise and Fall of the Antient Republicks , the English Whig historian Edward Wortley Montagu sought to describe "the principal causes of that degeneracy of manners, which reduc'd those once brave and free people into the most abject slavery." Following this reading of Roman ideals, the American revolutionary Charles Lee envisioned a Spartan , egalitarian society where every man was a soldier and master of his own land, and where people were "instructed from early infancy to deem themselves property of the State.... (and) were ever ready to sacrifice their concerns to her interests." The agrarianism of Thomas Jefferson represents a similar belief system; Jefferson believed that the ideal republic was composed of independent, rural agriculturalists rather than urban tradesmen .

Civic Virtue , 1919 These widely held ideals led American revolutionaries to found institutions such as the Society of the Cincinnati , named after the Roman farmer and dictator Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus , who according to Livy left his farm to lead the army of the Roman republic during a crisis, and voluntarily returned to his plow once the crisis had passed. About Cincinnatus, Livy writes: Operae pretium est audire qui omnia prae diuitiis humana spernunt neque honori magno locum neque uirtuti putant esse, nisi ubi effuse afluant opes ....

(It is worth while for those who disdain all human things for money, and who suppose that there is no room either for great honor or virtue, except where wealth is found, to listen to his story.) — Livy, Ab Urbe Condita , book III.

19th to mid-20th century [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( November 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Civic virtues were especially important during the 19th and 20th century.

[ according to whom?

] Class and profession greatly affected the virtues of the individual, and there was a general division about what the best civic virtues were. Additionally several major ideologies came into being, each with their own ideas about civic virtues.

Conservatism emphasized family values and obedience to the father and the state.

Nationalism carried by masses of people made patriotism an important civic virtue.

Liberalism combined republicanism with a belief in progress and liberalization based on capitalism . Civic virtues focused on individual behavior and responsibility were very important. Many liberals turned into socialists or conservatives in the end of the 19th century and early 20th century.

[ according to whom?

] Others became social liberals, valuing capitalism with a strong government to protect the poor. A focus on agriculture and landed nobility was supplanted by a focus on industry and civil society.

National Socialism , the German variant of twentieth-century fascism whose precepts were laid out in Adolf Hitler 's Mein Kampf , classified inhabitants of the ideal nation into three main hierarchical categories, each of which had different rights and duties in relation to the state: citizens, subjects, and aliens. The first category, citizens, were to possess full civic rights and responsibilities. Citizenship would be conferred only on those males of pure racial stock who had completed military service, and could be revoked at any time by the state. Only women who worked independently or who married a citizen could obtain citizenship for themselves. The second category, subjects, referred to all others who were born within the nation's boundaries who did not fit the racial criteria for citizenship. Subjects would have no voting rights, could not hold any position within the state, and possessed none of the other rights and civic responsibilities conferred on citizens. The final category, aliens, referred to those who were citizens of another state, who also had no rights: The People's State will classify its population in three groups: Citizens, subjects of the State, and aliens.

The principle is that birth within the confines of the State gives only the status of a subject. It does not carry with it the right to fill any position under the State or to participate in political life, such as taking an active or passive part in elections. Another principle is that the race and nationality of every subject of the State will have to be proved. A subject is at any time free to cease being a subject and to become a citizen of that country to which he belongs in virtue of his nationality. The only difference between an alien and a subject of the State is that the former is a citizen of another country.

[...] The citizen has privileges which are not accorded to the alien. He is the master in the Reich. But this high honour has also its obligations. Those who show themselves without personal honour or character, or common criminals, or traitors to the fatherland, can at any time be deprived of the rights of citizenship. Therewith they become merely subjects of the State.

— Adolf Hitler , Mein Kampf Volume II: The National Socialist Movement, Chapter III: Subjects and Citizens In later times [ edit ] The cover of an Eclectic First Reader book.

A number of institutions and organizations promote the idea of civic virtue in the older democracies. Among such organizations are the Boy Scouts of America , and Civil Air Patrol whose U.S.

oath , Cadet Oath and Cadet Honor Code reflect a goal to foster habits aimed at serving a larger community: Boy Scouts of America Scout Oath: On my honor I will do my best To do my duty to God and my country and to obey the Scout Law; To help other people at all times; To keep myself physically strong, mentally awake, and morally straight.

Boy Scouts of America Scout Law: A Scout is Trustworthy, Loyal, Helpful, Friendly, Courteous, Kind, Obedient, Cheerful, Thrifty, Brave, Clean, and Reverent.

Cadet Oath: I pledge that I will serve faithfully in the Civil Air Patrol Cadet Program, and that I will attend meetings regularly, participate actively in unit activities, obey my officers, wear my uniform properly, and advance my education and training rapidly to prepare myself to be of service to my community, state and nation.

Air Force Academy Cadet Honor Code: We will not lie, steal, or cheat, nor tolerate among us anyone who does. Furthermore, I resolve to do my duty and live honorably (so help me God).

Institutions that might be said to encourage civic virtue include the school , particularly with social studies courses, and the prison , namely in its rehabilitative function.

Other, later phenomena associated with the concept of civic virtue include McGuffey's Eclectic Readers , a series of primary school textbooks whose compiler, William Holmes McGuffey , deliberately sought out patriotic and religious sentiments to instill these values in the children who read them.

William Bennett , a Reagan administration cabinet member turned conservative commentator, produced The Book of Virtues: A Treasury of Great Moral Stories in 1993, another anthology of literary materials that might be [ weasel words ] considered an attempt to update McGuffey's concept.

Comparable ideas in non-Western societies [ edit ] Confucianism , which specifies cultural virtues and traditions which all members of society are to observe, in particular the heads of households and those who govern, was the basis of Chinese society for more than 2000 years and is still influential in modern China. Its related concepts can be compared to the Western idea of civic virtue.

Related concepts [ edit ] Friendliness Friendliness is a pro-social set of behaviors seen in people who are pleasant, agreeable, interested in others, genial, empathetic, considerate, and helpful.  Not all civil behaviors are friendly.  For example, duelling in response to an intolerable insult has been considered a civil behavior in many cultures, but it is not a friendly action.

Politeness Politeness focuses on the application of good manners or etiquette .  Because politeness is informed by cultural values, there is substantial overlap between what is polite and what is civil.  However, if the action in question is not related to civic virtues, then it may be polite or rude, without strictly being considered civil or incivil.

Social graces The social graces include deportment , poise , and fashion , which are unrelated to civility.

Incivility Incivility is a general term for social behavior lacking in civic virtue or good manners , on a scale from rudeness or lack of respect for elders, to vandalism and hooliganism , through public drunkenness and threatening behavior.

[ 4 ] The word incivility is derived from the Latin incivilis , meaning "not of a citizen".

[ 5 ] The distinction between plain rudeness, and perceived incivility as threat, will depend on some notion of "civility" as structural to society; incivility as anything more ominous than bad manners is therefore dependent on appeal to notions like its antagonism to the complex concepts of civic virtue or civil society. It has become a contemporary political issue in a number of countries.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Look up civility in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Arete Civic engagement Civic nationalism Civic virtue (organizational citizenship behavior dimension) , specific to organizational behavior theory Civil disobedience Civil religion Classical republicanism Commonwealth men Courtesy " England expects that every man will do his duty " Good citizenship Public good Republicanism Theological virtues Virtus Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Hale, John (1993).

The Civilization of Europe in the Renaissance . London.

ISBN 0002153394 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) [ page needed ] ^ Daniel Roche, La France des Lumières (Paris 1993) [ page needed ] ^ 1593. Benjamin Franklin (1706–90). Respectfully Quoted: A Dictionary of Quotations. 1989 [ page needed ] ^ "Definition of 'Incivility ' " .

AskOxford . Archived from the original on March 30, 2007 . Retrieved 2006-11-25 .

[ page needed ] ^ Soanes, Catherine; Stevenson, Angus, eds. (2005).

The Oxford Dictionary of English (revised ed.). Oxford University Press.

[ page needed ] ^ "Incivility in Political Discourse (The Coming Apogee of the Moonbat Hordes)" .

[InDC Journal] . 2004-10-13. Archived from the original on 2013-01-03 . Retrieved 2006-11-25 .

[ page needed ] Bibliography [ edit ] Hale, John (1993).

The Civilization of Europe in the Renaissance . London.

ISBN 0002153394 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Daniel Roche, La France des Lumières (Paris 1993) Parker, Harold T.

The Cult of Antiquity and the French Revolutionaries (Univ. Chicago, 1937) Wood, Gordon S.

The Creation of the American Republic, 1776–1787 (Univ. North Carolina Press 1969, repr. Horton 1975) ISBN 0-393-00644-1 Peggy Noonan (2008) Patriotic Grace Stephen L. Carter Integrity Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐4j6g9
Cached time: 20250817050642
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.668 seconds
Real time usage: 0.861 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4079/1000000
Revision size: 21659/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 108407/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19124/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 42899/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.443/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14416083/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  740.213      1 -total
 27.48%  203.408      1 Template:Reflist
 16.28%  120.518      1 Template:Republicanism_sidebar
 16.00%  118.411      1 Template:Politics_series_sidebar
 15.75%  116.596      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.58%  107.957      4 Template:Lang
 12.83%   94.978      3 Template:Cite_book
 11.10%   82.143      6 Template:Page_needed
 10.33%   76.482      1 Template:Short_description
  9.69%   71.700      6 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2123148:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817050642 and revision id 1294924108. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Civic_virtue&oldid=1294924108 " Categories : Virtue Social concepts Republicanism Democracy Concepts in political philosophy Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2011 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2024 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Articles needing additional references from November 2008 All articles needing additional references All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from February 2010 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2022 This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 16:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Civic virtue 9 languages Add topic

