Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 In philosophy Toggle In philosophy subsection 2.1 Plato 2.2 Aristotle 2.3 Epicurus 3 Contemporary interpretations Toggle Contemporary interpretations subsection 3.1 In sociology and anthropology (Bourdieu) 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Doxa 21 languages Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Magyar 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For other uses, see Doxa (disambiguation) .

Greek word meaning common belief or popular opinion Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Doxa ( Ancient Greek : δόξα ; from verb δοκεῖν , dokein , 'to appear, to seem, to think, to accept') [ 1 ] is a common belief or popular opinion. In classical rhetoric , doxa is contrasted with episteme ('knowledge').

Etymology [ edit ] The term doxa is an ancient Greek noun ( δόξα ) related to the verb dokein ( δοκεῖν ), meaning 'to appear, to seem, to think, to accept'.

[ 1 ] Between the 3rd and 1st centuries BC, the term picked up an additional meaning when the Septuagint used doxa to translate the Biblical Hebrew word for "glory" ( כבוד , kavod ). This Greek translation of the Hebrew scriptures , as used by the early Church , led to frequent use of the term in the New Testament . The word is also used in the worship services of the Greek Orthodox Church , where the glorification of God in true worship is also seen as true belief. In that context, doxa reflects behavior or practice in worship, and the belief of the whole church rather than personal opinion. The unification of these multiple meanings of doxa emerges in the modern terms orthodoxy [ 2 ] and heterodoxy .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] This semantic merging in the word doxa is also seen in the Russian word slava (слава), which means 'glory', but is used with the meaning of praise or worship in words like pravoslavie (православие), meaning "orthodoxy" (or, literally, "true belief", "true way of worship") related to the verb 'славить' – "to praise" but calqued from the Greek ὀρθοδοξία ( orthodoxia ).

In philosophy [ edit ] Plato [ edit ] In his dialogue Gorgias , Plato presents the sophists as wordsmiths who ensnared and used the malleable doxa of the multitude to their advantage without shame.

[ 5 ] In this and other writings, Plato relegated doxa as being a belief, unrelated to reason, that resided in the unreasoning, lower-parts of the soul.

[ 6 ] This viewpoint extended into the concept of doxasta in Plato's theory of forms , which states that physical objects are manifestations of doxa and are thus not in their true form.

[ 7 ] Plato's framing of doxa as the opponent of knowledge led to the classical opposition of error to truth , which has since become a major concern in Western philosophy . (However, in the Theaetetus and in the Meno , Plato has Socrates suggest that knowledge is orthos doxa for which one can provide a logos , thus initiating the traditional definition of knowledge as " justified true belief .") Thus, error is considered in as pure negative, which can take various forms, among them the form of illusion .

While doxa is used as a tool for the formation of arguments , it is also formed by argument. The former can be understood as told by James A. Herrick in The History and Theory of Rhetoric: An Introduction : [ 8 ] The Sophists in Gorgias hold that rhetoric creates truth that is useful for the moment out of doxa, or the opinions of the people, through the process of argument and counterargument. Socrates will have no part of this sort of 'truth' which, nevertheless, is essential to a democracy.

Importantly noted, democracy , which by definition is the manifestation of public opinion , is dependent upon (and therefore also constrained by) the same limits imposed upon the individuals responsible for its establishment. Due to compromised opinions within a society, as well as opinions not counted for due to inaccessibility and apathy , doxa is not homogeneous , nor is it created agreeably. Rather, it is pliable and imperfect—the outcome of an ongoing power struggle between clashing "truths." Aristotle [ edit ] Aristotle , Plato's student, objected to Plato's theory of doxa. Aristotle perceived that doxa's value was in practicality and common usage, in contrast with Plato's philosophical purity relegating doxa to deception. Further, Aristotle held doxa as the first step in finding knowledge ( episteme ), as doxa had found applications in the physical world, whereby those who held it had a great number of tests done to prove it and thus reason to believe it.

[ 9 ] Aristotle clarifies this by categorizing the accepted truths of the physical world that are passed down from generation to generation as endoxa .

[ 10 ] Endoxa is a more stable belief than doxa , because it has been "tested" in argumentative struggles in the Polis by prior interlocutors. The term endoxa is used in Aristotle's Organon , Topics and Rhetoric .

Aristotle conceives of doxa as a type of hupolêpsis . Knowledge also falls under this category.

[ 11 ] Categorizing doxa , or opinion, with knowledge suggests that doxa is rational.

[ 12 ] Epicurus [ edit ] The Principal Doctrines (Kyriai Doxai) are the main beliefs of the Epicurean school of Hellenistic philosophy, and constitute Epicurean orthodoxy. They are believed to be the authoritative conclusions arrived at by Epicurus, Metrodorus, and their close companions during the early years of the formation of the school, which were compiled into an epitome for the benefit of their disciples.

Contemporary interpretations [ edit ] In sociology and anthropology (Bourdieu) [ edit ] Pierre Bourdieu , in his Outline of a Theory of Practice (1972), used the term doxa to denote a society's taken-for-granted, unquestioned truths.

[ 13 ] In comparison, opinion is the sphere of that which may be openly contested and discussed.

[ 14 ] Bourdieu believes that doxa derives from socialization , as socialization also deals with beliefs that derive from society; as we grow up in the environment, we tend to believe what society tells us is correct. Adding on to his previous example, Bourdieu contends that it is a socially-accepted misconception that if you do not score as high as someone else, then you are obviously not as smart as they are. Scores do not prove that one is smarter, because there are many different factors that play into what you score on a test. People may excel within a certain topic and fail at another. However, even though it is a misconception, people tend to partake in common practices to make themselves feel better. In the case of common beliefs in school, the students who feel inferior due to popular belief that they are not as smart as the students who score higher than they, may use drugs to ease the insecurities they face. Bourdieu believes that doxa is more than common belief: it also has the potential to give rise to common action.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] This calls to attention that the notion of social order as naturally occurring is misperceived, disregarding its creation by political argumentation.

Doxa , then, can be understood as created by argument as well as used in the formation of argument, essential for the establishment of democratic policies.

See also [ edit ] Episteme Common sense Dogma Idola tribus Doxa of Parmenides Public opinion Vox populi Hoi polloi References [ edit ] ^ a b Liddell, Henry George , and Robert Scott . 1940. " δοκέω ." In A Greek-English Lexicon , edited by H. S. Jones and R. McKenzie. Oxford.

Clarendon Press . – via Perseus Project .

^ Harper, Douglas (November 2001).

"orthodox (adj.)" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved 2008-07-01 .

'what is regarded as true or correct [...]' ^ Harper, Douglas (November 2001).

"heterodox (adj.)" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved 2008-07-01 .

'not in accordance with established doctrines' ^ Ware, Kallistos (29 Apr 1993).

The Orthodox Church (new ed.). New York, NY: Penguin Books. pp. 8, 266.

ISBN 978-0-14-014656-1 .

The word 'Orthodoxy' has the double meaning of 'right belief' and 'right glory' (or 'right worship').

^ Plato . [380 B.C.E.].

Gorgias , translated by B. Jowett . – via Internet Classics Archive . Retrieved 2013-02-11.

^ Sorabji, Richard . 1992.

Essays on Aristotle's De Anima , edited by M. C. Nussbaum .

Oxford University Press .

^ Szaif, Jan (2007).

"Doxa and Episteme as Modes of Acquaintance in Republic V" .

Les Études Platoniciennes .

IV (4). Les Belles Lettres: 253– 272.

doi : 10.4000/etudesplatoniciennes.915 .

^ Herrick, James, A. (2005).

The History and Theory of Rhetoric: An Introduction (3rd ed.). Allyn and Bacon.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Doxa" .

Credo Reference . Sage UK. 2005 . Retrieved March 2, 2014 .

^ Eggs, Ekkehard; McElholm, Dermot (2002).

"Doxa in Poetry: A Study of Aristotle's Poetics" (PDF) .

Poetics Today .

23 (3). Duke University Press: 395– 426.

doi : 10.1215/03335372-23-3-395 .

S2CID 170165481 . Retrieved March 1, 2014 .

^ Moss, Jessica; Schwab, Whitney (2019).

"The Birth of Belief" .

Journal of the History of Philosophy .

57 (1): 14.

doi : 10.1353/hph.2019.0000 .

ISSN 1538-4586 .

^ Moss, Jessica; Schwab, Whitney (2019).

"The Birth of Belief" .

Journal of the History of Philosophy .

57 (1): 26.

doi : 10.1353/hph.2019.0000 .

ISSN 1538-4586 .

^ Bourdieu, Pierre . [1972] 1977.

Outline of a Theory of Practice 16, translated by R. Nice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

^ Nielsen, Finn Sivert. " Bourdieu, Pierre (Pierre-Félix) (1930-2002) ." AnthroBase .

^ Bourdieu, Pierre, and Terry Eagleton . 1992. "Doxa and common life." New Left Review . pp. 111–21, 199.

^ Vernon, Phillip E.

1969.

Intelligence and Cultural Environment . London: Methuen . p. 215.

v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Ancient Greek philosophical concepts Adiaphora (indifferent) Aletheia (truth) Apeiron (infinite) Aporia (problem) Arche (first principle) Arete (excellence) Ataraxia (tranquility) Cosmos (order) Diairesis (division) Doxa (opinion) Episteme (knowledge) Ethos (character) Eudaimonia (flourishing) Hesychia (stillness) Logos (reason) Mimesis (imitation) Monad (unit) Nous (intellect) Ousia (substance) Pathos (passion) Phronesis (prudence) Physis (nature) Sophia (wisdom) Sophrosyne (temperance) Sophós (sage) Techne (craft) Telos (goal) Thumos (temper) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Doxa&oldid=1293141187 " Categories : 19th century in philosophy 20th century in philosophy Anthropology Belief Concepts in ancient Greek epistemology Enlightenment philosophy Medieval philosophy Philosophy of science Concepts in political philosophy Scholasticism Philosophical skepticism Theories in ancient Greek philosophy Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text This page was last edited on 30 May 2025, at 23:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Doxa 21 languages Add topic

