Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Psychology experiment 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Liu Xie 12 languages Deutsch Français Galego 한국어 Italiano Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese monk, politician and writer (c.465–522) For the last emperor of Han, see Emperor Xian of Han .

Liu Xie ( Chinese : 劉勰 ; pinyin : Liú Xié , ca. 465–522 [ 1 ] ), courtesy name Yanhe ( 彦和 ), was a Chinese monk, politician, and writer . He was the author of China 's greatest work of literary aesthetics , The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (文心雕龍). His biography is included in the Liangshu .

Life [ edit ] A native of today's Zhenjiang , Liu's traced his ancestry to Shandong .

[ 2 ] He was orphaned in his youth and chose not to marry, either because of poverty or conviction (or both). Liu studied Buddhism with Sengyou and helped edit sutras at the Dinglin Monastery ( 定林寺 ) until his death during the Liang Dynasty .

[ 2 ] It was during his time editing Buddhist scriptures that he wrote his The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons.

[ 2 ] He later became a private secretary to Xiao Hong, brother of the Liang emperor Xiao Yan .

[ 2 ] He also did logistics for a military unit and was later promoted to county magistrate in Taimo (modern day Longyou county, Zhejiang province).

[ 2 ] Eventually, he again worked as a secretary to the emperor's other sons, until he was later sent back to the monastery.

[ 2 ] When the scripture editing project was finished, Liu decided to continue on at the monastery.

[ 2 ] Liu also wrote The Great Enlightenment ( Hong Ming Ji ) and On the World ( Shijie Ji ), both of which are lost.

[ 2 ] He also wrote an essay entitled "Treatise on Refuting Falsehood" ( Mie Huo Lun ).

[ 2 ] Psychology experiment [ edit ] Liu Xie conducted a psychology experiment by asking his subjects to draw a circle on a piece of paper with one hand, while the other hand tried to simultaneously draw a square. This test was to measure the level of distraction that could be managed by his subjects. As Liu observed, his students, who were the subjects of his experiment, struggled to perform both tasks simultaneously. What Liu's experiment had demonstrated was that by doing two experiments at once will mean that neither experiment is done correctly.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ Sun, Cecile Chu-chin (2011).

The Poetics of Repetition in English and Chinese Lyric Poetry .

University of Chicago Press . p. 92.

ISBN 978-0-226-78020-7 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Zhao, Heping (1990).

"Wen Xin Diao Long": An early Chinese rhetoric of written discourse . Purdue University.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Zhang Houcan; Luo Fang (December 2020).

"The Development of Psychological and Educational Measurement in China" .

Chinese/English Journal of Educational Measurement and Evaluation .

1 : 56.

doi : 10.59863/BUAI8988 .

S2CID 235193971 .

Yang, Mingzhao, "Liu Xie" .

Encyclopedia of China (Chinese Literature Edition), 1st ed.

External links [ edit ] Works by Xie Liu at Project Gutenberg Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Korea Poland Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX This article about a Chinese writer or poet is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liu_Xie&oldid=1232493845 " Categories : Chinese spiritual writers Liang dynasty Buddhists Northern and Southern dynasties Buddhist monks Liang dynasty government officials Liang dynasty writers Liu Song writers Politicians from Zhenjiang Southern Qi Buddhists Writers from Zhenjiang Rhetoricians Chinese writer stubs Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles with Project Gutenberg links Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown All stub articles This page was last edited on 4 July 2024, at 00:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liu Xie 12 languages Add topic

