Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Relationship to perennating organ 2 Underground storage organ 3 Other storage organs 4 Notes and references Toggle the table of contents Storage organ 10 languages العربية Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Magyar Polski தமிழ் 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a plant specifically modified for storage of energy or water A storage organ is a part of a plant specifically modified for storage of energy 
(generally in the form of carbohydrates ) or water.

[ 1 ] Storage organs often grow underground, where they are better protected from attack by herbivores . Plants that have an underground storage organ are called geophytes in the Raunkiær plant life-form classification system .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Storage organs often, but not always, act as perennating organs which enable plants to survive adverse conditions (such as cold, excessive heat, lack of light or drought).

Relationship to perennating organ [ edit ] Storage organs may act as perennating organs ('perennating' as in perennial , meaning "through the year", used in the sense of continuing beyond the year and in due course lasting for multiple years). These are used by plants to survive adverse periods in the plant's life-cycle (e.g. caused by cold, excessive heat, lack of light or drought). During these periods, parts of the plant die and then when conditions become favourable again, re-growth occurs from buds in the perennating organs. For example, geophytes growing in woodland under deciduous trees (e.g.

bluebells , trilliums ) die back to underground storage organs during summer when tree leaf cover restricts light and water is less available.

[ citation needed ] However, perennating organs need not be storage organs. After losing their leaves, deciduous trees grow them again from 'resting buds', which are the perennating organs of phanerophytes in the Raunkiær classification , but which do not specifically act as storage organs. Equally, storage organs need not be perennating organs. Many succulents have leaves adapted for water storage, which they retain in adverse conditions.

Underground storage organ [ edit ] In common parlance, underground storage organs may be generically called roots, tubers , or bulbs, but to the botanist there is more specific technical nomenclature : A harvested ginger rhizome True roots : Storage taproot – e.g.

carrot Tuberous root or root tuber – e.g.

Dahlia [ 4 ] Modified stems : Bulb (a short stem that produces fleshy scale leaves or modified leaf bases) – e.g.

Lilium , Narcissus , onion Caudex – e.g.

Adenium (desert-rose) Corm – e.g.

Crocus Pseudobulb – e.g.

Pleione (windowsill orchid) Rhizome – e.g.

Iris pseudacorus (yellow flag iris) Stem tuber – e.g.

Zantedeschia (arum lily), potato Trophopod (the persistent petiole base of several fern genera) [ 5 ] – e.g.

Diplazium , Onoclea sensibilis Others: Storage hypocotyl (the stem of a seedling) – sometimes called a tuber , as in Cyclamen Some of the above, particularly pseudobulbs and caudices, may occur wholly or partially above ground. Intermediates and combinations of the above are also found, making classification difficult. As an example of an intermediate, the tuber of Cyclamen arises from the stem of the seedling, which forms the junction of the roots and stem of the mature plant. In some species (e.g.

Cyclamen coum ) roots come from the bottom of the tuber, suggesting that it is a stem tuber; in others (e.g.

Cyclamen hederifolium ) roots come largely from the top of the tuber, suggesting that it is a root tuber.

[ 6 ] As an example of a combination, juno irises have both bulbs and storage roots.

[ 7 ] Underground storage organs used for food may be generically called root vegetables , although this phrase should not be taken to imply that the class only includes true roots.

Other storage organs [ edit ] Crassula arborescens , a leaf succulent Succulents are plants which are adapted to withstand periods of drought by their ability to store moisture in specialized storage organs.

[ 8 ] Leaf succulents store water in their leaves, which are thus thickened, fleshy and typically covered with a waxy coating or fine hairs to reduce evaporation. They may also contain mucilaginous compounds. Some leaf succulents have leaves which are distributed along the stem in a similar fashion to non-succulent species (e.g.

Crassula , Kalanchoe ); their stems may also be succulent. In others, the leaves are more compact, forming a rosette (e.g.

Echeveria , Aloe ). Pebble-plants or living stones (e.g.

Lithops , Conophytum ) have reduced their leaves to just two, forming a fleshy body, only the top of which may be visible above ground.

Ferocactus pilosus (Mexican lime cactus), a stem succulent Stem succulents are generally either leafless or have leaves which can be quickly shed in the event of drought. Photosynthesis is then taken over by the stems. As with leaf succulents, stems may be covered with a waxy coating or fine hairs to reduce evaporation. The ribbed bodies of cacti may be an adaption to allow shrinkage and expansion with the amount of water stored. Plants of the same general form as cacti are found in other families (e.g.

Euphorbia canariensis (family Euphorbiaceae ), Stapelia (family Apocynaceae )).

Notes and references [ edit ] ^ "the definition of storage organ" .

Dictionary.com . Retrieved 2 September 2016 .

^ The underground storage organ itself is sometimes called a geophyte, but this is not the original usage of the term in the Raunkiær plant life-form classification .

^ Raunkiær, Christen (1934), The life forms of plants and statistical plant geography , trans. Gilbert-Carter, H.; Fausbøll, A. & Tansley, A.G., Oxford: Clarendon Press, OCLC 4300750 ; reprinted (1977) in History of ecology series, New York: Arno Press, ISBN 978-0-405-10418-3 ^ Examples mainly taken from Rix, M. (1983), Growing bulbs , Beckenham, Kent: Croom Helm, ISBN 978-0-7099-2248-3 , pp. 5–12 ^ Johnson, David M. (January–March 1986).

"Trophopods in North American Species of Athyrium (Aspleniaceae)" .

Systematic Botany .

12 (1). American Society of Plant Taxonomists: 26– 31.

Bibcode : 1986SysBo..11...26J .

doi : 10.2307/2418941 .

JSTOR 2418941 . Retrieved 31 March 2022 .

^ Grey-Wilson, C. (1988), The Genus Cyclamen , Bromley, UK: Christopher Helm , ISBN 978-0-7470-1221-4 ^ Köhlein, Fritz (1987), Iris , translated by M.C. Peters from German original published in 1981, London: Christopher Helm, ISBN 978-0-7470-1803-2 , pp. 257ff.

^ Information in this section taken from Innes, Clive & Wall, Bill (1995), Cacti, Succulents and Bromeliads , London: Cassell Educational (for Royal Horticultural Society), ISBN 978-0-304-32076-9 , pp. 75–6 v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Storage_organ&oldid=1292294561 " Categories : Plant morphology Energy storage Biology terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2010 This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 06:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Storage organ 10 languages Add topic

