Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 Sources 5 External links Toggle the table of contents San Antonio Express-News 7 languages العربية Español Français Italiano Português Русский Simple English Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American newspaper, founded 1865 San Antonio Express-News The January 18, 2012, front page of the San Antonio Express-News Type Daily newspaper Format Broadsheet Owner(s) Hearst Communications Publisher Mark Medici Editor Marc Duvoisin [ 1 ] Founded 1865 Language English Headquarters Avenue E and Third Street San Antonio, Texas 78205 United States Circulation 58,624 (as of 2023) [ 2 ] ISSN 2690-7143 OCLC number 61312326 Website expressnews.com The San Antonio Express-News is a daily newspaper in San Antonio, Texas , founded in 1865. It is owned by the Hearst Corporation and has offices in San Antonio and Austin, Texas . The Express-News is the third largest newspaper in the state of Texas, with a daily circulation of nearly 100,000 copies in 2016.

[ 3 ] The newspaper's online presence can be found at Expressnews.com .

[ 4 ] Hearst also owns MYSanAntonio.com , which shares office space with the Express-News but maintains a separate newsroom and website.

[ 5 ] MYSanAntonio.com, or MySA , is editorially independent of ExpressNews.com.

[ 6 ] From 1881, the San Antonio Express-News' main competitor was the San Antonio Evening Light , which became a Hearst publication in 1924 and was shut down, in 1993, when Hearst bought the Express-News .

History [ edit ] The paper was first published in 1865 as a weekly tabloid-style newspaper under the name San Antonio Express . At that time, the city had already had a number of other newspapers in a number of different languages. However, all the other publications went out of business, leaving only the Express to serve the city.

[ citation needed ] In December 1866, the Express made the move from a weekly paper to a daily newspaper, and expanded into a full newspaper by the early 1870s. The early days of the Express was marked by several leadership changes which almost doomed the paper, until a brand new company, the Express Printing Company, took control in 1875. The Express eventually became a daily morning newspaper in 1878.

[ citation needed ] In January 1881, a new rival newspaper, the Evening Light , was first published by A. W. Gifford and J. P. Newcomb , who had been an early investor in the Express .

[ 7 ] The Evening Light was published as an afternoon paper, as opposed to the morning Express . At first, the editors of the Express chose to ignore the upstart paper, but the Light soon grew in popularity at the turn of the 20th century. In 1906 the Daily Light was sold to E. B. Chandler, and in 1909 the Daily Light Publishing Company bought the San Antonio Gazette . From then until 1911 the paper was referred to as the Light and Gazette . Edward S. O'Reilly, known as Tex, was at one time managing editor. In 1911 Harrison L. Beach and Charles S. Diehl, veteran correspondents of national standing, moved to San Antonio and bought the Light and Gazette . Once again it was known as the Light . Diehl was a founder of the AP wire service. Beach and Diehl installed leased wire news service and published the first full stock market reports in a San Antonio paper. The Light became liberal-Democratic in its political views. While Beach and Diehl ran the paper, circulation increased from 11,000 to 25,000 copies daily. In 1918, the Express ownership, now renamed Express Publishing Company, launched its own afternoon paper, the San Antonio Evening News . Soon thereafter, a rivalry developed between workers of the Express and the News . In fact, some News workers dubbed a new office building as the News-Express building. In 1924, however, William Randolph Hearst bought the Light and instituted Hearst policies, and by 1945 the circulation was approximately 70,000.

[ citation needed ] The 1920s was marked by expansion by Express Publishing as the company started one of the city's first radio stations, WOAI , in 1922. As the two rival publishers entered the 1950s, the Express and the News both had higher readership numbers than the Light . However, the Light skyrocketed to the top of the market when it acquired a number of popular comic strips, like Dick Tracy . The Express Publishing Company diversified further, acquiring two more radio stations and a television station, which they renamed KENS-TV . Those call letters were intended to stand for, K-Express News Station. In the 1960s, Express Publishing was sold to the Harte-Hanks newspaper group.

[ citation needed ] In 1973, with the Light beating both the Express and the News in circulation numbers, a new ownership group emerged. Australian native Rupert Murdoch of News Corp bought the Express and the News from Harte-Hanks. Murdoch re-formatted the News as a more tabloid-styled paper, while the Express retained its original, conservative format. The Light was now forced to compete against two different styles of newspaper while at the same time trying to combat the growing costs of an afternoon circulation.

[ citation needed ] By September 1984, the Express and the News merged into the San Antonio Express-News and afternoon service was slowly discontinued, while the Light started getting into the morning circulation business in order to keep up. But under News Corp.

, the Express-News adopted a more mainstream format and expanded its services to communities outside Bexar County . As a result, the Express-News became San Antonio's leading newspaper for good. By 1992, News Corp had diversified into movies and television and was looking to sell the Express-News . The Hearst Corporation, which still owned the Light , agreed to either sell or close the newspaper and acquire the Express-News in order to keep its stake in the San Antonio market. The Light never found a buyer and it went out of business in January 1993.

[ citation needed ] In 2019, the Express-News sold its downtown headquarters building. The planned move to another downtown property was delayed as the COVID-19 pandemic led to the staff working remotely. In 2022, the paper relocated to the top two floors of the Light Building, which is named after its former tenant and Hearst property, The San Antonio Light. Following this move, employees began transitioning back to in-person work, and the news organization now operates under a hybrid model.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Dan Cook List of newspapers in Texas Portals : Texas Companies References [ edit ] ^ Danner, Patrick (June 11, 2018).

"Duvoisin, a former Los Angeles Times top editor, named Express-News editor" .

San Antonio Express-News .

^ "2023 Texas Newspaper Directory" .

Texas Press Association . Archived from the original on May 3, 2023 . Retrieved May 3, 2023 .

^ "Top 10 Texas Daily Newspapers" .

Cision . August 3, 2016 . Retrieved January 9, 2018 .

^ "San Antonio Express-News" .

Hearst Corporation .

^ "San Antonio Express-News" .

Hearst Corporation . Hearst Communications . Retrieved October 3, 2023 .

^ "MySA" .

Hearst Corporation . Hearst Communications . Retrieved October 3, 2023 .

^ Handbook of Texas Online , James Pearson Newcomb ^ Fu, Angela (June 16, 2022).

" 'Back in the cockpit': The San Antonio Express-News moves into its new newsroom" .

Poynter . Retrieved June 17, 2022 .

Sources [ edit ] Donecker, Frances.

"San Antonio Light" .

Handbook of Texas .

Texas State Historical Association . Retrieved April 26, 2025 .

External links [ edit ] "San Antonio Express-News" .

"MySA" .

"Getting it down in black and white: A history of the E-N" .

Hearst subsidiary profile of the San Antonio Express-News San Antonio Light: About the Collection The Portal to Texas History University of North Texas v t e Hearst Communications Daily newspapers The Advocate Austin American-Statesman Times Union Beaumont Enterprise Chron.com Connecticut Post The Courier (Conroe, Texas) Edwardsville Intelligencer Greenwich Time The Hour Houston Chronicle Huron Daily Tribune Journal-Courier Laredo Morning Times Manistee News Advocate The Middletown Press Midland Daily News Midland Reporter-Telegram New Haven Register The News-Times MySA.com The Pioneer Plainview Herald Record-Journal The Register Citizen San Antonio Express-News San Francisco Chronicle seattlepi.com SFGate The Telegraph Connecticut Magazine Weekly newspapers The Bastrop Advertiser Benzie County Record Patriot The Berlin Citizen Canyon News Cleveland Advocate Eastex Advocate Examiner Newspapers (Bellaire, Memorial, River Oaks, West University) La Voz de Houston The Lake Houston Observer New Canaan Advertiser Pasadena Citizen The Potpourri (Magnolia and Tomball) Shoreline Times Sugar Land Sun The Villager (The Woodlands, Texas) Magazines United States Autoweek Best Products Bicycling Car and Driver Cosmopolitan Country Living Delish Elle Elle Decor Esquire Food Network Magazine Good Housekeeping Harper's Bazaar House Beautiful HGTV Men's Health Oprah Daily Popular Mechanics Prevention Redbook Road & Track Runner's World Seventeen Shondaland The Pioneer Woman Town & Country Woman's Day Women's Health Motor Trend Group Hot Rod Motor Trend International Bicycling Car and Driver Cosmopolitan Country Living Delish Elle Elle Decor Esquire Good Housekeeping Harper's Bazaar House Beautiful Men's Health Prevention Runner's World Women's Health United Kingdom Best Digital Spy Inside Soap Prima RED Italy Gente Marie Claire Marie Claire Maison The Netherlands JAN Quest Quest Junior Quote Spain Fotogramas Japan 25Ans 25Ans Wedding ELLE Girl Fujingaho Hodinkee Men's Club Modern Living Richesse Hearst Television ABC KETV KHBS KHOG KMBC-TV KOAT-TV KOCO-TV KSBW .2 WAPT WCVB-TV WMUR-TV WISN-TV WJCL WMTW WPBF WTAE-TV WZVN-TV ** CBS KCCI WLKY Independent WMOR-TV MyNetworkTV KQCA NBC KCRA-TV KSBW WBAL-TV WBBH-TV WDSU WESH WGAL WLWT WPTZ WVTM-TV WXII-TV WYFF The CW KCWE KHBS .2 KHOG .2 KQCA WCWG WKCF WNNE WPXT Radio WBAL WIYY Entertainment A&E Networks (50%) ESPN Inc.

(20%) Hearst Media Production Group King Features Syndicate NorthSouth Productions (50%) Reed Brennan Media Associates Business Black Book First Databank Fitch Group BMI Research Motor Marketplaces Bring a Trailer First Finds Men's Health Shop Oprah Daily Shop Real estate CDS Global Hearst Tower Hearst Service Center Hearst Ranch ** Owned by a third party and operated by Hearst Television.

v t e City of San Antonio Nickname: Alamo City Topics Architecture Culture History Neighborhoods Metropolitan Area San Antonio River ( Springs ) Attractions The Alamo Alamo Cenotaph Acequia Madre de Valero La Antorcha de la Amistad Basilica of the National Shrine of the Little Flower Cathedral of San Fernando Convention Center Earl Abel's Guenther House HemisFair '68 Houston Street La Villita Market Square Rivercenter River Walk St. Joseph Catholic Church Tower of the Americas Tower Life Building San Antonio Zoo Museums Artpace Blue Star Contemporary Art Museum Buckhorn Saloon & Museum Casa Navarro State Historic Site Guadalupe Cultural Arts Center Institute of Texan Cultures McNay Art Museum Museo Alameda Museum of Aerospace Medicine O. Henry House Museum Ruby City San Antonio Museum of Art Spanish Governor's Palace Edward Steves Homestead Texas Air Museum Texas Transportation Museum United States Army Medical Department Museum USAF Airman Heritage Museum Witte Museum Yturri-Edmunds Historic Site See also: List of museums in Central Texas Entertainment Alamo City Comic Con Arneson River Theater Aztec on the River Charline McCombs Empire Theatre Fiesta Noche del Rio Fiesta San Antonio Freeman Coliseum Majestic Theatre Morgan's Wonderland Ripley's Believe It or Not!

San Japan Santikos Theatres SeaWorld San Antonio Six Flags Fiesta Texas Splashtown San Antonio St. Mary's Strip Texas Folklife Festival Tobin Center for the Performing Arts ( San Antonio Symphony ) San Antonio Municipal Auditorium Woodlawn Theatre Industry Bill Miller Bar-B-Q Enterprises Christus Santa Rosa iHeartMedia Frost Bank H-E-B Jim's Restaurants Luby's M7 Aerospace NewTek NuStar Energy Rackspace San Antonio Express-News SAS Shoemakers (SAS) San Antonio Water System Security Service Federal Credit Union Taco Cabana Toyota Motor Manufacturing Texas USAA Valero Energy Visionworks of America Whataburger Research and education The Alamo Colleges Baptist Health System School of Health Professions Cancer Therapy & Research Center Greehey Children's Cancer Research Institute Oblate School of Theology Our Lady of the Lake University San Antonio Public Library San Antonio Municipal Archives South Texas Medical Center Texas Biomedical Research Institute Southwest Research Institute St. Mary's University Texas A&M University–San Antonio Texas Neurosciences Institute Trinity University University Health System University of the Incarnate Word University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio University of Texas at San Antonio Military San Antonio Military Medical Center Brooks City-Base Camp Bullis Fort Sam Houston Lackland Air Force Base Pershing House Randolph Air Force Base Wilford Hall Ambulatory Surgical Center Neighborhoods Alamo Heights Alazán-Apache Courts Brooks Dominion Downtown Inwood La Cantera Mahncke Park Monte Vista Pearl Pecan Valley Stone Oak Thompson Field Parks Acequia San Antonio Botanical Garden Brackenridge Park Denman Estate Park Dwight D. Eisenhower Park Friedrich Wilderness Park Government Canyon State Natural Area Phil Hardberger Park Mahncke Milam Park Miraflores Park Roosevelt Park San Antonio Japanese Tea Garden San Antonio Missions National Historical Park San Pedro Springs Park O. P. Schnabel Park Travis Park Sports Alamodome ( San Antonio Brahmas , UTSA Roadrunners football ) Frost Bank Center ( San Antonio Spurs ) Gayle and Tom Benson Stadium ( Incarnate Word Cardinals football ) Nelson W. Wolff Municipal Stadium ( San Antonio Missions ) Toyota Field ( San Antonio FC ) Freeman Coliseum San Antonio Stock Show & Rodeo Transportation San Antonio International Airport Amtrak Station VIA Metropolitan Transit Other Mayor San Antonio Fire Department San Antonio Police Department Bexar County San Antonio–New Braunfels Metro Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=San_Antonio_Express-News&oldid=1294839691 " Categories : Daily newspapers published in Texas Mass media in San Antonio Hearst Communications publications Newspapers established in 1865 1865 establishments in Texas Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 03:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents San Antonio Express-News 7 languages Add topic

