Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Hydrology Toggle Hydrology subsection 1.1 Tides 2 Geology 3 Flora and fauna 4 Human geography and history Toggle Human geography and history subsection 4.1 History 4.2 Settlements 4.3 Ports and shipping 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Bay of Fundy 64 languages العربية Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard मराठी მარგალური Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Scots Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 45°00′N 65°45′W ﻿ / ﻿ 45.000°N 65.750°W ﻿ / 45.000; -65.750 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Bay on the east coast of North America For the local service district of Fundy Bay, see Saint George Parish, New Brunswick § Fundy Bay .

Bay of Fundy Baie de Fundy The Bay of Fundy Bay of Fundy Location New Brunswick , Nova Scotia , Maine Coordinates 45°00′N 65°45′W ﻿ / ﻿ 45.000°N 65.750°W ﻿ / 45.000; -65.750 Type Estuary Etymology Likely from the French Fendu , meaning "split".

Primary inflows Canada and United States River sources Big Salmon , Magaguadavic , Memramcook , Petitcodiac , Quiddy , Saint John , St. Croix , Upper Salmon , Annapolis , Avon , Cornwallis , Farrells , Salmon , Shubenacadie , Kennetcook Primary outflows Gulf of Maine Ocean/sea sources Atlantic Ocean Max. length 151 kilometres (94 mi) [ 1 ] Max. width 52 kilometres (32 mi) [ 1 ] References The Bay of Fundy ( French : Baie de Fundy ) is a bay between the Canadian provinces of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia , with a small portion touching the U.S. state of Maine . It is an arm of the Gulf of Maine . Its tidal range is the highest in the world.

[ 2 ] The bay was named Bakudabakek by the indigenous Mi'kmaq and Passamaquoddy groups, meaning "open way". The Wolastoqiyik peoples named it Wekwabegituk , meaning "waves at the head of the bay".

[ 3 ] The name "Fundy" has been speculated to have derived from the French word fendu ("split") [ 4 ] or Fond de la Baie ("head of the bay"). Some individuals have disputed this, including William Francis Ganong , who suggested that the name likely derived from Portuguese origin instead, specifically regarding João Álvares Fagundes , who may have referred to the bay as Gram Baya ("Great Bay") and nearby waters as Rio Fondo ("deep river").

[ 3 ] Hydrology [ edit ] Alma, New Brunswick , at high and low tide Tides [ edit ] The tidal range in the Bay of Fundy is about 16 metres (52 ft); the average tidal range worldwide is only one metre (3.3 ft). Some tides are higher than others, depending on the position of the moon, the sun, and atmospheric conditions. Tides are semidiurnal , meaning they have two highs and two lows each day, with about 6 hours and 13 minutes between each high and low tide.

[ 5 ] Because of tidal resonance in the funnel-shaped bay, the tides that flow through the channel are very powerful. In one half-day tidal cycle, about 100 billion tonnes (110 billion short tons ) of water flow in and out of the bay, which is twice as much as the combined total flow of all the rivers of the world over the same period.

[ 6 ] The Annapolis Royal Generating Station , a 20 MW tidal power station on the Annapolis River upstream of Annapolis Royal , was, until its shutdown in 2019, [ 7 ] one of the few tidal generating stations in the world, and the only one in North America.

[ 8 ] Most of the rivers that drain into the Bay of Fundy have a tidal bore , a wave front of the incoming tide that "bores" its way up a river against its normal flow. Notable tidal bores include those on the Petitcodiac , Maccan , St. Croix , and Kennetcook rivers.

[ 9 ] Before the construction of a causeway in 1968 and subsequent siltation of the river, the Petitcodiac River had one of the world's largest tidal bores, up to two metres (6.6 ft) high. Since the opening of the causeway gates in 2010, the bore has been coming back, and in 2013 surfers rode it a record-breaking 29 kilometres (18 mi).

[ 10 ] Other tidal phenomena include the Reversing Falls near the mouth of the St. John River , a rip tide at Cape Enrage , and the Old Sow whirlpool at Passamaquoddy Bay .

[ 9 ] Geology [ edit ] The story of the Fundy Basin begins about 200 million years ago in the early Jurassic , when all land on earth was part of a supercontinent called Pangaea . At that time what is now the Maritimes was situated near the equator and had a warm tropical climate and lush vegetation.

[ 11 ] As continental drift reshaped the world, rift valleys formed, including the Cobequid – Chedabucto fault system.

During the continental breakup, magma erupted as basaltic lavas and left igneous rock formations such as the columnar jointing which can be seen on Brier and Grand Manan islands, among other places around the bay. These flows often are the sites of rarer mineral deposits including agate , amethyst , and stilbite , the latter being the provincial mineral of Nova Scotia.

[ 11 ] These rifts filled with sediment which became sedimentary rock . Many fossils have been found along the Fundy shoreline. The oldest dinosaur fossil in Canada was found at Burntcoat Head . Very early reptiles have been discovered in Carboniferous tree trunks at Joggins .

Wasson Bluff has a rich trove of Jurassic fossils.

The bay is a member of the Global Geoparks Network , [ 12 ] a UNESCO initiative to promote and conserve the planet's geological heritage.

Flora and fauna [ edit ] Although some land areas are protected, there is no formal marine protection zone in the bay.

[ 13 ] The Conservation Council of New Brunswick works to protect the ecosystem of the bay.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] A result of shipping traffic has been the potential for increased collisions between ships and the critically endangered North Atlantic right whale . In 2003, the Canadian Coast Guard adjusted shipping lanes crossing prime whale feeding areas at the entrance to the Bay of Fundy to lessen the risk of collision. Many other marine mammals are found in the bay including fin whales , humpback whales , minke whales , Atlantic white-sided dolphin and the harbour porpoise .

The Bay of Fundy mudflats are a rare and unique intertidal habitat. Major mudflats are found on around the Maringouin Peninsula which lies between Shepody Bay and the Cumberland Basin and at the northern end of Chignecto Bay . On the Nova Scotia side, mudflats are found on the southern side of the Minas Basin and in Cobequid Bay . In the Minas Basin, the size of the mudflats from low to high water marks is as much as 4 km (2.5 mi).

[ 16 ] Due to tidal turbulence, the water in these area contains very high amounts of fine sediment, source from tidal erosion of Carboniferous and Triassic sedimentary rock.

Primary producers include hollow green weed , phytoplankton , algae , and sea lettuce .

Protected areas include: Boot Island National Wildlife Area in the Minas Basin near the mouth of the Gaspereau River .

[ 17 ] Chignecto National Wildlife Area: near Amherst, contains a wide variety of habitats due to its geology.

[ 18 ] Grindstone Island Conservation Easement: managed by the Nature Trust of New Brunswick through a conservation easement on an island at the entrance of Shepody Bay.

[ 19 ] Isle Haute , managed by the Canadian Wildlife Service.

[ 20 ] John Lusby Marsh National Wildlife Area: a large wetland system near Amherst.

[ 21 ] New River Beach Provincial Park is a provincial park managed by the Government of New Brunswick near Saint John, New Brunswick Raven Head Wilderness Area, protects 44 km (27 mi) of undeveloped coast along the bay. It is southwest of Joggins and also a site for fossils. It is also a wildlife habitat for endangered species.

[ 22 ] Shepody National Wildlife Area: a habitat for birds and other wildlife, [ 23 ] recognized as an important wetland under the Ramsar Convention , a site of importance by the Western Hemisphere Shorebird Reserve Network , and a bird area by BirdLife International . The dominant bird species is the semipalmated sandpiper .

South Wolf Island Nature Preserve: in the lower bay, about 12 km (7.5 mi) offshore from Blacks Harbour . It was donated to the Nature Trust of New Brunswick by Clover Leaf Seafoods in 2011. It is ecologically important for birds, some not common on the mainland, as well as some very rare plants.

[ 15 ] Tintamarre National Wildlife Area [ 24 ] Human geography and history [ edit ] History [ edit ] Main articles: History of Nova Scotia and History of New Brunswick Fort Edward (built 1750), Windsor, Nova Scotia —the oldest blockhouse in North America The Miꞌkmaq fished in the Bay of Fundy and lived in communities around the bay for centuries before the first Europeans arrived. According to Miꞌkmaq legend, the tide was created when Glooscap wanted to take a bath.

[ 25 ] The first European to visit the bay may have been Portuguese explorer João Álvares Fagundes in about 1520, although the bay does not appear on Portuguese maps until 1558.

[ 26 ] The first European settlement was French, founded at Saint Croix Island in Maine, and then Port Royal , founded by Pierre Dugua and Samuel de Champlain in 1605. Champlain named it Labaye Francoise [ 27 ] [ 28 ] (The French Bay). Champlain describes finding an old rotted cross in the bay which may have been left by the Portuguese.

[ 26 ] The village was the first permanent European settlement north of the Spanish St. Augustine, Florida , and predated by two years the first permanent British settlement in Jamestown, Virginia . About 75 years later, Acadians spread out along the bay, founding Grand-Pré , Beaubassin , Cobequid , and Pisiguit .

[ 29 ] There was much military action and many attacks on the settlements around the bay, first as the French and British fought for control of the area, leading to the expulsion of the Acadians , and later by Americans during the American Revolution and the War of 1812 .

[ 30 ] In the 19th century, the bay was the site of much shipping, and shipbuilders flourished, including James Moran of St. Martins, New Brunswick , Joseph Salter , of Moncton , and William D. Lawrence of Maitland, Nova Scotia . Fundy ports produced the fastest ship in the world, Marco Polo ; the largest wooden ship ever built in Canada, William D. Lawrence ; and the first female sea captain in the western world, Molly Kool . The mystery ship Mary Celeste was also built there.

The highest water level ever recorded, 21.6 metres (71 feet), occurred in October 1869. It caused extensive destruction to ports and communities, much of which was attributed to a two-metre storm surge created by the Saxby Gale , a tropical cyclone , which coincided with a perigean spring tide . Waves breached dykes protecting low-lying farmland in the Minas Basin and the Tantramar Marshes , sending ocean waters surging far inland.

Settlements [ edit ] Saint John, NB, is the only major city on the Bay of Fundy.

The largest population centre on the bay is Saint John, New Brunswick , a major port and the first incorporated city in what is now Canada.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Other settlements include, in New Brunswick, St. Andrews , Blacks Harbour , Grand Manan , Campobello , Fundy-St. Martins , Alma , Riverside-Albert , Hopewell Cape , and Sackville , and in Nova Scotia, Amherst , Advocate Harbour , Parrsboro , Truro , Maitland , Cheverie , Windsor , Wolfville , Canning , Annapolis Royal , and Digby .

Ports and shipping [ edit ] Grand Manan V ferry at North Head, Grand Manan Island The port of Saint John gives access to the pulp and paper industry and the Irving oil refinery .

Hantsport , Nova Scotia, also has a pulp and paper mill and ships gypsum to the United States.

The bay is also traversed by ferries: Saint John to Digby , operated by Bay Ferries .

Grand Manan to Blacks Harbour and White Head Island , to Grand Manan, operated by Coastal Transport .

The Letete to Deer Island Ferry, operated by the New Brunswick Department of Transportation .

Campobello Island , to Deer Island and Eastport, Maine , to Deer Island. Operated by East Coast Ferries Limited.

Brier Island to Long Island and Long Island to peninsular Nova Scotia, operated by Nova Scotia Department of Transportation and Public Works.

Gallery [ edit ] Tilted layers of sandstone at Hopewell Rocks The Minas Basin in early May Reversing Falls is where the Saint John River and Bay of Fundy meet.

Salmon River tidal bore Basal contact of a lava flow section of Fundy basin See also [ edit ] Canada portal Nova Scotia portal Geography portal Fundy National Park , which connects to the Fundy Footpath .

Military action in the bay: Raid on St. John (1775) , Battle off Cape Split , Raid on Annapolis Royal (1781) .

The Rocks Provincial Park, site of the Hopewell Rocks Cape Chignecto Provincial Park : Nova Scotia's largest provincial park, named for Cape Chignecto , a headland which divides the Bay of Fundy and Chignecto Bay to the north and the Minas Channel leading to the Minas Basin to the east.

Blomidon Provincial Park and Five Islands Provincial Park, both in Nova Scotia.

Roosevelt Campobello International Park : preserves the house and surrounding landscape of the summer retreat of Franklin D. Roosevelt , on Campobello Island in New Brunswick.

[ 33 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b "Bay of Fundy" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . April 16, 2025.

Archived from the original on March 28, 2025 . Retrieved April 18, 2025 .

^ National Ocean Service Archived 2018-02-01 at the Wayback Machine , ^ a b "What Does "Fundy" Mean?" .

Backyard History . June 17, 2022.

Archived from the original on April 25, 2025 . Retrieved April 24, 2025 .

^ Garrett, Chris; Koslow, Tony; Singh, Rabindra (March 25, 2015) [July 8, 2010].

"Fundy, Bay of and Gulf of Maine" .

The Canadian Encyclopedia (online ed.).

Historica Canada .

Archived from the original on May 14, 2022 . Retrieved March 22, 2018 .

^ "The Bay of Fundy is a 160 billion tonne wonder; here's why" (blog). Tourism New Brunswick.

Government of New Brunswick . 2018-05-02.

Archived from the original on 2020-11-15 . Retrieved 7 June 2019 – via tourismnewbrunswick.ca.

^ "Why are the Bay of Fundy tides so high?" .

bayfundy.net .

Archived from the original on 18 December 2022 . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

^ Withers, Paul (23 February 2021).

"Nova Scotia Power to pull plug on tidal station; seeks $25M from ratepayers" . Nova Scotia.

cbc.ca/news .

CBC News .

Archived from the original on 26 January 2023 . Retrieved 26 June 2023 .

^ "Annapolis Tidal Station" .

nspower.ca .

Nova Scotia Power . Archived from the original on 1 July 2019 . Retrieved 1 July 2019 .

^ a b "The tidal bore" .

bayoffundytourism.com . Bay of Fundy Tourism. Archived from the original on 16 November 2019 . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

^ "Surfers set record after 29 km ride on Moncton tidal bore" . New Brunswick.

cbc.ca/news .

CBC News . 25 July 2013 . Retrieved 18 June 2019 .

^ a b The Last Billion Years: A geological history of the maritime provinces of Canada .

Atlantic Geoscience Society (via Nimbus Pub). 2001. pp.

126–134 .

ISBN 1-55109-351-0 – via Internet Archive .

^ "Tidal landscapes on an ancient shoreline" . Cliffs of Fundy Aspiring Global Geopark.

fundygeopark.ca .

UNESCO Global Geoparks .

Archived from the original on 29 April 2022 . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

^ "FAQ" .

Canadian Parks and Wilderness Society .

Archived from the original on 28 May 2023 . Retrieved 19 June 2019 .

^ "Marine Conservation" .

Conservation Council of New Brunswick . 2013-02-17. Archived from the original on 2019-06-21 . Retrieved 21 June 2019 .

^ a b "South Wolf Island Nature Preserve" .

Nature Trust of New Brunswick . Archived from the original on 16 June 2020 . Retrieved 19 June 2019 .

^ "Bay of Funday Mudflats" .

Fundy Biosphere . Archived from the original on 29 September 2022 . Retrieved 20 June 2019 .

^ "Boot Island National Wildlife Area" .

Government of Canada . 2011-12-21.

Archived from the original on 2019-05-03 . Retrieved 20 June 2019 .

^ "Chignecto National Wildlife Area" .

Government of Canada . 2011-12-21.

Archived from the original on 2019-05-11 . Retrieved 20 June 2019 .

^ "Grindstone Island Conservation Easement" .

Nature Trust of New Brunswick . Archived from the original on 16 June 2020 . Retrieved 19 June 2019 .

^ "Isle Haute National Wildlife Area" .

Government of Canada . 23 April 2019.

Archived from the original on 18 June 2019 . Retrieved 19 June 2019 .

^ "John Lusby Marsh National Wildlife Area" .

Government of Canada . 2011-12-21.

Archived from the original on 2019-06-20 . Retrieved 20 June 2019 .

^ "Raven Head Wilderness Area" .

Government of Nova Scotia . 1 April 2009.

Archived from the original on 19 June 2019 . Retrieved 19 June 2019 .

^ "Shepody National Wildlife Area" .

Government of Canada . 2011-12-21.

Archived from the original on 2019-06-20 . Retrieved 20 June 2019 .

^ "Tintamarre National Wildlife Area" .

Government of Canada . 2011-12-21.

Archived from the original on 2019-06-20 . Retrieved 20 June 2019 .

^ "Mi'kmaq Heritage" .

Bay of Fundy . 1 February 2011.

Archived from the original on 16 June 2020 . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

^ a b "European Contact and Mapping" . Mount Allison University. Archived from the original on 24 June 2019 . Retrieved 23 July 2019 .

^ Map of the northeast coast of North America, 1607, drawn by Samuel de Champlain Archived 2020-07-26 at the Wayback Machine , umaine.edu ^ Champlain's 1607 Map of New England Archived 2019-10-09 at the Wayback Machine , old-maps.com ^ Faragher, John Mack (2005).

A Great and Noble Scheme: The Tragic Story of the Expulsion of the French Acadians from Their American Homeland . W.W Norton & Company. pp.

110 –112.

ISBN 978-0-393-05135-3 .

^ Smith, Joshua (2011).

Battle for the Bay: The Naval War of 1812 . Fredericton, NB: Goose Lane Editions. pp. passim.

ISBN 978-0-86492-644-9 .

^ "Port Saint John reports 2016 tonnage" . Archived from the original on July 28, 2017 . Retrieved July 23, 2017 .

^ "Saint John" .

Canadian Encyclopedia .

Archived from the original on July 28, 2017 . Retrieved June 12, 2017 .

^ "Welcome to Campobello Island" .

VisitCampobello.com .

Archived from the original on 7 May 2019 . Retrieved 21 June 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bay of Fundy .

Wikivoyage has a travel guide for Bay of Fundy .

Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Fundy, Bay of ".

Where the Bay Becomes the Sea : a documentary about the Bay of Fundy ecosystem Bay of Fundy Ecosystem Partnership : scientific and popular information about the Bay.

v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category v t e Marginal seas of the Atlantic Ocean Basins Foxe Basin Bays Baffin Bay Bay of Biscay Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Bothnian Bay Hudson Bay James Bay Pottles Bay Channels English Channel Gulfs Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Seas Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea Greenland Sea Icarian Sea Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea Kattegat Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Skagerrak Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Oceans portal v t e Gulf of Maine estuaries Maine Bays Blue Hill Bay Casco Bay Chandler Bay Dennys Bay Englishman Bay Frenchman Bay Harrington Bay Machias Bay Maquoit Bay Merrymeeting Bay Muscongus Bay Narraguagus Bay Passamaquoddy Bay Penobscot Bay Pleasant Bay Saco Bay Wohoa Bay River mouths Batson River Benjamin River Cape Neddick River Damariscotta River Johns River Jordan River Josias River Kennebunk River Little River (Boothbay) Little River (Drakes Island) Little River (Georgetown) Little River (Goosefare Bay) Little River (York) Morse River Mousam River Ogunquit River Pemaquid River Piscataqua River Sheepscot River Sprague River Webhannet River York River Massachusetts Bays Cape Cod Bay Massachusetts Bay River mouths Annisquam River Eagle Hill River Egypt River Ipswich River Jericho Creek Merrimack River Roger Island River Rowley River Skug River New Brunswick Bays Bay of Fundy Chignecto Bay Cumberland Basin Passamaquoddy Bay Shepody Bay River mouths Big Salmon River Quiddy River Saint John River New Hampshire River mouths Blackwater River Hampton River Piscataqua River Nova Scotia Bays Bay of Fundy Annapolis Basin Cobequid Bay Cumberland Basin Minas Basin St. Marys Bay River mouths Tusket River v t e Rivers of Maine by drainage system Bay of Fundy Passamaquoddy Bay Little River (Big Lake) Little River (Passamaquoddy Bay) Pennamaquan River St. Croix River Saint John River Watershed Allagash River Aroostook River Baker Branch Saint John River Blackwater River Big Black River Birch River Brown River Campbell Branch Little Black River Chimenticook River Daaquam River Depot River East Branch Pocwock Stream Fish River Gobeil River Little Black River Little Machias River Little Madawaska River Little River Little Saint Roch River Little Southwest Branch Saint John River Machias River Meduxnekeag River Musquacook Stream North Branch Birch River North Branch Blackwater River North Branch Meduxnekeag River Northwest Branch Saint John River Otter River Pocwock River Red River River De Chute Saint Francis River Saint John River Shields Branch South Branch Birch River South Branch Blackwater River South Branch Machias River South Branch Meduxnekeag River Southwest Branch Saint John River St. Croix Stream West Branch Little Black River West Branch Pocwock Stream Wolastoq Casco Bay Fore River Watershed Fore River Long Creek Stroudwater River South Branch Stroudwater River Presumpscot River Watershed Bear River Chute River Crooked River East Branch Piscataqua River Little River Muddy River North Branch Little River Northwest River Piscataqua River Pleasant River Presumpscot River Songo River Sticky River Tenny River Others Cousins River Harraseeket River Little River New Meadows River Royal River Toddy Brook Gulf of Maine Blue Hill Bay ( Union River Watershed) Bog River East Branch Union River Little Bog River Middle Branch Union River Union River West Branch Union River Chandler Bay Sandy River Dennys Bay Dennys River Hardscrabble River Orange River Englishman Bay Chandler River East Branch Chandler River Englishman River Frenchman Bay Jordan Stream Skillings River Harrington Bay Harrington River Mill River Little River Watershed Little River (Drakes Island) Merriland River Machias Bay ( Machias River Watershed) Crooked River East Machias River Machias River Maine River Middle River West Branch Machias River Mousam River Watershed Littlefield River Middle Branch Mousam River Mousam River Narraguagus Bay ( Narraguagus River Watershed) Little Narraguagus River Narraguagus River Spring River West Branch Narraguagus River (Cherryfield) West Branch Narraguagus River (Hancock County) Pleasant Bay ( Pleasant River Watershed) Little River Pleasant River West Branch Pleasant River Western Little River Piscataqua River Watershed Great Works River Little River Neoutaquet River Piscataqua River Salmon Falls River Sheepscot River Watershed Back River Cross River Dyer River Marsh River Sasanoa River Sheepscot River West Branch Sheepscot River Wohoa Bay Indian River Southwest Branch Indian River West River Others Batson River Benjamin River Cape Neddick River Damariscotta River Johns River Jordan River Josias River Kennebunk River Little River (Boothbay) Little River (Georgetown) Little River (Goosefare Bay) Little River (York) Morse River Ogunquit River Pemaquid River Sprague River Webhannet River York River Merrymeeting Bay Androscoggin River Watershed Alder River Androscoggin River Bear River Cathance River Concord River Cupsuptic River Dead Cambridge River Dead River (Androscoggin) Dead River (Sabattus) East Branch Cupsuptic River East Branch Nezinscot River East Branch Pleasant River East Branch Swift River Ellis River First East Branch Magalloway River Kennebago River Little Androscoggin River Little East Branch Cupsuptic River Little Magalloway River Little River Magalloway River Middle Branch Little Magalloway River Muddy River Nezinscot River Pleasant River Rangeley River Rapid River Sabattus River Sanborn River Second East Branch Magalloway River South Branch Sunday River Sunday River Swift Cambridge River Swift River Third East Branch Magalloway River Webb River West Branch Ellis River West Branch Little Magalloway River West Branch Magalloway River West Branch Nezinscot River West Branch Pleasant River West Branch Swift River Wild River Kennebec River Watershed Abagadasset River Back River Carrabassett River Dead River East Branch Eastern River East Branch Moose River East Branch Sebasticook River Eastern River Kennebec River Lemon Stream Little River Moose River Moxie Falls North Branch Dead River Roach River Sandy River Sebasticook River South Branch Dead River South Branch Moose River South Branch Sandy River Temple Stream West Branch Carrabassett River West Branch Eastern River West Branch Moose River Muscongus Bay Saint George River Watershed Back River Dead River East Branch Oyster River Mill River Oyster River Saint George River West Branch Oyster River Others Back River (Medomak) Back River (Meduncook) Goose River Medomak River Meduncook River Penobscot Bay Penobscot River Watershed Dead River East Branch Mattawamkeag River East Branch Penobscot River East Branch Piscataquis River East Branch Pleasant River Kenduskeag Stream Little Seboeis River Mattawamkeag River Middle Branch Pleasant River Molunkus Stream North Branch Marsh River North Branch Penobscot River Narramissic River Orland River Passadumkeag River Penobscot River Pleasant River Piscataquis River Sebec River Seboeis River South Branch Marsh River South Branch Penobscot River Stillwater River West Branch Mattawamkeag River West Branch Penobscot River West Branch Piscataquis River West Branch Pleasant River Others Bagaduce River Ducktrap River Goose River (Belfast Bay) Goose River (Rockport Harbor) Little River Megunticook River Passagassawakeag River Weskeag River Saco Bay Saco River Watershed Charles River Cold River Hancock Brook Kezar River Little Cold River Little Ossipee River Little River Little Saco River Mad River Middle Branch Mad River Old Course Saco River Ossipee River Saco River Shepards River South Branch Mad River South River Tenmile River West Branch Tenmile River Others Dunstan River Libby River Nonesuch River Scarborough River Spurwink River v t e Rivers of New Brunswick by drainage system Bay of Fundy Cumberland Basin Missaguash River Chignecto Bay Upper Salmon River Passamaquoddy Bay Magaguadavic River St. Croix River Watershed of Saint John River Aroostook River Becaguimec Stream Canaan River Hammond River Iroquois River Jemseg River Kennebecasis River Keswick River Little Iroquois River Madawaska River Meduxnekeag River Nashwaak River Nerepis River North Branch Meduxnekeag River Oromocto River River De Chute Saint Francis River Saint John River Salmon River Tobique River Wolastoq Shepody Bay (watershed of Petitcodiac River ) Jonathan Creek Memramcook River Petitcodiac River Turtle Creek Others Big Salmon River Quiddy River Gulf of Saint Lawrence Chaleur Bay (watershed of Restigouche River ) Belle Kedgwick River Gounamitz River Kedgwick River Little Main Restigouche River Little Southeast Upsalquitch River North Branch Gounamitz River Northwest Upsalquitch River Patapédia River Popelogan River Restigouche River South Branch Kedgwick River Southeast Upsalquitch River Upsalquitch River West Branch Gounamitz River Miramichi Bay (watershed of Miramichi River ) Barnaby River Bartholomew River Bartibog River Cains River Dungarvon River Little Southwest Miramichi River Miramichi River Napan River North Pole Stream Northwest Miramichi River Oyster River Renous River Sevogle River Southwest Miramichi River Tuadook River Northumberland Strait Buctouche River Gaspereau River Kouchibouguac River Kouchibouguacis River Molus River Richibucto River Watershed of Saint Lawrence River Rimouski River Others Black River Caraquet River Nepisiguit River Pokemouche River Rivière du Nord v t e Rivers of Nova Scotia by drainage system Atlantic Ocean Bedford Basin Little Sackville River Sackville River Eastern Shore East River Sheet Harbour Framboise River Mira River Musquodoboit River St. Mary's River West River Sheet Harbour South Shore LaHave River Medway River Mersey River Petite Rivière Shelburne River Bay of Fundy Annapolis Basin Annapolis River Bear River Cobequid Bay Salmon River Shubenacadie River Stewiacke River Cumberland Basin River Hebert Watershed Halfway River Maccan River River Hebert Others Missaguash River Gulf of Maine St. Marys Bay Sissiboo River Others Tusket River Gulf of Saint Lawrence Northumberland Strait East River of Pictou Middle River of Pictou Pugwash River River John River Philip Tidnish River Wallace River Others Aspy River Baddeck River Chéticamp River Margaree River Sydney River Minas Basin Avon River Watershed Avon River Halfway River Kennetcook River St. Croix River Others Canard River Cornwallis River Farrells River Gaspereau River Nova Scotia portal Rivers portal Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐6wvg9
Cached time: 20250817044416
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.028 seconds
Real time usage: 1.318 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4776/1000000
Revision size: 30743/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 310771/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7111/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 181728/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.633/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19095316/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1048.994      1 -total
 27.49%  288.347      2 Template:Infobox
 26.75%  280.623      1 Template:Infobox_body_of_water
 25.14%  263.761      1 Template:Reflist
 17.75%  186.169     24 Template:Cite_web
 17.61%  184.698     26 Template:Navbox
  9.51%   99.786      1 Template:Native_name_checker
  8.83%   92.676      1 Template:List_of_seas
  7.21%   75.669      1 Template:Short_description
  6.76%   70.901      3 Template:Sister_project Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:66769:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044416 and revision id 1301823044. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bay_of_Fundy&oldid=1301823044 " Categories : Bays of Maine Bays of New Brunswick Bays of Nova Scotia Bays of the Atlantic Ocean Borders of New Brunswick Borders of Nova Scotia Canada–United States border Tides Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without alt Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map alt Articles using infobox body of water without image bathymetry Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 22:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bay of Fundy 64 languages Add topic

