Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Superfluidity 1.2 Fermionic superfluids 1.3 Condensates of fermionic atoms 2 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 2.1 Chiral condensate 2.2 BCS theory 2.3 QCD 2.4 Helium-3 superfluid 3 See also 4 Footnotes 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Sources Toggle the table of contents Fermionic condensate 25 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Қазақша മലയാളം 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia State of matter This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( September 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Condensed matter physics Phases Phase transition QCP States of matter Solid Liquid Gas Plasma Bose–Einstein condensate Bose gas Fermionic condensate Fermi gas Fermi liquid Supersolid Superfluidity Luttinger liquid Time crystal Phase phenomena Order parameter Phase transition QCP Electronic phases Electronic band structure Plasma Insulator Mott insulator Semiconductor Semimetal Conductor Superconductor Thermoelectric Piezoelectric Ferroelectric Topological insulator Spin gapless semiconductor Electronic phenomena Quantum Hall effect Spin Hall effect Kondo effect Magnetic phases Diamagnet Superdiamagnet Paramagnet Superparamagnet Ferromagnet Antiferromagnet Metamagnet Spin glass Quasiparticles Phonon Exciton Plasmon Polariton Polaron Magnon Roton Soft matter Amorphous solid Colloid Granular material Liquid crystal Polymer Scientists Van der Waals Onnes von Laue Bragg Debye Bloch Onsager Mott Peierls Landau Luttinger Anderson Van Vleck Hubbard Shockley Bardeen Cooper Schrieffer Josephson Louis Néel Esaki Giaever Kohn Kadanoff Fisher Wilson von Klitzing Binnig Rohrer Bednorz Müller Laughlin Störmer Yang Tsui Abrikosov Ginzburg Leggett Parisi Wetterich Perdew Physics portal Category v t e A fermionic condensate (or Fermi–Dirac condensate ) is a superfluid phase formed by fermionic particles at low temperatures . It is closely related to the Bose–Einstein condensate , a superfluid phase formed by bosonic atoms under similar conditions. Examples of fermionic condensates include superconductors and the superfluid phase of helium-3 . The first fermionic condensate in dilute atomic gases was created by a team led by Deborah S. Jin using potassium-40 atoms at the University of Colorado Boulder in 2003.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Background [ edit ] Superfluidity [ edit ] Fermionic condensates are attained at lower temperatures than Bose–Einstein condensates. Fermionic condensates are a type of superfluid . As the name suggests, a superfluid possesses fluid properties similar to those possessed by ordinary liquids and gases , such as the lack of a definite shape and the ability to flow in response to applied forces. However, superfluids possess some properties that do not appear in ordinary matter. For instance, they can flow at high velocities without dissipating any energy—i.e. zero viscosity . At lower velocities, energy is dissipated by the formation of quantized vortices , which act as "holes" in the medium where superfluidity breaks down. Superfluidity was originally discovered in liquid helium-4 whose atoms are bosons , not fermions.

Fermionic superfluids [ edit ] It is far more difficult to produce a fermionic superfluid than a bosonic one, because the Pauli exclusion principle prohibits fermions from occupying the same quantum state . However, there is a well-known mechanism by which a superfluid may be formed from fermions: That mechanism is the BCS transition , discovered in 1957 by J. Bardeen , L.N. Cooper , and R. Schrieffer for describing superconductivity. These authors showed that, below a certain temperature, electrons (which are fermions) can pair up to form bound pairs now known as Cooper pairs . As long as collisions with the ionic lattice of the solid do not supply enough energy to break the Cooper pairs, the electron fluid will be able to flow without dissipation. As a result, it becomes a superfluid, and the material through which it flows a superconductor.

The BCS theory was phenomenally successful in describing superconductors. Soon after the publication of the BCS paper, several theorists proposed that a similar phenomenon could occur in fluids made up of fermions other than electrons, such as helium-3 atoms. These speculations were confirmed in 1971, when experiments performed by D.D. Osheroff showed that helium-3 becomes a superfluid below 0.0025 K. It was soon verified that the superfluidity of helium-3 arises from a BCS-like mechanism.

[ a ] Condensates of fermionic atoms [ edit ] When Eric Cornell and Carl Wieman produced a Bose–Einstein condensate from rubidium atoms in 1995, there naturally arose the prospect of creating a similar sort of condensate made from fermionic atoms, which would form a superfluid by the BCS mechanism. However, early calculations indicated that the temperature required for producing Cooper pairing in atoms would be too cold to achieve. In 2001, Murray Holland at JILA suggested a way of bypassing this difficulty. He speculated that fermionic atoms could be coaxed into pairing up by subjecting them to a strong magnetic field .

In 2003, working on Holland's suggestion, Deborah Jin at JILA, Rudolf Grimm at the University of Innsbruck , and Wolfgang Ketterle at MIT managed  to coax fermionic atoms into forming molecular bosons, which then underwent Bose–Einstein condensation. However, this was not a true fermionic condensate. On December 16, 2003, Jin managed to produce a condensate out of fermionic atoms for the first time. The experiment involved 500,000 potassium -40 atoms cooled to a temperature of 5×10 −8 K, subjected to a time-varying magnetic field.

[ 2 ] Examples [ edit ] Chiral condensate [ edit ] A chiral condensate is an example of a fermionic condensate that appears in theories of massless fermions with chiral symmetry breaking, such as the theory of quarks in Quantum Chromodynamics .

BCS theory [ edit ] The BCS theory of superconductivity has a fermion condensate. A pair of electrons in a metal with opposite spins can form a scalar bound state called a Cooper pair . The bound states themselves then form a condensate. Since the Cooper pair has electric charge , this fermion condensate breaks the electromagnetic gauge symmetry of a superconductor, giving rise to the unusual electromagnetic properties of such states.

QCD [ edit ] In quantum chromodynamics (QCD) the chiral condensate is also called the quark condensate . This property of the QCD vacuum is partly responsible for giving masses to hadrons (along with other condensates like the gluon condensate ).

In an approximate version of QCD, which has vanishing quark masses for N quark flavours , there is an exact chiral SU( N ) × SU( N ) symmetry of the theory. The QCD vacuum breaks this symmetry to SU( N ) by forming a quark condensate. The existence of such a fermion condensate was first shown explicitly in the lattice formulation of QCD. The quark condensate is therefore an order parameter of transitions between several phases of quark matter in this limit.

This is very similar to the BCS theory of superconductivity. The Cooper pairs are analogous to the pseudoscalar mesons . However, the vacuum carries no charge. Hence all the gauge symmetries are unbroken. Corrections for the masses of the quarks can be incorporated using chiral perturbation theory .

Helium-3 superfluid [ edit ] A helium-3 atom is a fermion and at very low temperatures, they form two-atom Cooper pairs which are bosonic and condense into a superfluid . These Cooper pairs are substantially larger than the interatomic separation.

See also [ edit ] Fermi gas Bose gas Footnotes [ edit ] ^ The theory of superfluid helium-3 is a little more complicated than the BCS theory of superconductivity. These complications arise because helium atoms repel each other much more strongly than electrons, but the basic idea is the same.

References [ edit ] ^ DeMarco, Brian; Bohn, John; Cornell, Eric (2006).

"Deborah S. Jin 1968–2016" .

Nature .

538 (7625): 318.

doi : 10.1038/538318a .

ISSN 0028-0836 .

PMID 27762370 .

^ a b Regal, C.A.; Greiner, M.; Jin, D.S. (28 January 2004). "Observation of resonance condensation of Fermionic atom pairs".

Physical Review Letters .

92 (4): 040403.

arXiv : cond-mat/0401554 .

Bibcode : 2004PhRvL..92d0403R .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.92.040403 .

PMID 14995356 .

S2CID 10799388 .

Sources [ edit ] Guenault, Tony (2003).

Basic superfluids .

Taylor & Francis .

ISBN 978-0-7484-0892-4 .

"NIST/University of Colorado scientists create new form of matter: A Fermionic condensate" (Press release). University of Colorado. 28 January 2004. Archived from the original on 7 December 2006.

Rodgers, Peter; Dumé, Bell (January 28, 2004).

"Fermionic condensate makes its debut" .

Physics World . Retrieved 29 Jun 2019 .

Hägler, Ph. (2010). "Hadron structure from lattice quantum chromodynamics".

Physics Reports .

490 ( 3– 5): 49– 175.

arXiv : 0912.5483 .

Bibcode : 2010PhR...490...49H .

doi : 10.1016/j.physrep.2009.12.008 .

ISSN 0370-1573 .

v t e States of matter ( list , timeline ) State Solid Liquid Gas / Vapor Supercritical fluid Plasma Low energy Bose–Einstein condensate Fermionic condensate Degenerate matter Quantum Hall Rydberg matter Strange matter Superfluid Supersolid Photonic molecule High energy QCD matter Quark–gluon plasma Color-glass condensate Other states Colloid Crystal Liquid crystal Time crystal Quantum spin liquid Exotic matter Programmable matter Dark matter Antimatter Magnetically ordered Antiferromagnet Ferrimagnet Ferromagnet String-net liquid Superglass Phase transitions Boiling Boiling point Condensation Critical line Critical point Crystallization Deposition Evaporation Flash evaporation Freezing Chemical ionization Ionization Lambda point Melting Melting point Recombination Regelation Saturated fluid Sublimation Supercooling Triple point Vaporization Vitrification Quantities Enthalpy of fusion Enthalpy of sublimation Enthalpy of vaporization Latent heat Latent internal energy Trouton's rule Volatility Concepts Baryonic matter Binodal Compressed fluid Cooling curve Equation of state Leidenfrost effect Macroscopic quantum phenomena Mpemba effect Order and disorder (physics) Spinodal Superconductivity Superheated vapor Superheating Thermo-dielectric effect Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fermionic_condensate&oldid=1292197654 " Categories : American inventions Condensed matter physics Phases of matter Quantum field theory Exotic matter Quantum phases Superfluidity Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2018 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 18:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fermionic condensate 25 languages Add topic

