Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and Development of Military Geography 2 Urbanistics 3 Types of terrain Toggle Types of terrain subsection 3.1 Desert warfare 3.2 Jungle and forest warfare 3.3 Winter warfare 3.4 Mountain warfare 3.5 Mud 4 Ocean fronts (harbors, beaches and sea cliffs) Toggle Ocean fronts (harbors, beaches and sea cliffs) subsection 4.1 Harbors 4.2 Beaches 4.3 Sea cliffs 5 Resources; future flashpoints 6 See also 7 References 8 Sources 9 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Military geography 24 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Italiano ქართული Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Polski Português Русский සිංහල Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Field of geography A landing in Egypt .

Part of a series on Geography Portal Outline History of geography Graeco-Roman Chinese Islamic Age of Discovery History of cartography Historical geography Environmental determinism Regional geography Quantitative revolution Critical geography Human geography Fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical geography Fields Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Geology Geomorphology Glaciology Hydrology / Hydrography Landscape ecology Limnology Pedology Quaternary science Technical geography Fields Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated geography Fields Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Methods Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote Sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Philosophy of geography Behavioral Critical Feminist Marxist Non-representational theory Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Societies Index Geographers v t e Military geography is a sub-field of geography that is used by the military, as well as academics and politicians, to understand the geopolitical sphere through the military lens. To accomplish these ends, military geographers consider topics from geopolitics to physical locations’ influences on military operations and the cultural and economic impacts of a military presence. On a tactical level, a military geographer might put together the terrain and the drainage system below the surface, so a unit is not at a disadvantage if the enemy uses the drainage system to ambush it, especially in urban warfare . On a strategic level, an emerging field of strategic and military geography seeks to understand the changing human and biophysical environments that alter the security and military domains.

Climate change , for example, is adding and multiplying the complexity of military strategy, planning and training.

[ 1 ] Emerging responsibilities for the military to be involved in: protection of civilian populations ( Responsibility to protect ), women and ethnic groups; provision of humanitarian aid and disaster response (HADR); new technology and domains of training and operations, such as in cybergeography , make military geography a dynamic frontier.

If a general desired to be a successful actor in the great drama of war, his first duty is to study carefully the theater of operations so that he may see clearly the relative advantages and disadvantages it presents for himself and his enemies.

— Baron De Jomini [ 2 ] History and Development of Military Geography [ edit ] Military geography has a long and practical history. For example, Imperial Military Geography in 1938 [ 3 ] shows how a colonial empire approach to military geography could describe the geographical setting of empire, the responsibilities and the resources that could be mobilised for national or imperial needs.

Environmental determinism , regional geography , geographic information systems and geography more generally have all evolved and entwined over hundreds of years.

The revival of geography and military geography as a sub-discipline is a remarkable trend since 2000 with a number of key geopolitical, international relations, [ 4 ] historical geography [ 5 ] and geographical approaches being developed.  The American Association of Geographers and Institute of Australian Geographers have interest groups that continue to develop the sub-discipline of military geography.

In 2018, Australian Contributions to Strategic and Military Geography [ 6 ] outlined  a new Australian approach and included chapters on themes and specific regions.

Urbanistics [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Russian colonel N. S. Olesik terms the field of analyzing the complex urban environment in particular “military geo-urbanistics.” In the open country, units only deal with terrain, weather, and the enemy. In urban warfare , the terrain is more complex, filled with many structures and transformations of the land by the inhabitants, which restrict visibility from the air and create obstacles to ground units. Spaces may be narrow, and convoys may be restricted to certain routes between buildings, where they face roadside bombs and ambushes.

Units must work with or work around local people, some of whom may cooperate and others of whom may oppose, while others are neutral or caught between the two factions. Guerilla fighters may count on an enemy's unwillingness to bomb or fire on heavily populated areas.

Types of terrain [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Several types of terrain and associated climate are prevalent, each affecting combatants differently.

Desert warfare [ edit ] Main article: Desert warfare In an arid climate, as in many desert areas across the globe, sand is a main concern.

Sand can hamper an army's attempts to remain hydrated, sapping moisture from skin; sand also jams machinery including the firing mechanisms of firearms.

Terrain is usually fairly flat, though in some regions there are vast, rolling sand dunes.  The desert environment can also contain mountains; as in Afghanistan and in certain areas around Israel.  Due to the ongoing conflicts in the Middle East, the U.S. military has redesigned the uniforms for the different branches of service.  All of the uniforms have a digital camouflage pattern that is very effective in the desert environment, and the boots have been changed from the standard polished black boots to light brown colored suede leather boots. These boots are cooler under the intense heat of the desert sun.

Jungle and forest warfare [ edit ] Main article: Jungle warfare The conditions of these regions are basically the opposite of those found in desert regions. There are thousands of flora and fauna, and there is always moisture present which presents its own difficulties. The moisture speeds up the rotting processes as well as causing wounds to become infected much easier because of all of the bacteria that live in the water. With proper filtration systems an army should have no problem keeping hydrated.

The densely packed trees and underbrush provide concealment from the air as well as from the ground. Ambushes can be easily conducted in this environment just like they can in an urban environment. The jungle can also contain mountains, but these mountains are organized differently from those that exist in the desert. The jungle mountains have far more plant life, and are usually much more difficult to ascend. Helicopters have been proven as a very useful means of transportation over jungle and forested areas; Vietnam was, of course, the testing ground for this. Tanks and other vehicles have difficulty maneuvering through and around the densely packed trees, and most military aircraft fly too fast to accurately observe the ground through the trees.

Winter warfare [ edit ] See also: Arctic warfare This type of warfare is not based on a geographical design, but is based on the drastic differences in this particular climate. During war it is much harder to remain warm than it is to remain cool. Even Forested areas can, and many do, experience winter weather conditions. For this specific type of combat there are soldiers that are specifically trained to fight under the conditions individual to the winter season. These conditions call for a drastically thicker and thus warmer uniform, and the weapons even need to be refitted with the proper devices to ensure that they will operate in the cold.

Mountain warfare [ edit ] Main article: Mountain warfare No two mountains are alike, but there is less oxygen at higher altitude. Fighting up a mountain can be very treacherous. There can be avalanches, rockslides, cliffs, and ambushes from higher up the slopes, and there are almost guaranteed to be caves somewhere in the mountain, as in Afghanistan.

Mud [ edit ] Mud is a universal menace to all armies. While it does not hamper the use of air power, it slows and sometimes stops ground movements all together. The most common season for mud across the globe is spring. After the thawing of winter's snow and the addition of the rains that the season brings, the ground becomes very soft, and almost any military vehicle can get bogged down if it is not properly equipped. The mud is not always dependent on the spring. Rather, in some parts of the world, it is determined by the monsoons.

Ocean fronts (harbors, beaches and sea cliffs) [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Harbors [ edit ] In the concerns of a seaport, especially if it is a goal to either capture or defend it, there are more difficulties than in defending a city that is in land. With a harbor there is also the threat from the sea in addition to the land and the air. A harbor is always a key objective for an army to capture when an invasion is commenced.  The sooner the harbor can be captured, the sooner it can be used to bring in massive amounts of reinforcements and material. The trouble is to capture the harbor before the enemy can sabotage it by blocking the entrance with wreckage or by deploying mines throughout the harbor.  Defending the harbor is a treacherous task because odds are that the enemy can observe your position from both the air and the sea.  The harbor is on the periphery of the defense network of many nations, and even more so if the navy is either deployed or nonexistent. The best ways to defend the harbor are to have military airfields in close vicinity, to have naval units based in the harbor on a permanent basis, and to be ready to make the harbor unusable by the enemy if they should overcome your defenses.

Beaches [ edit ] Beaches have always been a favourable place for landings. Beaches with naturally shallow inclines are often used for deploying troops and armoured vehicles. Often, however, they can be blocked by mines and other anti-tank defences. This makes them a high risk place to land but, if there is no prior warning, a beach-landing can be a very effective route into enemy territory.

Sea cliffs [ edit ] The same rules apply to this category as to the preceding one with the exception of the mines.  Here there is almost no need for anti-vehicle mines, and so, the defenses could be planned without much concern for an armored attack.

Resources; future flashpoints [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Middle East contains numerous valuable resources that major nations may compete over when supplies begin to fall around the world. The first Gulf War was an example of the United States’ willingness to go to war to protect its access to the rich oilfields of the Persian Gulf.  The strong military presence influenced some leaders to aid the United States with cheap oil, but over time those forces began to be viewed as a threat to the Muslim world.  The attacks of September 11, 2001, have brought new hostilities to the region with the invasions of both Afghanistan and Iraq.  Other hotspots around the globe centering on oil are the areas around Venezuela, the Caspian Sea region, and possibly the offshore oil deposits around Vietnam and China.

The most precious and most needed resource of all is water, and in some parts of the world, that is a very expensive resource to obtain.  The most obvious areas that conflict may arise over disputes for water supplies would be in the desert, but at the moment oil is the most valuable liquid in the Middle East. However, oil will not always be there, and if those people are going to survive, they must have water. Several times, countries that are upriver have threatened to build dams across the rivers in order to cut off the country down river, starving that particular country of its water supply. This has been the case with both the Nile and the River Jordan, and the results in both cases have been the same: the countries that are down river have threatened retaliation if such an event should occur. As the global warming trend continues, weather patterns will continue to shift, and that means that some places will fall into a severe drought.  These people [ who?

] may become desperate when they do not have the resources to obtain water if such a disaster should occur.

Densely wooded regions of the world are constantly shrinking, and as the oil runs out, people will need to keep warm in the winter. Odds are that they will return to using wood as a primary fuel source for keeping warm. As the forests shrink, neighboring countries will [ when?

] turn on each other for this resource in order to appease their populations. The forests of Latin America and the Pacific Islands are the key hotspots [ citation needed ] for this resource; this is in part due to the already tense situations in and around those regions because of growing tensions over global oil supplies.

"Conflict diamonds" are a currency used to fund illegal weapons deals. Such diamonds are not sold through an internationally recognized company.

[ citation needed ] They are conflict diamonds because warlords in Africa fight for these diamonds in order to sell them to acquire larger wealth and new weapons for continued fighting.  The same is true for the gold fields in southern Africa.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Military crest Loss of Strength Gradient Geostrategy Natural lines of drift Strategic depth Defence in depth Military geology References [ edit ] ^ Holloway, J., Thomas, M.D. and Durrant, C. "Strategic Military Geography: Climate Change Adaptation and the Military." Handbook of Climate Change Adaptation. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2015. 493-514.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-38670-1_24 ^ p.215, Jomini ^ Cole, D. H. (1933). Imperial military geography: general characteristics of the empire in relation to defence. Sifton Praed & CoY London.

^ Kaplan, R. D. (2012).

The revenge of geography: what the map tells us about coming conflicts and the battle against fate.

Random House.

^ Kilcullen, D. (2015).

Out of the mountains: The coming age of the urban guerrilla.

Oxford University Press.

^ Pearson, S. Holloway J.L. & Thackway, R. (2018) Australian Contributions to Strategic and Military Geography Springer.

Sources [ edit ] Baron De Jomini, Antoine Henri, The Art of War, Plain Label Books, (from original French) 1862 translation ISBN 1-60303-255-X [1] Bibliography [ edit ] Bayles, William J. "Terrain Intelligence and Battlefield Success: a Historical Perspective." Engineer 23 (1993): 50–53.

Cole, D.H.

Imperial Military Geography: The Geographical Background of the Defense Problems of the British Commonwealth . London: S. Praed (1950).

Collins, John M.

Military Geography for Professionals and the Public . Washington, D.C.: National Defense University Press (1998).

Dibb, Paul. "STRATEGIC TRENDS." Naval War College Review 54 (2001): 22–39.

Dupuy, R. Ernest.

World in Arms: A Study in Military Geography . Harrisburg, PA: Military Service Publishing Company (1940).

Flint, Colin.

The Geography of War and Peace: From Death Camps to Diplomats . Oxford: Oxford University Press (2005).

Galgano, Francis, and Eugene J. Palka (eds.).

Modern Military Geography . London: Routledge (2010).

Johnson, Douglas Wilson.

Topography and Strategy in the War . NY: Henry Holt (1917).

Johnson, Douglas Wilson.

Battlefields of the World, Western and Southern Fronts: A Study in Military Geography . Oxford: Oxford University Press (1921).

Kirby, Robert F. "Why Study Military Geography?" Engineer 20 (1990): 1–2.

Kirsch, Scott, and Colin Flint (eds.).

Reconstructing Conflict: Integrating War and Post-War Geographies . Burlington, VT: Ashgate (2011).

Klare, Michael T. "The New Geography of Conflict." Foreign Affairs 80 (2001): 49–61.

Olesik, Nikolai S. "Military Geography and Urbanistics." Military Thought 15 (2006): 81–91.

Maguire, T. Miller.

Outlines of Military Geography . Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press (1899) O'Sullivan, Patrick M.

The Geography of War in the Post Cold War World . Lewiston: Edwin Mellen Press (2001).

Palka, Eugene J., and Francis Galgano, Jr.

Military Geography: From Peace to War . Boston: McGraw-Hill (2005).

Peltier, Louis C.

Bibliography of Military Geography . Military Geography Committee, Association of American Geographers (1962).

Peltier, Louis C., and G.

Etzel Pearcy .

Military Geography . Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand (1966).

Rech, M., Bos, D., Jenkings, K. N., Williams, A., & Woodward, R. Geography, military geography, and critical military studies. Critical Military Studies, 1(1), (2015): 47–60.

Rosenburgh, Bob. "Training for Warfare." Soldiers 62 (2007): 34–36.

Rottman, Gordon. L.

World War II Pacific Island Guide: A Geo-Military Study . Westport: Greenwood Press (2002).

Woodward, Rachel.

Military Geographies . Malden, MA: Blackwell (2004).

Zakharenko, I. A. "Military Geography: Past and Present." Military Thought 10 (2001): 32–37.

The United States Air War College [2] Powerpoint of Flashpoints [3] Links to related articles v t e Intelligence management Collection Human (HUMINT) Special reconnaissance organizations Clandestine Asset recruiting Cell system Covert action Direct action Operational techniques Espionage Agents field handling Asset Black operation black bag Concealment device Cover Cryptography Cutout Dead drop Defection / Turncoat Denial and deception Eavesdropping False flag Industrial espionage Interrogation Numbers station One-way voice link Resident spy Steganography Surveillance Signals (SIGINT) By alliances, nations and industries In modern history Operational platforms by nation Direction finding Traffic analysis TEMPEST Measurement and signature (MASINT) Electro-optical Geophysical Nuclear Radar Radiofrequency Materials Casualty estimation ( earthquake ) Other Financial (FININT) Geospatial (GEOINT) Imagery (IMINT) Open-source (OSINT) Technical (TECHINT) Analysis Competing hypotheses Target-centric Words of estimative probability All-source intelligence Basic intelligence Intelligence assessment Medical intelligence Military geography Scientific & Technical intelligence Dissemination Intelligence cycle security Counterintelligence organizations Counterintelligence and counter-terrorism organizations v t e Sub-fields of and approaches to human geography Sub-fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Approaches Critical Culture theory Feminist Marxist Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Non-representational theory Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Scientific method Time Universalism Category v t e Geography topics Glossary History Philosophy Geographers Index Outline Branches Human Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Atmospheric science / Meteorology Environmental science Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Geobiology Geophysics / Geodesy Earth system science Geomorphology / Geology Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Soil science ( Pedology / Edaphology ) Quaternary science Technical Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Time geography Techniques and tools Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Institutions, organizations, and societies Geography organizations Geographic data and information organizations Geographical societies Geoscience societies Education Geo-literacy Geographers on Film International Geography Olympiad National Council for Geographic Education Spatial citizenship Publication Geography books Geography journals Geographic magazines Category Portal Commons WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐d4s4k
Cached time: 20250812021047
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.431 seconds
Real time usage: 0.518 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2950/1000000
Revision size: 16852/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 188113/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 41705/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 71361/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.259/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5171366/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  407.172      1 -total
 17.62%   71.754      1 Template:Geography_sidebar
 17.21%   70.063      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 13.92%   56.663      1 Template:Navboxes
 13.48%   54.905      1 Template:Reflist
 13.43%   54.684      4 Template:Unreferenced_section
 13.15%   53.537      7 Template:Navbox
 12.21%   49.707      4 Template:Unreferenced
 11.48%   46.725      1 Template:Short_description
 11.29%   45.955      4 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1794929:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021047 and revision id 1268888050. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Military_geography&oldid=1268888050 " Categories : Military geography Human geography Political geography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles needing additional references from November 2024 All articles needing additional references All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from November 2024 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from November 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2008 This page was last edited on 12 January 2025, at 01:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Military geography 24 languages Add topic

