Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 Description Toggle Description subsection 2.1 FindU 2.2 MADIS 2.3 Ease of sending data 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Citizen Weather Observer Program 2 languages Čeština Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Network of weather stations based in the United States This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Citizen Weather Observer Program" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A CWOP home weather station.  The mast supports a wind vane and anemometer , while the rain gauge and other sensors are installed near ground level.

The Citizen Weather Observer Program ( CWOP ) is a network of privately owned electronic weather stations concentrated in the United States but also located in over 150 countries. Network participation allows volunteers with computerized weather stations to send automated surface weather observations to the National Weather Service (NWS) by way of the Meteorological Assimilation Data Ingest System (MADIS). This data is then used by the Rapid Refresh (RAP) and other forecast models to produce forecasts. Observations are also redistributed to the public.

Origin [ edit ] The CWOP was originally set up by amateur radio operators experimenting with packet radio , but now includes Internet-only connected stations, as well as amateur radio Automatic Packet Reporting System (APRS) stations. As of October 2017 [update] , more than 13,000 stations worldwide report regularly to the network.

[ 1 ] Description [ edit ] The Citizen Weather Observer Program is a program to collect surface weather observations from thousands of privately operated weather stations, into the FindU database, and forward it to the Meteorological Assimilation Data Ingest System ( MADIS Archived 2009-03-12 at the Wayback Machine ), operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).

[ 2 ] FindU [ edit ] The FindU database is a set of privately operated Internet servers, run by Steve Dimse, (amateur radio callsign K4HG). Numerous IGates (Internet Gateways) receive broadcast amateur radio Automatic Packet Reporting System (APRS) packets containing position and short messages (including telemetry such weather observations), and forward the data to the FindU servers via APRS-IS on the Internet. Weather observations may be polled directly from FindU, and the data is forwarded to MADIS for ingest. APRS messages may also originate directly from computers on the Internet without being broadcast on the radio waves.

MADIS [ edit ] The Meteorological Assimilation Data Ingest System ( MADIS Archived 2009-03-12 at the Wayback Machine ) integrates weather observations from numerous different sources, including CWOP via FindU, and drives a number of different weather forecasting products. Incoming data are subjected to temporal and spatial consistency checks, and quality flags are stored with the data, to enable users to access the most trustworthy data possible. From MADIS, CWOP data is also re-distributed to other users such as Mesowest .

Ease of sending data [ edit ] The amateur radio connection makes it inexpensive and simple for an individual to install consumer-level weather sensors at a point of interest, connect them to a radio transmitter via a simple APRS modem, and start sharing weather reports with forecasters worldwide. Solar power and radio transmission makes it possible to drop completely self-contained weather sensors on unattended and wireless sites, allowing for a dense set of sample measurements to be collected.

See also [ edit ] Mesonet Community Collaborative Rain, Hail and Snow Network (CoCoRaHS) Cooperative Observer Program Significant Weather Observing Program (SWOP) Skywarn Safecast References [ edit ] ^ Citizens Weather Observing Program.

Hourly Number of WX Stations sending data to CWOP servers.

Retrieved on 2017-10-18.

^ David Helms.

Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) Information.

Archived 2002-12-05 at archive.today Retrieved on 2008-01-12.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Citizen Weather Observer Program .

Citizen Weather Observer Program APRS links and information, after Bob Bruninga, WB4APR APRSWXNET Information page about APRS weather reporting by Steve Dimse CWOP quality control description by Russ Chadwick CWOP wiki by Russ Chadwick Sample FindU weather report, from W0CHP-13 in Winona, Minnesota v t e Earth-based meteorological observation systems and weather stations General Aircraft report (AIREP) Automated airport weather station Automatic weather station (AWS) Binary Universal Form for the Representation of meteorological data (BUFR) Dropsonde Hurricane Hunters Mesonet Meteorological Aerodrome Report (METAR) Pilot report (PIREP) Weather ship By region Worldwide Aircraft Communication Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS) Aircraft Meteorological Data Relay (AMDAR) Argo Automated Meteorological Data Acquisition System (AMeDAS) Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis (DART) FluxNet Project (FluxNet) Global Atmosphere Watch (GAW) Global Sea Level Observing System (GLOSS) Prediction and Research Moored Array in the Atlantic (PIRATA) Research Moored Array for African-Asian-Australian Monsoon Analysis and Prediction (RAMA) Tropical Atmosphere Ocean project (TAO/TRITON) Voluntary observing ship program United States Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) NEXRAD radar Snow Telemetry (SNOTEL) Remote Automated Weather Station (RAWS) Road Weather Information System (RWIS) Tropospheric Airborne Meteorological Data Reporting (TAMDAR) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Citizen_Weather_Observer_Program&oldid=1241283243 " Categories : Crowdsourcing Meteorological data and networks Hidden categories: Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2014 All articles needing additional references Articles containing potentially dated statements from October 2017 All articles containing potentially dated statements Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 August 2024, at 10:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Citizen Weather Observer Program 2 languages Add topic

