Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Mission concept 1.2 Objectives 2 Proposed scientific payload 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Enceladus Life Finder 5 languages Español Français 한국어 Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Proposed NASA mission to a moon of Saturn Voyager 2 view of Enceladus in 1981: Samarkand Sulci vertical grooves (lower center); Ali Baba and Aladdin craters (upper left) Enceladus Life Finder ( ELF ) is a proposed astrobiology mission concept for a NASA spacecraft intended to assess the habitability of the internal aquatic ocean of Enceladus , which is Saturn 's sixth-largest moon [ 1 ] [ 2 ] of at least 274 total moons, and seemingly similar in chemical makeup to comets .

[ 3 ] The spaceprobe would orbit Saturn and fly through Enceladus's geyser-like plumes multiple times. It would be powered by energy supplied from solar panels on the spacecraft .

Overview [ edit ] Enceladus's south pole - Geysers spray water from many locations along the 'tiger stripes' feature.

The Enceladus Life Finder mission was first proposed in 2015 for Discovery Mission 13 funding, [ 2 ] and then it was proposed in May 2017 to NASA's New Frontiers program Mission 4, [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] but it was not selected.

[ 7 ] If selected at another future opportunity, the ELF mission would search for biosignature and biomolecules in the geysers of Enceladus. The south polar jets loft water, salts and organic molecules dozens of miles over the moon's surface from an underground regional ocean. The hypothesis is that the water is warmed by thermal vents similar to features found deep in Earth's oceans. ELF's instruments would measure amino acids — the building blocks of proteins — analyze fatty acids , and determine whether methane (CH 4 ) found in the plumes could have been produced by living organisms .

[ 2 ] In 2008, the Cassini orbiter was flown through a plume and analyzed the material with its neutral mass spectrometer . The  orbiter detected simple organics, including methane (CH 4 ), carbon monoxide (CO), carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) nitrogen , and complex organic compounds .

[ 8 ] Cassini also detected sodium and potassium at a concentration implying a salty liquid ocean.

[ 8 ] However, Cassini did not have the equipment with the sensitivity required for direct analyses.

[ 1 ] [ 8 ] On 14 December 2023, astronomers reported the first time discovery, in the plumes of Enceladus, of hydrogen cyanide , a possible chemical essential for life as we know it, as well as other organic molecules , some of which are yet to be better identified and understood. According to the researchers, "these [newly discovered] compounds could potentially support extant microbial communities or drive complex organic synthesis leading to the origin of life ." [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Mission concept [ edit ] Composite map of Enceladus's south polar region showing cracks dubbed 'tiger stripes' where the geysers are located.

The Enceladus Life Finder (ELF) mission would pursue the implications of Cassini orbiter's 2005 discoveries of active jetting from, and existence of an ocean within, Enceladus. The mission concept would have the ELF orbiter fly 8 to 10 times through plumes of water launched above the south pole of Enceladus over a period of 3 years.

[ 2 ] The geysers could provide easy access for sampling the moon's subsurface ocean, and if there is microbial life in it, ice particles from the sea could contain the evidence astrobiologists need to identify them.

[ 11 ] The Principal Investigator is Jonathan Lunine of Cornell University in Ithaca, New York.

Objectives [ edit ] The goals of the mission are derived directly from the most recent decadal survey: first, to determine primordial sources of organics and the sites of organic synthesis today; and second, to determine if there are current habitats in Enceladus where the conditions for life could exist today, and if life exists there now.

[ 1 ] To achieve these goals, the ELF mission has three objectives: [ 1 ] To measure abundances of a carefully selected set of neutral species, some of which were detected by Cassini , to ascertain whether the organics and volatiles coming from Enceladus have been thermally altered over time.

To determine the details of the interior marine environment — pH , oxidation state , available chemical energy, and temperature — that permit characterization of the life-carrying capacity of the interior.

To look for indications that organics are the result of biological processes through three independent types of chemical measurements that are widely recognized as diagnostic of life.

Proposed scientific payload [ edit ] Artist's impression of possible hydrothermal activity on Enceladus.

The ELF spacecraft would use two mass spectrometers to assess habitability of the interior oceanic environment. The payload consists of
the MASPEX and the ENIJA, optimized to analyze respectively the gas and grains: [ 1 ] [ 8 ] Mass Spectrometer for Planetary Exploration (MASPEX) is a next generation mass spectrometer with significantly improved performance over existing instruments, and optimized to analyze the gas expelled from the vents.

Enceladus Icy Jet Analyzer (ENIJA), optimized to analyze solid particles expelled from the vents.

The Cassini spacecraft has measured small silica particles, normally formed at 90 °C or higher, streaming from Enceladus.

[ 12 ] The size and composition of the particles suggest that they come from current hydrothermal activity , [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] where the moon's ocean meets the underlying rock, a prime habitat for life.

[ 12 ] [ 17 ] ELF's instruments would conduct three kinds of tests in order to minimize the ambiguity involved in life detection.

[ 1 ] [ 8 ] The first would look for a characteristic distribution of amino acids (the building blocks of proteins ). The second test would determine whether the carbon number distribution in fatty acids or isoprenoids is biased toward a particular rule (even, odd, or divisible by a small integer). The third would measure carbon and hydrogen isotopic ratios , together with the abundance of methane relative to other alkanes, to assess whether the values fall in the range for biological processes.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Astronomy portal Biology portal Abiogenesis Astrobiology Enceladus Orbilander Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability (ELSAH) Explorer of Enceladus and Titan (E 2 T) Europa Clipper Journey to Enceladus and Titan (JET) Life Investigation For Enceladus (LIFE) THEO References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Lunine, Jonathan I.; Waite, Jack Hunter Jr.; Postberg, Frank; Spilker, Linda J. (2015).

Enceladus Life Finder: The search for life in a habitable moon (PDF) . 46th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference (2015). Houston (TX): Lunar and Planetary Institute.

^ a b c d Clark, Stephen (April 6, 2015).

"Diverse destinations considered for new interplanetary probe" .

Space Flight Now . Retrieved April 7, 2015 .

^ Battersby, Stephen (March 26, 2008).

"Saturn's moon Enceladus surprisingly comet-like" .

New Scientist . Retrieved April 16, 2015 .

^ Cofield, Calla (April 14, 2017).

"Enceladus' Subsurface Energy Source: What It Means for Search for Life" .

Space.com .

^ Chang, Kenneth (September 15, 2017).

"Back to Saturn? Five Missions Proposed to Follow Cassini" .

The New York Times .

^ Mann, Adam (2017).

"Inner Workings: Icy ocean worlds offer chances to find life" .

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences .

114 (18): 4566– 4568.

Bibcode : 2017PNAS..114.4566M .

doi : 10.1073/pnas.1703361114 .

ISSN 0027-8424 .

PMC 5422794 .

PMID 28461387 .

^ Glowatz, Elana (December 20, 2017).

"NASA's New Frontier Mission Will Search For Alien Life Or Reveal The Solar System's History" .

IB Times .

^ a b c d e f Lunine, Jonathan I.

"Searching for Life in the Saturn System: Enceladus Life Finder" (PDF) .

ELF Team . Lunar And Planetary Institute . Retrieved April 7, 2015 .

^ Chang, Kenneth (December 14, 2023).

"Poison Gas Hints at Potential for Life on an Ocean Moon of Saturn - A researcher who has studied the icy world said "the prospects for the development of life are getting better and better on Enceladus." " .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 14, 2023 . Retrieved December 15, 2023 .

^ Peter, Jonah S.; et al. (December 14, 2023).

"Detection of HCN and diverse redox chemistry in the plume of Enceladus" .

Nature Astronomy .

arXiv : 2301.05259 .

doi : 10.1038/s41550-023-02160-0 .

Archived from the original on December 15, 2023 . Retrieved December 15, 2023 .

^ Gronstal, Aaron (July 30, 2014).

"Enceladus in 101 Geysers" .

NASA Astrobiology Institute . Archived from the original on August 16, 2014 . Retrieved April 8, 2015 .

^ a b Witze, Alexandra (March 11, 2015).

"Hints of hot springs found on Saturnian moon" .

Nature News . Retrieved April 7, 2015 .

^ "Ocean Within Enceladus May Harbor Hydrothermal Activity" .

SpaceRef . March 11, 2015.

^ Platt, Jane; Bell, Brian (April 3, 2014).

"NASA Space Assets Detect Ocean inside Saturn Moon" .

NASA . Retrieved April 3, 2014 .

^ Iess, L.; Stevenson, D. J.; Parisi, M.; Hemingway, D.; Jacobson, R.A.; Lunine, Jonathan I.; Nimmo, F.; Armstrong, J. W.; Asmar, S. W.; Ducci, M.; Tortora, P. (April 4, 2014).

"The Gravity Field and Interior Structure of Enceladus" (PDF) .

Science .

344 (6179): 78– 80.

Bibcode : 2014Sci...344...78I .

doi : 10.1126/science.1250551 .

PMID 24700854 .

S2CID 28990283 .

^ Amos, Jonathan (April 3, 2014).

"Saturn's Enceladus moon hides 'great lake' of water" .

BBC News . Retrieved April 7, 2014 .

^ Anderson, Paul Scott (March 13, 2015).

"Cassini Finds Evidence for Hydrothermal Activity on Saturn's Moon Enceladus" .

AmericaSpace . Retrieved April 7, 2015 .

v t e Astrobiology Disciplines Astrochemistry Astrophysics Atmospheric sciences Biochemistry Evolutionary biology Exoplanetology Geomicrobiology Microbiology Paleontology Planetary oceanography Planetary science Main topics Abiogenesis Allan Hills 84001 Biomolecule Biosignature Drake equation Earliest known life forms Earth analog Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial sample curation Extremophiles Hypothetical types of biochemistry List of microorganisms tested in outer space Ocean planet Panspermia Planetary protection Search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) Yamato meteorite Planetary habitability Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Space missions Earth orbit BIO BIOCORE Biolab Bion BIOPAN Biosatellite program E-MIST ERA Eu:CROPIS EXOSTACK EXPOSE Lunar Micro Ecosystem O/OREOS OREOcube Tanpopo VEGGIE Mars Beagle 2 Fobos-Grunt Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover Mars 2020 Perseverance rover Phoenix Tianwen-1 Zhurong rover Trace Gas Orbiter Viking Comets and asteroids Hayabusa2 OSIRIS-REx Rosetta Heliocentric BioSentinel Planned Dragonfly Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover Proposed Breakthrough Enceladus BRUIE CAESAR Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder‎ Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Orbilander Europa Lander ExoLance Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Mars sample return mission Oceanus THEO Trident Cancelled and undeveloped Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection Kazachok Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher MELOS Northern Light Red Dragon Terrestrial Planet Finder Institutions and programs Astrobiology Society of Britain Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Breakthrough Starshot Carl Sagan Institute Center for Life Detection Science European Astrobiology Network Association NASA Astrobiology Institute Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Ocean Worlds Exploration Program Spanish Astrobiology Center‎ Category Commons v t e Extraterrestrial life Events and objects Shergotty meteorite (1865) Nakhla meteorite (1911) Murchison meteorite (1969) Viking lander biological experiments (1976) Allan Hills 77005 (1977) Allan Hills 84001 (1984) Yamato 000593 (2000) CI1 fossils (2011) Signals of interest Misidentified CP 1919 (misidentified pulsar) CTA-102 (misidentified quasar) Stars KIC 8462852 (unusual light fluctuations) EPIC 204278916 (unusual light fluctuations) VVV-WIT-07 (unusual light fluctuations) HD 164595 signal (unknown origin) Other SHGb02+14a (radio source) Wow! signal (inconclusive) Fast radio burst (unknown origin) BLC1 (radio signal) Life in the Universe Earliest known life forms Planetary habitability in the Solar System Life on Venus Life on Mars Life on Titan Planetary habitability Catalog of Nearby Habitable Systems Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems List of potentially habitable exoplanets Planetary habitability Superhabitable planet Tholin Space missions Beagle 2 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection BioSentinel Curiosity rover Darwin Dragonfly Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover ExoLance EXPOSE Foton-M3 Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Geyser Hopper Mars sample-return mission Mars 2020 Northern Light Opportunity rover Perseverance rover SpaceX Red Dragon Spirit rover Tanpopo Titan Mare Explorer Venus In Situ Explorer Viking 1 Viking 2 Interstellar communication Active SETI Allen Telescope Array Arecibo message Arecibo Observatory Berkeley SETI Research Center Bracewell probe Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence Gauss's Pythagorean right triangle proposal Astrolinguistics Lincos language NIROSETI Pioneer plaque Project Cyclops Project Ozma Project Phoenix SERENDIP Search for extraterrestrial intelligence SETI@home setiQuest Voyager Golden Record Water hole Xenolinguistics Types of alleged extraterrestrial beings Energy beings Grey aliens Insectoids Little green men Nordic aliens Reptilian humanoids Hypotheses Cosmic pluralism Directed panspermia Drake equation Extraterrestrial hypothesis Fermi paradox Hypothetical types of biochemistry Interplanetary contamination Kardashev scale Mediocrity principle Non-planetary abiogenesis Panspermia Fermi paradox solutions Aestivation hypothesis Berserker hypothesis Dark forest hypothesis Firstborn hypothesis Great Filter Hart–Tipler conjecture Neocatastrophism Planetarium hypothesis Rare Earth hypothesis Zoo hypothesis Related topics Ancient astronauts Astrobiology Astroecology Biosignature Brookings Report Exotheology Extraterrestrials in fiction Extremophile Hemolithin History of the extraterrestrial life debate Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Noogenesis Planetary protection Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact Post-detection policy San Marino Scale Technosignature UFO religion Xenoarchaeology v t e NASA Planetary Missions Program Office Discovery program Missions Main NEAR Shoemaker Mars Pathfinder Lunar Prospector Stardust Genesis CONTOUR † MESSENGER Deep Impact Dawn Kepler GRAIL InSight Lucy Psyche DAVINCI VERITAS Opportunity ASPERA-3 EPOXI NExT Moon Mineralogy Mapper Strofio MEGANE Proposals Finalists Mission 12 Comet Hopper Titan Mare Explorer Mission 13 and 14 NEOCam Mission 15 and 16 Io Volcano Observer Trident Candidates Enceladus Life Finder Icebreaker Life ISOCHRON JET LIFE MANTIS Mars Geyser Hopper Moon Diver PADME Phobos Surveyor Whipple New Frontiers program Missions New Horizons Juno OSIRIS-REx Dragonfly Proposals Finalists Mission 2 MoonRise Mission 3 MoonRise SAGE Mission 4 CAESAR Candidates CONDOR CORSAIR ELF ELSAH Oceanus SPRITE VICI VISAGE VOX Solar System Exploration program Missions DART JUICE instruments Europa Clipper Underline indicates active current missions Italics indicate missions yet to launch Symbol † indicates failure en route or before intended mission data returned v t e Spacecraft missions to Saturn Past Flybys Pioneer 11 Voyager 1 Voyager 2 Orbiters Cassini–Huygens timeline retirement Landers Huygens (on Titan) Planned Dragonfly (to Titan, 2028) Proposed Saturn , rings Kronos Saturn Atmospheric Entry Probe SPRITE Titan Saturn System Mission Enceladus Enceladus Orbilander Breakthrough Enceladus mission Enceladus Life Finder Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Explorer Life Investigation For Enceladus Titan AVIATR Oceanus TALISE Titan Mare Explorer Titan Submarine Several moons Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Journey to Enceladus and Titan There are no ongoing missions to Saturn Portals : Astronomy Biology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Enceladus_Life_Finder&oldid=1293673883 " Categories : Discovery program proposals Enceladus Missions to Saturn New Frontiers program proposals Proposed NASA space probes Proposed astrobiology space missions Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from April 2015 This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 02:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Enceladus Life Finder 5 languages Add topic

