Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Editions 2 See also 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Leibniz–Clarke correspondence 4 languages Deutsch فارسی Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence ) Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716) Samuel Clarke (1675–1729) The Leibniz–Clarke correspondence was a scientific , theological and philosophical debate conducted in an exchange of letters between the German thinker Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and Samuel Clarke , an English supporter of Isaac Newton during the years 1715 and 1716.  The exchange began because of a letter Leibniz wrote to Caroline of Ansbach , in which he remarked that Newtonian physics was detrimental to natural theology .  Eager to defend the Newtonian view, Clarke responded, and the correspondence continued until the death of Leibniz in 1716.

[ 1 ] Although a variety of subjects are touched on in the letters, the main interest for modern readers is in the dispute between the absolute theory of space favoured by Newton and Clarke, and Leibniz's relational approach.  Also important is the conflict between Clarke's and Leibniz's opinions on free will and whether God must create the best of all possible worlds .

[ 2 ] Leibniz had published only one book on moral matters, the Théodicée (1710), and his more metaphysical views had never been exposed to a sufficient extent, so the collected letters were met with interest by their contemporaries. The primary dispute between Leibniz and Newton about calculus was still fresh in the public's mind and it was taken as a matter of course that it was Newton himself who stood behind Clarke's replies.

Editions [ edit ] The Leibniz-Clarke letters were first published under Clarke's name in the year following Leibniz's death.

[ 3 ] Clarke wrote a preface, took care of the translation from French, added notes and some of his own writing. In 1720 Pierre Desmaizeaux published a similar volume in a French translation, [ 4 ] including quotes from Newton's work. It is quite certain that for both editions the opinion of Newton himself has been sought and Leibniz left at a disadvantage.

[ 5 ] However the German translation of the correspondence published by Kohler, also in 1720, [ 6 ] contained a reply to Clarke's last letter which Leibniz had not been able to answer, due to his death. The letters have been reprinted in most collections of Leibniz's works and regularly published in stand-alone editions.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy of space and time Principle of sufficient reason Notes [ edit ] ^ Rowe, p. 8 ^ Rowe, p. 4 ^ A Collection of Papers, which passed between the late Learned Mr. Leibniz, and Dr. Clarke, In the Years 1715 and 1716 , by Samuel Clarke D.D. (London:  James Knapton, 1717) ^ Recueil de pièces diverses sur la philosophie la religion et l'histoire par Leibniz, Clarke et Newton , publiées par Pierre Desmaizeaux, Amsterdam, 1720 ^ Bertoloni-Melli D., Newton and the Leibniz-Clarke correspondence ,  The Cambridge Companion to Newton, eds. I. B. Cohen and G. E. Smith, Cambridge University Press,  2002.

^ Merckwurdige Schriften welche . . . zwischen dem Herrn Baron von Leibniz und dem Herrn D. Clarke über besondere Materien der naturlichen Religion in Franzos. und Englischer Sprache gewechselt und . . . in teutscher Sprache herausgegeben worden von Heinrich Kohler, Frankfurt and Leipzig (Jena), 1720: there was a preface by Christian Wolff and a reply to Clarke's last letter in  behalf of Leibniz by Ludwig Philipp Thümmig; it appeared also in the Latin translation from 1740.

^ A full list is given in Alexander H., The Leibniz-Clarke Correspondence ,  with extracts from Newton's Principia and Opticks , edited with an introduction and notes, Manchester, 1955 (and reeditions); for a more recent edition see e.g.

G. W. Leibniz and Samuel Clarke: Correspondence , Edited, with Introduction, by Roger Ariew, Hackett Publishing Co. Inc. Indianapolis/Cambridge, 2000.

References [ edit ] G.V. Leroy, Die philosophische Probleme in dem Briefwechsel Leibniz und Clarke , Giessen, 1893.

Vailati, Ezio (1997).

Leibniz and Clarke: A Study of Their Correspondence . Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780195113990 .

Rowe, William L.

, "Can God Be Free?", Oxford UP, 2004.

ISBN 0198250452 .

External links [ edit ] Complete transcription of the 1717 edition at The Newton Project Stanford encyclopedia of philosophy - Divine Freedom v t e Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Bibliography Outline Mathematics and philosophy Alternating series test Best of all possible worlds Calculus controversy Calculus ratiocinator Characteristica universalis Compossibility Difference Dynamism Identity of indiscernibles Individuation Law of continuity Leibniz wheel Leibniz's gap Leibniz's notation Lingua generalis Mathesis universalis Pre-established harmony Plenitude Sufficient reason Salva veritate Theodicy Transcendental law of homogeneity Rationalism Universal science Vis viva Works De Arte Combinatoria (1666) Discourse on Metaphysics (1686) New Essays on Human Understanding (1704) Théodicée (1710) Monadology (1714) Leibniz–Clarke correspondence (1715–1716) Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Leibniz–Clarke_correspondence&oldid=1274998759 " Categories : 1715 documents 1716 documents Philosophical debates Historical physics publications Space Correspondences Works by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Caroline of Ansbach Hidden category: Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images This page was last edited on 10 February 2025, at 14:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Leibniz–Clarke correspondence 4 languages Add topic

