Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology Toggle Etymology subsection 1.1 Definition 1.2 Scholarly work and expanding definition 2 African diasporas 3 Asian diasporas 4 European diasporas 5 Internal diasporas Toggle Internal diasporas subsection 5.1 Canada 5.2 Brazil 5.3 Italy 6 20th century Toggle 20th century subsection 6.1 World War II, colonialism, and post-colonialism 6.2 The Cold War and the formation of post-colonial states 7 21st century Toggle 21st century subsection 7.1 Middle East 7.2 Venezuelan refugee crisis 8 Diaspora Internet services 9 Diaspora languages 10 In popular culture 11 See also Toggle See also subsection 11.1 Specific diasporas 11.1.1 Religious diasporas 11.1.2 Country-specific diasporas 11.2 Forced migration 11.3 Conflicts and genocides 11.4 Statelessness 12 References Toggle References subsection 12.1 Citations 12.2 Sources 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Diaspora 87 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch Аԥсшәа العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Nedersaksies 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Widely scattered population from a single original territory For other uses, see Diaspora (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Dysphoria .

India has the world's largest annual emigration.

[ 1 ] Pictured at Ricoh Coliseum, in Toronto, Canada, on April 15, 2015 The Mexican diaspora is the world's second-largest; [ 2 ] pictured is Mexican day celebrations in Germany .

A diaspora ( / d aɪ ˈ æ s p ər ə / dy- ASP -ər-ə ) is a population that is scattered across regions which are separate from its geographic place of origin .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The word is used in reference to people who identify with a specific geographic location, but currently reside elsewhere.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Notable diasporic populations include the Palestinian diaspora; [ 8 ] Romani from the Indian subcontinent ; [ 9 ] Jewish diaspora after the Babylonian exile; [ 10 ] Assyrian diaspora following the Assyrian genocide ; [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Greeks that fled or were displaced following the fall of Constantinople [ 13 ] and the later Greek genocide [ 14 ] as well as the Istanbul pogroms ; [ 15 ] Anglo-Saxons (primarily to the Byzantine Empire ) after the Norman Conquest of England ; [ 16 ] the Chinese diaspora and Indian diaspora who left their homelands during the 19th and 20th centuries; [ 17 ] the Irish diaspora after the Great Famine ; [ 18 ] the Scottish diaspora that developed on a large scale after the Highland and Lowland Clearances ; [ 19 ] the Italian diaspora , the Mexican diaspora ; the Circassian diaspora in the aftermath of the Circassian genocide ; the Armenian diaspora following the Armenian genocide ; [ 20 ] [ 21 ] the Lebanese diaspora due to the Lebanese civil war ; [ 22 ] Syrians due to the Syrian civil war ; [ 23 ] and the Iranian diaspora which grew from half a million to 3.8 million between the 1979 revolution and 2019.

[ 24 ] According to a 2019 United Nations report, the Indian diaspora is the world's largest diaspora, with a population of 17.5 million, followed by the Mexican diaspora , with a population of 11.8 million, and the Chinese diaspora , with a population of 10.7 million.

[ 25 ] Etymology [ edit ] The term "diaspora" is derived from the Ancient Greek verb διασπείρω ( diaspeirō ), "I scatter", "I spread about" which in turn is composed of διά ( dia ), "between, through, across" and the verb σπείρω ( speirō ), "I sow, I scatter". The term διασπορά ( diaspora ) hence meant "scattering".

[ 26 ] Emigrants Leave Ireland depicting the emigration from Ireland following the Great Famine There is confusion over the exact process of derivation from these Ancient Greek verbs to the concept of diaspora. Many cite Thucydides (5th century BC) as the first to use the word.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] However, sociologist Stéphane Dufoix remarks "not only is the noun diaspora quite absent from the Greek original [Thucydides' Peloponnesian War , II, 27)], but the original does not include the verb diaspeírô either. The verb used is the verb speírô (seed) conjugated in the passive aorist." [ 30 ] The passage in Thucydides reads: καὶ οἱ μὲν αὐτῶν ἐνταῦθα ᾤκησαν, οἱ δ᾽ ἐσπάρησαν [esparēsan] κατὰ τὴν ἄλλην Ἑλλάδα , translated to mean 'Those of the Aeginetans who did not settle here were scattered over the rest of Hellas.' [ 31 ] Dufoix further notes, "Of all the occurrences of diaspora in the Thesaurus Linguae Graecae (TLG), which draws upon almost the entire written corpus in the Greek language . . . none refer to colonisation." [ 32 ] Dufoix surmises that the confusion may stem from a comment by Jewish historian Simon Dubnow , who wrote an entry on diaspora for the influential Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences .

[ 33 ] His entry, published in 1931, includes the following remark: "In a sense Magna Graecia constituted a Greek diaspora in the ancient Roman Empire." [ 34 ] [ a ] "Magna Graecia" refers to ancient Greek colonies established along the Italian coast, which lost their independence following the Second Punic War and their integration into the Roman Empire.

The first recorded use of the word "diaspora" is found in the Septuagint , first in: Deuteronomy 28:25, in the phrase ἔσῃ ἐν διασπορᾷ ἐν πάσαις ταῖς βασιλείαις τῆς γῆς , esē en diaspora en pasais tais basileiais tēs gēs , translated to mean 'thou shalt be a dispersion in all kingdoms of the earth' and secondly in: Psalms 146(147).2, in the phrase οἰκοδομῶν Ἰερουσαλὴμ ὁ Kύριος καὶ τὰς διασπορὰς τοῦ Ἰσραὴλ ἐπισυνάξει , oikodomōn Ierousalēm ho Kyrios kai tas diasporas tou Israēl episynaxē , translated to mean 'The Lord doth build up Jerusalem: he gathereth together the outcasts of Israel'.

When the Bible was translated into Greek, the word diaspora was applied in reference to the Kingdom of Samaria which was exiled from Israel by the Assyrians between 740 and 722 BC, [ 36 ] as well as Jews, Benjaminites, and Levites who were exiled from the Kingdom of Judah by the Babylonians in 587 BC, and Jews who were exiled from Roman Judea by the Roman Empire in 70 AD.

[ 37 ] It subsequently came to be used in reference to the historical movements and settlement patterns of the Jews.

[ 38 ] In English, capitalized, and without modifiers, the term can refer specifically to the Jewish diaspora .

[ 39 ] The wider application of diaspora evolved from the Assyrian two-way mass deportation policy of conquered populations to deny future territorial claims on their part.

[ 40 ] Definition [ edit ] Kurdish refugees from Kobanî in a refugee camp, on the Turkish side of the Syria–Turkey border .

The oldest known use of the word "diaspora" in English is in 1594 in John Stockwood's translation of Lambert Daneau's commentary on the Twelve Prophets . Daneau writes: This scattering abrode of the Iewes, as it were an heauenly sowing, fell out after their returne from the captiuitie of Babylon. Wherevpon both Acts. 2. and also 1. Pet. 1. and 1. Iam. ver. 1. [sic] they are called Diaspora , that is, a scattering or sowing abrode.

[ 41 ] However, the current entry on "diaspora" in the Oxford English Dictionary Online dates the first recorded use a century later to 1694, in a work on ordination by the Welsh theologian James Owen. Owen wanted to prove that there is no difference in the Bible between Presbyters and Bishops; he cited the example of the Jews in exile: The Presbyters of the Jewish Diaspora , to whom St.

Peter wrote, are requir'd ποιμαίνειν ϗ̀ ἐπισκοπείν, to feed or rule the Flock, and to perform the office and work of Bishops among them.

[ 42 ] The OED records a usage of "diaspora" in 1876, which refers to "extensive diaspora work (as it is termed) of evangelizing among the National Protestant Churches on the continent".

[ 43 ] The term became more widely assimilated into English by the mid 1950s, with long-term expatriates in significant numbers from other particular countries or regions also being referred to as a diaspora.

[ 44 ] An academic field, diaspora studies , has become established relating to this sense of the word.

Scholarly work and expanding definition [ edit ] The Chinese diaspora is the world's third largest; Paifang ( torna ) gateway at Sydney Chinatown in Australia .

William Safran in an article published in 1991, [ 45 ] set out six rules to distinguish diasporas from migrant communities. These included criteria that the group maintains a myth or collective memory of their homeland; they regard their ancestral homeland as their true home, to which they will eventually return ; being committed to the restoration or maintenance of that homeland, and they relate "personally or vicariously" to the homeland to a point where it shapes their identity.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] [ 48 ] Safran's definitions were influenced by the idea of the Jewish diaspora.

[ 49 ] Safran also included a criterion of having been forced into exile by political or economic factors, followed by a long period of settlement in the new host culture.

[ 50 ] In 1997, Robin Cohen argued that a diasporic group could leave its homeland voluntarily, and assimilate deeply into host cultures.

[ 51 ] Rogers Brubaker (2005) more inclusively applied three basic definitional criteria: First, geographic dispersion (voluntary or forced) of a people; second, "the orientation to a real or imagined 'homeland' as an authoritative source of value, identity and loyalty"; and third, maintenance of a social boundary corresponding to the conservation of a distinctive diasporic identity which differs from the host culture.

[ 52 ] Brubaker also noted that the use of the term diaspora has been widening. He suggests that one element of this expansion in use "involves the application of the term diaspora to an ever-broadening set of cases: essentially to any and every nameable population category that is to some extent dispersed in space".

[ 53 ] Brubaker used the WorldCat database to show that 17 out of the 18 books on diaspora published between 1900 and 1910 were on the Jewish diaspora. The majority of works in the 1960s were also about the Jewish diaspora, but in 2002 only two out of 20 books sampled (out of a total of 253) were about the Jewish case, with a total of eight different diasporas covered.

[ 54 ] Brubaker outlined the original use of the term diaspora as follows: [ 55 ] Most early discussions of the diaspora were firmly rooted in a conceptual 'homeland'; they were concerned with a paradigmatic case, or a small number of core cases. The paradigmatic case was, of course, the Jewish diaspora; some dictionary definitions of diaspora, until recently, did not simply illustrate but defined the word with reference to that case.

Armenian American dancers in New York City Some observers have labeled evacuation from New Orleans and the Gulf Coast in the wake of Hurricane Katrina the New Orleans diaspora , since a significant number of evacuees have not been able to return, yet maintain aspirations to do so.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] Agnieszka Weinar (2010) notes the widening use of the term, arguing that recently, "a growing body of literature succeeded in reformulating the definition, framing diaspora as almost any population on the move and no longer referring to the specific context of their existence".

[ 47 ] It has even been noted that as charismatic Christianity becomes increasingly globalized, many Christians conceive of themselves as a diaspora, and form a bond that mimics salient features of some ethnic diasporas.

[ 58 ] Professional communities of individuals no longer in their homeland can also be considered diaspora. For example, science diasporas are communities of scientists who conduct their research away from their homeland [ 59 ] and trading diasporas are communities of merchant aliens. In an article published in 1996, Khachig Tölölyan [ 60 ] argues that the media have used the term corporate diaspora in a rather arbitrary and inaccurate fashion, for example as applied to "mid-level, mid-career executives who have been forced to find new places at a time of corporate upheaval" (10) The use of corporate diaspora reflects the increasing popularity of the diaspora notion to describe a wide range of phenomena related to contemporary migration, displacement and transnational mobility. While corporate diaspora seems to avoid or contradict connotations of violence, coercion, and unnatural uprooting historically associated with the notion of diaspora, its scholarly use may heuristically describe the ways in which corporations function alongside diasporas. In this way, corporate diaspora might foreground the racial histories of diasporic formations without losing sight of the cultural logic of late capitalism in which corporations orchestrate the transnational circulation of people, images, ideologies and capital.

In contemporary times, scholars have classified the different kinds of diasporas based on their causes, such as colonialism , trade/labour migrations , or the social coherence which exists within the diaspora communities and their ties to the ancestral lands. With greater migration flows through the world in modern times, the concept of a secondary diaspora (a new diaspora branching out of a previous diaspora) or sub-diaspora groupings has started being studied.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] Some diaspora communities maintain strong cultural and political ties to their homelands. Other qualities that may be typical of many diasporas are thoughts of return to the ancestral lands, maintaining any form of ties with the region of origin as well as relationships with other communities in the diaspora, and lack of full integration into the new host countries. Diasporas often maintain ties to the country of their historical affiliation and usually influence their current host country's policies towards their homeland. "Diaspora management" is a term that Harris Mylonas has "re-conceptualized to describe both the policies that states follow in order to build links with their diaspora abroad and the policies designed to help with the incorporation and integration of diasporic communities when they 'return' home".

[ 63 ] African diasporas [ edit ] Further information: African diaspora Major slave trading regions of Africa, 15th–19th centuries The diaspora of Africans during the Atlantic slave trade is one of the most notorious modern diasporas. 10.7 million people from West Africa survived transportation to arrive in the Americas as slaves starting in the late 16th century CE and continuing into the 19th.

[ citation needed ] Outside of the Atlantic slave trade, however, African diasporic communities have existed for millennia. While some communities were slave-based, other groups emigrated for various reasons.

From the 8th through the 19th centuries, the Arab slave trade dispersed millions of Africans to Asia and the islands of the Indian Ocean.

[ 64 ] [ page needed ] The Islamic slave trade also has resulted in the creation of communities of African descent in India, most notably the Siddi , Makrani and Sri Lanka Kaffirs .

[ 65 ] [ page needed ] Beginning as early as the 2nd century AD, the kingdom of Aksum (modern-day Ethiopia ) created colonies on the Arabian Peninsula. During the 4th century, Aksum formally adopted Christianity as a state religion, becoming the first to do so along with Armenia . In the 6th century, Kaleb of Axum invaded Himyar (modern-day Yemen ) to aid and defend Christians under religious persecution. During these campaigns, several groups of soldiers chose not to return to Aksum. These groups are estimated to have ranged in size from the 600s to mid 3000s.

[ 66 ] Previously, migrant Africans with national African passports could only enter thirteen African countries without advanced visas. In pursuing a unified future, the African Union (AU) launched an African Union Passport in July 2016, allowing people with a passport from one of the 55 member states of the AU to move freely between these countries under this visa free passport and encourage migrants with national African passports to return to Africa.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] [ 69 ] Asian diasporas [ edit ] Main article: Asian diaspora Filipino Market in Kota Kinabalu , Sabah , Malaysia.

Bukharan Jews in Samarkand , present-day Uzbekistan , c.

1910 The largest Asian diaspora in the world is the Indian diaspora. The overseas Indian community, estimated to number over 17.5 million, is spread across many regions of the world, on every continent. It is a global community which is diverse, heterogeneous and eclectic and its members represent different regions, languages, cultures, and faiths (see Desi ).

[ 70 ] Similarly, the Romani , numbering roughly 12 million in Europe [ 71 ] trace their origins to the Indian subcontinent , and their presence in Europe is first attested to in the Middle Ages .

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] The South Asian diaspora as a whole has over 44 million people.

[ 74 ] The earliest known Asian diaspora of note is the Jewish diaspora . With roots in the Babylonian Captivity and later migrations under Hellenism , the majority of the diaspora can be attributed to the Roman conquest , expulsion, and enslavement of the Jewish population of Judea , [ 75 ] whose descendants became the Ashkenazim , Sephardim , and Mizrahim of today, [ 76 ] [ 77 ] roughly numbering 15 million of which 8 million still live in the diaspora, [ 78 ] though the number was much higher before Zionist aliyah (immigration to Israel) and the murder of 6 million Jews in the Holocaust .

Chinese emigration (also known as the Chinese Diaspora; see also Overseas Chinese ) [ 79 ] first occurred thousands of years ago. The mass emigration that occurred from the 19th century to 1949 was caused mainly by wars and starvation in mainland China , as well as political corruption. Most migrants were illiterate or poorly educated peasants, called by the now-recognized racial slur coolies ( Chinese : 苦力 ; lit.

'hard labour'), who migrated to developing countries in need of labor, such as the Americas, Australia, South Africa, Southeast Asia, Malaya and other places.

The Pakistani diaspora is the third largest diaspora in Asia with approximately 10 million Pakistanis living abroad mostly in Middle East, North America and Europe.

[ 80 ] At least three waves of Nepalese diaspora can be identified.

[ 81 ] The earliest wave dates back hundreds of years as early marriage and high birthrates propelled Hindu settlement eastward across Nepal, then into Sikkim and Bhutan. A backlash developed in the 1980s as Bhutan's political elites realized that Bhutanese Buddhists were at risk of becoming a minority in their own country. At least 60,000 ethnic Nepalese from Bhutan have been resettled in the United States.

[ 82 ] A second wave was driven by British recruitment of mercenary soldiers beginning around 1815 and resettlement after retirement in the British Isles and Southeast Asia. The third wave began in the 1970s as land shortages intensified and the pool of educated labor greatly exceeded job openings in Nepal. Job-related emigration created Nepalese enclaves in India, the wealthier countries of the Middle East, Europe, and North America. Current estimates of the number of Nepalese living outside Nepal range well up into the millions.

In Siam, regional power struggles among several kingdoms in the region led to a large diaspora of ethnic Lao between the 1700s–1800s by Siamese rulers to settle large areas of the Siamese kingdom's northeast region, where Lao ethnicity is still a major factor in 2012. During this period, Siam decimated the Lao capital, capturing, torturing, and killing the Lao king Anuwongse , who led the Lao rebellion in the 19th century .

European diasporas [ edit ] Further information: European diaspora European history contains numerous diaspora-causing events. In ancient times , the trading and colonising activities of the Greek tribes from the Balkans and Asia Minor spread people of Greek culture, religion and language around the Mediterranean and Black Sea basins, establishing Greek city-states in southern Italy (the so-called " Magna Graecia "), northern Libya, eastern Spain, the south of France , and the Black Sea coasts. Greeks founded more than 400 colonies.

[ 83 ] Tyre and Carthage also colonised the Mediterranean.

Greek territories and colonies during the Archaic period (750–550 BC) Alexander the Great 's conquest of the Achaemenid Empire marked the beginning of the Hellenistic period , characterized by a new wave of Greek colonization in Asia and Africa, with Greek ruling classes established in Egypt , southwest Asia and northwest India .

[ 84 ] Subsequent waves of colonization and migration during the Middle Ages added to the older settlements or created new ones, thus replenishing the Greek diaspora and making it one of the most long-standing and widespread in the world. The Romans also established numerous colonies and settlements outside of Rome and throughout the Roman empire.

The Migration Period relocations, which included several phases, are just one set of many in history. The first phase Migration-Period displacement (between 300 and 500 AD) included relocation of the Goths ( Ostrogoths and Visigoths ), Vandals , Franks , various other Germanic peoples ( Burgundians , Lombards , Angles , Saxons , Jutes , Suebi and Alemanni ), Alans and numerous Slavic tribes . The second phase, between 500 and 900 AD, saw Slavic , Turkic , and other tribes on the move, resettling in Eastern Europe and gradually leaving it predominantly Slavic, and affecting Anatolia and the Caucasus as the first Turkic tribes ( Avars , Huns , Khazars , Pechenegs ), as well as Bulgars , and possibly Magyars arrived. The last phase of the migrations saw the coming of the Hungarian Magyars. The Viking expansion out of Scandinavia into southern and eastern Europe, Iceland, the British Isles and Greenland. The recent application of the word "diaspora" to the Viking lexicon highlights their cultural profile distinct from their predatory reputation in the regions they settled, especially in the North Atlantic.

[ 85 ] The more positive connotations associated with the social science term help to view the movement of the Scandinavian peoples in the Viking Age in a new way.

[ 86 ] Such colonizing migrations cannot be considered indefinitely as diasporas; over very long periods, eventually, the migrants assimilate into the settled area so completely that it becomes their new mental homeland. Thus the modern Magyars of Hungary do not feel that they belong in the Western Siberia that the Hungarian Magyars left 12 centuries ago; and the English descendants of the Angles, Saxons and Jutes do not yearn to reoccupy the plains of Northwest Germany.

The Italian explorer Christopher Columbus leads an expedition to the New World , 1492.

His voyages are celebrated as the discovery of the Americas from a European perspective, and they opened a new era in the history of humankind and sustained contact between the two worlds.

In 1492 a Spanish-financed expedition headed by Christopher Columbus arrived in the Americas, after which European exploration and colonization rapidly expanded. Historian James Axtell estimates that 240,000 people left Europe for the Americas in the 16th century.

[ 87 ] Emigration continued. In the 19th century alone over 50 million Europeans migrated to North and South America.

[ 88 ] Other Europeans moved to Siberia, Africa, and Australasia. The properly Spanish emigrants were mainly from several parts of Spain, but not only the impoverished ones (i.e., Basques in Chile ), and the destination varied also along the time. As an example, the Galicians moved first to the American colonies during the XVII-XX (mainly but not only Mexico, Cuba, Argentine and Venezuela, as many writers during the Francoist exile), later to Europe (France, Switzerland) and finally within Spain (to Madrid, Catalonia or the Basque Country).

A specific 19th-century example is the Irish diaspora , beginning in the mid-19th century and brought about by an Gorta Mór or "the Great Hunger" of the Irish Famine . An estimated 45% to 85% of Ireland's population emigrated to areas including Britain, the United States, Canada, Argentina, Australia, and New Zealand. The size of the Irish diaspora is demonstrated by the number of people around the world who claim Irish ancestry; some sources put the figure at 80 to 100 million.

From the 1860s, the Circassian people, originally from Europe, were dispersed through Anatolia, Australia, the Balkans, the Levant, North America, and West Europe, leaving less than 10% of their population in the homeland – parts of historical Circassia (in the modern-day Russian portion of the Caucasus ).

[ 89 ] The Scottish Diaspora includes large populations of Highlanders moving to the United States and Canada after the Highland Clearances ; as well as the Lowlanders, becoming the Ulster Scots in Ireland and the Scotch-Irish in America.

Italian Argentines during the opening parade of the XXXIV Immigrant's Festival . About 60% of Argentina's population has Italian ancestry.

[ 90 ] There were two major Italian diasporas in Italian history . The first diaspora began around 1880, two decades after the Unification of Italy , and ended in the 1920s to the early 1940s with the rise of Fascist Italy .

[ 91 ] Poverty was the main reason for emigration, specifically the lack of land as mezzadria sharecropping flourished in Italy, especially in the South, and property became subdivided over generations. Especially in Southern Italy , conditions were harsh.

[ 91 ] Until the 1860s to 1950s, most of Italy was a rural society with many small towns and cities and almost no modern industry in which land management practices, especially in the South and the Northeast , did not easily convince farmers to stay on the land and to work the soil.

[ 92 ] Another factor was related to the overpopulation of Southern Italy as a result of the improvements in socioeconomic conditions after Unification .

[ 93 ] That created a demographic boom and forced the new generations to emigrate en masse in the late 19th century and the early 20th century, mostly to the Americas .

[ 94 ] The new migration of capital created millions of unskilled jobs around the world and was responsible for the simultaneous mass migration of Italians searching for "work and bread".

[ 95 ] The second diaspora started after the end of World War II and concluded roughly in the 1970s. Between 1880 and 1980, about 15,000,000 Italians left the country permanently.

[ 96 ] By 1980, it was estimated that about 25,000,000 Italians were residing outside Italy.

[ 97 ] Internal diasporas [ edit ] An ethnographic map of 16th-century Siberia , made in the Russian Empire period, between 1890 and 1907 In the United States of America, approximately 4.3 million people moved outside their home states in 2010, according to IRS tax-exemption data.

[ 98 ] In a 2011 TEDx presentation, Detroit native Garlin Gilchrist referenced the formation of distinct "Detroit diaspora" communities in Seattle and in Washington, DC, [ 99 ] while layoffs in the auto industry also led to substantial blue-collar migration from Michigan to Wyoming c.

2005.

[ 100 ] In response to a statewide exodus of talent, the State of Michigan continues to host "MichAGAIN" career-recruiting events in places throughout the United States with significant Michigan-diaspora populations.

[ 101 ] In the People's Republic of China, millions of migrant workers have sought greater opportunity in the country's booming coastal metropolises, [ when?

] though this trend has slowed with the further development of China's interior.

[ 102 ] Migrant social structures in Chinese megacities are often based on place of origin, such as a shared hometown or province, and recruiters and foremen commonly select entire work-crews from the same village.

[ 103 ] In two separate June 2011 incidents, Sichuanese migrant workers organized violent protests against alleged police misconduct and migrant-labor abuse near the southern manufacturing hub of Guangzhou .

[ 104 ] Much of Siberia 's population has its origins in internal migration – voluntary or otherwise – from European Russia since the 16th century. The vast majority of the Siberian population (over 85%) is Slavic and other Indo-European ethnicities, [ 105 ] [ 106 ] mainly the Russians (including their subethnic group Siberians ), Ukrainians , and Germans . Most non-Slavic groups are Turkic . Smaller linguistic groups include Mongolic (ca. 600,000 speakers), Uralic ( Samoyedic , Ugric ; roughly 100,000 speakers), Manchu-Tungus (ca. 40,000 speakers), Chukotko-Kamchatkan (ca. 25,000 speakers), Eskimo–Aleut (some 2,000 speakers), Yukaghir (highly endangered), and languages isolates Ket (but see below) and Nivkh .

Canada [ edit ] Main article: Interprovincial migration in Canada Pamphlet advertising for immigration to Western Canada , c.

1910 In Canada, internal migration has occurred for a number of different factors over the course of Canadian history. An example is the migration of workers from Atlantic Canada (particularly Newfoundland and Labrador ) to Alberta , driven in part by the cod collapse in the early 1990s and the 1992 moratorium on cod fishing. Fishing had previously been a major driver of the economies of the Atlantic provinces, and this loss of work proved catastrophic for many families. As a result, beginning in the early 1990s and into the late 2000s, thousands of people from the Atlantic provinces were driven out-of-province to find work elsewhere in the country, especially in the Alberta oil sands during the oil boom of the mid-2000s.

[ 107 ] This systemic export of labour [ 108 ] is explored by author Kate Beaton in her 2022 graphic memoir Ducks , which details her experience working in the Athabasca oil sands .

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] Brazil [ edit ] Main article: Internal migration in Brazil Internal migration in Brazil occurs mainly for economic reasons and ecological disasters.

Internal migration involves the movement of people within the same territory, which can be between regions, states or municipalities. It does not affect the total number of inhabitants in a country, but it does change the regions involved in this process. In Brazil, economic factors exert the greatest influence on migratory flows, as the capitalist production model creates privileged areas for industries, forcing people to move from one place to another in search of better living conditions and jobs to meet their basic survival needs.

[ 111 ] Some examples of internal migration in Brazil occurred in the 1960s, when the droughts devastated the Northeast of Brazil, leading thousands of people to abandon their homes in the Brazilian hinterland due to the lack of agricultural alternatives and social policies in the region. At the end of the 19th century, northeasterners migrated to the North of Brazil because of the rubber cycle. 
In the 1970s, migrants from the Northeast and the South left in search of a better life in the Southeast , Brazil's only industrial center at the time.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] Italy [ edit ] Main article: Internal migration in Italy Castello di Lombardia , Enna , Sicily View of the Falck steelworks in Sesto San Giovanni , in Lombardy , Italy The oldest internal migration in Italy goes back to the 11th century when soldiers and settlers from Northern Italy (at the time collectively called "Lombardy" [ 113 ] ), settled the central and eastern part of Sicily during the Norman conquest of southern Italy . After the marriage between the Norman king Roger I of Sicily with Adelaide del Vasto , member of Aleramici family, many Lombard colonisers left their homeland, in the Aleramici's possessions in Piedmont and Liguria , to settle on the island of Sicily.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] The migration of people from Northern Italy to Sicily continued until the end of the 13th century.

[ 116 ] In the same period people from Northern Italy also emigrated to Basilicata .

[ 117 ] It is believed that the population of Northern Italy who immigrated to Sicily during these centuries was altogether about 200,000 people.

[ 118 ] Their descendants, who are still present in Sicily today, are called Lombards of Sicily . Following these ancient migrations, in some municipalities of Sicily and Basilicata, dialects of northern origin are still spoken today, the Gallo-Italic of Sicily and the Gallo-Italic of Basilicata .

With the fall of Fascist regime in 1943, and the end of World War II in 1945, a large internal migratory flow began from one Italian region to another. This internal emigration was sustained and constantly increased by the economic growth that Italy experienced between the 1950s and 1960s.

[ 119 ] Given that this economic growth mostly concerned Northwest Italy , which was involved in the birth of many industrial activities, migratory phenomena affected the peasants of the Triveneto and southern Italy , who began to move in large numbers.

[ 119 ] Other areas of northern Italy were also affected by emigration such as the rural areas of Mantua and Cremona . The destinations of these emigrants were mainly Milan , Turin , Varese , Como , Lecco , and Brianza .

[ 120 ] The rural population of the aforementioned areas began to emigrate to the large industrial centers of the north-west, especially in the so-called "industrial triangle, or the area corresponding to the three-sided polygon with vertices in the cities of Turin, Milan and Genoa .

[ 119 ] [ 121 ] Even some cities in central and southern Italy (such as Rome , which was the object of immigration due to employment in the administrative and tertiary sectors) experienced a conspicuous immigration flow.

[ 119 ] These migratory movements were accompanied by other flows of lesser intensity, such as transfers from the countryside to smaller cities and travel from mountainous areas to the plains.

[ 119 ] The main reasons that gave rise to this massive migratory flow were linked to the living conditions in the places of origin of the emigrants (which were very harsh), the absence of stable work, [ 121 ] [ 120 ] the high rate of poverty, the poor fertility of many agricultural areas, the fragmentation of land properties, [ 92 ] which characterized southern Italy above all, and the insecurity caused by organized crime .

[ 120 ] Overall, the Italians who moved from southern to northern Italy amounted to 4 million.

[ 119 ] The migratory flow from the countryside to the big cities also contracted and then stopped in the 1980s.

[ 119 ] At the same time, migratory movements towards medium-sized cities and those destined for small-sized villages increased.

[ 119 ] 20th century [ edit ] Expulsion of Germans from Czechoslovakia following the end of World War II The 20th century saw huge population movements. Some involved large-scale transfers of people by government action. Some migrations occurred to avoid conflict and warfare. Other diasporas formed as a consequence of political developments, such as the end of colonialism .

World War II, colonialism, and post-colonialism [ edit ] As World War II (1939–1945) unfolded, Nazi German authorities deported and killed millions of Jews ; they also enslaved or murdered millions of other people , including Romani , Ukrainians , Russians , and other Slavs . Some Jews fled from the persecution and moved to the unoccupied parts of Western Europe or they moved to the Americas before the borders of the Americas were closed. Later, other Eastern European refugees moved west, away from Soviet expansion [ 122 ] [ failed verification ] and from the Iron Curtain regimes established as World War II ended. Hundreds of thousands of these anti-Soviet political refugees and displaced persons ended up in western Europe, Australia, Canada, and the United States of America.

After World War II, the Soviet Union and communist -controlled Poland, Czechoslovakia , Hungary and Yugoslavia expelled millions of ethnic Germans , most of them were the descendants of immigrants who had settled in those areas centuries ago. This expulsion was allegedly carried out in reaction to Nazi Germany's invasions and pan-German attempts to annex Eastern European territory.

[ citation needed ] Most of the refugees moved to the West, including western Europe, and with tens of thousands seeking refuge in the United States.

Istrian Italians leave Pola in 1947 during the Istrian-Dalmatian exodus The Istrian–Dalmatian exodus was the post- World War II exodus and departure of local ethnic Italians ( Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians ) as well as ethnic Slovenes , Croats , and Istro-Romanians from the Yugoslav territory of Istria , Kvarner , the Julian March as well as Dalmatia , towards Italy , and in smaller numbers, towards the Americas , Australia , and South Africa .

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] These regions were ethnically mixed, with long-established historic Croatian, Italian, and Slovene communities. According to various sources, the exodus is estimated to have amounted to between 230,000 and 350,000 Italians (the others being ethnic Slovenes, Croats, and Istro-Romanians, who chose to maintain Italian citizenship ) [ 125 ] leaving the areas in the aftermath of the conflict.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] Hundreds or perhaps tens of thousands of local ethnic Italians (Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians) were killed or summarily executed during World War II by Yugoslav Partisans and OZNA during the first years of the exodus, in what became known as the foibe massacres .

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] From 1947, after the war, Istrian Italians and Dalmatian Italians were subject by Yugoslav authorities to less violent forms of intimidation, such as nationalization, expropriation, and discriminatory taxation, [ 130 ] which gave them little option other than emigration.

[ 131 ] [ 132 ] [ 133 ] In 1953, there were 36,000 declared Italians in Yugoslavia, just about 16% of the original Italian population before World War II.

[ 134 ] According to the census organized in Croatia in 2001 and that organized in Slovenia in 2002, the Italians who remained in the former Yugoslavia amounted to 21,894 people (2,258 in Slovenia and 19,636 in Croatia ).

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] Spain sent many political activists into exile during the rule of Franco 's military regime from 1936 until his death in 1975.

[ 137 ] Prior to World War II and the re-establishment of Israel in 1948, a series of anti-Jewish pogroms broke out in the Arab world and caused many to flee, mostly to Palestine/Israel. The 1947–1949 Palestine war likewise saw at least 750,000 Palestinians expelled or forced to flee from the newly forming Israel.

[ 138 ] Many Palestinians continue to live in refugee camps in the Middle East, while others have resettled in other countries.

The 1947 Partition in the Indian subcontinent resulted in the migration of millions of people between India, Pakistan, and present-day Bangladesh. Many were murdered in the religious violence of the period, with estimates of fatalities up to 2 million people.

[ 139 ] Thousands of former subjects of the British Raj went to the UK from the Indian subcontinent after India and Pakistan became independent in 1947.

[ citation needed ] From the late 19th century, and formally from 1910, Japan made Korea a Japanese colony . Millions of Chinese fled to western provinces not occupied by Japan (that is, in particular, Sichuan and Yunnan in the Southwest and Shaanxi and Gansu in the Northwest) and to Southeast Asia.

[ citation needed ] More than 100,000 Koreans moved across the Amur River into the Russian Far East (and later into the Soviet Union) away from the Japanese.

[ 140 ] The Cold War and the formation of post-colonial states [ edit ] Vietnamese " boat people " awaiting rescue.

Both during and after the Cold War -era, huge populations of refugees migrated from countries which experienced conflicts, especially from then- developing countries . Upheavals in the Middle East and Central Asia , some of which were related to power struggles between the United States and the Soviet Union , produced new refugee populations that developed into global diasporas.

In Southeast Asia , many Vietnamese people emigrated to France and later millions of other Vietnamese people migrated to the United States, Australia and Canada after the Cold War-related Vietnam War of 1955–1975. Later, 30,000 French colons from Cambodia were displaced after they were expelled by the 1975–1979 Khmer Rouge regime under Pol Pot .

[ citation needed ] A small, predominantly Muslim ethnic group, the Cham people , long residing in Cambodia, were nearly eradicated.

[ 141 ] The mass exodus of Vietnamese people from Vietnam from 1975 onwards led to the popularisation of the term " boat people ".

[ 142 ] In Southwestern China , many Tibetan people emigrated to India, following the 14th Dalai Lama after the failure of his 1959 Tibetan uprising . This wave lasted until the 1960s, and another wave followed when Tibet opened up to trade and tourism in the 1980s. It is estimated [ by whom?

] that about 200,000 Tibetans live now dispersed worldwide, half of them in India, Nepal and Bhutan. In lieu of lost citizenship papers, the Central Tibetan Administration offers Green Book identity documents to Tibetan refugees.

Celebrations of Murugan by the Sri Lankan Tamil community in Paris, France Sri Lankan Tamils have historically migrated to find work, notably, during the British colonial period (1796–1948). Since the beginning of the Sri Lankan Civil War in 1983, more than 800,000 Tamils have been displaced within Sri Lanka as a local diaspora, and over a half-million Tamils have emigrated as the Tamil diaspora to destinations such as India, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, the UK, and Europe.

The Afghan diaspora resulted from the 1979 invasion of Afghanistan by the former Soviet Union, resulting in the creation of the second-largest refugee population in the world as of 2018 [update] (2.6 million in 2018).

[ 143 ] Many Iranians fled from the 1979 Iranian Revolution which culminated in the fall of the USA/British-ensconced Shah .

[ quantify ] In Africa , a new series of diasporas was formed after the end of colonial rule. In some cases, as countries became independent, numerous minority descendants of Europeans emigrated; others stayed.

Uganda expelled 80,000 South Asians in 1972 and took over their businesses and properties.

The 1990–1994 Rwandan Civil War between rival social/ethnic groups ( Hutu and Tutsi ) turned deadly and produced a mass efflux of refugees.

In Latin America , following the 1959 Cuban Revolution and the introduction of communism , over a million people have left Cuba.

[ 144 ] A new Jamaican diaspora formed around the start of the 21st century. More than 1 million Dominicans live abroad, a majority living in the US.

[ 145 ] A million Colombian refugees have left Colombia since 1965 to escape violence and civil wars .

Thousands of Argentine and Uruguay refugees fled to Europe during periods of military rule in the 1970s and 1980s.

In Central America , Nicaraguans , Salvadorans, Guatemalans, and Hondurans have fled [ when?

] conflict and poor economic conditions.

Hundreds of thousands of people fled from the Rwandan genocide in 1994 and moved into neighboring countries.

Between 4 and 6 million have emigrated from Zimbabwe beginning in the 1990s especially since 2000, greatly increasing the Zimbabwean diaspora due to a protracted socioeconomic crisis, forming large communities in South Africa, the United Kingdom, Australia, Canada, and smaller communities in the United States , New Zealand and Ireland.

[ 146 ] The long war in Congo , in which numerous nations have been involved, has also result in millions of displaced refugees.

A South Korean diaspora movement during the 1990s caused the homeland fertility rate to drop when a large amount of the middle class emigrated, as the rest of the population continued to age. To counteract the change in these demographics, the South Korean government initiated a diaspora-engagement policy in 1997.

[ 147 ] 21st century [ edit ] Middle East [ edit ] See also: 2015 European migrant crisis and Refugees of the Syrian Civil War Migrants crossing the Aegean Sea from Turkey to the Greek island of Lesbos during the 2015 European migrant crisis The 2015 European migrant crisis was a period of significantly increased movement of refugees and migrants into Europe, namely from the Middle East . An estimated 1.3 million people came to the continent to request asylum , [ 148 ] the most in a single year since World War II .

[ 149 ] They were mostly Syrians , [ 150 ] but also included a significant number of people from Afghanistan , Pakistan , Iraq , Nigeria , Eritrea , [ 151 ] and the Balkans .

[ 152 ] The increase in asylum seekers has been attributed to factors such as the escalation of various wars in the Middle East and ISIL 's territorial and military dominance in the region due to the Arab Winter , as well as Lebanon, Jordan, and Egypt ceasing to accept Syrian asylum seekers.

[ 153 ] The EU attempted to enact some measures to address the problem, [ 154 ] including distributing refugees among member countries, tackling root causes of emigration in the home countries of migrants, and simplifying deportation processes.

[ 155 ] However, due to a lack of political coordination at the European level, the distribution of countries was unequal, with some countries taking in many more refugees than others.

The initial responses of national governments varied greatly.

[ 155 ] Many European Union (EU) governments reacted by closing their borders, and most countries refused to take in the arriving refugees. Germany would ultimately accept most of the refugees after the government decided to temporarily suspend its enforcement of the Dublin Regulation . Germany would receive over 440,000 asylum applications (0.5% of the population). Other countries that took in a significant number of refugees include Hungary (174,000; 1.8%), Sweden (156,000; 1.6%) and Austria (88,000; 1.0%).

The crisis had significant political consequences in Europe. The influx of migrants caused significant demographic and cultural changes in these countries. As a consequence, the public showed anxiety towards the sudden influx of immigrants, often expressing concerns over a perceived danger to European values.

[ 156 ] Political polarization increased, [ 157 ] confidence in the European Union fell, [ 158 ] and many countries tightened their asylum laws.

Right-wing populist parties capitalized on public anxiety and became significantly more popular in many countries. There was an increase in protests regarding immigration and the circulation of the white nationalist conspiracy theory of the Great Replacement .

[ 159 ] Nonetheless, despite the political consequences, a 2023 study leveraging quantified economic metrics (such as chained GDP and the inflation rate) concluded that the events ultimately resulted in a “low but positive impact” to the German economy.

[ 160 ] Venezuelan refugee crisis [ edit ] Main article: Venezuelan refugee crisis Venezuelan refugees in 2018 The Venezuelan refugee crisis , the largest recorded refugee crisis in the Americas , [ 161 ] refers to the emigration of millions of Venezuelans from their native country during the presidencies of Hugo Chávez and Nicolás Maduro since the Bolivarian Revolution .

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] [ 164 ] The revolution was an attempt by Chávez and later Maduro to establish a cultural and political hegemony , [ 165 ] [ 166 ] which culminated in the crisis in Venezuela .

[ 167 ] The resulting refugee crisis has been compared to those faced by Cuban exiles , Syrian refugees and those affected by the European migrant crisis .

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] [ 170 ] The Bolivarian government has denied any migratory crisis, stating that the United Nations and others are attempting to justify foreign intervention within Venezuela.

[ 171 ] Newsweek described the "Bolivarian diaspora" as "a reversal of fortune on a massive scale", where the reversal refers to Venezuela's high immigration rate during the 20th century.

[ 163 ] Initially, upper class Venezuelans and scholars emigrated during Chávez's presidency, but middle- and lower-class Venezuelans began to leave as conditions worsened in the country.

[ 172 ] This has caused a brain drain that affects the nation, due to the large number of emigrants who are educated or skilled.

[ 173 ] [ 174 ] During the crisis, Venezuelans have been asked about their desire to leave their native country; [ 175 ] over 30 percent of respondents to a December 2015 survey said that they planned to permanently leave Venezuela.

[ 176 ] The percentage nearly doubled the following September as, according to Datincorp, 57 percent of respondents wanted to leave the country.

[ 177 ] By mid-2019, over four million Venezuelans had emigrated since the revolution began in 1999.

[ 178 ] [ 179 ] [ 180 ] Officers of the National Police of Colombia leading Venezuelan refugees from San Antonio del Táchira , Venezuela, toward Villa del Rosario, Norte de Santander , Colombia.

The United Nations predicted that by the end of 2019, there would have been over 5 million recorded emigrants during the Venezuelan crisis, over 15% of the population.

[ 181 ] A late-2018 study by the Brookings Institution suggested that emigration would reach 6 million – approximately 20% of Venezuela's 2017 population – by the end of 2019, [ 182 ] with a mid-2019 poll by Consultares 21 estimating that up to 6 million Venezuelans had fled the country by this point; [ 183 ] estimates going into 2020 suggested that the number of Venezuelan migrants and refugees was overtaking the 6 million figure, [ 184 ] at this time the same number of refugees from the Syrian Civil War , which started years before the recorded Venezuelan crisis and was considered the worst humanitarian disaster in the world at the time.

[ 184 ] [ 185 ] Estimates had risen to 7.1 million by October 2022, over 20 percent of the country's population .

[ 186 ] The Norwegian Refugee Council , the Brookings Institution and the Organization of American States commissioner for the Venezuelan refugee crisis, David Smolansky , have estimated that the crisis is also one of the most underfunded refugee crisis in modern history.

[ 187 ] [ 188 ] [ 189 ] According to the UNHCR , more than 7.7 million people have emigrated from Venezuela in the years corresponding to Maduro's rise to power and the consolidation of Chavismo .

[ 190 ] From May to August 2023, 390,000 Venezuelans left their country, driven by despair over challenging living conditions, characterized by low wages, rampant inflation, lack of public services, and political repression. However, R4V suggests that these figures could be even higher, as many migrants without regular status are not included in the count.

[ 191 ] [ 190 ] The organization's calculation method is based on asylum requests and refugee registrations in each country, which might exclude those in irregular situations.

[ 191 ] Despite the upcoming presidential elections, hope is scarce among Venezuelans. Many fear that through manipulations and frauds, Maduro might "get re-elected" and remain in power for another six years, despite his unpopularity. In this scenario, emigration might continue to be a constant in Venezuela's near future.

[ 191 ] [ 190 ] Diaspora Internet services [ edit ] Numerous web-based news portals and forum sites are dedicated to specific diaspora communities, often organized on the basis of an origin characteristic and a current location characteristic.

[ 192 ] The location-based networking features of mobile applications such as China's WeChat have also created de facto online diaspora communities when used outside of their home markets.

[ 193 ] Now, large companies from the emerging countries are looking at leveraging diaspora communities to enter the more mature market.

[ 194 ] Diaspora languages [ edit ] See also: Diaspora language Municipalities where Talian is co-official in Rio Grande do Sul , Brazil The term diaspora language , coined in the 1980s, [ 195 ] is a sociolinguistic idea referring to a variety of languages spoken by peoples with common roots who have dispersed, under various pressures and often globally. The emergence and evolution of a diaspora language is usually part of a larger attempt to retain cultural identity. Examples are Yiddish , African American Vernacular English , Yoruba , Molise Slavic , Istro-Romanian , Griko , Gallo-Italic of Sicily , Talian , Cocoliche , Lunfardo and Arbëresh .

In popular culture [ edit ] Gran Torino , a 2008 drama starring Clint Eastwood , was the first mainstream American film to feature the Hmong American diaspora.

[ 196 ] See also [ edit ] List of diasporas List of sovereign states by immigrant and emigrant population Diaspora politics Diaspora politics in the United States Human migration Integration of immigrants Population transfer Population transfer in the Soviet Union Specific diasporas [ edit ] Kurdish refugees Anti-Romani sentiment History of the Romani people Romani Holocaust Rural exodus Religious diasporas [ edit ] Ummah Jewish history Antisemitism Persecution of Jews History of the Jews during World War II The Holocaust Expulsions and exoduses of Jews The Exodus Jewish exodus from the Muslim world Yom HaAliyah Country-specific diasporas [ edit ] Exodusters (African American) Great Migration (African American) History of immigration to the United States Forced migration [ edit ] Forced displacement Expulsion of Poles by Nazi Germany Expulsion of the Acadians Expulsion of the Moriscos Forced settlements in the Soviet Union List of expulsions of African Americans Long Walk of the Navajo Trail of Tears Conflicts and genocides [ edit ] Ethnic cleansing List of ethnic cleansing campaigns Late Ottoman genocides Armenian genocide Assyrian genocide Great Famine of Mount Lebanon Greek genocide Myanmar conflict Persecution of Muslims in Myanmar Rohingya conflict Rohingya genocide Partition of India Xinjiang conflict Persecution of Uyghurs in China World War II evacuation and expulsion Persecution of Yazidis Yazidi genocide Statelessness [ edit ] State collapse Statelessness Stateless nation References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Dubnow's comment is referenced, for example, in an article by the editor of the journal Diaspora , Khachig Tölölyan . Tölölyan cites but does not actually quote Dubnow, claiming that Dubnow "stipulates that the Greek colony-cities of Antiquity might be called diasporas," whereas Dubnow clearly refers to the colonies as they stood "in the ancient Roman Empire," that is, after they had lost their political independence.

[ 35 ] ^ "Infographic: India Has the World's Biggest Diaspora" .

Statista Daily Data . 12 September 2023 . Retrieved 18 January 2024 .

^ "Population Facts" (PDF) . United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs. Population Division. December 2017. p. 3.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 February 2018 . Retrieved 8 February 2019 .

In 2017, with 16.6 million persons living abroad, India was the leading country of origin of international migrants. Migrants from Mexico constituted the second largest 'diaspora' in the world (13.0 million), followed by those from the Russian  Federation (10.6 million), China (10.0 million), Bangladesh (7.5 million), the Syrian Arab Republic (6.9 million), Pakistan (6.0 million), Ukraine (5.9 million), the Philippines (5.7 million) and the United Kingdom Since 2000,  countries experiencing the largest increase in their diaspora populations were the Syrian Arab Republic (872 per cent), India (108 per cent) and the Philippines (85 per cent).

^ "Diaspora" .

Merriam Webster . Retrieved 22 February 2011 .

^ Melvin Ember , Carol R. Ember and Ian Skoggard, ed. (2004).

Encyclopedia of Diasporas: Immigrant and Refugee Cultures Around the World. Volume I: Overviews and Topics; Volume II: Diaspora Communities . Springer. p. xxvi.

ISBN 9780306483219 .

^ "Diasporas" .

Migration Data Portal . Retrieved 21 February 2020 .

^ Edwards, Brent Hayes (8 October 2014).

"Diaspora" .

Keywords for American Cultural Studies, Second Edition . Retrieved 21 February 2020 .

^ "Diaspora definition and meaning" .

CollinsDictionary.com . Retrieved 21 February 2020 .

^ Ghada Ageel, 'My Body in Shatat, My Heart in Gaza, My Soul in Beit Daras,' The Palestine Chronicle  18 May 2013.

^ Broughton, Simon; Ellingham, Mark; Trillo, Richard (1999).

World Music: Africa, Europe and the Middle East . Rough Guides. p.

147 .

ISBN 9781858286358 . Retrieved 8 December 2015 .

^ "Babylonian Captivity | Definition, History, & Significance | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com . 6 July 2023 . Retrieved 8 August 2023 .

^ Demir, Sara (2017). "The atrocities against the Assyrians in 1915: A legal perspective". In Travis, Hannibal (ed.).

The Assyrian Genocide: Cultural and Political Legacies . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-351-98025-8 .

^ Gaunt, David; Atto, Naures; Barthoma, Soner O. (2019). "Introduction: Contextualizing the Sayfo in the First World War".

Let Them Not Return: Sayfo – The Genocide Against the Assyrian, Syriac, and Chaldean Christians in the Ottoman Empire . Berghahn Books.

ISBN 9781785334993 .

^ "Fall of Constantinople" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 19 August 2020 . Retrieved 2 August 2020 .

^ Jones, Adam (2010).

Genocide: A Comprehensive Introduction (revised ed.). London: Routledge. p. 163.

ISBN 9780203846964 .

OCLC 672333335 .

^ Kaya, Önder (9 January 2013).

"İstanbul'da GÜRCÜ Cemaati ve Katolik Gürcü kilisesi" .

Şalom (in Turkish) . Retrieved 25 April 2013 .

^ "English Refugees in the Byzantine Armed Forces: The Varangian Guard and Anglo-Saxon Ethnic Consciousness" . De Re Militari.

^ Yun, Lisa (2008).

The coolie speaks : Chinese indentured laborers and African slaves in Cuba . Internet Archive. Philadelphia : Temple University Press.

ISBN 978-1-59213-581-3 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Montgomery, David R. (14 May 2007).

Dirt: The Erosion of Civilizations . University of California Press.

ISBN 9780520933163 .

^ "The Highland Clearances" .

Historic UK . Retrieved 9 September 2021 .

^ Bloxham, Donald (2005).

The Great Game of Genocide: Imperialism, Nationalism, and the Destruction of the Ottoman Armenians .

Oxford University Press .

^ Harutyunyan, Arus (1 April 2009).

"Contesting National Identities in an Ethnically Homogeneous State: The Case of Armenian Democratization" .

Dissertations : 192.

^ Wwirtz, James J. (March 2008). "Things Fall Apart: Containing the Spillover from an Iraqi Civil Warby Daniel L. Byman and Kenneth M. Pollack".

Political Science Quarterly .

123 (1): 157– 158.

doi : 10.1002/j.1538-165x.2008.tb00621.x .

ISSN 0032-3195 .

^ Kodmani, Bassma (5 December 2018).

"The Syrian Diaspora, Old and New" .

Arab Reform Initiative .

^ "Migration and Brain Drain from Iran | Iranian Studies" .

iranian-studies.stanford.edu . Retrieved 11 November 2023 .

^ With $78 billion, India still highest overseas remittance receiver , The Economic Times , 28 November 2019.

^ διασπορά .

Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert ; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project ^ Chaliand & Rageau 1995 , p. xiii, n. 1.

^ Tölölyan 1996 , p. 10.

^ Kenny 2013 , p. 2.

^ Dufoix 2017 , p. 30–31.

^ "Thucydides, The Peloponnesian War, book 2, chapter 27, section 2" .

data.perseus.org .

^ Dufoix 2017 , p. 29.

^ Dufoix 2017 , p. 143.

^ Dubnow 1931 , p. 126.

^ Tölölyan 1996 , p. 9.

^ Assyrian captivity of Israel ^ Kantor, pp. 53, 105–106.

^ p. 1, Barclay ^ "Definition of DIASPORA" .

Merriam-Webster.com . 23 July 2023.

^ Galil & Weinfeld, pp. 96–97.

^ Daneau, Lambert.

A Fruitfull Commentarie Vpon the Twelue Small Prophets . p. 1042.

^ Owen, James.

A Plea for Scripture Ordination; or, Ten Arguments from Scripture and Antiquity, proving Ordination by Presbyters, without Bishops, to be valid . p. 13.

Many today believe that the audience of the First Epistle of Peter to which Owen refers was in fact Christians of non-Jewish origin, but the consensus in Owen's time was that the letter was directed to ethnic Jews. See for example Calvin, John.

Commentaries on the Catholic Epistles . p. 25.

^ "diaspora, n." Oxford English Dictionary Online . November 2010 . Retrieved 22 February 2011 .

^ "diaspora" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 30 September 2022 .

^ Safran 1991 , pp. 83–99.

^ Brubaker 2005 , p. 5.

^ a b Weinar 2010 , p. 75.

^ Cohen 2008 , p. 6.

^ Cohen 2008 , p. 4.

^ Safran 1991 , pp. 83–84.

^ Cohen, Robin (1997).

Global Diasporas . Seattle: University of Washington Press. p. 6.

doi : 10.4324/9780203928943 .

ISBN 9781134077953 .

^ Brubaker 2005 , pp. 5–6.

^ Brubaker 2005 , p. 3.

^ Brubaker 2005 , p. 14.

^ Brubaker 2005 , p. 2.

^ Kennedy, Bruce (31 August 2010).

"The Economic Impact of the 'Katrina Diaspora' " .

Daily Finance . Retrieved 23 February 2011 .

^ Walden, Will (1 September 2005).

"Katrina scatters a grim diaspora" .

BBC News . Retrieved 23 February 2011 .

^ McAlister, Elizabeth.

"Listening for Geographies" . Routledge. Archived from the original on 23 May 2013 . Retrieved 5 November 2012 .

^ Burns, William (9 December 2013).

"The Potential of Science Diasporas" .

Science & Diplomacy .

2 (4).

^ Tölölyan 1996 , pp. 3–36.

^ Mission in “the Present Time”: What about the People in Diaspora?

Michael A. Rynkiewich ^ Délano Alonso, Alexandra; Mylonas, Harris (12 March 2019).

"The microfoundations of diaspora politics: unpacking the state and disaggregating the diaspora" .

Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies .

45 (4): 473– 491.

doi : 10.1080/1369183X.2017.1409160 .

ISSN 1369-183X .

^ Mylonas, Harris (2013).

Issue Brief: The Politics of Diaspora Management in the Republic of Korea (PDF) . Republic of Korea: The ASAN Institute for Policy Studies. p. 1.

^ Jayasuriya, Shihan De S.; Pankhurst, Richard, eds. (2003).

The African Diaspora in the Indian Ocean . Trenton: Africa World Press.

ISBN 9780865439801 .

^ Shanti, Sadiq Ali (1996).

The African Dispersal in the Deccan: From Medieval to Modern Times . Orient Longman.

ISBN 8125004858 .

OCLC 611743417 .

^ Munro-Hay, Stuart C. (1991).

Aksum: An African Civilisation of Late Antiquity . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press. pp. ix–8.

^ Monks, Kieron (5 July 2016).

"African Union launches all-Africa passport" . CNN . Retrieved 13 December 2016 .

^ Njoroge, June (3 July 2022).

"Africa: Era of the African Passport – A Mixed Bag of Opportunities?" .

The Exchange Africa . Retrieved 6 May 2023 .

^ "African Union Passport Launched during Opening of 27th AU Summit in Kigali" .

au.int . Union africaine . Retrieved 6 May 2023 .

^ "At 17.5 million, Indian diaspora largest in the world: UN report" .

The Economic Times . 18 September 2019.

^ "Roma" .

European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights . 11 August 2012.

^ Kenrick, Donald (2007).

Historical Dictionary of the Gypsies (Romanies) (2nd ed.). Scarecrow Press. p. xxxvii.

The Gypsies, or Romt it is generally accepted that they did emigrate from northern India some time between the 6th and 11th centuries, then crosanies, are an ethnic group that arrived in Europe around the 14th century. Scholars argue about when and how they left India, bused the Middle East and came into Europe.

^ Kalaydjieva, Luba; Gresham, D.; Calafell, F. (2001).

"Genetic studies of the Roma (Gypsies): A review" .

BMC Medical Genetics .

2 5.

doi : 10.1186/1471-2350-2-5 .

PMC 31389 .

PMID 11299048 .

^ Shah, Muhammad Hamza; Roy, Sakshi; Ahluwalia, Arjun (2023).

"Time to address the mental health challenges of the South Asian diaspora" .

The Lancet Psychiatry .

10 (6): 381– 382.

doi : 10.1016/s2215-0366(23)00144-x .

ISSN 2215-0366 .

PMID 37208111 .

^ Josephus War of the Jews 9:2.

^ Killebrew, Ann E.; Biblical Peoples and Ethnicity. An Archaeological Study of Egyptians, Canaanites, Philistines and Early Israel 1300–1100 B.C.E. (Archaeology and Biblical Studies) , Society of Biblical Literature , 2005 ^ Schama, Simon (2014).

The Story of the Jews: Finding the Words 1000 BC–1492 AD . HarperCollins.

ISBN 9780062339447 .

^ DellaPergola, Sergio.

"2018 World Jewish Population" .

JewishDatabank.org . Retrieved 30 November 2019 .

^ Ma, Laurence J. C.; Cartier, Carolyn L. (2003).

The Chinese diaspora: space, place, mobility, and identity . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 9780742517561 .

^ "Bureau of Emigration & Overseas Employment - Government of Pakistan" .

beoe.gov.pk . Retrieved 26 December 2024 .

^ Rahman, Md Mizanur; Yong, Tan Tai (10 April 2015).

International Migration and Development in South Asia . Routledge. p. 187.

ISBN 978-1-317-48484-4 .

^ Bhaumik, Subir (7 November 2007).

"Bhutan refugees are 'intimidated' " .

BBC News . Retrieved 25 April 2008 .

^ "Early development of Greek society" . Highered.mcgraw-hill.com. Archived from the original on 6 March 2012 . Retrieved 5 January 2014 .

^ "Hellenistic Civilization" . Archived from the original on 5 July 2008.

^ Jesch, J.

A Viking Diaspora , London, Routledge.

^ Adrams, L. "Diaspora and Identity in the Viking Age", Early Medieval Europe , vol. 20 (1), pp. 17–38.

^ Axtell, James (September–October 1991).

"The Columbian Mosaic in Colonial America" .

Humanities .

12 (5): 12– 18.

JSTOR 4636419 . Archived from the original on 19 November 2009.

^ Eltis, Kingston David (1987).

Economic Growth and the Ending of the Transatlantic Slave Trade . Oxford University Press. p. 139.

ISBN 9780195364811 .

^ Richmond, pp. 172–173.

^ Departamento de Derecho y Ciencias Políticas de la Universidad Nacional de La Matanza (14 November 2011).

"Historias de inmigrantes italianos en Argentina" .

infouniversidades.siu.edu.ar (in Spanish).

Se estima que en la actualidad, el 90% de la población argentina tiene alguna ascendencia europea y que al menos 25 millones están relacionados con algún inmigrante de Italia.

^ a b Pozzetta, George E., Bruno Ramirez, and Robert F. Harney. The Italian Diaspora: Migration across the Globe. Toronto: Multicultural History Society of Ontario, 1992.

^ a b McDonald, J. S. (October 1958). "Some Socio-economic Emigration Differentials in Rural Italy, 1902–1913".

Economic Development and Cultural Change .

7 (1): 55– 72.

doi : 10.1086/449779 .

ISSN 0013-0079 .

S2CID 153889304 .

^ Sori, Ercole (1984).

L'emigrazione italiana dall' Unità alla Seconda Guerra Mondiale (in Italian) (2nd ed.). Il Mulino. 1st chapter.

ISBN 9788815005748 .

^ Gabaccia, Donna (2000).

Italy's Many Diasporas . "Global Disaporas" series. New York: Routledge. pp.

58– 80.

^ Pozzetta, George E. (1980).

Pane e Lavoro: The Italian American Working Class . Toronto: Multicultural History Society of Ontorio.

^ Ben-Ghiat and Hom, "Introduction" to Italian Mobilities (Routledge, 2016) ^ King, Russell (1 January 1978). "Report: The Italian Diaspora".

Area .

10 (5): 386.

JSTOR 20001401 .

^ Bruner, Jon (16 November 2011).

"Migration in America" .

Forbes . Retrieved 30 September 2013 .

^ Gilchrist, Garlin (6 August 2011).

"From Detroit. To Detroit" .

TEDxLansing .

TED . Archived from the original on 1 October 2013 . Retrieved 30 September 2013 .

^ Compare: Silke Carty, Sharon (5 December 2006).

"Wyoming wins over Michigan job seekers" .

USA Today . Retrieved 30 September 2013 .

About 100 people have made the move so far, and 6,000 more Michiganians have posted résumés on Wyoming's jobs website.

^ Walsh, Tom (10 April 2011).

"MichAgain program aims to return talented people, investments to Michigan" .

Detroit Free Press . Retrieved 1 October 2013 .

^ Kenneth, Rapoza (19 February 2013).

"Chinese Migrant Workers Enticed To Stay Home" .

Forbes . Retrieved 1 October 2013 .

^ "China's migrant workers" .

Wildcat . Winter 2007/08 (80) . Retrieved 1 October 2013 .

^ Demick, Barbara (13 June 2011).

"China tries to restore order after migrant riots" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 3 October 2013 .

^ "ВПН-2010" .

Perepis-2010.ru . Archived from the original on 18 January 2012 . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

^ "ВПН-2010" .

Gks.ru . Archived from the original on 15 March 2013 . Retrieved 3 April 2016 .

^ Lionais, Doug; Murray, Christinas; Donatelli, Chloe (19 January 2020).

"Dependence on Interprovincial Migrant Labour in Atlantic Canadian Communities: The Role of the Alberta Economy" .

Societies .

10 (1): 11.

doi : 10.3390/soc10010011 .

^ Ferguson, Nelson (1 January 2011).

"From Coal Pits to Tar Sands: Labour Migration Between an Atlantic Canadian Region and the Athabasca Oil Sands" .

Just Labour . 17 & 18 (Special Section).

doi : 10.25071/1705-1436.35 . Retrieved 4 December 2022 .

^ Smart, James (6 October 2022).

" Ducks by Kate Beaton review – Powerful big oil memoir" . The Guardian . Retrieved 4 December 2022 .

^ Rogers, Shelagh (2 December 2022).

"Kate Beaton's affecting Ducks dives into the lonely life of labour in Alberta's oil sands" . CBC . Retrieved 4 December 2022 .

^ a b "Migração interna no Brasil" .

Brasil Escola . Retrieved 3 May 2024 .

^ "Secas do Nordeste" .

Brasil Escola . Retrieved 3 May 2024 .

^ "Lombardo" .

treccani.it (in Italian) . Retrieved 15 April 2022 .

^ Graham A. Loud; Alex Metcalfe (2002).

The Society of Norman Italy . BRILL.

ISBN 9004125418 .

^ These Lombard colonisers were native northern Italians and should not be confused with the Germanic tribe the Lombards , who were referred to as longobardi to distinguish them from the Italians of the region who were known as lombardi .

^ Fiorenzo Toso (2008).

Le minoranze linguistiche in Italia (in Italian). Il Mulino. p. 137.

ISBN 978-88-15-12677-1 .

^ Nicola De Blasi (1994).

L'italiano in Basilicata: una storia della lingua dal Medioevo a oggi (in Italian). Il Salice. p. 30.

^ "I PAESI della SICILIA dove si parla LOMBARDO" (in Italian). 23 October 2021 . Retrieved 5 April 2022 .

^ a b c d e f g h "Una indagine CATI per lo studio della mobilità interna in Italia in un'ottica longitudinale" (PDF) (in Italian). Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 April 2021 . Retrieved 8 February 2018 .

^ a b c "Emigrazione interna italiana" (in Italian) . Retrieved 8 February 2018 .

^ a b "L'emigrazione interna italiana negli anni '50 e '60" (in Italian). 16 November 2012 . Retrieved 8 February 2018 .

^ "An International Conference on the Baltic Archives Abroad" . Kirmus.ee. Archived from the original on 13 February 2012 . Retrieved 5 January 2014 .

^ "Il Giorno del Ricordo" (in Italian). 10 February 2014 . Retrieved 16 October 2021 .

^ "L'esodo giuliano-dalmata e quegli italiani in fuga che nacquero due volte" (in Italian). 5 February 2019 . Retrieved 24 January 2023 .

^ Tobagi, Benedetta.

"La Repubblica italiana | Treccani, il portale del sapere" . Treccani.it . Retrieved 28 January 2015 .

^ Evans, Thammy; Abraham, Rudolf (2013).

Istria . Bradt Travel Guides. p. 11.

ISBN 9781841624457 .

^ Markham, James M. (6 June 1987).

"Election Opens Old Wounds in Trieste" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 9 June 2016 .

^ Konrád, Ota; Barth, Boris; Mrňka, Jaromír, eds. (2021).

Collective Identities and Post-war Violence in Europe, 1944–48 . Springer International. p. 20.

ISBN 9783030783860 .

^ Bloxham, Donald ; Dirk Moses, Anthony (2011). "Genocide and ethnic cleansing". In Bloxham, Donald; Gerwarth, Robert (eds.).

Political Violence in Twentieth-century Europe . Cambridge University Press. p. 125.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511793271.004 .

ISBN 9781107005037 .

^ Ballinger, Pamela (7 April 2009).

Genocide: Truth, Memory, and Representation . Duke University Press. p. 295.

ISBN 9780822392361 . Retrieved 30 December 2015 .

^ Tesser, Lynn (14 May 2013).

Ethnic Cleansing and the European Union . Springer. p. 136.

ISBN 9781137308771 .

^ Ballinger, Pamela (2003).

History in Exile: Memory and Identity at the Borders of the Balkans . Princeton University Press. p. 103.

ISBN 0691086974 .

^ Bramwell, Anna C. (1988).

Refugees in the Age of Total War . Unwin Hyman. pp. 139, 143.

ISBN 9780044451945 .

^ Klemenčič, Matjaž.

"The Effects of the Dissolution of Yugoslavia on Minority Rights: the Italian Minority in Post-Yugoslav Slovenia and Croatia" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 July 2011 . Retrieved 23 April 2010 .

^ "Državni Zavod za Statistiku" (in Croatian) . Retrieved 10 June 2017 .

^ "Popis 2002" . Retrieved 10 June 2017 .

^ Meyers, Kayla.

"What exhuming Francisco Franco's remains could mean for Spain" .

The Washington Post .

^ Aaron J., Hahn Tapper; Sucharov, Mira, eds. (24 June 2019).

Social Justice and Israel/Palestine: Foundational and Contemporary Debates . Toronto.

ISBN 9781487588069 .

OCLC 1090240955 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Sikand, Yoginder (31 July 2004).

Muslims in India Since 1947 . London and New York: Taylor & Francis. p. 5.

ISBN 9781134378258 . Retrieved 8 August 2021 .

^ Oh, Chong Jin (2006). "Diaspora nationalism: The case of ethnic Korea minority in Kazakhstan and its lessons from the Crimean Tatars in Turkey".

Nationalities Papers .

34 (2): 111– 129.

doi : 10.1080/00905990600617623 .

S2CID 128636139 .

^ Compare: Kissi, Edward (2003). "Genocide in Cambodia and Ethiopia". In Gellately, Robert ; Kiernan, Ben (eds.).

The Specter of Genocide: Mass Murder in Historical Perspective . Cambridge University Press. p. 314.

ISBN 9780521527507 . Retrieved 28 June 2020 .

About 100,000 of an estimated Cham population of 250,000, at the time of the revolution in 1975, had perished by the time the Khmer Rouge regime was overthrown by Vietnam in January 1979 ^ "boat people" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) – "2. Refugees who have left a country by sea, esp. the Vietnamese people who fled in small boats and moved to Hong Kong, Australia, and elsewhere after the conquest of South Vietnam by North Vietnam in 1975." ^ "Refugee population by country or territory of origin" .

Data.WorldBank.org . The World Bank . Retrieved 26 November 2019 .

^ "1959: The Cuban Revolution" .

Upfront: The Newsmagazine for Teens . Scholastic.

^ "Nearly 20 Percent of All Dominicans Live Abroad" .

Dominican Today . Archived from the original on 8 December 2012.

^ Zimbabwe's New Diaspora: Displacement and the Cultural Politics of Survival . Berghahn Books. 2010.

ISBN 9781845456580 .

^ Song, Changzoo (May 2014).

"Engaging the diaspora in an era of transnationalism" (PDF) .

IZA World of Labor : 1– 10.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 July 2018 . Retrieved 28 June 2020 .

Since the 1990s, South Korea's population has been aging and its fertility rate has fallen. At the same time, the number of Koreans living abroad has risen considerably. These trends threaten to diminish South Korea's international and economic stature. To mitigate the negative effects of these new challenges, South Korea has begun to engage the seven million Koreans living abroad, transforming the diaspora into a positive force for long-term development.

^ Barlai, Melani; Fähnrich, Birte; Griessler, Christina; Rhomberg, Markus, eds. (2017).

The migrant crisis: European perspectives and national discourses . Peter Filzmaier (preface). LIT Verlag Münster.

ISBN 978-3-643-90802-5 .

OCLC 953843642 .

^ Dumont, Jean-Christophe; Scarpet, Stefano (September 2015).

"Is this humanitarian migration crisis different?" (PDF) .

Migration Policy Debates .

OECD .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 July 2021 . Retrieved 23 August 2021 .

^ Ayaz, Ameer; Wadood, Abdul (Summer 2020).

"An Analysis of European Union Policy towards Syrian Refugees" (PDF) .

Journal of Political Studies .

27 (2): 1– 19.

eISSN 2308-8338 .

ProQuest 2568033477 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 January 2023 . Retrieved 30 January 2023 .

^ "FACTBOX-How big is Europe's refugee and migrant crisis?" .

Thomson Reuters Foundation News. 30 November 2016.

Archived from the original on 16 October 2021 . Retrieved 14 October 2021 .

^ "Migrant crisis: Explaining the exodus from the Balkans" .

BBC News . 8 September 2015.

Archived from the original on 9 March 2022 . Retrieved 9 March 2022 .

^ Zaragoza-Cristiani, Jonathan (2015).

"Analysing the Causes of the Refugee Crisis and the Key Role of Turkey: Why Now and Why So Many?" (PDF) .

EUI Working Papers . Robert Schuman Centre for Advanced Studies.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 August 2021 . Retrieved 7 August 2021 .

^ Hatton, Tim (2020).

European asylum policy before and after the migration crisis (PDF) . IZA World of Labor.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 May 2023 . Retrieved 19 May 2023 .

^ a b Nugent, Neil (2017). "Setting the Scene: The 'Crises', the Challenges, and Their Implications for the Nature and Operation of the EU".

The government and politics of the European Union (8th ed.).

Palgrave Macmillan . pp.

1– 20.

ISBN 978-1-137-45409-6 .

^ Bowen, John (2014).

European states and their Muslim citizens : the impact of institutions on perceptions and boundaries . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-107-03864-6 .

^ Connor, Phillip (19 September 2018).

"Europeans support taking in refugees – but not EU's handling of issue" .

Pew Research Center .

Archived from the original on 20 September 2018 . Retrieved 13 July 2021 .

^ Outhwaite, William (28 February 2019). Menjívar, Cecilia; Ruiz, Marie; Ness, Immanuel (eds.).

"Migration Crisis and "Brexit" " .

The Oxford Handbook of Migration Crises . Oxford Handbooks.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780190856908.001.0001 .

ISBN 9780190856908 .

Archived from the original on 14 May 2022 . Retrieved 24 February 2024 .

^ Williams, Thomas Chatterton (27 November 2017).

"The French Origins of "You Will Not Replace Us" " .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on 14 August 2019 . Retrieved 24 February 2024 .

^ Solinsky, Irish (3 February 2023).

"The 2015 Migrant Crisis: An Impact to Germany?" .

Doctoral Dissertations and Projects .

^ • Board, Editorial (23 February 2018).

"Latin-America's worst-ever refugee crisis: Venezuelans" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on 24 February 2018 . Retrieved 25 February 2018 .

This human outflow, ... is the largest displacement of people in Latin American history Hylton, Wil S. (9 March 2018).

"Leopoldo López Speaks Out, and Venezuela's Government Cracks Down" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 12 May 2019 . Retrieved 12 March 2018 .

Venezuela is the most urgent humanitarian disaster in the Western Hemisphere, producing the largest exodus of refugees in the history of the Americas "Venezuela's mounting refugee crisis" .

Financial Times . 20 April 2018.

Archived from the original on 12 April 2019 . Retrieved 22 April 2018 .

"Venezuela's exodus: Forced to flee" .

Al Jazeera . 15 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2020 . Retrieved 15 September 2018 .

Latin America is facing the largest refugee crisis in its history as hundreds of thousands of people flee Venezuela to escape severe economic hardship.

Kurmanaev, Anatoly (17 May 2019).

"Venezuela's Collapse Is the Worst Outside of War in Decades, Economists Say" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 14 January 2020 . Retrieved 18 May 2019 .

Venezuela has lost a tenth of its population in the past two years as people fled, even trekking across mountains, setting off Latin America's biggest ever refugee crisis.

^ Olivares, Francisco (13 September 2014).

"Best and brightest for export" . El Universal. Archived from the original on 16 September 2014 . Retrieved 24 September 2014 .

The Bolivarian diaspora is a reversal of fortune on a massive scale ^ a b "Hugo Chavez is Scaring Away Talent" .

Newsweek . 30 June 2009.

Archived from the original on 10 March 2021 . Retrieved 24 September 2014 .

The Bolivarian diaspora is a reversal of fortune on a massive scale ^ • Maria Delgado, Antonio (28 August 2014).

"Venezuela agobiada por la fuga masiva de cerebros" . El Nuevo Herald.

Archived from the original on 27 August 2014 . Retrieved 28 August 2014 .

The massive emigration of Venezuelans, a trend that was unprecedented in the republican history of the nation, is mainly motivated by personal insecurity, legal insecurity and lack of options to progress under the Bolivarian regime Weddle, Cody (18 March 2017).

"More desperate college grads flee Venezuela" .

WPLG .

Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 15 October 2017 .

some academics refer to the exodus in its totality as the Bolivarian diaspora Wyss, Jim (25 July 2017).

"As Venezuela faces critical week, Colombia prepares for a wave of migrants" .

The Miami Herald .

Archived from the original on 4 May 2020 . Retrieved 15 October 2017 .

And as conditions in Venezuela worsen, the "Bolivarian Diaspora" is likely to keep growing. One measure of the desperation:the number of Venezuelans seeking asylum abroad tripled from 2015 to 2016.

Manner, Benedict (5 September 2017).

"A family bereavement brings home Venezuela's crisis" .

Financial Times .

Archived from the original on 22 September 2019 . Retrieved 15 October 2017 .

Like the rest of the ' Bolivarian diaspora ' dotted around the globe, it has been impossible to escape the asphyxiating drama ^ Canelón-Silva, Agrivalca Ramsenia (2014).

"Del Estado Comunicador Al Estado De Los Medios. Catorce Años De Hegemonía Comunicacional En Venezuela" .

Palabra Clave .

17 (4).

University of La Sabana : 1243– 78.

doi : 10.5294/pacla.2014.17.4.11 .

hdl : 10818/22065 .

^ Rory, Carroll (2014).

Comandante : Hugo Chavez's Venezuela . Penguin Books: New York. pp.

182– 94.

ISBN 978-0143124887 .

^ 남민우, 기 (2 May 2018).

"화폐경제 무너졌는데…최저임금 인상에 목매는 베네수엘라" .

朝鮮日報 (in Korean).

Archived from the original on 4 October 2018 . Retrieved 22 May 2018 .

Venezuela's fall is considered to be mainly caused by the populist policy ... Venezuela, for decades, has increased the number of public sector employees and has promoted populist support to maintain the regime ^ Oner, Imdat (20 September 2018).

"Latin America is facing its worst refugee crisis in its history. Will it repeat the EU's mistakes regarding Syrian refugees?" .

Global Americans . Retrieved 19 August 2024 .

^ " 'I can't go back': Venezuelans are fleeing their crisis-torn country en masse" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 7 December 2020 . Retrieved 7 April 2018 .

^ Welsh, Teresa (19 September 2018).

"Venezuela crisis is 'on the scale of Syria,' UNHCR says" . Devex.

Archived from the original on 17 January 2021 . Retrieved 21 September 2018 .

^ "Venezuela government denies facing migration crisis" .

Al Jazeera . 4 September 2018.

Archived from the original on 4 September 2018 . Retrieved 4 September 2018 .

^ LaFranchi, Howard (2 November 2016).

"Why time is ripe for US to address Venezuela's mess" .

The Christian Science Monitor .

Archived from the original on 20 June 2019 . Retrieved 4 November 2016 .

^ Maria Delgado, Antonio (28 August 2014).

"Venezuela agobiada por la fuga masiva de cerebros" . El Nuevo Herald.

Archived from the original on 27 August 2014 . Retrieved 28 August 2014 .

The massive emigration of Venezuelans, a trend that was unprecedented in the republican history of the nation, is mainly motivated by personal insecurity, legal insecurity and lack of options to progress under the Bolivarian regime ^ "El 90% de los venezolanos que se van tienen formación universitaria" . El Impulso. 23 August 2014.

Archived from the original on 17 October 2015 . Retrieved 28 August 2014 .

^ Pitts, Pietro D.; Rosati, Andrew (4 December 2014).

"Venezuela's Oil Industry Exodus Slowing Crude Production: Energy" .

Bloomberg .

Archived from the original on 25 December 2014 . Retrieved 24 January 2015 .

^ Lee, Brianna (2 December 2015).

"Venezuela Elections 2015: Why Venezuelans Are Fleeing The Country" .

International Business Times .

Archived from the original on 9 December 2020 . Retrieved 30 December 2015 .

^ Margolis, Mac (14 September 2016).

"Latin America Has a Different Migration Problem" .

Bloomberg .

Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 22 September 2016 .

^ "Refugees and migrants from Venezuela top 4 million: UNHCR and IOM" .

UNHCR . UNHCR, IOM. 7 June 2019.

Archived from the original on 17 December 2020 . Retrieved 10 June 2019 .

^ "Gracias a las malas políticas del Gobierno bolivariano, más de 4 millones de venezolanos se han ido del país (encuesta)" .

La Patilla (in European Spanish). 19 January 2018.

Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 20 January 2018 .

^ Forero, Juan; Protti, Tommaso (13 February 2018).

"Venezuela's Misery Fuels Migration on Epic Scale" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2021 . Retrieved 13 February 2018 .

^ "More than 5m set to flee Venezuela by end of this year" .

Financial Times . 19 June 2019.

Archived from the original on 7 November 2020 . Retrieved 19 June 2019 .

^ Bahar, Dany; Barrios, Douglas (10 December 2018).

"How many more migrants and refugees can we expect out of Venezuela?" .

Brookings .

Archived from the original on 7 March 2021 . Retrieved 22 September 2019 .

^ Wyss, Jim (13 August 2019).

"A nation is vanishing: Has Venezuela lost almost 20 percent of its population?" .

Miami Herald .

Archived from the original on 7 November 2020 . Retrieved 15 August 2019 .

^ a b Fieser, Ezra; Moran, Nancy (20 September 2019).

"Venezuela Exodus Is as Big as Syria's, Yet Got 1.5% of the Aid" .

Bloomberg .

Archived from the original on 20 December 2019 . Retrieved 22 September 2019 .

^ "Syrian refugees biggest humanitarian crisis" .

Middle East Star . 28 August 2014.

Archived from the original on 14 March 2016 . Retrieved 30 August 2014 .

^ Buschschlüter, Vanessa (17 October 2022).

"Venezuela crisis: 7.1m leave country since 2015" .

BBC News . Retrieved 17 October 2022 .

^ "Horrors in the Darién Gap should prompt more support for Venezuelans and other refugees and migrants" .

Norwegian Refugee Council . Retrieved 4 June 2023 .

^ Dooley, Dany Bahar and Meagan (9 December 2019).

"Venezuela refugee crisis to become the largest and most underfunded in modern history" .

Brookings Institution .

Archived from the original on 14 June 2021 . Retrieved 14 June 2021 .

^ " "Ha faltado cooperación de internacional con refugiados venezolanos" " .

El Nacional (in Spanish). 3 January 2021.

Archived from the original on 14 June 2021 . Retrieved 14 June 2021 .

^ a b c "UNHCR, Venezuela situation" .

^ a b c "Almost 8 million Venezuelans have been forced to leave their country due to the Maduro regime" . 21 September 2023.

^ Van Den Bos, Matthijs; Nell, Liza (2006).

"Territorial bounds to virtual space: transnational online and offline networks of Iranian and Turkish–Kurdish immigrants in the Netherlands" (PDF) .

Global Networks .

6 (2): 201– 20.

doi : 10.1111/j.1471-0374.2006.00141.x . Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 August 2014 . Retrieved 30 September 2013 .

^ Chester, Ken (7 August 2013).

"How WeChat and Zalo Shine a Light on the Asian American Diaspora" .

Tech in Asia . Retrieved 30 September 2013 .

^ "The Globe: Diaspora Marketing, Nirmalya Kumar and Jan-Benedict Steenkamp" .

Harvard Business Review . October 2013.

^ Joseph Foley, New Englishes: the case of Singapore , 1988, p. 1.

^ Peterson-de la Cueva, Lisa (24 November 2008).

"Gran Torino connects Hmong Minnesotans with Hollywood" .

Twin Cities Daily Planet . Retrieved 30 September 2013 .

Sources [ edit ] Barclay, John M. G. (ed.), Negotiating Diaspora: Jewish Strategies in the Roman Empire , Continuum International Publishing Group, 2004 Baser, B. & Swain, A.

Diasporas as Peacemakers: Third Party Mediation in Homeland Conflicts with Ashok Swain. International Journal on World Peace 25 (3), September 2008.

Braziel, Jana Evans. 2008.

Diaspora: An Introduction . Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell.

Brubaker, Rogers (2005).

"The 'diaspora' diaspora" (PDF) .

Ethnic and Racial Studies .

28 (1): 1– 19.

doi : 10.1080/0141987042000289997 .

S2CID 17914353 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 9 April 2011 . Retrieved 22 February 2011 .

Bueltmann, Tanja, et al. eds.

Locating the English Diaspora, 1500–2010 (Liverpool University Press, 2012) Chaliand, Gérard; Rageau, Jean-Pierre (1995).

Penguin Atlas of Diasporas . Penguin.

ISBN 9780670854394 .

Cohen, Robin (2008).

Global Diasporas: An Introduction (2nd ed.). Abingdon: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415435505 .

Délano Alonso, Alexandra & Mylonas, Harris . 2019. " The Microfoundations of Diaspora Politics: Unpacking the State and Disaggregating the Diaspora ", Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies , Volume 45, Issue 4: 473–491.

Dubnow, Simon (1931). "Diaspora". In Johnson, Alvin (ed.).

Encyclopaedia of the Social Sciences . Vol. 5. New York: Macmillan. pp.

126– 130.

Dufoix, Stéphane (2017).

The Dispersion: A History of the Word Diaspora . Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 9789004326910 .

Galil, Gershon , & Weinfeld, Moshe , Studies in Historical Geography and Biblical Historiography: Presented to Zekharyah Ḳalai , Brill, 2000 Jayasuriya, Shihan De S.; Pankhurst, Richard, eds. (2003).

The African Diaspora in the Indian Ocean . Trenton: Africa World Press.

ISBN 9780865439801 .

Kantor, Mattis, The Jewish Timeline Encyclopedia: A Year-by-year History from Creation to the Present , (new updated edition), Northvalem New Jersey: Jason Aronson, 1992 Kenny, Kevin (2013).

Diaspora: A Very Short Introduction . New York: Oxford University Press.

Luciuk, Lubomyr, Searching for Place: Ukrainian Displaced Persons, Canada and the Migration of Memory . University of Toronto Press, 2000.

Mahroum, Sami & De Guchteneire, P. (2007), Transnational Knowledge Through Diaspora Networks-Editorial . International Journal of Multicultural Societies 8 (1), pp. 1–3 Mahroum, Sami; Eldridge, Cynthia; Daar, Abdallah S. (2006).

Transnational diaspora options: How developing countries could benefit from their emigrant populations . International Journal on Multicultural Societies, 2006.

Nesterovych, Volodymyr (2013). " Impact of ethnic diasporas on the adoption of normative legal acts in the United States ". Viche. 8: pp. 19–23.

Oonk, G., Global Indian Diasporas: trajectories of migration and theory , Amsterdam University Press, 2007 Free download here Safran, William (1991). "Diasporas in Modern Societies: Myths of Homeland and Return".

Diaspora .

1 (1): 83– 99.

doi : 10.1353/dsp.1991.0004 .

S2CID 143442531 .

Shain, Yossi, Kinship and Diasporas in International Politics , Michigan University Press, 2007 Tölölyan, Khachig (1996). "Rethinking Diaspora (s): Stateless Power in the Transnational Moment".

Diaspora .

5 (1): 3– 36.

doi : 10.1353/dsp.1996.0000 .

S2CID 145562896 .

Weheliye, Alexander G. "My Volk to Come: Peoplehood in Recent Diaspora Discourse and Afro-German Popular Music." Black Europe and the African Diaspora. Ed. Darlene Clark. Hine, Trica Danielle. Keaton, and Stephen Small. Urbana: University of Illinois, 2009. pp. 161–179.

Weinar, Agnieszka (2010).

"Instrumentalising diasporas for development: International and European policy discourses" . In Bauböck, Rainer; Faist, Thomas (eds.).

Diaspora and Transnationalism: Concepts, Theories and Methods . Amsterdam University Press. pp.

73– 89.

ISBN 9789089642387 . Retrieved 12 January 2021 .

Xharra, B. & Wählisch, M.

Beyond Remittances: Public Diplomacy and Kosovo's Diaspora , Foreign Policy Club, Pristina (2012), abstract and free access here .

Further reading [ edit ] Cohen, Robin, and Carolin Fischer (eds.) Routledge Handbook of Diaspora Studies (2019) Gewecke, Frauke.

"Diaspora" (2012). University Bielefeld – Center for InterAmerican Studies.

Knott, Kim, and Sean McLoughlin, eds.

Diasporas: Concepts, Intersections, Identities (2010) Sheffer, Gabriel.

Diaspora Politics: At Home Abroad (2006) External links [ edit ] Look up diaspora in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to diasporas .

Livius.org: Diaspora Archived 3 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine Open access book on Diasporas Integration: Building Inclusive Societies (IBIS) UN Alliance of Civilizations online community on Good Practices of Integration of Migrants across the World Diasporic Trajectories: Transnational Cultures in the 21st Century Podcast playlist of a seminar series held in 2015 at the University of Edinburgh, School of Literatures, Languages, and Cultures v t e Diasporas Africa v t e African diaspora Geography Americas / Latin America Caribbean Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda Aruba Bahamas Barbados Bermuda Cayman Islands Cuba Afro-Roma Arará Cape Verdean Ganga-Longoba Curaçao Dominica Dominican Republic Cocolo Samaná Americans Grenada Haiti Marabou Marron Jamaica Afro-Roma Coromantee Igbos Jamaican Maroons Puerto Rico Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Garifuna Trinidad and Tobago Douglas Merikins Turks and Caicos Islands Central America Belize Garifuna Costa Rica El Salvador Guatemala Honduras Miskito people Miskito Sambu Nicaragua Panama Cimarrón North America Canada Black Mennonites Indigenous Black Canadians New Brunswick Nova Scotia Ontario African immigrants Mexico Mascogos United States African Americans Afro-Roma Affrilachians African-American Jews Alabama Creoles Black Mennonites Black Southerners Black Hispanic Black Indians / Freedmen Cherokee freedmen Chickasaw freedmen Choctaw freedmen Creek freedmen Seminole freedmen Creoles of color Gullah Brass Ankles Chestnut Ridge people Dominickers Fulani Garifuna Igbos Louisiana Redbones Lumbee Melungeons Somali Bantus Yoruba African immigrants South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Kalungas Macombo Quilombola Chile Colombia Raizal Ecuador French Guiana Aluku Ndyuka Saramaka Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Kwinti Matawai Ndyuka Paramaccan Saramaka Uruguay Venezuela Europe ( Blacks ) Abkhazia Austria Belgium Finland France Paris Germany Greece Blacks Ireland Italy Netherlands Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom Cambridge Liverpool London Scotland Wales Middle East Iran Iraq Israel Ethiopian Israelis Sudanese refugees Jordan Oman Palestine Saudi Arabia Syria Turkey Africans United Arab Emirates Yemen Asia and Oceania Australia China Guangzhou Hong Kong Afro-Asians in South Asia India and Pakistan Siddi in Karnataka Indonesia Black Dutchmen Mardijker Japan Malaysia New Zealand Sri Lanka Kaffirs Atlantic Saint Helena Secondary Afro-American diaspora Africa Ghana African Americans Tabom Liberia Americo-Liberians Nigeria Afro-Brazilians Saro Sierra Leone Sierra Leone Creole Europe France African Americans Haitians United Kingdom African Americans Afro-Caribbean people British Jamaicans Asia and Oceania Israel African Hebrew Israelites Japan Related topics African diaspora religions Anti-African sentiment Anti-Black racism Atlantic slave trade Coromantee Igbo Kongo Tikar Yoruba Slavery in the Ottoman Empire Black Lives Matter Black power Civil rights movement Creole peoples Genetic history Maroons Pan-Africanism Slavery Reparations Category Commons Asia v t e Overseas Asians and Asian diasporas By origin in Asia Central Kazakh Mongolians Uzbeks East Chinese Japanese Koreans Ryukyuans Taiwanese South Country Afghans Bangladeshis Indians Maldivians Nepalis Pakistanis Sri Lankans Tibetans Ethnicity Baloch Bengali Hindu Gujaratis Odia Kashmiri Mirpuri Mizos Pashtuns Punjabis Roma Saraikis Sikhs Sindhis South Indians Malayalis In the Gulf Tamils Sri Lankan Tamils Telugus Southeast Country Indonesians Malaysians Singaporeans Ethnicity Acehnese Burmese Filipinos Hmong Javanese Laotians Malays Minangkabau Moluccans Thais Vietnamese West Arabs Emirati Iraqi Lebanese Palestinian Syrian Yemeni Armenian Assyrians Azerbaijani Iranian Israeli ( Jews ) Kurds Turkish By residence Africa Nigeria South Africa Americas Canada East Asians South Asians Southeast Asians West Asians Latin America Argentina Brazil Colombia Mexico Peru Caribbean Chinese Dougla Indian Marabou Suriname Indian Javanese Chinese United States Central Asians Hispanic and Latino East Asians South Asians Southeast Asians Europe France Germany Netherlands South Asians Sweden United Kingdom Central Asians East Asians South Asians Southeast Asians Oceania Australia New Zealand Europe v t e European diasporas Britain and Ireland Cornish English Irish Manx Scottish Welsh Caucasus Armenians Azerbaijanis Circassians Chechens Georgians Central Europe Austrians Czechs Croats Germans Volksdeutsche Hungarians Kashubians Poles Slovaks Slovenes Swiss Eastern Europe Belarusians Crimean Tatars Russians Ukrainians Northern Europe Danes Estonians Finns Icelanders Latvians Lithuanians Norwegians Swedes Southeastern Europe Albanians Kosovars Aromanians Bosnians Bulgarians Cypriots Greek Cypriots Turkish Cypriots Greeks Macedonians Romanians Moldovans Serbs Turks Meskhetian Turks Southwestern Europe Italians Internal migration Maltese Portuguese Spaniards Asturians Basques Canarians Catalans Galicians Western Europe Belgians Flanders Walloons Dutch French Quebecois Bretons Corsicans Luxembourgers Comprehensive group Argentina Australia Brazil Canada Morocco New Zealand Pakistan Peru Tunisia United States Venezuela Oceania Australians New Zealanders Americas Caribbean Haitians Jamaicans Latin America v t e Latin American diaspora By origin Brazilians Colombians Dominicans (Dominican Republic) Ecuadorians Hondurans Mexicans Nicaraguans Uruguayans Venezuelans By residence Australia Belize Canada Finland Israel New Zealand Trinidad and Tobago United Kingdom United States Northern America Americans Canadians Internal migration Other diasporas Commonwealth Religious Buddhist Christian Jain Jewish Muslim Sikh Related articles Colonial diaspora Trading diaspora Diaspora language v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal Authority control databases National Germany France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5fbcdb88b6‐dx5lr
Cached time: 20250818124129
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.370 seconds
Real time usage: 2.670 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 15373/1000000
Revision size: 131661/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 663879/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13341/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 25/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 694373/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.506/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18725082/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2201.172      1 -total
 53.03% 1167.272      2 Template:Reflist
 15.32%  337.188     54 Template:Cite_web
 14.17%  311.823     17 Template:Navbox
 13.23%  291.239     49 Template:Cite_book
 11.43%  251.489     45 Template:Cite_news
  7.76%  170.736     24 Template:Cite_journal
  6.91%  152.080      1 Template:Diasporas
  6.72%  147.943     20 Template:Sfn
  5.47%  120.358     16 Template:Lang Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:8613:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818124129 and revision id 1306563048. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Diaspora&oldid=1306563048 " Categories : Diasporas Diaspora studies Hidden categories: CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) CS1 maint: publisher location Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1: long volume value CS1 Croatian-language sources (hr) CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 Korean-language sources (ko) CS1 European Spanish-language sources (es-es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2023 Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Irish-language text All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from November 2018 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from May 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2008 Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from June 2020 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2018 All articles containing potentially dated statements Vague or ambiguous time from June 2020 Articles containing Latin-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles prone to spam from January 2014 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 12:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Diaspora 87 languages Add topic

