Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Works 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Abraham Maimonides 8 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano עברית مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Egyptian rabbi (1186–1237) Abraham Maimonides ( Hebrew : אברהם בן רמב"ם ; also known as Rabbeinu Avraham ben ha-Rambam , and Avraham Maimuni , June 13, 1186 [ 1 ] – December 7, 1237) was the son of Maimonides and succeeded his father as nagid of the Egyptian Jewish community .

Cairo Genizah fragment by Abraham ibn Maymun Biography [ edit ] Further information: History of the Jews in Egypt Avraham was born in Fustat in the Ayyubid-ruled Egypt near Cairo when his father was fifty-one years old. The boy was "modest, highly refined and unusually good natured"; he was also noted for his brilliant intellect and even while a youth became known as a great scholar. When his father died in 1204 at the age of sixty-nine, [ 2 ] Avraham was recognised as the greatest scholar in his community. Thus, he succeeded Rambam as Nagid (head of the Egyptian Jews ), as well as in the office of court physician , at the age of only eighteen. (The office of nagid was held by the Maimonides family for four successive generations until the end of the 14th century). After his appointment, the family of Sar Shalom ben Moses (a bitter rival of Maimonides) attempted to undermine his power by falsely claiming that he attempted to Islamize the synagogue liturgy.

[ 3 ] Avraham greatly honored the memory of his father, and defended his writings and works against all critics. Due to his influence, a large Egyptian Karaite community became Rabbinical Jews .

Yemenite Jews are known to have maintained contact with Avraham while he served as head of the Jewish community in Egypt, sending to him some thirteen questions relating to halakha , to which questions he replied in his own succinct way.

[ 4 ] Works [ edit ] Abraham's best-known work is his Milhamoth ha-Shem ("The Book of the Wars for God"), in which he answers the critics of his father's philosophical doctrines expressed in The Guide for the Perplexed . He had initially avoided entering the controversy over his father's writings, however, when he heard of the alleged burning of his father's books in Montpellier in 1235, he compiled the Milhamot HaShem , which he addressed to the Hachmei Provence . His principal work is entitled "A Comprehensive Guide for the Servants of God" ( Judeo-Arabic : כתאב כפיא אלעאבדין , romanized: Kitāb Kifāyah al-`Ābidīn ). From the extant surviving portion it is conjectured that Maimuni's treatise was three times as long as his father's Guide for the Perplexed . In the book, Maimuni evinces a great appreciation of and affinity for Sufism (Islamic mysticism). Followers of his path continued to foster a Jewish-Sufi form of pietism for at least a century, and he is rightly considered the founder of this pietistic school.

His other works include an exegesis on the Torah , of which only his commentaries on Genesis and Exodus are now extant, as well as commentaries on parts of his father's Mishneh Torah and on various tractates of the Talmud . He also wrote a work on Halakha (Jewish law), combined with philosophy and ethics (also in Judeo-Arabic, and arranged after his father's Mishneh Torah ), as well as a book of Questions & Responsa , more commonly known as Sefer Birkat Avraham .

[ 5 ] His "Discourse on the Sayings of the Rabbis"—discussing aggadah —is often quoted.

He also authored various medical works .

References [ edit ] ^ Russ-Fishbane, Elisha (2015).

Judaism, Sufism, and the Pietists of Medieval Egypt . Oxford University Press. p. 9.

ISBN 9780198728764 .

^ Abraham Maimonides' Wars of the Lord and the Maimonidean controversy , ed. Jacob Israel Dienstag, Fred Rosner - 2000 "His son Abraham stood at his bedside until his father's death when, at the young age of nineteen, he succeeded his father" ^ Bareket, Elinoar (2010-10-01).

"Megillat Zuṭṭa" .

Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World .

^ Abraham Maimuni Responsa (ed. Avraham H. Freimann and Shelomo Dov Goitein ), Mekize Nirdamim: Jerusalem 1937, responsa no's 82–94 (pp.

107–136) (Hebrew). The people of the city of Aden (Yemen) posed an additional seven questions unto Rabbi Abraham ben Maimonides, preserved in a 15th–16th century document still in manuscript form (pp. 188b–193a), containing mostly the commentary of Zechariah HaRofe on Maimonides' legal code of Jewish law. The rare document can be seen at the Hebrew University National Library in Jerusalem, Department of Manuscripts, in microfilm # F- 44265.

^ Questions & Responsaof Rabbi Avraham, the son of Rambam Archived November 29, 2014, at the Wayback Machine Rabbi Abraham Maimon Ha-Nagid , Hampstead Garden Suburb Synagogue site External links [ edit ] Discourse on the Sayings of the Rabbis ( Hebrew ) - Translation in wikisource Hebrew-Arabic Commentary on parts of Genesis and Exodus v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Sweden Vatican Israel Catalonia People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abraham_Maimonides&oldid=1306299961 " Categories : 1186 births 1237 deaths 13th-century Egyptian rabbis Maimonides Physicians from Cairo Bible commentators Medieval Jewish physicians of Egypt 13th-century Egyptian physicians Authors of books on Jewish law Rabbis from Cairo Physicians from the Ayyubid Sultanate Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Hebrew-language text Articles containing Judeo-Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 01:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abraham Maimonides 8 languages Add topic

