Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Politics 1.2 Sexual assault allegations 1.3 Awards and recognitions 2 Philosophical work Toggle Philosophical work subsection 2.1 Speech acts 2.2 Intentionality and the background 2.3 Consciousness 2.3.1 Ontological subjectivity 2.3.2 Artificial intelligence 2.4 Social reality 2.4.1 Searle–Lawson debate 2.5 Rationality 2.6 Searle–Derrida debate 3 Bibliography 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents John Searle 42 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher (born 1932) This article is about the American philosopher. For the American businessman and philanthropist, see John Gideon Searle . For the American minister and educator, see John Preston Searle . For the Australian educator, see John W. Searle . For other people, see John Serle (disambiguation) .

John Searle Searle at Christ Church, Oxford , 2005 Born John Rogers Searle ( 1932-07-31 ) July 31, 1932 (age 93) Denver , Colorado, U.S.

Spouse Dagmar Searle [ 3 ] Education Alma mater University of Wisconsin–Madison Christ Church, Oxford Thesis Problems arising in the theory of meaning out of the notions of sense and reference (1959) Academic advisors Peter Strawson J. L. Austin Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic Direct realism [ 1 ] Institutions Christ Church, Oxford UC Berkeley Doctoral students Bence Nanay [ 2 ] Notable students William Hirstein Main interests Philosophy of language Philosophy of mind Intentionality · Social ontology · Social reality Notable ideas Indirect speech acts Chinese room Biological naturalism Direction of fit Signature John Rogers Searle ( / s ɜːr l / ⓘ ; born July 31, 1932) [ 4 ] is an American philosopher widely noted for contributions to the philosophy of language , philosophy of mind , and social philosophy . He began teaching at UC Berkeley in 1959 and was Willis S. and Marion Slusser Professor Emeritus of the Philosophy of Mind and Language and Professor of the Graduate School until June 2019, when his status as professor emeritus was revoked because he was found to have violated the university's sexual harassment policies.

[ 5 ] As an undergraduate at the University of Wisconsin–Madison , Searle was secretary of "Students against Joseph McCarthy ". He received all his university degrees, BA, MA, and DPhil, from the University of Oxford , where he held his first faculty positions. Later, at UC Berkeley, he became the first tenured professor to join the 1964–1965 Free Speech Movement . In the late 1980s, Searle challenged the restrictions of Berkeley's 1980 rent stabilization ordinance . Following what came to be known as the California Supreme Court's "Searle Decision" of 1990, Berkeley changed its rent control policy, leading to large rent increases between 1991 and 1994.

In 2000, Searle received the Jean Nicod Prize ; [ 6 ] in 2004, the National Humanities Medal ; [ 7 ] and in 2006, the Mind & Brain Prize . In 2010 he was elected to the American Philosophical Society .

[ 8 ] Searle's early work on speech acts , influenced by J. L. Austin and Ludwig Wittgenstein , helped establish his reputation. Perhaps his most famous philosophical contribution is the " Chinese room " argument, which attempts to refute the thesis of "strong" artificial intelligence .

Biography [ edit ] John Searle speaking at Google, 2015 Searle's father, G. W. Searle, an electrical engineer , was employed by AT&T Corporation ; his mother, Hester Beck Searle, was a physician .

[ 4 ] Searle began his college education at the University of Wisconsin–Madison . In his junior year, he became a Rhodes Scholar at the University of Oxford , where he obtained all his university degrees, BA, MA, and DPhil.

[ 4 ] [ 9 ] Searle was the Willis S. and Marion Slusser Professor Emeritus of the Philosophy of Mind and Language and Professor of the Graduate School at the University of California, Berkeley ; even though he retired in 2014, he continued teaching until 2016.

[ citation needed ] In June 2019, the emeritus title was revoked.

[ 5 ] Politics [ edit ] While an undergraduate at the University of Wisconsin–Madison , Searle became the secretary of "Students against Joseph McCarthy ".

[ 10 ] McCarthy at that time served as the junior senator from Wisconsin . In 1959, Searle began teaching at Berkeley, and he was the first tenured professor to join the 1964–65 Free Speech Movement .

[ 11 ] In 1969, while serving as chairman of the Academic Freedom Committee of the Academic Senate of the University of California, [ 12 ] he supported the university in its dispute with students over the People's Park .

In The Campus War: A Sympathetic Look at the University in Agony (1971), [ 13 ] Searle investigates the causes behind the campus protests of the era. In it he declares, "I have been attacked by both the House Un-American Activities Committee and...several radical polemicists... Stylistically, the attacks are interestingly similar. Both rely heavily on insinuation and innuendo, and both display a hatred --one might almost say terror-- of close analysis and dissection of argument." He asserts that "My wife was threatened that I (and other members of the administration) would be assassinated or violently attacked." [ 10 ] In the late 1980s, Searle, along with other landlords, petitioned Berkeley's rental board to raise the limits on how much he could charge tenants under the city's 1980 rent-stabilization ordinance .

[ 14 ] The rental board refused to consider Searle's petition and Searle filed suit, charging a violation of due process. In 1990, in what came to be known as the "Searle Decision", the California Supreme Court upheld Searle's argument in part and Berkeley changed its rent-control policy, leading to large rent-increases between 1991 and 1994. Searle was reported to see the issue as one of fundamental rights, being quoted as saying "The treatment of landlords in Berkeley is comparable to the treatment of blacks in the South... our rights have been massively violated and we are here to correct that injustice." [ 15 ] The court described the debate as a "morass of political invective, ad hominem attack, and policy argument".

[ 16 ] Shortly after the September 11 attacks , Searle wrote an article arguing that the attacks were a particular event in a long-term struggle against forces that are intractably opposed to the United States, and signaled support for a more aggressive neoconservative interventionist foreign policy . He called for the realization that the United States is in a more-or-less permanent state of war with these forces. Moreover, a probable course of action would be to deny terrorists the use of foreign territory from which to stage their attacks. Finally, he alluded to the long-term nature of the conflict and blamed the attacks on the lack of American resolve to deal forcefully with America's enemies over the past several decades.

[ 17 ] Sexual assault allegations [ edit ] In March 2017, Searle became the subject of sexual assault allegations. The Los Angeles Times reported: "A new lawsuit alleges that university officials failed to properly respond to complaints that John Searle ... sexually assaulted his ... research associate last July and cut her pay when she rejected his advances." [ 18 ] [ 19 ] The case brought to light several earlier complaints against Searle, on which Berkeley allegedly had failed to act.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] The lawsuit, filed in a California court on March 21, 2017, alleged sexual harassment, retaliation, wrongful termination and assault and battery and sought damages both from Searle and from the Regents of the University of California as his employers.

[ 22 ] It also claims that Jennifer Hudin, the director of the John Searle Center for Social Ontology, where the complainant had been employed as an assistant to Searle, has stated that Searle "has had sexual relationships with his students and others in the past in exchange for academic, monetary or other benefits".

[ 22 ] After news of the lawsuit became public, several previous allegations of sexual harassment and assault by Searle were also revealed.

[ 23 ] On June 19, 2019, following campus disciplinary proceedings by Berkeley's Office for the Prevention of Harassment and Discrimination (OPHD), University of California President Janet Napolitano approved a recommendation that Searle have his emeritus status revoked, after a determination that he had violated university policies against sexual harassment and retaliation between July and September 2016.

[ 5 ] Awards and recognitions [ edit ] Searle has five honorary-doctorate degrees from four countries and is an honorary visiting professor at Tsing Hua University and at East China Normal University .

In 2000, Searle received the Jean Nicod Prize ; [ 6 ] in 2004, the National Humanities Medal ; [ 7 ] and in 2006, the Mind & Brain Prize .

Philosophical work [ edit ] Speech acts [ edit ] Searle's early work, which did much to establish his reputation, was on speech acts . He attempted to synthesize ideas from many colleagues – including J. L. Austin (the " illocutionary act ", from How To Do Things with Words ), Ludwig Wittgenstein and G. C. J. Midgley (the distinction between regulative and constitutive rules) – with his own thesis that such acts are constituted by the rules of language . He also drew on the work of Paul Grice (the analysis of meaning as an attempt at being understood), Hare and Stenius (the distinction, concerning meaning, between illocutionary force and propositional content), P. F. Strawson , John Rawls and William Alston , who maintained that sentence meaning consists in sets of regulative rules requiring the speaker to perform the illocutionary act indicated by the sentence and that such acts involve the utterance of a sentence which (a) indicates that one performs the act; (b) means what one says; and (c) addresses an audience in the vicinity.

In his 1969 book Speech Acts , Searle sets out to combine all these elements to give his account of illocutionary acts . There, he provides an analysis of what he considers the prototypical illocutionary act of promising and offers sets of semantical rules intended to represent the linguistic meaning of devices indicating further illocutionary act types. Among concepts presented in the book is the distinction between the "illocutionary force" and the "propositional content" of an utterance . Searle does not precisely define the former as such, but rather introduces several possible illocutionary forces by example. According to Searle, the sentences...

Sam smokes habitually.

Does Sam smoke habitually?

Sam, smoke habitually!

Would that Sam smoked habitually!

... each indicate the same propositional content (Sam smoking habitually) but differ in the illocutionary force indicated (respectively, a statement, a question, a command and an expression of desire).

[ 24 ] According to a later account, which Searle presents in Intentionality (1983) and which differs in important ways from the one suggested in Speech Acts , illocutionary acts are characterised by having "conditions of satisfaction", an idea adopted from Strawson's 1971 paper "Meaning and Truth", and a " direction of fit ", an idea adopted from Austin and Elizabeth Anscombe . For example, the statement "John bought two candy bars" is satisfied if and only if it is true, i.e., John did buy two candy bars. By contrast, the command "John, buy two candy bars!" is satisfied if and only if John carries out the action of purchasing two candy bars. Searle refers to the first as having the "word-to-world" direction of fit, since the words are supposed to change to accurately represent the world, and the second as having the "world-to-word" direction of fit, since the world is supposed to change to match the words. There is also the double direction of fit, in which the relationship goes both ways, and the null or zero direction of fit, in which it goes neither way because the propositional content is presupposed, as in "I am sorry I ate John's candy bars." In Foundations of Illocutionary Logic [ 25 ] (1985, with Daniel Vanderveken), Searle prominently uses the notion of the "illocutionary point".

[ 26 ] Searle's speech-act theory has been challenged by several thinkers in various ways. Collections of articles referring to Searle's account are found in Burkhardt 1990 [ 27 ] and Lepore / van Gulick 1991.

[ 28 ] Intentionality and the background [ edit ] In Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind (1983), Searle applies the principles of his account(s) of illocutionary acts to the investigation of intentionality , which is central to Searle's "Philosophy of Mind". (Searle is at pains to emphasize that 'intentionality', the capacity of mental states to be about worldly objects, is not to be confused with 'intensionality', the referential opacity of contexts that fail tests for 'extensionality'.

[ 29 ] ) For Searle, intentionality is exclusively mental, being the power of minds to represent or symbolize over, things, properties and states of affairs in the external world.

[ 30 ] Causal covariance, about-ness and the like are not enough: maps, for instance, only have a 'derived' intentionality, a mere after-image of the real thing.

Searle also introduces a technical term the Background , [ 31 ] which, according to him, has been the source of much philosophical discussion ("though I have been arguing for this thesis for almost twenty years," Searle writes, [ 32 ] "many people whose opinions I respect still disagree with me about it"). He calls Background the set of abilities, capacities, tendencies, and dispositions that humans have that are not themselves intentional states but that generate appropriate such states on demand.

Thus, when someone is asked to "cut the cake," they know to use a knife and when someone is asked to "cut the grass," they know to use a lawnmower (and not vice versa), even though the request did not mention this. Beginning with the possibility of reversing these two, an endless series of sceptical, anti-real or science-fiction interpretations could be imagined. "I wish to say that there is a radical underdetermination of what is said by the literal meaning..." emphasizes Searle.

[ 33 ] The Background fills the gap, being the capacity always to have a suitable interpretation to hand. "I just take a huge metaphysics for granted," he says.

[ 34 ] Searle sometimes supplements his reference to the Background with the concept of the Network , one's network of other beliefs, desires, and other intentional states necessary for any particular intentional state to make sense.

To give an example, two chess players might be engaged in a bitter struggle at the board, but they share all sorts of Background presuppositions: that they will take turns to move, that no one else will intervene, that they are both playing to the same rules, that the fire alarm will not go off, that the board will not suddenly disintegrate, that their opponent will not magically turn into a grapefruit, and so on indefinitely. As most of these possibilities will not have occurred to either player, Searle thinks the Background is itself unconscious as well as nonintentional.

[ 35 ] To have a Background is to have a set of brain structures that generate appropriate intentional states (if the fire alarm does go off, say). "Those brain structures enable me to activate the system of intentionality and to make it function, but the capacities realized in the brain structures do not themselves consist in intentional states." [ 36 ] It seems to Searle that Hume and Nietzsche were probably the first philosophers to appreciate, respectively, the centrality and radical contingency of the Background. "Nietzsche saw, with anxiety, that the Background does not have to be the way it is." [ 37 ] Searle also thinks that a Background appears in the ideas of other modern thinkers: as the river-bed/substratum of Wittgenstein's On Certainty [ 38 ] ("the work of the later Wittgenstein is in large part about the Background, especially On Certainty " [ 39 ] ) and Pierre Bourdieu 's habitus .

In his debate with Jacques Derrida , Searle argued against Derrida 's purported view that a statement can be disjoined from the original intentionality of its author, for example when no longer connected to the original author, while still being able to produce meaning. Searle maintained that even if one was to see a written statement with no knowledge of authorship it would still be impossible to escape the question of intentionality, because "a meaningful sentence is just a standing possibility of the (intentional) speech act". For Searle, ascribing intentionality to a statement was a basic requirement for attributing it any meaning at all.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] In 2023 Pierre Jacob described Searle's view as "anti-intentionalist" .

[ 42 ] Consciousness [ edit ] Building upon his views about intentionality, Searle presents a view concerning consciousness in his book The Rediscovery of the Mind (1992). He argues that, starting with behaviorism , an early but influential scientific view, succeeded by many later accounts that Searle also dismisses, much of modern philosophy has tried to deny the existence of consciousness, with little success. In Intentionality , he parodies several alternative theories of consciousness by replacing their accounts of intentionality with comparable accounts of the hand: No one would think of saying, for example, "Having a hand is just being disposed to certain sorts of behavior such as grasping" (manual behaviorism), or "Hands can be defined entirely in terms of their causes and effects" (manual functionalism ), or "For a system to have a hand is just for it to be in a certain computer state with the right sorts of inputs and outputs" (manual Turing machine functionalism), or "Saying that a system has hands is just adopting a certain stance toward it" (the manual stance ) (p. 263).

Searle argues that philosophy has been trapped by a false dichotomy : that, on one hand, the world consists of nothing but objective particles in fields of force, but that yet, on the other hand, consciousness is clearly a subjective first-person experience.

Searle says simply that both are true: consciousness is a real subjective experience, caused by the physical processes of the brain. (A view which he suggests might be called biological naturalism .) Ontological subjectivity [ edit ] Searle has argued [ 43 ] that critics like Daniel Dennett , [ 44 ] who he claims insist that discussing subjectivity is unscientific because science presupposes objectivity, are making a category error . Perhaps the goal of science is to establish and validate statements which are epistemically objective, i.e., whose truth can be discovered and evaluated by any interested party, but are not necessarily ontologically objective.

Searle calls any value judgment epistemically subjective . Thus, " McKinley is prettier than Everest " is "epistemically subjective", whereas "McKinley is higher than Everest" is "epistemically objective". In other words, the latter statement is evaluable, in fact, falsifiable, by an understood ('background') criterion for mountain height, like "the summit is so many meters above sea level". No such criteria exist for prettiness.

Beyond this distinction, Searle thinks there are certain phenomena, including all conscious experiences, that are ontologically subjective, i.e., can only exist as subjective experience. For example, although it might be subjective or objective in the epistemic sense, a doctor's note that a patient suffers from back pain is an epistemically objective claim: it counts as a medical diagnosis only because the existence of back pain is "an objective fact of medical science".

[ 45 ] The pain itself, however, is ontologically subjective : it is only experienced by the person having it.

Searle goes on to affirm that "where consciousness is concerned, the existence of the appearance is the reality".

[ 46 ] His view that the epistemic and ontological senses of objective/subjective are cleanly separable is crucial to his self-proclaimed biological naturalism , because it allows epistemically objective judgments like "That object is a pocket calculator" to pick out agent-relative features of objects, and such features are, on his terms, ontologically subjective, unlike, say, "That object is made mostly of plastic".

Artificial intelligence [ edit ] See also: Chinese room and philosophy of artificial intelligence Biological naturalism implies that if humans want to create a conscious being, they will have to duplicate whatever physical processes the brain goes through to cause consciousness. Searle thereby means to contradict what he calls " Strong AI ", defined by the assumption that "the appropriately programmed computer really is a mind, in the sense that computers given the right programs can be literally said to understand and have other cognitive states." [ 47 ] In 1980, Searle presented the " Chinese room " argument, which purports to prove the falsity of strong AI.

[ 47 ] A person is in a room with two slits, and they have a book and some scratch paper. This person does not know any Chinese. Someone outside the room slides some Chinese characters in through the first slit; the person in the room follows the instructions in the book, transcribing the characters as instructed onto the scratch paper, and slides the resulting sheet out by the second slit. To people outside the room, it appears that the room speaks Chinese – they have slid Chinese statements into one slit and got valid responses in English – yet the 'room' does not understand a word of Chinese. This suggests, according to Searle, that no computer can ever understand Chinese or English, because, as the thought experiment suggests, being able to 'translate' Chinese into English does not entail 'understanding' either Chinese or English: all that the person in the thought experiment, and hence a computer, is able to do is to execute certain syntactic manipulations.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] Douglas Hofstadter and Daniel Dennett in their book The Mind's I criticize Searle's view of AI, particularly the Chinese room argument.

[ 50 ] Stevan Harnad argues that Searle's "Strong AI" is really just another name for functionalism and computationalism , and that these positions are the real targets of his critique.

[ 51 ] Functionalists argue that consciousness can be defined as a set of informational processes inside the brain. It follows that anything that carries out the same informational processes as a human is also conscious. Thus, if humans wrote a computer program that was conscious, they could run that computer program on, say, a system of ping-pong balls and beer cups and the system would be equally conscious, because it was running the same information processes.

Searle argues that this is impossible, contending that consciousness is a physical property, like digestion or fire. No matter how good a simulation of digestion is built on the computer, it will not digest anything; no matter how well it simulates fire, nothing will get burnt. By contrast, informational processes are observer-relative : observers pick out certain patterns in the world and consider them information processes, but information processes are not things-in-the-world themselves. Since they do not exist at a physical level, Searle argues, they cannot have causal efficacy and thus cannot cause consciousness. There is no physical law, Searle insists, that can see the equivalence between a personal computer, a series of ping-pong balls and beer cans, and a pipe-and-water system all implementing the same program.

[ 52 ] Social reality [ edit ] Searle extended his inquiries into observer-relative phenomena by trying to understand social reality. Searle begins by arguing collective intentionality (e.g., "we are going for a walk") is a distinct form of intentionality, not simply reducible to individual intentionality (e.g., "I am going for a walk with him and I think he thinks he is going for a walk with me and he thinks I think I am going for a walk with him and...") In The Construction of Social Reality (1995), Searle addresses the mystery of how social constructs like "baseball" or "money" can exist in a world consisting only of physical particles in fields of force. Adapting an idea by Elizabeth Anscombe in "On Brute Facts", Searle distinguishes between brute facts , like the height of a mountain, and institutional facts , like the score of a baseball game. Aiming at an explanation of social phenomena in terms of Anscombe's notion, he argues that society can be explained in terms of institutional facts, and institutional facts arise out of collective intentionality through constitutive rules with the logical form "X counts as Y in C". Thus, for instance, filling out a ballot counts as a vote in a polling place, getting so many votes counts as a victory in an election, getting a victory counts as being elected president in the presidential race, etc.

Many sociologists, however, do not see Searle's contributions to social theory as very significant.

Neil Gross , for example, argues that Searle's views on society are more or less a reconstitution of the sociologist Émile Durkheim 's theories of social facts, social institutions, collective representations, and the like. Searle's ideas are thus open to the same criticisms as Durkheim's.

[ 53 ] Searle responded that Durkheim's work was worse than he had originally believed and, admitting he had not read much of Durkheim's work, said: "Because Durkheim's account seemed so impoverished I did not read any further in his work." [ 54 ] Steven Lukes , however, responded to Searle's response to Gross and argued point by point against the allegations that Searle makes against Durkheim, essentially upholding Gross's argument that Searle's work bears a great resemblance to Durkheim's. Lukes attributes Searle's miscomprehension of Durkheim's work to the fact that Searle had never read Durkheim.

[ 55 ] Searle–Lawson debate [ edit ] Further information: Social ontology In recent years, Searle's main interlocutor on issues of social ontology has been Tony Lawson . Although their accounts of social reality are similar, there are important differences. Lawson emphasizes the notion of social totality whereas Searle prefers to refer to institutional facts. Furthermore, Searle believes that emergence implies causal reduction whereas Lawson argues that social totalities cannot be completely explained by the causal powers of their components. Searle also places language at the foundation of the construction of social reality, while Lawson believes that community formation necessarily precedes the development of language and, therefore, there must be the possibility for non-linguistic social structure formation.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] [ 58 ] The debate is ongoing and takes place additionally through regular meetings of the Centre for Social Ontology at the University of California, Berkeley and the Cambridge Social Ontology Group at the University of Cambridge .

[ 59 ] Rationality [ edit ] In Rationality in Action (2001), Searle argues that standard notions of rationality are badly flawed. According to what he calls the Classical Model, rationality is seen as something like a train track: a person moves onto it at one point with their beliefs and desires, and then the rules of rationality compel them all the way to a conclusion. Searle doubts that this picture of rationality holds generally.

Searle briefly critiques one particular set of these rules: those of mathematical decision theory . He points out that its axioms require that anyone who valued a quarter and their life would, at some odds, bet their life for a quarter. Searle insists he would never take such a bet and believes that this stance is perfectly rational.

Most of his attack is directed against the common conception of rationality, which he believes is badly flawed. First, he argues that reason does not cause an individual to do anything, because having sufficient reason wills , but does not force , them to do that thing. Therefore, in any decision situation, people experience a gap between reasons and actions. For example, when a person decides to vote, they may determine that they care most about economic policy and that they prefer candidate Jones's economic policy, but they must also make an effort to actually cast a vote. Similarly, every time a smoker who feels guilty about their action lights a cigarette, they are aware that they are succumbing to their craving, and not merely acting automatically as they do when they exhale. This gap makes people think they have freedom of the will . Searle thinks that whether one really has free will or not is an open question, but considers its absence highly unappealing because it makes the feeling of freedom of will an epiphenomenon, which is highly unlikely from the evolutionary point of view given its biological cost. He also says, "All rational activity presupposes free will".

[ 60 ] Further information: Fact-value distinction Second, Searle believes that people can rationally do things that do not result from their own desires. It is widely believed that one cannot derive an "ought" from an "is", i.e., that facts about how the world is can never tell a person what they should do ( Hume's Law ). By contrast, insofar as a fact is understood to relate to an institution (marriage, promises, commitments, etc.), which is to be understood as a system of constitutive rules, then what one should do can be understood as following from the institutional fact of what one has done; institutional fact, then, can be understood as opposed to the "brute facts" related to Hume's Law. For example, Searle believes that the promise of doing something means that one must do it, because by making the promise one participates in the constitutive rules that arrange the system of promise-making itself; a "shouldness" is implicit in the mere factual action of promising. Furthermore, he believes that this provides a desire-independent reason for an action – if one orders a drink at a bar, there is an obligation to pay for it even if one has no desire to do so. This argument, which he first made in his paper, "How to Derive 'Ought' from 'Is'" (1964), [ 61 ] remains highly controversial, but Searle maintained that "the traditional metaphysical distinction between fact and value cannot be captured by the linguistic distinction between 'evaluative' and 'descriptive' because all such speech act notions are already normative".

[ 62 ] Third, Searle argues that much of rational deliberation involves adjusting patterns of desires, which are often inconsistent, to decide between outcomes, not the other way around. While in the Classical Model one would start from viewing a desire to go to Paris as a greater factor than saving money, which would lead to calculating the cheapest way to get there, Searle would argue that people balance the desire of Paris against the desire to save money to determine which one they value more. Hence, he believes that rationality is not a system of rules, but more of an adverb. Certain behaviors are seen as rational, no matter what their source, and a system of rules derives from finding patterns in what is considered rational.

Searle–Derrida debate [ edit ] Main article: Searle–Derrida debate After Jacques Derrida , in his 1972 paper "Signature Event Context," responded to J. L. Austin 's theory of the illocutionary act , Searle argued, in his 1977 essay "Reiterating the Differences: A Reply to Derrida," that Derrida's apparent rejection of Austin was unwarranted. Searle later refused to let his 1977 reply be printed along with Derrida's papers in the 1988 collection Limited Inc — in which a new text by Derrida attacked Searle's positions on the topic. In the 1990s, Searle elaborated on why he did not consider Derrida's approach to be legitimate philosophy.

Bibliography [ edit ] Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language (1969), Cambridge University Press , ISBN 978-0521096263 The Campus War: A Sympathetic Look at the University in Agony (political commentary; 1971) Expression and Meaning: Studies in the Theory of Speech Acts (essay collection; 1979) Intentionality: An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind (1983) Minds, Brains and Science: The 1984 Reith Lectures (lecture collection; 1984) Foundations of Illocutionary Logic (John Searle & Daniel Vanderveken 1985) The Rediscovery of the Mind (1992) The Construction of Social Reality (1995) The Mystery of Consciousness (review collection; 1997) Mind, Language and Society: Philosophy in the Real World (summary of earlier work; 1998) Rationality in Action (2001) Consciousness and Language (essay collection; 2002) Freedom and Neurobiology (lecture collection; 2004) Mind: A Brief Introduction (summary of work in philosophy of mind; 2004) Philosophy in a New Century: Selected Essays (2008) Making the Social World: The Structure of Human Civilization (2010) "What Your Computer Can't Know" (review of Luciano Floridi , The Fourth Revolution: How the Infosphere Is Reshaping Human Reality , Oxford University Press, 2014; and Nick Bostrom , Superintelligence: Paths, Dangers, Strategies , Oxford University Press, 2014), The New York Review of Books , vol. LXI, no. 15 (October 9, 2014), pp. 52–55.

Seeing Things As They Are: A Theory of Perception (2015) See also [ edit ] American philosophy Consciousness Language/action perspective List of American philosophers List of Jean Nicod Prize laureates Performative turn Practical reason Pragmatics Unconscious mind References [ edit ] ^ John R. Searle, Seeing Things as They Are: A Theory of Perception , Oxford University Press, 2015, p. 15.

^ "Humboldt Research Award" .

www.ruhr-uni-bochum.de .

^ "Introduction: John Searle in Czech Context" (PDF) .

Sav.sk . 2012 . Retrieved April 21, 2017 .

^ a b c Shook, John R. (January 1, 2005).

Dictionary of Modern American Philosophers . A&C Black. p. 2175.

ISBN 978-1-84371-037-0 .

^ a b c Weinberg, Justin (June 21, 2019).

"Searle Found to Have Violated Sexual Harassment Policies" .

Daily Nous .

Archived from the original on June 21, 2019 . Retrieved June 21, 2019 .

^ a b "Jean-Nicod 2000 Prize" . Archived from the original on September 23, 2015 . Retrieved June 11, 2015 .

^ a b "President Bush Awards 2004 National Humanities Medals" .

NEH.gov . Retrieved April 21, 2017 .

^ "APS Member History" .

search.amphilsoc.org . Retrieved April 21, 2021 .

^ "John Searle | Biography, Philosophy, & Facts" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved October 14, 2021 .

^ a b Searle, John R. (1971).

"The Anatomy of Student Revolts" .

The Campus War .

Archived from the original on May 27, 2023 . Retrieved November 14, 2024 – via Digital Text International.

^ "Socrates and Berkeley Scholars Web Hosting Services Have Been Retired – Web Platform Services" .

socrates.berkeley.edu . January 2, 2018.

^ Searle, John R. (1971).

"The Faculty" .

The Campus War .

Archived from the original on April 4, 2023 . Retrieved November 14, 2024 – via Digital Text International.

^ "The Campus War" . Retrieved March 24, 2012 .

^ See Searle v. City of Berkeley Rent Stabilization Bd.

(1988) 197 Cal.App.3d 1251, 1253 [243 Cal.Rptr. 449] ^ "Letters to the Editor. Category: Features from The Berkeley Daily Planet" .

Berkeley Daily Planet . December 14, 2004 . Retrieved April 21, 2017 .

^ Korngold, Gerald (January 1, 1998).

"Whatever Happened to Landlord-Tenant Law?" .

Nebraska Law Review .

77 (4).

^ "Terror.doc" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on May 15, 2008 . Retrieved January 1, 2009 .

^ Watanabe, Tessa (March 23, 2017).

"Lawsuit alleges that a UC Berkeley professor sexually assaulted his researcher and cut her pay when she rejected him" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved March 28, 2017 .

^ Fraley, Malaika (March 23, 2017).

"Berkeley: Renowned philosopher John Searle accused of sexual assault and harassment at UC Berkeley" .

East Bay Times . Retrieved March 28, 2017 .

^ Baker, Katie J.M. (April 7, 2017).

"UC Berkeley Was Warned About Its Star Professor Years Before Sexual Harassment Lawsuit" .

BuzzFeedNews . Retrieved April 8, 2017 .

^ "Berkeley: Renowned philosopher John Searle accused of sexual assault and harassment at UC Berkeley" .

East Bay Times . March 23, 2017 . Retrieved February 24, 2022 .

^ a b Baker, Katie J.M. (March 23, 2017).

"A Former Student Says UC Berkeley's Star Philosophy Professor Groped Her And Watched Porn At Work" .

BuzzFeedNews . Retrieved March 28, 2017 .

Contains facsimile of the suit.

^ Tate, Emily (April 10, 2017).

"Earlier Complaints on Professor Accused of Harassment" .

Inside Higher Ed .

^ John R. Searle (1969).

Speech Acts: An Essay in the Philosophy of Language . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521096263 .

^ John R. Searle, Daniel Vanderveken (1985).

Foundations of Illocutionary Logic . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-26324-5 .

^ Although Searle does not mention earlier uses of the concept, it originates from Alexander Sesonske's article "Performatives" .

^ Burkhardt, Armin (ed.), Speech Acts, Meaning and Intentions: Critical Approaches to the Philosophy of John R. Searle . Berlin / New York 1990.

^ Lepore, Ernest / van Gulick, Robert (eds): John Searle and his Critics . Oxford: Basil Blackwell 1991.

^ Searle, "Making the Social World: The Structure of Human Civilization" (2010) p. 48-62 ^ Searle, Intentionality (1983) ^ Searle, Intentionality (1983); The Rediscovery of the Mind (1992) ch. 8 ^ "Literary Theory and Its Discontents", New Literary History , 640 ^ Searle, John (1995).

The Construction of Social Reality . London: Allen Lane The Penguin Press. p. 131.

ISBN 978-0-14-023590-6 .

^ Searle, John (1999).

Mind, Language and Society . London: Orion Books Ltd. p. 108.

ISBN 978-0-75380-921-1 .

^ Searle, John (1992).

The Rediscovery of the Mind . Mass, US: MIT Press. p.

185 .

ISBN 978-0-262-19321-4 .

^ Searle, John (2001).

Rationality in Action . Mass, US: MIT Press. p. 58.

ISBN 978-0-262-19463-1 .

^ Searle, The Construction of Social Reality (1995), p.132 ^ Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1969).

On Certainty . Oxford: Basil Blackwell.

^ Searle, The Rediscovery of the Mind (1992), p.177 and endnote ^ John Searle, Reiterating the Différences: A Reply to Derrida , Glyph 2 (Baltimore MD: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1977 p. 202 ^ Gerald Graff. 1988. Summary of Reiterating the differences. in Derrida, Jacques.

Limited Inc.

p. 26.

^ Jacob, Pierre (2019).

"Intentionality" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Searle, J R: The Mystery of Consciousness (1997) p. 95-131 ^ The Myth of the Computer: An Exchange by Daniel C. Dennett, reply by John R. Searle, The New York Review of Books , June 24, 1982 Issue ^ Searle, J.R.: The Mystery of Consciousness (1997) p.122 ^ Searle, J.R.: The Mystery of Consciousness (1997) p.112 ^ a b "Minds, Brains and Programs" Archived 2001-02-21 at the Wayback Machine , The Behavioral and Brain Sciences .3, pp. 417–424. (1980) ^ "Conversation with John Searle, p.4 of 6" .

globetrotter.berkeley.edu .

^ Roberts, Jacob (2016).

"Thinking Machines: The Search for Artificial Intelligence" .

Distillations .

2 (2): 14– 23. Archived from the original on August 19, 2018 . Retrieved March 22, 2018 .

^ Hofstadter, D., 1981, 'Reflections on Searle', in Hofstadter and Dennett (eds.), The Mind's I, New York: Basic Books, pp. 373–382.

^ Harnad, Stevan (2001) , "What's Wrong and Right About Searle's Chinese Room Argument", in M.; Preston, J., Essays on Searle's Chinese Room Argument , Oxford University Press.

^ Searle 1980 ^ "Gross – Comment On Searle | PDF | Émile Durkheim | Sociology" .

Scribd .

^ "Searle – Reply To Gross | PDF | Émile Durkheim | Mind" .

Scribd .

^ Lukes, Steven (2007), Tsohatzidis, Savas L. (ed.), "Searle versus Durkheim" , Intentional Acts and Institutional Facts: Essays on John Searle's Social Ontology , Theory and Decision Library, Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp.

191– 202, doi : 10.1007/978-1-4020-6104-2_9 , ISBN 978-1-4020-6104-2 , retrieved December 5, 2020 ^ Lawson, Tony (December 1, 2016).

"Comparing Conceptions of Social Ontology: Emergent Social Entities and/or Institutional Facts?" .

Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour .

46 (4): 359– 399.

doi : 10.1111/jtsb.12126 .

ISSN 1468-5914 .

^ Searle, John R. (December 1, 2016). "The Limits of Emergence: Reply to Tony Lawson".

Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour .

46 (4): 400– 412.

doi : 10.1111/jtsb.12125 .

ISSN 1468-5914 .

^ Lawson, Tony (December 1, 2016).

"Some Critical Issues in Social Ontology: Reply to John Searle" .

Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour .

46 (4): 426– 437.

doi : 10.1111/jtsb.12129 .

ISSN 1468-5914 .

^ "Workshop on Critical Issues in Social Ontology.—The Cambridge Social Ontology Group" .

www.csog.econ.cam.ac.uk . September 19, 2014 . Retrieved October 11, 2017 .

^ Rationality in Action by John R. Searle (2003) ^ John Searle, " How to Derive 'Ought' from 'Is' ", The Philosophical Review , 73 :1 (January 1964), 43–58 ^ John Searle in Thomas Mautner, Dictionary of Philosophy (Penguin 1996).

ISBN 0-14-051250-0 Sources [ edit ] John Searle and His Critics (Ernest Lepore and Robert Van Gulick, eds.; 1991) John Searle (Barry Smith, ed.; 2003) John Searle and the Construction of Social Reality (Joshua Rust; 2006) Intentional Acts and Institutional Facts (Savas Tsohatzidis, ed.; 2007) Searle's Philosophy and Chinese Philosophy: Constructive Engagement (Bo Mou, ed.; 2008) John Searle (Joshua Rust; 2009) Further reading [ edit ] The issue of free will in John R. Searle: a contrast of biological naturalism to physicalism and to functionalism – Cescon, E., & Nunes, D. P. (2015). A questão do livre-arbítrio em John R. Searle: uma contraposição do naturalismo biológico ao fisicalismo e ao funcionalismo.

Cognitio-Estudos: revista eletrônica de filosofia , 12 (2), 179–190.

Papers on the History of Speech Act Theory by Barry Smith "Minds, Brains and Programs" , The Behavioral and Brain Sciences .3, pp. 417–424. (1980) "Is the Brain a Digital Computer?" (1990) Presidential Address to the American Philosophical Association "Collective Intentions and Actions" (1990) in Intentions in Communication by Philip R. Cohen, Jerry L. Morgan & Martha E. Pollack (eds.). Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press: pp. 401–416.

The Problem of Consciousness , Social Research , Vol. 60, No.1, Spring 1993.

Consciousness Annu. Rev. Neurosci. (2000) 23:557–78. Review.

D. Koepsell (ed.) and L. Moss (ed.) "Searle and Smith: A Dialogue" in John Searle's Ideas About Social Reality: Extensions, Criticisms, and Reconstructions (2003), Blackwell, ISBN 978-1-4051-1258-1 Dualism revisited J Physiol Paris . 2007 Jul–Nov;101(4–6):169–78. Epub 2008 Jan 19.

M. Bennett, D. Dennett , P. Hacker , J. Searle, Neuroscience and Philosophy: Brain, Mind and Language (2007), Columbia University Press, ISBN 0-231-14044-4 The Storm Over the University Interview with Léo Peruzzo Júnior .

Doerge (2006), Friedrich Christoph: Illocutionary Acts—Austin's Account and What Searle Made Out of It . Tuebingen: Tuebingen University.

Koblizek (2012), Tomas: How to Make the Concepts Clear: Searle's Discussion with Derrida . Organon F, Suppl. Issue 2, pp. 157–165. (Searle's reply to Koblizek: ibid., pp. 217–220.) Gary Marcus , "Am I Human?: Researchers need new ways to distinguish artificial intelligence from the natural kind", Scientific American , vol. 316, no. 3 (March 2017), pp. 58–63.

Multiple tests of artificial-intelligence efficacy are needed because, "just as there is no single test of athletic prowess, there cannot be one ultimate test of intelligence ." One such test, a "Construction Challenge", would test perception and physical action -—"two important elements of intelligent behavior that were entirely absent from the original Turing test ." Another proposal has been to give machines the same standardized tests of science and other disciplines that schoolchildren take. A so far insuperable stumbling block to artificial intelligence is an incapacity for reliable disambiguation . "[V]irtually every sentence [that people generate] is ambiguous , often in multiple ways." A prominent example is known as the "pronoun disambiguation problem": a machine has no way of determining to whom or what a pronoun in a sentence—such as "he", "she" or "it"—refers.

External links [ edit ] John Searle at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Philosophy portal Biography portal John Searle at IMDb John Searle on mind, matter, consciousness and his theory of perception Conversations with Searle Interview in Conversations with History Archived October 12, 2009, at the Wayback Machine series. Available in webcast and podcast .

Video or transcript of an interview with John Searle on language, writing, mind, and consciousness Video: Searle on the Free Speech Movement at UC Berkeley Archived February 24, 2022, at the Wayback Machine (1982) Video: "Our shared condition—consciousness" , Searle's May 2013 TED talk Webcast of Philosophy of Society lectures The Moscow Center for Consciousness Studies video interview with John Searle 2011-06-13 1984 audio Figure/Ground interview with John Searle. November 19th, 2012.

v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project DBLP PhilPeople Artists MusicBrainz People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐xjlr4
Cached time: 20250817044203
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.970 seconds
Real time usage: 1.187 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6746/1000000
Revision size: 57148/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 223642/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10504/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 200226/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.611/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22460927/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  972.218      1 -total
 26.34%  256.078      1 Template:Reflist
 15.37%  149.392      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 12.13%  117.926      7 Template:Navbox
 11.26%  109.445      1 Template:Social_and_political_philosophy
  9.23%   89.758      3 Template:Lang
  8.68%   84.356     15 Template:Cite_web
  8.40%   81.662      1 Template:Analytic_philosophy
  5.64%   54.827      1 Template:Short_description
  5.27%   51.224      1 Template:Sister_project_links Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:147079:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044203 and revision id 1296433539. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Searle&oldid=1296433539 " Categories : 1932 births 20th-century American philosophers 21st-century American philosophers Alumni of Christ Church, Oxford American Rhodes Scholars Analytic philosophers Artificial intelligence researchers Communication theorists American consciousness researchers and theorists American epistemologists Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Jean Nicod Prize laureates Living people Members of the European Academy of Sciences and Arts American metaphysicians National Humanities Medal recipients Ontologists Ordinary language philosophy American philosophers of culture American philosophers of language American philosophers of mathematics American philosophers of mind American philosophers of social science American philosophers of technology University of California, Berkeley faculty University of Wisconsin–Madison alumni Writers from Denver 20th-century American male writers 21st-century American male writers Members of the American Philosophical Society Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2020 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages including recorded pronunciations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2022 Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 00:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Searle 42 languages Add topic

