Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Humans 2 Other animals 3 Plants 4 References Toggle the table of contents Organ system 60 languages العربية অসমীয়া বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Bikol Central Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa کٲشُر Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски Malagasy Bahasa Melayu Nederlands ଓଡ଼ିଆ Polski Português Română Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt West-Vlams ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of organs assembled in a structural unit to serve a common function This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Organ system" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is part of a series on the Development of organ systems Nervous system Digestive system Reproductive system Urinary system Endocrine system Human development Circulatory system v t e Structure of the immune system Details System Lymphatic system Identifiers FMA 7149 Anatomical terminology [ edit on Wikidata ] An organ system is a biological system consisting of a group of organs that work together to perform one or more bodily functions.

[ 1 ] Each organ has a specialized role in an organism body, and is made up of distinct tissues .

Humans [ edit ] Main article: List of systems of the human body Nervous system in a human body There are 11 distinct organ systems in human beings, [ 2 ] which form the basis of human anatomy and physiology . The 11 organ systems: the respiratory system, digestive and excretory system, circulatory system, urinary system, integumentary system, skeletal system, muscular system, endocrine system, lymphatic system, nervous system, and reproductive system. There are other systems in the body that are not organ systems—for example, the immune system protects the organism from infection, but it is not an organ system since it is not composed of organs. Some organs are in more than one system—for example, the nose is in the respiratory system and also serves as a sensory organ in the nervous system; the testes and ovaries are both part of the reproductive and endocrine systems.

Organ system Description Component organs Respiratory system breathing: exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide nose , mouth , paranasal sinuses , pharynx , larynx , trachea , bronchi , lungs and thoracic diaphragm Digestive and excretory system digestion : breakdown and absorption of nutrients , excretion of solid wastes teeth , tongue , salivary glands , esophagus , stomach , liver , gallbladder , pancreas , small intestine , large intestine , rectum and anus Circulatory system circulate blood in order to transport nutrients, waste, hormones, O 2 , CO 2 , and aid in maintaining pH and temperature blood , heart , arteries , veins and capillaries Urinary system maintain fluid and electrolyte balance, purify blood and excrete liquid waste ( urine ) kidneys , ureters , bladder and urethra Integumentary system exterior protection of body and thermal regulation skin , hair , fat and nails Skeletal system structural support and protection, production of blood cells bones , cartilage , ligaments and tendons Muscular system movement of body, production of heat skeletal muscles , smooth muscles and cardiac muscle Endocrine system communication within the body using hormones made by endocrine glands hypothalamus , pituitary , pineal gland , thyroid , parathyroid and adrenal glands , ovaries and testicles Exocrine system various functions including lubrication and protection ceruminous glands , lacrimal glands , sebaceous glands and mucus Lymphatic system return lymph to the bloodstream, aid immune responses, form white blood cells lymph, lymph nodes , lymph vessels , tonsils , spleen and thymus Nervous system sensing and processing information, controlling body activities brain , spinal cord , nerves , sensory organs and the following sensory systems (nervous subsystems): visual system , olfactory system , taste ( gustatory system ) and hearing ( auditory system ) Reproductive system sex organs involved in reproduction ovaries , fallopian tubes , uterus , vagina , vulva , penis , testicles , vasa deferentia , seminal vesicles and prostate Other animals [ edit ] Other animals have similar organ systems to humans although simpler animals may have a lot of organs in an organ system or even fewer organ systems.

Plants [ edit ] Root and shoot systems in a eudicot Plants have two major organs systems. Vascular plants have two distinct organ systems: a shoot system , and a root system . The shoot system consists stems, leaves, and the reproductive parts of the plant (flowers and fruits). The shoot system generally grows above ground, where it absorbs the light needed for photosynthesis . The root system, which supports the plants and absorbs water and minerals, is usually underground.

[ 3 ] Organ system Description Component organs Root system anchors plants into place, absorbs water and minerals, and stores carbohydrates roots Shoot system stem for holding and orienting leaves to the sun as well as transporting materials between roots and leaves, leaves for photosynthesis , and flowers for reproduction stem , leaves , and flowers References [ edit ] ^ Betts, J Gordon; et al. (2013).

1.2 Structural Organization of the Human Body - Anatomy and Physiology . Openstax.

ISBN 978-1-947172-04-3 .

Archived from the original on 2023-03-24 . Retrieved 14 May 2023 .

^ Wakim, Suzanne; Grewal, Mandeep (August 8, 2020).

"Human Organs and Organ Systems" .

Archived from the original on November 24, 2020 . Retrieved October 7, 2020 .

^ Hillis, David M.; Sadava, David; Hill, Richard W.; Price, Mary V. (2014). "The plant body".

Principles of Life (2nd ed.). Sunderland, Mass.: Sinauer Associates. pp.

521– 536.

ISBN 978-1464175121 .

v t e Human systems and organs Musculoskeletal system Skeletal system Bone Carpus Collar bone (clavicle) Thigh bone (femur) Fibula Humerus Mandible Metacarpus Metatarsus Ossicles Patella Phalanges Radius Skull Tarsus Tibia Ulna Rib Vertebra Pelvis Sternum Cartilage Joints Fibrous joint Cartilaginous joint Synovial joint Muscular system Muscle Tendon Diaphragm Circulatory system Cardiovascular system peripheral Artery Vein Lymphatic vessel Heart Lymphatic system primary Bone marrow Thymus secondary Spleen Lymph node CNS equivalent Glymphatic system Nervous system Brain Spinal cord Nerve Sensory system Ear Eye Somatic system Tissue Integumentary system Skin Subcutaneous tissue Breast Mammary gland Haematopoietic and immune systems Myeloid Myeloid immune system Lymphoid Lymphoid immune system Respiratory system Upper Nose Nasopharynx Larynx Lower Trachea Bronchus Lung Digestive system Mouth Salivary gland Tongue Lip Tooth upper GI Oropharynx Laryngopharynx Esophagus Stomach lower GI Small intestine Appendix Colon Rectum Anus accessory Liver Biliary tract Pancreas Urinary system Genitourinary system Kidney Ureter Bladder Urethra Reproductive system Male Scrotum Penis Prostate Testicle Seminal vesicle Female Uterus Vagina Vulva Ovary Placenta Endocrine system Pituitary Pineal Thyroid Parathyroid Adrenal Islets of Langerhans Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Organ_system&oldid=1296024996 " Category : Organ systems Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2019 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 09:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Organ system 60 languages Add topic

