Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 20th century 1.2 21st century 2 Faculty 3 Fellowships 4 Notable fellows and alumni 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Edmond & Lily Safra Center for Ethics Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Research center at Harvard University Edmond & Lily Safra Center for Ethics Established 1986 ; 39 years ago ( 1986 ) Director Eric Beerbohm Location Cambridge , Massachusetts , United States Operating agency Harvard University Website ethics .harvard .edu The Edmond & Lily Safra Center for Ethics is a research center at Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts . The center's mission is to "advance teaching and research on ethical issues in public life." [ 1 ] It is named for Edmond J. Safra and Lily Safra and is supported by the Edmond J. Safra Foundation. The Center for Ethics was the first interfaculty initiative at Harvard University.

Founded as the Program in Ethics and the Professions in 1986, the center has supported the work of more than 800 fellows and visiting scholars. Many have spent a year or more at the center.

[ 2 ] They include professors, graduate students, and undergraduates, journalists, physicians, lawyers, psychologists from many educational institutions and governments throughout the world.

The center does not promote a particular theory or conception of ethics or morality but rather encourages rigorous study of difficult ethical issues, informed by empirical research and philosophical analysis. Although the range of topics range widely, major themes have included professional ethics, institutional corruption , “Diversity, Justice and Democracy,” and "Political Economy and Justice." [ 3 ] [ citation needed ] History [ edit ] 20th century [ edit ] Harvard President Derek Bok argued that there was a pressing need for "problem-oriented courses in ethics" that would prepare students for the moral dilemmas and ethical decisions they would face throughout their careers.

[ 4 ] He recruited Dennis Thompson, then a professor at Princeton, to come to Harvard to start a new program.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] It was Harvard's first major inter-faculty initiative.

In 1990, a graduate fellows program was established by Arthur Applbaum , a fellow in the first class and now a professor of ethics at the Harvard Kennedy School.

Thompson worked with Bok, and subsequent Harvard Presidents Neil Rudenstine and Lawrence Summers to raise funds to support the program which now has an endowment of more than $55 million. major benefactors are the Edmond J. Safra Foundation, the estate of Lester Kissel, Eugene P. Beard and the American Express Foundation.

Twenty years later, Bok observed that "one of the best new developments in professional education is the wide and growing interest in resolving problems of ethics. Harvard’s Center was instrumental in this effort, and it has exceeded even my own optimistic expectations." [ 7 ] 21st century [ edit ] In 2008, Thompson stepped down, and Lawrence Lessig , a scholar of Internet law at Stanford University , was appointed to lead the center.

[ 8 ] He had been a fellow at the center in 1996-1997 and developed his ideas on Internet law there. As director, Lessig led  a campaign against institutional corruption. He took the campaign to the public, and ran for President of the U.S.

in 2015.

In 2011, the center announced a partnership with InnoCentive "seeking innovative systems to monitor institutions for potential signs of corrupting forces." [ 9 ] After Lessig resigned in 2015, he was replaced by Danielle Allen , a political theorist at the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton.

[ 10 ] Her vision took  the program from the Thompson and Lessig eras into a larger endeavor to target world problems.

Eric Beerbohm became the center's fourth director. Harvard University Provost and Chief Academic Officer Alan Garber stated that Beerbohm's intellectual achievements in ethics and political thought and his cross-disciplinary engagement both inside and outside the University made him an ideal candidate.

[ 11 ] Beerbohm has a long history of engagement with the center, having served as a faculty fellow from 2009 to 2010, and then as Director of Graduate Fellowships from 2010 to 2017 and Founding Director of its Undergraduate Fellowship Program.

[ 12 ] Faculty [ edit ] In July 2023, Beerbohm was appointed director of the Edmond & Lily Safra Center for Ethics, replacing Danielle Allen , who served in this position from 2015. She succeeded Lawrence Lessig , who served from 2009 to 2015.

Dennis Thompson , appointed by President Derek Bok in 1986, is the founding director.

[ 13 ] Fellowships [ edit ] The center offers four categories of fellowships: undergraduate fellows, graduate fellows, fellows-in-residence; and ethics pedagogy fellows.

[ 14 ] In 2016, the center entered into a partnership with the Berggruen Institute 's Philosophy and Culture Center, as a partner institution for the Berggruen Fellowship Program. The Philosophy and Culture Center supports three Berggruen Fellows each year. Berggruen Fellows engage in scholarship of broad social and political importance from cross-cultural perspectives, and demonstrate a commitment to the public dissemination of their ideas.

[ 15 ] Notable fellows and alumni [ edit ] Rajeev Bhargava , former Director of Centre for the Study of Developing Societies, New Delhi Ezekiel Emanuel , founding chair of Department of Bioethics, National Institutes of Health , Chair of Department of Medical Ethics and Health Policy at the University of Pennsylvania Heather Gerken , legal adviser to Obama campaign in 2008 and 2012 and Professor of Law, Yale University Amy Gutmann , founder of Princeton University 's Center for Human Values, former President of University of Pennsylvania, United States Ambassador to Germany Chris Hayes , political commentator and TV show host, MSNBC [ 16 ] Elizabeth Kiss , founder, Kenan Institute for Ethics, Duke University , eighth President of Agnes Scott College and now Warden of Rhodes House, Oxford Sanford Levinson , constitutional commentator and Professor of Law, University of Texas Robert Massie , Episcopal priest, politician, author, and environmental activist, and former candidate for Lieutenant Governor in Massachusetts Samuel Moyn , Berggruen Institute fellow, Jeremiah Smith, Jr. Professor of Law, Harvard Law School Richard Pildes , NBC and ABC commentator on elections and law professor, New York University Samantha Power , former U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations Jedediah Purdy , author and law professor, Duke University Aaron Swartz , internet activist who committed suicide in 2013 while under federal indictment for alleged computer crimes connected to downloading a large academic journal archive [ 17 ] [ 18 ] Yael Tamir , former Minister of Education, Government of Israel Melissa Williams , founder of Centre for Ethics, University of Toronto References [ edit ] ^ "Mission" . Ethics.harvard.edu. Archived from the original on January 12, 2013 . Retrieved September 16, 2013 .

^ Gudrais, Elizabeth (May 2007).

"Ethics in Practice" .

Harvard Magazine .

^ "Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics Research Themes" .

^ Bok, Derek (October 1976). "Can Ethics Be Taught?".

Choice Magazine .

8 (9): 26– 30.

doi : 10.1080/00091383.1976.10568973 .

^ "Director of New Interfaculty Program on Ethics Appointed".

Harvard University Gazette . April 11, 1986.

^ Winkler, Karen (July 20, 1988). "Harvard Program for Study of Professional Ethics Aims to Advance Scholarly Research in the Field".

Chronicle of Higher Education .

^ "History" .

^ "Lawrence Lessig receives two Harvard appointments" .

Harvard University Gazette . December 18, 2008.

^ "Harvard University's Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics Partners with InnoCentive to Identify Systems to Monitor Institutional Corruption" . Innocentive.com. Archived from the original on May 31, 2014 . Retrieved September 16, 2013 .

^ "Danielle Allen named to Harvard posts" .

Harvard University Gazette . December 18, 2014.

^ "Beerbohm appointed director of Edmond and Lily Safra Center for Ethics" .

Harvard Gazette . May 8, 2023 . Retrieved July 14, 2023 .

^ "Edmond & Lily Safra Center for Ethics" .

ethics.harvard.edu . Retrieved July 14, 2023 .

^ "Faculty Committee | Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics" .

ethics.harvard.edu . Retrieved August 22, 2019 .

^ "Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics Fellowships" .

^ "Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics Berggruen Fellowship" .

^ "Chris Hayes Moves To MSNBC Weeknights" .

Deadline Hollywood . Retrieved September 16, 2013 .

^ Seidman, Bianca (July 22, 2011).

"Internet activist charged with hacking into MIT network" . Arlington, Va.: Public Broadcasting Service. Archived from the original on April 15, 2013.

[Swartz] was in the middle of a fellowship at Harvard's Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics, in its Lab on Institutional Corruption ^ "Lab Fellows 2010–2011: Aaron Swartz" .

Edmond J. Safra Center for Ethics . Harvard University. 2010. Archived from the original on May 29, 2013.

During the fellowship year, he will conduct experimental and ethnographic studies of the political system to prepare a monograph on the mechanisms of political corruption.

External links [ edit ] Official website "Ethics in Practice" , Harvard Magazine , May–June 2007 v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Edmond_%26_Lily_Safra_Center_for_Ethics&oldid=1299100529 " Categories : 1986 establishments in Massachusetts Ethics organizations Harvard University research institutes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from August 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2017 This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 15:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Edmond & Lily Safra Center for Ethics Add languages Add topic

