Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Platonism in the Renaissance 4 languages پښتو Polski Slovenčina 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Platonism , especially in its Neoplatonist form, underwent a revival in the Renaissance as part of a general revival of interest in classical antiquity . Interest in Platonism was especially strong in Florence under the Medici .

History [ edit ] Giovanni Pico della Mirandola During the sessions at Florence of the Council of Ferrara-Florence in 1438–1445, during the failed attempts to heal the schism of the Orthodox and Catholic churches , Cosimo de' Medici and his intellectual circle had made acquaintance with the Neoplatonic philosopher, George Gemistos Plethon , whose discourses upon Plato and the Alexandrian mystics so fascinated the learned society of Florence that they named him the second Plato.

In 1459, John Argyropoulos was lecturing on Greek language and literature at Florence, and Marsilio Ficino became his pupil. When Cosimo decided to refound Plato's Academy at Florence, his choice to head it was Ficino, who made the classic translation of Plato from Greek to Latin (published in 1484), as well as a translation of a collection of Hellenistic Greek documents of the Hermetic Corpus , [ 1 ] and the writings of many of the Neoplatonists, for example, Porphyry , Iamblichus , Plotinus , and others. Following suggestions laid out by Gemistos Plethon , Ficino tried to synthesize Christianity and Platonism .

Ficino's student, Giovanni Pico della Mirandola , also based his ideas chiefly on Plato , but Pico retained a deep respect for Aristotle . Although he was a product of the studia humanitatis , Pico was constitutionally an eclectic, and in some respects he represented a reaction against the exaggerations of pure humanism , defending what he believed to be the best of the medieval and Islamic commentators (see Averroes , Avicenna ) on Aristotle in a famous long letter to Ermolao Barbaro in 1485. It was always Pico's aim to reconcile the schools of Plato and Aristotle , since he believed they both used different words to express the same concepts.

It was perhaps for this reason that his friends called him Princeps Concordiae ("Prince of Harmony"), a punning allusion to Concordia, one of his family's holdings.

[ 2 ] Similarly, Pico believed that an educated person also should study the Hebrew and Talmudic sources, and the Hermetics , because he believed they represented the same view seen in the Old Testament, in different words, of God.

The writings attributed to Hermes Trismegistus had played an important role in the Renaissance Neoplatonic revival.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Allegorical interpretations of Plato Cambridge Platonists Platonic Academy (Florence) List of Renaissance commentators on Aristotle References [ edit ] ^ Yates, Frances A . (1964) Giordano Bruno and the Hermetic Tradition .

University of Chicago Press 1991 edition: ISBN 0-226-95007-7 ^ Paul Oskar Kristeller, Eight Philosophers of the Italian Renaissance . Stanford University Press (Stanford, California, 1964.) p. 62.

^ Heiser, James D., Prisci Theologi and the Hermetic Reformation in the Fifteenth Century , Malone, TX: Repristination Press, 2011.

ISBN 978-1-4610-9382-4 .

External links [ edit ] Christian Platonists and Neoplatonists v t e Renaissance General Renaissance Greek scholars in the Renaissance High Renaissance Mannerism Northern Mannerism Outline of the Renaissance Renaissance studies By field Architecture Brick Central and Eastern Europe French Italian domes Palladian Plateresque Portuguese Purism Spanish Venetian Art Early Netherlandish painting Dutch and Flemish painting Italian painting Sculpture Italian sculpture Dance Humanism France Northern Europe Latin Literature Dutch French Spanish Magic Medicine Music Philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Science Scientific Revolution Technology Theatre Warfare By region Italian Renaissance Bergamo and Brescia Ferrara Florence Lombardy Rome Papacy Sicily Urbino Venice Northern Renaissance England France Germany Saxony Weser Low Countries Poland Scotland Iberian peninsula Portugal Spain Spanish Golden Age Lists Composers Figures Humanists Structures Related Cloak and dagger Medieval renaissances Carolingian Ottonian 12th century Reenactment v t e Plato Works Apology Charmides Clitophon Cratylus Critias Crito Euthydemus Euthyphro First Alcibiades Gorgias Hippias Major Hippias Minor Ion Laches Laws Lysis Menexenus Meno Parmenides Phaedo Phaedrus Philebus Protagoras Republic Sophist Statesman Symposium Theaetetus Timaeus Of doubtful authenticity Axiochus Definitions Demodocus Epigrams Epinomis Epistles Seventh Letter Eryxias Halcyon Hipparchus Minos On Justice On Virtue Rival Lovers Second Alcibiades Sisyphus Theages Life The Academy in Athens Socratic problem List of speakers in Plato's dialogues Legacy Unwritten doctrines List of manuscripts of Plato's dialogues 23 24 228 229 Commentaries Middle Platonism Neoplatonism and Christianity and Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Plato's Dream Poitier Meets Plato Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Platonism_in_the_Renaissance&oldid=1239410993 " Categories : Neoplatonism Renaissance philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2020 This page was last edited on 9 August 2024, at 03:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Platonism in the Renaissance 4 languages Add topic

