Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Drummond Matthews 10 languages العربية Deutsch Español Euskara Français Polski Português Slovenščina Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British marine geologist and geophysicist Drummond Matthews (left) and Frederick Vine , 1981 Drummond Hoyle Matthews FRS [ 1 ] (5 February 1931 – 20 July 1997), known as "Drum", [ 2 ] was a British marine geologist and geophysicist and a key contributor to the theory of plate tectonics .  His work, along with that of fellow Briton Fred Vine and Canadian Lawrence Morley , showed how variations in the magnetic properties of rocks forming the ocean floor could be consistent with, and ultimately help confirm, Harry Hammond Hess 's 1962 theory of seafloor spreading . In 1989 he was awarded the Geological Society of London 's highest honour, the Wollaston Medal .

[ 3 ] Early life [ edit ] During World War II he went to school at The Downs in Malvern, and then Bryanston School in Dorset. He became head boy at both.

[ 2 ] Career [ edit ] Alfred Wegener 's theory of continental drift had never gained much scientific support due to its lack of any satisfactory mechanism to drive the process. During the 1950s, however, extensive surveys of the ocean floor revealed a global, linked system of mid-ocean ridges, all of which exhibited high thermal flow and considerable seismic activity. Hess hypothesized that new ocean crust was being formed at the ocean ridges by extrusions of magma from the Earth's mantle, and that convection currents within the mantle were continuously carrying the newly formed crust away from the ridge, widening the ocean basin and pushing the continents apart.

In 1962 Matthews, as a research fellow at King's College , Cambridge , made a survey across part of an ocean ridge in the north-west Indian Ocean . This revealed a pattern of magnetic anomalies running in parallel stripes and virtually symmetrically on either side of the ridge. The most plausible explanation for these anomalies required the assumption (already in circulation at the time, but not yet proven) that the Earth's magnetic field had reversed its polarity repeatedly over time. Ocean crust consists of basic igneous rock , containing significant amounts of magnetite . When such rock solidifies, the magnetite aligns itself with the prevailing magnetic field at the time, thus providing a sort of "fossil" magnetic record. If new crust were being formed at the ridges and moving away, as Hess theorized, then reversals in the Earth's magnetic polarity would result in just the kind of parallel, symmetrical anomalies that Matthews' survey had found. The ocean crust would in effect act as a kind of giant tape recorder of magnetic anomalies over time.

Matthews and his research student, Fred Vine, published these ideas in the article "Magnetic Anomalies over Ocean Ridges" in the magazine Nature in 1963.

[ 4 ] From then on, rapid progress was made both in terms of acceptance of Hess's theory and of further verification. Subsequent surveys of other ocean ridges showed similar and correlatable anomalies in every case. Confirmation of the Earth's polarity reversals a few years later not only further validated the Vine–Matthews–Morley hypothesis but provided a timescale allowing the rate of spreading to be estimated for each section of ocean ridge. The contribution of Matthews and Vine proved to be an essential element in the development and acceptance of plate tectonics theory.

In 1977 he won the Chree medal and prize .

In 1982 Matthews became the first scientific director of the British Institutions Reflection Profiling Syndicate (BIRPS), which had been established in 1981 to carry out deep seismic reflection profiling around the United Kingdom Continental Shelf .

[ 5 ] References [ edit ] ^ White, R. S. (1999). "Drummond Hoyle Matthews. 5 February 1931 -- 20 July 1997: Elected F.R.S. 1974".

Biographical Memoirs of Fellows of the Royal Society .

45 : 275.

doi : 10.1098/rsbm.1999.0019 .

S2CID 73351674 .

^ a b "The Oxford Dictionary of National Biography".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press. 2004.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/64976 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ "Wollaston Medal" .

Award Winners since 1831 .

Geological Society of London . Archived from the original on 19 August 2010 . Retrieved 25 February 2009 .

^ Vine, F. J.; Matthews, D. H.

(1963). "Magnetic Anomalies over Oceanic Ridges".

Nature .

199 (4897): 947.

Bibcode : 1963Natur.199..947V .

doi : 10.1038/199947a0 .

S2CID 4296143 .

^ Gates A.E. (2009).

A to Z of Earth Scientists . Notable Scientists Series. Infobase Publishing. pp.

159– 160.

ISBN 9781438109190 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Drummond Matthews at Wikimedia Commons v t e Fellows of the Royal Society elected in 1974 Fellows Walter Bodmer William Boon Kenneth Burton John Cairns Roy Yorke Calne David Roderick Curtis John Frank Davidson Jack D. Dunitz Pehr Victor Edman John D. Eshelby Jack Halpern Stephen Hawking Volker Heine Robert Hinde Albert Edward Litherland James Lovelock Richard Matthews Drummond Matthews Peter D. Mitchell Samuel Victor Perry Norman James Petch John R. Philip John Polkinghorne Charles Rees John Rishbeth Roger Valentine Short John Trevor Stuart Robert Henry Stewart Thompson John Vane Frederick Vine Stephen Esslemont Woods Pierre Henry John Young Statute 12 Vivian Fuchs Foreign Renato Dulbecco George H. Hitchings Giuseppe Occhialini Jean-Pierre Serre Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National United States Academics Scopus Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Drummond_Matthews&oldid=1193971945 " Categories : 1931 births 1997 deaths 20th-century British geologists People educated at Bryanston School Alumni of King's College, Cambridge Wollaston Medal winners Fellows of the Royal Society British geophysicists Marine geologists People educated at The Downs School, Herefordshire Tectonicists Marine geophysicists Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 January 2024, at 15:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Drummond Matthews 10 languages Add topic

