Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Remains 2 Historiography 3 Monuments and memorials 4 Anthems and marches 5 Portraits 6 Film 7 Bibliography 8 References Toggle the table of contents Legacy of José de San Martín Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mausoleum of San Martín at the Buenos Aires Metropolitan Cathedral . The three statues are national personifications of Argentina, Chile and Peru José de San Martín is the national hero of Argentina , Chile and Peru , and along with Simón Bolívar , the most important Libertador of the Spanish American Wars of Independence . For this reason, he is paid homage and depicted in several cultural works of those countries, and even internationally. He led the Campaign across the Andes from Argentina to Chile which has been studied around the world for its complexity.

Remains [ edit ] José de San Martín died on 17 August 1850, in his house at Boulogne-sur-Mer , France . He requested in his will to be taken to the cemetery without any funeral , and to be moved to Buenos Aires , Argentina , afterwards. He also bequeathed his curved saber to the Argentine governor Juan Manuel de Rosas .

Mariano Balcarce informed Rosas and the foreign minister Felipe Arana of San Martín's death. Balcarce oversaw the embalming of his remains and his temporary stay in a chapel of the city. He also sent the saber to Buenos Aires.

[ 1 ] However, the rebellion of Justo José de Urquiza against Rosas in 1851, Rosas' defeat at the battle of Caseros and the resulting chaos delayed the move of San Martín's remains to Buenos Aires. Still, both Rosas and Urquiza organized public homages to San Martín, regardless of their ongoing conflict. Buenos Aires seceded from Argentina as the state of Buenos Aires , dominated by Unitarians who despised San Martín. Thus, the move of his remains was postponed indefinitely. Aware that there were no favourable conditions to the project, Balcarce arranged the creation of a tomb in the Boulogne-sur-Mer cemetery.

[ 2 ] The remains of San Martín were finally repatriated on May 29, 1880, during the presidency of Nicolás Avellaneda . The mausoleum was placed inside the Buenos Aires Metropolitan Cathedral . As San Martín was suspected of being a freemason , the mausoleum was placed in an expanded wing of the cathedral.

[ 3 ] Historiography [ edit ] Cover of the book Historia de San Martín y de la emancipación sudamericana ( Spanish : History of San Martín and the South American emancipation ) by Bartolomé Mitre .

San Martín was first acclaimed as a national hero of Argentina by the Federals , as Rosas and Urquiza.

Bernardo de Irigoyen published the Recuerdos del General San Martín ( Spanish : Memoirs of the General San Martín ) in 1851. The unitarians still resented his refusal to aid the Supreme Directors with the Army of the Andes against Estanislao López and Francisco Ramírez , which led to their downfall at the Battle of Cepeda , and San Martín's constant support to Rosas.

[ 4 ] The unitarian Bartolomé Mitre wrote a series of biographies, and established Bernardino Rivadavia as a national hero of Argentina. However, as Rivadavia was a statesman without a military career, Mitre sought to create a military national hero, to complement Rivadavia, and wrote a biography of Manuel Belgrano . This attempt did not prove completely effective, as Belgrano had grave defeats in his military career.

[ 5 ] Thus, Mitre wrote a biography of San Martín, " Historia de San Martín y de la emancipación sudamericana " ( Spanish : History of San Martín and the South American emancipation ). By that time, several accounts of San Martín were being written at many countries: Valentín Ledesma from Lima wrote in 1853 about San Martín's campaign in Peru, and Benjamín Vicuña Mackenna from Chile wrote in 1856 about the Chilean War of Independence .

[ 6 ] San Martín's support for Latin American integration contradicted the strong centralism of the government party. As a result, the biography written by Mitre modified details about him. The Spanish American wars of independence are not treated as a continent-wide revolution, but merely as an Argentine revolution that extends freedom to Chile and Peru. Bolívar is portrayed instead as a conqueror, annexing the new free countries into an artificial unity. The war is described to be separatist from the beginning, and encouraged and supported by Britain.

[ 7 ] However, in the specific case of San Martín this scenario could seem contradictory, as he had left America as a child and served for the Spanish army for 22 years. As a result, his military career in Spain is summarized in six pages (the whole book has more than six hundred), giving very little detail about him before his arrival to Buenos Aires.

[ 8 ] As for the reason for his departure from the Spanish army to join the South American ones, the book describes that " he decided to return to his distant nation, which he had always loved as a true mother, to offer her his sword and devote her his life ".

[ 9 ] Meaning, that his first six years living in America shaped his personality more than the twenty eight he had lived so far in Spain. This point generated controversy among historians.

[ 8 ] The historiography outlined by Mitre was first questioned in the 1930s, by historians who sought to update the information about Juan Manuel de Rosas . The support of San Martín to Rosas and the bequeathing of his saber was usually concealed or downplayed by the Mitrist historians, those new ones highlighted it. Later historians would point even more informations that contradicted the portrayal by Mitre, such as his good relations with the other caudillos and his personal enmity with Rivadavia, which included a cancelled duel .

[ 10 ] Monuments and memorials [ edit ] Granaderos regiment at the equestrian statue of José de San Martín, in the homonymous park in Buenos Aires , Argentina .

When the news of the death of San Martín arrived to Entre Ríos , the governor Justo José de Urquiza erected a column in his recognition at the main plaza of Paraná .

[ 11 ] Tomás Guido proposed a statue at the Santa Fe Province in 1854.

[ 12 ] Louis-Joseph Daumas began a monument of San Martín in Santiago de Chile in 1859, so another one was requested to the sculptor and rushed in Buenos Aires at the Plaza Marte (modern Plaza San Martín ). The monument in Chile was inaugurated in 1863, and the one in Buenos Aires in 1862.

[ 13 ] Statues of San Martín appear in most cities of Argentina, as well as in Santiago and Lima .

Two monuments were erected in Peru in the early 20th century, one in front of the Real Felipe Fortress in 1901 and another in Lima in 1921. A statue was built in Rosario in 1883.

Santa Fe got one in 1901, Mendoza in 1904, Corrientes in 1806, and so on. Finally, the Cerro de la Gloria in Mendoza was inaugurated on February 12, 1914, an anniversary of the Battle of Chacabuco .

[ 14 ] The neighbourhood of San Martín in Bogotá , Colombia's Centro Internacional area is named for the large equestrian statue of the General situated in a small plaza also named for him.

Santo Domingo , Dominican Republic, has an avenue named Avenida San Martín in his honor that connects the colonial zone to the west of the city.

An equestrian statue of the General was erected in Boulogne-sur-Mer ; the statue was inaugurated on 24 October 1909, at a ceremony attended by several units from the Argentine military.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] The statue was erected through purely private initiative, with the support of national government of Argentina, the municipal council of Buenos Aires and a public funding campaign. The statue is 10m high, on a 4m by 6m base; it is well known to locals. Located on the beach, it was virtually untouched by the numerous bombings campaigns during both world wars.

[ 17 ] There is an equestrian statue of General San Martín in Washington D.C. along NW Virginia Street. It is a copy of a statue in Buenos Aires. It was given in 1925 from Argentina.

[ 18 ] There is also a bust of San Martin at the Intramuros or Walled City of Manila , which was erected in 1950 at the request of the Perón government as a reminder that San Martin's brother, Juan Fermín , served in the Philippines from 1801 to 1822.

[ 19 ] There is an equestrian statue of General San Martín in New York City, on the southern side of Central Park . It was dedicated in 1951 and was donated by the City of Buenos Aires, Argentina.

[ 20 ] There is a bronze sculpture at Belgrave Square , London, United Kingdom. Another outdoor sculpture is installed at the McGovern Centennial Gardens in Houston, Texas, in the United States.

There is a memorial featuring a bust of General San Martín in Beverly Hills, California. The bust was designed by Fernando Di Zitti and dedicated in 2001.

[ 21 ] General Liberator San Martin Drive roadway in the Ku-ring-gai National Park north of Sydney Australia is named in his honour.

Equestrian monument to General San Martin at the homonymous park in Buenos Aires , Argentina The Cerro de la Gloria monument in Mendoza , Argentina Statue of San Martin in Córdoba , Argentina Statue of San Martin in Lima , Peru San Martin Memorial in Washington , D.C.

Statue of San Martin in Santiago , Chile Statue of José de San Martín in Boulogne-sur-Mer , France. A replica stand in the city of La Plata , Argentina Statue of José de San Martín in Cádiz , Spain Anthems and marches [ edit ] The battle of San Lorenzo, the only battle actually fought by San Martín in the modern territory of Argentina, is the theme of the San Lorenzo march . The military march was composed in February 1901 by Cayetano Alberto Silva following a proposal from Representative Celestino Pera. It was first officially played on October 30, 1902, at the inauguration of the monument to General San Martín in Rosario . The lyrics were written by professor Carlos Benielli in 1908.

[ 22 ] The march became famous in other countries and, according to the Argentine British Community Council , it has been considered in Europe to be one of the five best military marches ever written.

[ 23 ] The military bands of Uruguay, Brazil and Poland, amongst others, include it in their musical repertory.

[ 23 ] Anthem to the Liberator General San Martín Music: Arturo Luzzatt
Lyrics: Segundo M. Argarañaz Yerga el Ande su cumbre más alta, Dé la mar el metal de su voz, y entre cielos y nieves eternas se alce el trono del Libertador.

Suenen claras trompetas de gloria y levanten un himno triunfal, que la luz de la historia agiganta la figura del Gran Capitán.

De las tierras del Plata a Mendoza, de Santiago à la Lima gentil, fue sembrando en la ruta laureles a su paso triunfal San Martín.

San Martín, el señor en la guerra, por secreto designio de Dios, grande fue cuando el sol lo alumbraba, y más grande en la puesta del Sol.

¡Padre augusto del pueblo argentino, héroe magno de la libertad!

A su sombra la Patria se agranda en virtud, en trabajo y en paz.

¡San Martín! ¡San Martín! Que tu nombre, honra y prez de los pueblos del Sur, asegure por siempre los rumbos de la Patria que alumbra tu luz.

Rise the Andes its highest peak; Give the sea the metal of his voice.

And between skies and everlasting snows, shall arise the throne of the Liberator.

May trumpets of glory sound clearly and play a triumphal anthem because the light of history aggrandizes the figure of the Great Captain.

From the lands of River Plate to Mendoza , from Santiago to genteel Lima , he went, planting laurels along the way in his triumphal journey, San Martín.

San Martín, the lord of war, by secret choice of God, was great when the Sun was shining on him, and even greater in the sunset.

Great father of the Argentine People, Greatest hero of freedom!

beneath his shadow the fatherland grows in virtue, in work, and in peace.

San Martín! San Martín! may your name, the honour and glory of the people of the South, assure for ever the fates of the fatherland enlightened by your light.

Portraits [ edit ] Portrait of San Martín by José Gil de Castro . It is the first known case when San Martín posed for a portrait.

San Martín was born in Yapeyú, Corrientes , in a poor family, and moved to Spain a short time afterwards. For evident reasons, he did not pose for any portrait during his infancy. Neither he did during his military career in Spain , as he lived in the barracks and it was not common to make portraits of young military. He was usually reluctant to pose for portraits, because of modesty and his frugal military lifestyle. During his stay in Argentina there is a drawing on ivory in his mounted grenadier uniform, of unknown author.

[ 24 ] The first known case where San Martín posed for a portrait was the 1818 portrait by José Gil de Castro , made in Chile.

[ 24 ] It was painted after the battle of Chacabuco , as part of the celebrations for victory, and it was officially exhibited the following year, during the Chilean Declaration of Independence . Castro's portrait features a notable sharp aquiline nose, but that was part of his particular style, and his other works usually feature similar noses. It is unknown if he posed for other portraits in Peru: the one by the contemporary Mariano Carrillo was signed after San Martín's departure from the Americas, and the one by Drexel was made five years after it.

[ 24 ] When he moved to Brussels , after his retirement, Jean Henri Simon made a medal of him. He posed for a new portrait in an unknown date for the artist Francois Joseph Navez, which is currently kept at the National Historical Museum . In 1828 the general Miller, who was writing his memoirs, requested San Martín to pose again, in military uniform. The work was done by Jean-Baptiste Madou . Madou made both a portrait and a testing lithography , which are kept in the aforementioned museum. After it, San Martín swore that he would not pose for further portraits. However, a new technology was developed in France by then, the daguerreotype , predecessor of modern photography. San Martín's daughter took him with pretexts to the house of the daguerreotypist and, once there, convinced him to pose for it. He posed for two daguerreotypes.

[ 24 ] The first portraits of the crossing of the Andes featured San Martín mounting a white horse. This was done for visual purposes, to make San Martín prominent among the other soldiers, and the white color has visual impact. This led to the common misconception that San Martín may have crossed the Andes on a white horse, when he actually did so on a mule, which is better suited to move in the mountains.

[ 25 ] Film [ edit ] Alfredo Alcón as José de San Martín (right) and the director Leopoldo Torre Nilsson during the filming of " El Santo de la Espada ".

The first Argentine silent movies were created in the 1910s, nearing the Argentina Centennial . José de San Martín was played by the novice actor Federico López in the movie " El himno nacional " ( Spanish : The national anthem ), singing the Argentine National Anthem . It was directed by Mario Gallo , who made other films related to San Martín: " La batalla de San Lorenzo " ( Spanish : The battle of San Lorenzo ), " La batalla de Maipú " ( Spanish : The battle of Maipu ) and " Episodios de San Martín " ( Spanish : Episodes of San Martín ). Those last three films are lost.

[ 26 ] The first full biographical film of San Martín was " Nuestra Tierra de Paz " ( Spanish : Our land of peace ), from 1939. It was written by Arturo Mom and the main actor was Pedro Tocci. Except for the scenes at the Andes , it was all filmed at the Campo de Mayo military base. A new biographical film, " El Santo de la Espada ", starred by Alfredo Alcón , was made in 1970. Directed by Leopoldo Torre Nilsson , it kept the technical crew and most of the cast of an earlier movie about the Martín Fierro . It was one of the most expensive Argentine films to that date. San Martín was used as a secondary character in the films " Güemes: la tierra en armas " (1971) and " Juan Manuel de Rosas " (1972).

[ 27 ] The controversial National Reorganization Process reduced the popular interest in warfare films. " El General y la fiebre " ( Spanish : The General and the fever ) was an attempt in 1993 to make a film about San Martín without warfare. Written by Jorge Coscia and starred by Rubén Stella , it focused on his brief stay in Córdoba recovering from his diseases, and his opium addiction as a form of anesthesia . The 2010 Argentina Bicentennial renewed the interest in historical films, which led to a new biographical film of San Martín, " Revolución: El cruce de los Andes " ( Spanish : Revolution: the crossing of the Andes ), directed by Leandro Ipiña and starring Rodrigo de la Serna . San Martín, played by Pablo Echarri , was also a secondary character of the film Manuel Belgrano .

[ 28 ] The 2010 Bicentennial of Chile led to the creation of the miniseries Héroes , with biopics of national heroes of Chile Bernardo O'Higgins , José Miguel Carrera and Manuel Rodríguez , along others.

Daniel Muñoz played San Martín at the three films, "O'Higgins, vivir para merecer su nombre" , "Carrera, el príncipe de los caminos" and "Rodríguez, hijo de la rebeldía" .

Bibliography [ edit ] Galasso, Norberto (2009).

Seamos Libres y lo demás no importa nada . Buenos Aires: Colihue.

ISBN 978-950-581-779-5 .

Mitre, Bartolomé (1952).

Historia de San Martín y de la emancipación sudamericana . Buenos Aires: Peuser.

Bordón, Juan Manuel (2009). "San Martín, entre la historia y el mito".

Ñ (294). Clarín.

References [ edit ] ^ Galasso, pp. 569-574 ^ Galasso, pp. 574-577 ^ Galasso, p. 584 ^ Galasso, pp. 574-576 ^ " General Belgrano is a historical man who does not seduce by his appearance; he did not shine in the art of war, as San Martín, nor left undying traces in fundamental institutions, as Rivadavia " ( Domingo Faustino Sarmiento ) - Galasso, p. 579 ^ Galasso, p. 579 ^ Galasso, p. 582-583 ^ a b Galasso, p. 583 ^ Mitre, p. 77 ^ Galasso, p. 586 ^ Galasso, p. 574 ^ Galasso, p. 580 ^ Galasso, p. 581 ^ Galasso, p. 585 ^ "[Inauguration de la statue équestre du général argentin San Martin], marins argentins [du navire Presidente Sarmiento], 24 oct. 1909" .

BNF Gallica (in French) . Retrieved 13 May 2016 .

^ "[Inauguration de la statue équestre du général argentin San Martin], cavaliers argentins, [détachement du régiment des grenadiers à cheval,] Boulogne[-sur-Mer, 24 octobre 1909] : [photographie de presse] /" .

BNF Gallica (in French) . Retrieved 13 May 2016 .

^ Verley, André (21 October 2009).

"José de San Martín : histoire d'un monument" [José de San Martín : History of a monument].

La semaine dans le boulonnais (in French). Boulogne . Retrieved 13 May 2016 .

^ "[Smithsonian Inventory-Liberador: General Jose de San Martin, (sculpture)]" . Retrieved 28 June 2016 .

^ Aguilar, Karl (22 July 2012).

"Of conquistadores and libertadores: the case of Intramuros monuments" . The Urban Roamer . Retrieved 6 July 2015 .

^ "[Central Park Monuments – General Jose de San Martin : NYC Parks]" .

NYC Parks . New York City Department of Parks & Recreation . Retrieved 26 May 2016 .

^ "José de San Martín Bust" .

AtlasObscura . Retrieved 16 July 2020 .

^ David Marchini and Diego Mayochi.

"La marcha de San Lorenzo" [The battle of San Lorenzo].

El combate de San Lorenzo (in Spanish).

San Martín National Institute . Archived from the original on July 6, 2011 . Retrieved February 16, 2011 .

^ a b Dr. John Emery and Ian Gall.

"La Marcha de San Lorenzo or St. Lawrence's March" . Argentine British Community Council. Archived from the original on April 25, 2012 . Retrieved February 16, 2011 .

^ a b c d Enrique Mario Mayochi.

"San Martín visto por los artistas" [San Martín saw by artists] (in Spanish).

San Martín National Institute . Archived from the original on June 1, 2012 . Retrieved July 14, 2012 .

^ Galasso, p. 209 ^ Bordón, p. 32 ^ Bordón, pp. 32-33 ^ Bordón, p. 33 v t e José de San Martín Political career Lautaro Lodge Revolution of 8 October 1812 Inca plan Guayaquil conference Military career Spain Military career in Spain Argentina Battle of San Lorenzo Yatasto relay Chile Crossing of the Andes Chacabuco Cancha Rayada Maipú Military units Regiment of Mounted Grenadiers Army of the Andes Personal life Early life María de los Remedios de Escalada Curved saber Later life Historiography San Martín National Institute Historia de San Martín y de la emancipación sudamericana Legacy Cerro de la Gloria El Santo de la Espada Revolución: El cruce de los Andes v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Legacy_of_José_de_San_Martín&oldid=1268247509 " Categories : Cultural depictions of José de San Martín Legacies by person Culture of Argentina Culture of Chile Culture of Peru Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles containing Spanish-language text This page was last edited on 8 January 2025, at 21:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Legacy of José de San Martín Add languages Add topic

