Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Properties 2 Metrization theorems 3 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 3.1 Locally metrizable but not metrizable 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Metrizable space 17 languages Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Polski Русский Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Urysohn's metrization theorem ) Topological space that is homeomorphic to a metric space This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( September 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In topology and related areas of mathematics , a metrizable space is a topological space that is homeomorphic to a metric space . That is, a topological space ( X , τ τ ) {\displaystyle (X,\tau )} is said to be metrizable if there is a metric d : X × × X → → [ 0 , ∞ ∞ ) {\displaystyle d:X\times X\to [0,\infty )} such that the topology induced by d {\displaystyle d} is τ τ .

{\displaystyle \tau .} [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Metrization theorems are theorems that give sufficient conditions for a topological space to be metrizable.

Properties [ edit ] Metrizable spaces inherit all topological properties from metric spaces. For example, they are Hausdorff paracompact spaces (and hence normal and Tychonoff ) and first-countable .  However, some properties of the metric, such as completeness , cannot be said to be inherited. This is also true of other structures linked to the metric. A metrizable uniform space , for example, may have a different set of contraction maps than a metric space to which it is homeomorphic.

Metrization theorems [ edit ] One of the first widely recognized metrization theorems was Urysohn's metrization theorem . This states that every Hausdorff second-countable regular space is metrizable. So, for example, every second-countable manifold is metrizable. (Historical note: The form of the theorem shown here was in fact proved by Tikhonov in 1926. What Urysohn had shown, in a paper published posthumously in 1925, was that every second-countable normal Hausdorff space is metrizable.) The converse does not hold: there exist metric spaces that are not second countable, for example, an uncountable set endowed with the discrete metric.

[ 3 ] The Nagata–Smirnov metrization theorem , described below, provides a more specific theorem where the converse does hold.

Several other metrization theorems follow as simple corollaries to Urysohn's theorem. For example, a compact Hausdorff space is metrizable if and only if it is second-countable.

Urysohn's Theorem can be restated as: A topological space is separable and metrizable if and only if it is regular, Hausdorff and second-countable. The Nagata–Smirnov metrization theorem extends this to the non-separable case. It states that a topological space is metrizable if and only if it is regular, Hausdorff and has a σ-locally finite base. A σ-locally finite base is a base which is a union of countably many locally finite collections of open sets. For a closely related theorem see the Bing metrization theorem .

Separable metrizable spaces can also be characterized as those spaces which are homeomorphic to a subspace of the Hilbert cube [ 0 , 1 ] N , {\displaystyle \lbrack 0,1\rbrack ^{\mathbb {N} },} that is, the countably infinite product of the unit interval (with its natural subspace topology from the reals) with itself, endowed with the product topology .

A space is said to be locally metrizable if every point has a metrizable neighbourhood . Smirnov proved that a locally metrizable space is metrizable if and only if it is Hausdorff and paracompact . In particular, a manifold is metrizable if and only if it is paracompact.

Examples [ edit ] The group of unitary operators U ( H ) {\displaystyle \mathbb {U} ({\mathcal {H}})} on a separable Hilbert space H {\displaystyle {\mathcal {H}}} endowed
with the strong operator topology is metrizable (see Proposition II.1 in [ 4 ] ).

Non-normal spaces cannot be metrizable; important examples include the Zariski topology on an algebraic variety or on the spectrum of a ring , used in algebraic geometry , the topological vector space of all functions from the real line R {\displaystyle \mathbb {R} } to itself, with the topology of pointwise convergence .

The real line with the lower limit topology is not metrizable.  The usual distance function is not a metric on this space because the topology it determines is the usual topology, not the lower limit topology. This space is Hausdorff, paracompact and first countable.

Locally metrizable but not metrizable [ edit ] The Line with two origins , also called the bug-eyed line is a non-Hausdorff manifold (and thus cannot be metrizable). Like all manifolds, it is locally homeomorphic to Euclidean space and thus locally metrizable (but not metrizable) and locally Hausdorff (but not Hausdorff ). It is also a T 1 locally regular space but not a semiregular space .

The long line is locally metrizable but not metrizable; in a sense, it is "too long".

See also [ edit ] Apollonian metric – Romanian mathematician and poet (1895 - 1961) Bing metrization theorem – Characterizes when a topological space is metrizable Metrizable topological vector space – Topological vector space whose topology can be defined by a metric Moore space (topology) Nagata–Smirnov metrization theorem – Characterizes when a topological space is metrizable Uniformizability – Topological space whose topology is generated by a uniform structure Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets , the property of a topological space of being homeomorphic to a uniform space , or equivalently the topology being defined by a family of pseudometrics References [ edit ] ^ Simon, Jonathan.

"Metrization Theorems" (PDF) . Retrieved 16 June 2016 .

^ Munkres, James (1999).

Topology (second ed.).

Pearson . p. 119.

^ Mitya Boyarchenko (Fall 2010).

"Math 395 - Honors Analysis I: 10. Some counterexamples in topology" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-09-25 . Retrieved 2012-08-08 .

^ Neeb, Karl-Hermann, On a theorem of S. Banach. J. Lie Theory 7 (1997), no. 2, 293–300.

v t e Metric spaces ( Category ) Basic concepts Metric space Cauchy sequence Completeness Equivalent metrics Metrizable space Triangle inequality Main results Baire category theorem Banach fixed-point Kuratowski embedding Lebesgue's number lemma Metrization theorems : Bing Nagata–Smirnov Urysohn's Maps Contraction Metric map Dilation Equicontinuity ( Quasi- ) Isometry Lipschitz continuity Metric derivative Metric outer measure Metric projection Motion Quasisymmetric Stretch factor Uniform continuity Isomorphism Uniform convergence Types of metric spaces Complete Convex Doubling Hyperbolic Injective Length metric space Metric space aimed at its subspace Polish Totally bounded Tree-graded Ultrametric space Uniformly disconnected Urysohn universal Sets Balls Borel Bounded Delone Diameter Distance set Gromov product Gromov–Hausdorff convergence Hausdorff distance Kuratowski convergence Meyer Packing dimension Porous Positively separated sets Tight span Examples Manifolds Euclidean distance Riemannian Functional analysis and Measure theory Chebyshev distance Inner product space Lévy metric Lévy–Prokhorov metric Metrizable topological vector space Normed space Taxicab geometry Wasserstein metric General topology Discrete space Intrinsic metric Laakso space Product metric Related Category of metric spaces Cantor space Generalizations Approach space Cauchy space Coarse structure Cosmic space Diversity Generalised metric Measure space Probabilistic metric space Proximity space Pseudometric space Uniform space This article incorporates material from Metrizable on PlanetMath , which is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution/Share-Alike License .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metrizable_space&oldid=1284953160#Urysohn's_metrization_theorem " Categories : General topology Manifolds Metric spaces Properties of topological spaces Theorems in topology Topological spaces Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2024 All articles lacking in-text citations Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Wikipedia articles incorporating text from PlanetMath This page was last edited on 10 April 2025, at 19:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Metrizable space 17 languages Add topic

