Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concept 2 Marketable collateral 3 Examples of collateral 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Collateral (finance) 27 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Français Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Lietuvių Magyar मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska ไทย Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Borrower's pledge of property to a lender to be owed if a loan can't be repaid This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Collateral" finance – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Pawning is an example of a common type of loan secured with collateral In lending agreements , collateral is a borrower's pledge of specific property to a lender , to secure repayment of a loan.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The collateral serves as a lender's protection against a borrower's default and so can be used to offset the loan if the borrower fails to pay the principal and interest satisfactorily under the terms of the lending agreement.

The protection that collateral provides generally allows lenders to offer a lower interest rate on loans that have collateral. The reduction in interest rate can be up to several percentage points, depending on the type and value of the collateral. For example, the Annual Percentage Rate (APR) on an unsecured loan is often much higher than on a secured loan or logbook loan .

If a borrower defaults on a loan (due to insolvency or another event), that borrower loses the property pledged as collateral, with the lender then becoming the owner of the property. In a typical mortgage loan transaction, for instance, the real estate being acquired with the help of the loan serves as collateral. If the buyer fails to repay the loan according to the mortgage agreement, the lender can use the legal process of foreclosure to obtain ownership of the real estate. If a second mortgage is involved the primary mortgage loan is repaid first with the remaining funds used to satisfy the second mortgage.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] A pawnbroker is a common example of a business that may accept a wide range of items as collateral.

The type of the collateral may be restricted based on the type of the loan (as is the case with auto loans and mortgages); it also can be flexible, such as in the case of collateral-based personal loans.

Concept [ edit ] Collateral, especially within banking , traditionally refers to secured lending (also known as asset-based lending ). More-complex collateralization arrangements may be used to secure trade transactions (also known as capital market collateralization ). The former often presents unilateral obligations secured in the form of property , surety , guarantee or other collateral (originally denoted by the term security ), whereas the latter often presents bilateral obligations secured by more-liquid assets (such as cash ). Collateralization of assets gives lenders a sufficient level of reassurance against default risk. It also help some borrowers to obtain loan if they have poor credit histories. Collateralized loans generally have substantially lower interest rate than unsecured loans.

Marketable collateral [ edit ] Marketable collateral is the exchange of financial assets , such as stocks and bonds, for a loan between a financial institution and borrower. To be deemed marketable, assets must be capable of being sold under normal market conditions with reasonable promptness at current fair market value . For sizeable banks to accept a borrower's loan proposal, collateral must be equal to or greater than 100% of the loan or credit extension amount. In the United States of America, the bank's total outstanding loans and credit extensions to one borrower may not exceed 15 percent of the bank's capital and surplus (plus an additional 10 percent of the bank's capital and surplus if the bank fulfills certain qualifications).

[ 5 ] Reduction of collateral value is the primary risk when securing loans with marketable collateral. Financial institutions closely monitor the market value of any financial assets held as collateral and take appropriate action if the value subsequently declines below the predetermined maximum loan-to-value ratio. The permitted actions are generally specified in a loan agreement or margin agreement.

Tokenization of securities like company shares, pharmaceutical & defence project patents and mining licenses is an emerging novel concept of dynamic investment despite still being considered and classified as relatively experimental. Spektral Investment Bank is currently the only example of above mentioned novel complete tokenization concept via establishment of 800.000.000.00 EU worth in-kind collateral based capital composed of exclusive pharmaceutical & bioceucal patent rights and reserve volume approved mining licenses.

Examples of collateral [ edit ] Intellectual property such as copyrights , patents , and trademarks , as well as royalty streams from licensing revenue, are increasingly being used as collateral.

[ 6 ] The use of IP as collateral in IP-backed finance transactions is the subject of a report series at the World Intellectual Property Organization .

[ 7 ] Many agricultural assets can be used as collateral, [ 8 ] even unharvested crops in some cases.

[ 9 ] Some Italian banks (such as the Credito Emiliano ) accept wheels of aging Parmigiano Reggiano cheese as collateral, and may even provide high-quality storage for it.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Auto-collateralisation Consignment Credit Support Annex Cross-collateralization Hypothecation Intellectual asset finance Security deposit Security interest Shadow banking system Intangible asset finance References [ edit ] ^ Garrett, Joan F. (1995).

Banks and Their Customers . Dobbs Ferry, NY: Oceana Publications. p.

99 .

ISBN 0-379-11194-2 .

^ O'Sullivan, Arthur ; Sheffrin, Steven M. (2003).

Economics: Principles in Action . Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458: Pearson Prentice Hall. p. 513.

ISBN 0-13-063085-3 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) ^ Postel-Vinay, Natacha (2017).

"Debt dilution in 1920s America: lighting the fuse of a mortgage crisis" (PDF) .

Economic History Review .

70 (2): 559– 585.

doi : 10.1111/ehr.12342 .

S2CID 154648457 .

^ Subprime mortgage credit derivatives . Goodman, Laurie S. Hoboken, N.J.: John Wiley & Sons. 2008.

ISBN 978-0-470-39274-4 .

OCLC 237093908 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ "12 CFR 32.3 - Lending limits" .

LII / Legal Information Institute . Retrieved 2017-05-10 .

^ Security interests in intellectual property . Toshiyuki Kono. Singapore. 2017.

ISBN 978-981-10-5415-0 .

OCLC 1001337977 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ "Launch of new WIPO report series on unlocking IP-Backed Finance at Singapore's IP Week, 26 August 2021 – Sharing the Singapore Country Report" .

www.wipo.int . Retrieved 2021-12-24 .

^ "Lending for Livestock, Credit for Crops: Filing a Financing Statement - National Agricultural Law Center" .

nationalaglawcenter.org . Retrieved 2024-08-04 .

^ Carpenter, Ronald K. (1968).

"Farm Financing under the Uniform Commercial Code" .

North Dakota Law Review .

44 (4): 553– 566.

^ Nobel, Carmen (1 July 2015).

"A Bank That Accepts Parmesan As Collateral: The Cheese Stands A Loan" .

Forbes . Retrieved 2024-03-14 .

^ Henderson, Joanna (2022-05-23).

"Why This Italian Bank Accepts Parmesan Cheese as Collateral for Loans" .

Lessons from History . Retrieved 2024-03-14 .

v t e Real estate Property Tertiary sector By location Bangladesh Canada China Indonesia Italy Turkey Kenya Pakistan Panama Puerto Rico Russia Saudi Arabia United Arab Emirates United Kingdom Types Commercial property Commercial building Corporate Real Estate Extraterrestrial real estate International real estate Lease administration Niche real estate Garden real estate Healthcare real estate Vacation property Arable land Golf property Luxury real estate Off-plan property Private equity real estate Real estate owned Residential property Sectors Property management Real estate development Real estate investing Real estate flipping Relocation Law and regulation Adverse possession Chain of title Closing Concurrent estate Conditional sale Conveyancing Deed Eminent domain Encumbrance Foreclosure Just cause eviction Land law Land registration Leasehold estate Lease Property abstract Real estate transaction Real estate contract Real property Rent regulation Severance Torrens title Zoning Economics, financing and valuation Asset-based lending Capitalization rate Cash out refinancing Effective gross income Gross rent multiplier Hard money loan Highest and best use Home equity Home equity investments Home equity loan Home equity line of credit Investment rating for real estate Mortgage insurance Mortgage loan Negative equity Real estate derivative Real estate economics Real estate bubble Real estate valuation Remortgage Rental value Reverse mortgage Parties Appraiser Buyer agent Buyer broker Chartered Surveyor Exclusive buyer agent Land banking Landlord Moving company Property manager Real estate broker Real estate investment club Real estate investment trust Real property administrator Tenant Other Companies Eviction Filtering Gentrification Graduate real estate education Green belt Indices Industry trade groups Investment firms Land banking People Property cycle Real estate trends Undergraduate real estate programs Urban decay Urban planning List of housing markets by real estate prices Category Commons List of topics Authority control databases : National Germany Japan Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Collateral_(finance)&oldid=1305535070 " Categories : Business terms Credit Liability (financial accounting) Loans Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location CS1 maint: others CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from March 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles needing additional references from November 2016 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 16:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Collateral (finance) 27 languages Add topic

