Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Signs and symptoms 2 Causes 3 Pathophysiology 4 Diagnosis 5 Treatment 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Papilledema 16 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Français Hrvatski Italiano עברית Nederlands Polski Português Русский Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Swelling of the eye's optic disc due to high intracranial pressure This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Papilledema" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Medical condition Papilledema Fundal photograph showing severe papilledema in the left eye Specialty Ophthalmology , optometry , neuro-ophthalmology , neurology , neurosurgery Papilledema or papilloedema is optic disc swelling that is caused by increased intracranial pressure due to any cause.

[ 1 ] The swelling is usually bilateral and can occur over a period of hours to weeks.

[ 2 ] Unilateral presentation is extremely rare.

In intracranial hypertension, the optic disc swelling most commonly occurs bilaterally. When papilledema is found on fundoscopy , further evaluation is warranted because vision loss can result if the underlying condition is not treated.

[ 1 ] Further evaluation with a CT scan or MRI of the brain and/or spine is usually done. Recent research has shown that point-of-care ultrasound can be used to measure optic nerve sheath diameter for detection of increased intracranial pressure and shows good diagnostic test accuracy compared to CT.

[ 3 ] Thus, if there is a question of papilledema on fundoscopic examination or if the optic disc cannot be adequately visualized, ultrasound can be used to rapidly assess for increased intracranial pressure and help direct further evaluation and intervention. Unilateral papilledema can suggest a disease in the eye itself, such as an optic nerve glioma .

Signs and symptoms [ edit ] Fundal photograph showing severe papilloedema in the right eye.

Despite being classically referred to as a key symptom of rising intracranial pressure, papilledema is often not present in patients seen in an acute setting such as an emergency room . Many urgent cases of increased ICP only have identifiable papilledema after a day or more.

[ 1 ] Early on, papilledema may be discovered on examination with an ophthalmoscope without any changes in patient vision. It can progress to enlargement of the blind spot, blurring of vision, a concentric blind spot pattern, or diplopia (double vision). Ultimately, total loss of vision can occur, as well as other patterns of permanent injury to the optic nerve .

[ 1 ] Papilledema (right) revealed by scanning laser ophthalmoscopy (top) and laser Doppler imaging (bottom). Healthy contralateral eye (left).

The signs of papilledema that may be seen using an ophthalmoscope include: venous engorgement (usually the first signs) loss of venous pulsation hemorrhages over and/or adjacent to the optic disc blurring of optic margins elevation of the optic disc Paton's lines (radial retinal lines cascading from the optic disc) On visual field examination, the physician may elicit an enlarged blind spot; the visual acuity may remain relatively intact until papilledema is severe or prolonged.

Causes [ edit ] Raised intracranial pressure [ 1 ] as a result of one or more of the following: Brain tumor , idiopathic intracranial hypertension (also known as Pseudotumor Cerebri ), cerebral venous sinus thrombosis or intracerebral hemorrhage Respiratory failure [ 4 ] Isotretinoin , which is a powerful derivative of vitamin A , rarely causes papilledema.

medications like tetracycline Hypervitaminosis A , in some people who take megadoses of nutritional supplements and vitamins.

Hyperammonemia , elevated level of ammonia in blood (including cerebral edema/intracranial pressure) Guillain–Barré syndrome , due to elevated protein levels POEMS syndrome , a paraneoplastic syndrome that can cause increased intracranial pressure.

Foster Kennedy syndrome (FKS) Chiari malformation Tumors of the frontal lobe Acute mountain sickness and high-altitude cerebral edema Meningitis , leading to increased cranial pressure [ 5 ] Intracranial aneurysm , or Cerebral aneurysm, which can cause Intracranial hypertension [ 6 ] Malignant hypertension Medulloblastoma Obesity [ 7 ] Orbital Glaucoma : central retinal vein occlusion , cavernous sinus thrombosis Local lesion : optic neuritis , Ischemic optic neuropathy , methanol poisoning , infiltration of the disc by glioma , sarcoidosis and Lymphoma Acute lymphocytic leukemia (caused by infiltration of the retinal vessels by immature leukocytes) Long periods of weightlessness ( microgravity ) [ 8 ] (See also visual impairment and intracranial pressure ) Pathophysiology [ edit ] As the optic nerve sheath is continuous with the subarachnoid space of the brain (and is regarded as an extension of the central nervous system ), increased pressure is transmitted through to the optic nerve.  The brain itself is relatively spared from pathological consequences of high pressure.  However, the anterior end of the optic nerve stops abruptly at the eye.  Hence the pressure is asymmetrical and this causes a pinching and protrusion of the optic nerve at its head.  The fibers of the retinal ganglion cells of the optic disc become engorged and bulge anteriorly.  Persistent and extensive optic nerve head swelling, or optic disc edema, can lead to loss of these fibers and permanent visual impairment.

Diagnosis [ edit ] Checking the eyes for signs of papilledema should be carried out whenever there is a clinical suspicion of raised intracranial pressure , and is recommended in newly onset headaches . This may be done by ophthalmoscopy or fundus photography , and possibly slit lamp examination.

It is important to determine whether the observed condition is due to optic nerve head drusen , which can cause an elevation of the optic nerve head that can be mistaken for papilledema.  For this reason, optic nerve head drusen is also called pseudopapilledema.

Treatment [ edit ] Historically, papilledema was a potential contraindication to lumbar puncture , as it indicates a risk for tentorial herniation and subsequent death via cerebral herniation , however newer imaging techniques have been more useful at determining when and when not to conduct a lumbar puncture.

[ 9 ] Imaging by CT or MRI is usually done to find out whether there is a structural cause i.e., tumor.  A magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) and magnetic resonance venography (MRV) may also be ordered to rule out the possibility of stenosis or thrombosis of the arterial or venous systems.

The treatment depends largely on the underlying cause. However, the root cause of papilledema is the increased intracranial pressure (ICP). This is a dangerous sign, indicative of a brain tumor , CNS inflammation or idiopathic intracranial hypertension (IIH) that may become manifest in the near future.

Thus, a biopsy is routinely performed prior to the treatment in the initial stages of papilledema to detect whether a brain tumor is present. If detected, laser treatment, radiation and surgeries can be used to treat the tumor.

To decrease ICP, medications can be administered by increasing the absorption of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), or decreasing its production. Such medicines include diuretics like acetazolamide and furosemide . These diuretics, along with surgical interventions, can also treat IIH. In IIH, weight loss (even a loss of 10-15%) can lead to normalization of ICP.

Meanwhile, steroids can reduce inflammation (if this is a contributing factor to increased ICP), and may help to prevent vision loss. However, steroids have also been known to cause increased ICP, especially with a change in dosage. However, if a severe inflammatory condition exists, such as multiple sclerosis , steroids with anti-inflammatory effects such as Methylprednisolone and prednisone can help.

Other treatments include repeated lumbar punctures to remove excess spinal fluid in the cranium. The removal of potentially causative medicines including tetracyclines and vitamin A analogues may help decrease ICP; however, this is only necessary if the medication is truly felt to contribute to the ICP increase.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Blumenfeld, Hal (2022).

Neuroanatomy through clinical cases (3rd ed.). Sunderland, Massachusetts: Sinauer Associates. p. 143.

ISBN 978-1-60535-962-5 .

^ K., Khurana, A. (2015).

Comprehensive ophthalmology . Khurana, Aruj K., Khurana, Bhawna. (6th ed.). New Delhi: Jaypee, The Health Sciences Publisher.

ISBN 9789351526575 .

OCLC 921241041 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Ohle, Robert; McIsaac, Sarah M.; Woo, Michael Y.; Perry, Jeffrey J. (2015-07-01).

"Sonography of the Optic Nerve Sheath Diameter for Detection of Raised Intracranial Pressure Compared to Computed Tomography A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis" .

Journal of Ultrasound in Medicine .

34 (7): 1285– 1294.

doi : 10.7863/ultra.34.7.1285 .

ISSN 0278-4297 .

PMID 26112632 .

S2CID 25301791 .

^ Cameron AJ (1933).

"Marked papilloedema in pulmonary emphysema" .

Br J Ophthalmol .

17 (3): 167– 9.

doi : 10.1136/bjo.17.3.167 .

PMC 511527 .

PMID 18169104 .

^ Garrity JA, Herman DC, Imes I, Fries P (1993). "Optic Nerve Sheath Decompression for Visual Loss in Patients With Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome and Cryptococcal Meningitis With Papilledema".

American Journal of Ophthalmology .

116 (4).

doi : 10.1016/S0002-9394(14)71407-2 .

^ Fahmy JA (1972). "Papillodema associated with ruptured intracranial aneurysms".

Acta Ophthalmologica .

50 (6): 793– 802.

doi : 10.1111/j.1755-3768.1972.tb06618.x .

^ Krispel CM, Keltner JL, Smith W, Chu DG, Ali MR (2011).

"Undiagnosed papilledema in a morbidly obese patient population: A prospective study" .

Journal of Neuro-Ophthalmology .

31 (4): 310– 315.

doi : 10.1097/WNO.0b013e3182269910 .

PMID 21799447 .

S2CID 6759222 .

^ Rich Phillips (2012-02-10).

"Astronaut feels space's toll on his body" .

CNN . Archived from the original on February 13, 2012 . Retrieved 2012-03-01 .

^ Gower DJ, Baker AL, Bell WO, Ball MR (1987).

"Papilledema and lumbar puncture risk" .

J. Neurol. Neurosurg. Psychiatry .

50 (8): 1071– 4.

doi : 10.1136/jnnp.50.8.1071 .

PMC 1032242 .

PMID 3655817 .

External links [ edit ] Classification D ICD - 10 : H47.1 ICD - 9-CM : 377.0 MeSH : D010211 DiseasesDB : 9580 SNOMED CT : 423488006 External resources eMedicine : oph/187 Patient UK : Papilledema v t e Diseases of the human eye Adnexa Eyelid Inflammation Stye Chalazion Blepharitis Meibomian gland dysfunction Entropion Ectropion Lagophthalmos Blepharochalasis Ptosis Blepharophimosis Xanthelasma Ankyloblepharon Eyelash Trichiasis Madarosis Distichiasis Trichomegaly Lacrimal apparatus Dacryoadenitis Epiphora Dacryocystitis Xerophthalmia Orbit Exophthalmos Enophthalmos Orbital cellulitis Orbital lymphoma Periorbital cellulitis Conjunctiva Chemosis Conjunctivitis allergic Pterygium Pseudopterygium Pinguecula Subconjunctival hemorrhage Globe Fibrous tunic Sclera Scleritis Episcleritis Cornea Keratitis herpetic acanthamoebic fungal Exposure Photokeratitis Corneal ulcer Thygeson's superficial punctate keratopathy Corneal dystrophy Fuchs' Meesmann Corneal ectasia Keratoconus Pellucid marginal degeneration Keratoglobus Terrien's marginal degeneration Post-LASIK ectasia Keratoconjunctivitis sicca Corneal opacity Corneal neovascularization Kayser–Fleischer ring Haab's striae Arcus senilis Band keratopathy Vascular tunic Iris Ciliary body Uveitis Intermediate uveitis Hyphema Rubeosis iridis Persistent pupillary membrane Iridodialysis Synechia Choroid Choroideremia Choroiditis Chorioretinitis Focal choroidal excavation Polypoidal choroidal vasculopathy Lens Cataract Congenital cataract Childhood cataract Aphakia Ectopia lentis Retina Retinitis Chorioretinitis Cytomegalovirus retinitis Retinal detachment Posterior vitreous detachment Retinoschisis Ocular ischemic syndrome / Central retinal vein occlusion Central retinal artery occlusion Branch retinal artery occlusion Retinopathy diabetic hypertensive Purtscher's of prematurity Bietti's crystalline dystrophy Coats' disease Sickle cell photic Macular degeneration Retinitis pigmentosa Retinal haemorrhage Central serous retinopathy Macular edema Epiretinal membrane (Macular pucker) Vitelliform macular dystrophy Leber's congenital amaurosis Birdshot chorioretinopathy Other Glaucoma / Ocular hypertension / Primary juvenile glaucoma Floater Leber's hereditary optic neuropathy Ocular hypotony Red eye Globe rupture Keratomycosis Phthisis bulbi Persistent fetal vasculature Persistent tunica vasculosa lentis Familial exudative vitreoretinopathy Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease Pathways Optic nerve Optic disc Optic neuritis optic papillitis Papilledema Foster Kennedy syndrome Optic atrophy Optic disc drusen Optic neuropathy Ischemic anterior (AION) posterior (PION) arteritic anterior (AAION or arteritic AION) non-arteritic anterior (NAION) Kjer's Leber's hereditary Toxic and nutritional Strabismus Extraocular muscles Binocular vision Accommodation Paralytic strabismus Ophthalmoparesis Chronic progressive external ophthalmoplegia Kearns–Sayre syndrome palsies Oculomotor (III) Fourth-nerve (IV) Sixth-nerve (VI) Other strabismus Esotropia / Exotropia Hypertropia Heterophoria Esophoria Exophoria Cyclotropia Brown's syndrome Duane syndrome Other binocular Conjugate gaze palsy Convergence insufficiency Internuclear ophthalmoplegia One and a half syndrome Refraction Refractive error Hyperopia Myopia Astigmatism Anisometropia / Aniseikonia Presbyopia Vision disorders Blindness Amblyopia Leber's congenital amaurosis Diplopia Scotoma Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Monochromacy Nyctalopia Oguchi disease Blindness / Vision loss / Visual impairment Anopsia Hemianopsia binasal bitemporal homonymous Quadrantanopia subjective Asthenopia Hemeralopia Photophobia Scintillating scotoma Pupil Anisocoria Argyll Robertson pupil Marcus Gunn pupil Adie syndrome Miosis Mydriasis Cycloplegia Parinaud's syndrome Other Nystagmus Childhood blindness Infections Trachoma Onchocerciasis Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Papilledema&oldid=1292062244 " Category : Disorders of optic nerve and visual pathways Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2012 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles needing additional references from August 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 00:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Papilledema 16 languages Add topic

