Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics and scope 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Origins and early development 2.2 Foundational figures 3 Issues and concepts Toggle Issues and concepts subsection 3.1 Issues 3.1.1 Ethics 3.2 Concepts 3.2.1 The artificial 3.2.2 Agency 3.3 Decolonizing design 4 Research methods Toggle Research methods subsection 4.1 Design ethnography 4.2 Actor-network theory 4.3 Semiotics, rhetorical analysis, and discourse theory 5 Societies 6 References 7 External links Toggle External links subsection 7.1 Journals Toggle the table of contents Design studies 2 languages العربية 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Academic field This image describes the matrix of design studies. The inner circle describes the subject(s) of design, the outer, its context.

Design studies can refer to any design-oriented studies but is more formally an academic discipline or field of study that pursues, through both theoretical and practical modes of inquiry, a critical understanding of design practice and its effects in society.

Characteristics and scope [ edit ] Design studies encompasses the study of both the internal practices of design and the external effects that design activity has on society, culture and the environment.

Susan Yelavich explained design studies as embracing "two broad perspectives—one that focuses inward on the nature of design and one that looks outward to the circumstances that shape it, and conversely, the circumstances design changes, intentionally or not".

[ 1 ] This dual aspect is reflected in the complementary orientations of the two leading journals in the field.

Design Studies (established 1979) is "the interdisciplinary journal of design research" and is "focused on developing understanding of design processes".

Design Issues (established 1984) "examines design history, theory, and criticism" and "provokes inquiry into the cultural and intellectual issues surrounding design".

An interdisciplinary field, design studies includes many scholarship paradigms and uses an evolving set of methodologies and theories drawn from key thinkers from within the field itself. The field has connections with the humanities, the social sciences and the sciences, but many scholars regard design itself as a distinct discipline.

[ 2 ] Design studies scholars recognize that design, as a practice, is only one facet of much larger circumstances. They examine and question the role of design in shaping past and present personal and cultural values, especially in light of how they shape the future.

The extensive scope of design studies is conveyed in two collected sets of readings: Design Studies: A Reader (2009) [ 3 ] is a compilation of extracts from classic writings that laid the foundations of the field, and The Routledge Companion to Design Studies (2016) [ 4 ] contains newer writings over a wide range of topics such as gender and sexuality, consumerism and responsibility, globalization and post-colonialism.

History [ edit ] Origins and early development [ edit ] The origins of design studies lie in the rapid expansion of issues and topics around design since the 1960s, including its role as an academic discipline, its relationships with technological and social change, and its cultural and environmental impacts.

[ 5 ] As a field of studies it developed more specifically in the development of interaction between design history and design research . Debates about the role of design history and the nature of design research from the 1970s and 80s were brought together in 1992 when Victor Margolin argued in the journal Design Studies for the incorporation of design history into design research, in a combined approach to the study of design. Margolin noted the "dynamic crossings of intellectual boundaries" when considering developments in both fields at the time, and defined design studies as "that field of inquiry which addresses questions of how we make and use products in our daily lives and how we have done so in the past".

[ 6 ] Margolin's argument triggered counterarguments and other suggestions about what constitutes design history and how to characterize the study of design as something more than a professional practice. In a reply to Margolin in the Journal of Design History in 1993, Adrian Forty argued that design history had consistently performed a vital role in examining questions around quality in design and was already embracing new lines of thought, for example from cultural studies and anthropology.

[ 7 ] The growing debate led to a special issue of the journal Design Issues in 1995 which focused attention on "some of the controversies and problems that surround the seemingly simple task of telling the history of design".

[ 8 ] A shift from design history towards design studies continued to develop as the overlapping research methods and approaches to the study of design began to lead to broader questions of meaning, authority and power. The realization came that design history is only "but one component of what goes on in studying design, and to claim that all that is going on now could use the umbrella term 'design history' is not tenable".

[ 9 ] Foundational figures [ edit ] Reyner Banham (1922–1988) Banham's Theory and Design in the First Machine Age and his journalistic articles written for New Society have been described by the British writer and design historian Penny Sparke as representing a major "shift in how material culture was seen.

[ 10 ] His writing focused on popular commodities as well as formal architecture.

Gui Bonsiepe (born 1934) Bonsiepe is a German designer and professor for various universities including FH Koln; Carnegie Mellon; EUA, Chile; LBDI/FIESC, Brazil; Jan van Eyck Academy, Netherlands.

[ 3 ] His most influential work is Design and Democracy.

Richard Buchanan American professor of design, management, and information systems and editor of the journal Design Issues . He is well known for "extending the application of design into new areas of theory and practice, writing, and teaching as well as practicing the concepts and methods of interaction design." [ 11 ] As a co-editor of Discovering Design: Explorations in Design Studies with Victor Margolin, he brought together the fields of psychology, sociology, political theory, technology studies, rhetoric, and philosophy.

[ 12 ] Nigel Cross (born 1942) Cross is a British academic, design researcher and educator who has focused on design's intellectual space in the academic sphere. He is an emeritus professor of design studies in the Department of Design and Innovation, Faculty of Technology, at the UK's Open University, and emeritus editor-in-chief of Design Studies , the international journal of design research. In his 1982 journal article "Designerly Ways of Knowing" in Design Studies , Cross argued that design has its own intellectual and practical culture as a basis for education, contrasting it with cultures of science and arts and humanities.

[ 13 ] Clive Dilnot Originally educated as a fine artist, Dilnot later began studying social philosophy and the sociology of culture with Polish sociologist Zygmunt Bauman . Dilnot has worked on the history, theory, and criticism of the visual arts in their broadest terms. His teaching and writing have focused on design history, photography, criticism, and theory. Dilnot studied ethics in relation to design, and the role of design's capabilities in creating a humane world in his book, Ethics? Design?

[ 14 ] published in 2005.

Adrian Forty (born 1948) Forty was Professor of Architectural History at The Bartlett, The Faculty of the Built Environment at University College London. Forty believed that the drive to define a new field, the field of design studies, was unnecessary due to the fact that the field of design history had not exhausted all of its possibilities.

[ 15 ] His book Objects of Desire explores how consumer goods relate to larger issues of social processes.

[ 16 ] Tony Fry Fry is a British design theorist and philosopher who writes on the relationship between design, unsustainability , and politics. Fry has taught design and cultural theory in Britain, the United States, Hong Kong and Australia. He is perhaps best known for his writing on defuturing, the destruction of the future by design.

[ 17 ] John Heskett (1937–2014) In the late 1970s, Heskett became a prominent member of a group of academics based in several of Britain's art schools (then part of the polytechnics) who helped develop the discipline of design history and theory, later to become subsumed under the broader banner of design studies. Heskett brought his deep knowledge of economics, politics and history to the project and worked alongside scholars from other disciplines to communicate the meaning and function of that increasingly important concept, 'design', both past and present.

[ 18 ] Victor Margolin (1941–2019) Considered one of the founders of design studies, Victor Margolin was professor emeritus of design history at the University of Illinois, Chicago. He was a co-editor of the academic design journal, Design Issues , and the author, editor, or co-editor of a number of books including Design Discourse , Discovering Design , The Idea of Design , The Designed World , and The Politics of the Artificial .

[ 19 ] Victor Papanek (1923–1998) An industrial designer, Papanek suggested that industrial design had lethal effects by virtue of creating new species of permanent garbage and by choosing materials and processes that pollute the air.

[ 20 ] His writing and teaching were consistently in favour of re-focusing design for the general good of humanity and the environment.

Elizabeth Sanders As a practitioner, Sanders introduced many of the methods being used today to drive design from a human-centered perspective. She has practiced participatory design research within and between all the design disciplines. Her current research focuses on codesign processes for innovation, intervention, and transdisciplinary collaboration.

[ 21 ] Penny Sparke Sparke is a professor of design history and director of the Modern Interiors Research Centre (MIRC) at Kingston University, London. Along with Fiona Fisher, Sparke co-edited The Routledge Companion to Design Studies , [ 4 ] a comprehensive collection of essays embracing the wide range of scholarship relating to design—theoretical, practice-related, and historical.

Issues and concepts [ edit ] Design studies inquires about the meanings and consequences of design. It studies the influence of designers and the effects design has on citizens and the environment.

[ 3 ] Victor Margolin distinguishes a degree in design from a degree in design studies by saying that "the former is about producing design, while the latter is about reflecting on design as it has been practiced, is currently practiced, and how it might be practiced".

[ 22 ] Design studies urges a rethinking of design as a process, as a practice, and as a generator or products and systems that gives lives meaning and is imbricated in our economic and political systems. The study of design thinking explores the complexities inherent in the task of thinking about design.

[ 3 ] Design studies is also concerned with the relationship between design and gender, design and race, and design and culture. It studies design as ethics, its role in sustainability (social and environmental), and the nature of agency in design's construction the artificial.

Issues [ edit ] Ethics [ edit ] Design has the capacity of structuring life in certain ways and thus design should result in greater good for individuals and society but it doesn't always do so.

Ethics deals with how our actions affect others and should affect others. Design studies sees ethics as central to design.

[ 3 ] Tony Fry, a leading figure in design studies, said that it is widely recognized that design is an ethical process but remains underdeveloped and marginal within design education.

[ citation needed ] Clive Dilnot's essay "Ethics in Design: Ten Questions" explores the relationship between design and ethics and why we need ethics in design. Dilnot discussed the ability of the designer to address the public as citizens and not as consumers, and about infusing "humane intelligence" into the made environment.

[ 3 ] Concepts [ edit ] The artificial [ edit ] Clive Dilnot wrote that the artificial is by no means confined to technology. Today, it is combination of technical systems, the symbolic realm, including mind and the realm of human transformations and transmutations of nature. He gave the example of a genetically modified tomato that is neither purely natural nor purely artificial. It belongs rather to the extended realms of living things that are, as human beings ourselves are, a hybrid between these conditions.

[ 23 ] Design studies scholars also reference sociologist Bruno Latour when investigating the dynamics of the artificial. Latour's concept of actor–network theory (ANT) portrays the social as an interdependent network of human individual actors and non-human, non-individual entities called actants.

[ 24 ] Agency [ edit ] Design plays a constitutive role in everyday life. The things people see and read, the objects they use, and the places they inhabit are all designed. These products (all artificial because they are made by people) constitute an increasingly large part of the world. The built environment is the physical infrastructure that enables behavior, activity, routines, habits, and rituals, which affect our agency . Jamer Hunt defined the built environment as the combination of all design work.

[ 25 ] Decolonizing design [ edit ] There have been protests that the field of design studies is not sufficiently "geared towards delivering the kinds of knowledge and understanding that are adequate to addressing the systemic problems that arise from the coloniality of power".

[ 26 ] Moves towards decolonizing design entail changing design discourse from within by challenging and critiquing the dominant status quo from spaces where marginal voices can be heard, by educating designers about the politics of what they do and create, and by posing alternatives to current (colonial) design practices, rooted in the contexts and histories of the Global South rather than just the North.

[ 27 ] The argument is that design history and design research tend to have the strongest influences from the triad of Western Europe, North America, and Japan. The effect tends to be in line with the notion that history is written by the victors and thus design history is written by the economically powerful. Denise Whitehouse said, "While many countries produce local histories of design, the output is uneven and often driven by nationalist and trade agendas", although some academic groups such as the Japanese Design History Forum and the International Committee for Design History and Studies (ICDHS) attempt to draw together both western and non-western, post-communist, postcolonial, Asian, and Southern Hemisphere approaches, "to remap the scope and narrative concerns of design history".

[ 3 ] : 54–63 A special issue of the Design and Culture journal (Volume 10, Issue 1, 2018) was published on the topic of decolonizing design.

[ 28 ] Research methods [ edit ] The following are some of the research methods that may be used in design studies.

Design ethnography [ edit ] This form of research requires the scholar to partake in the use of, or observe others use, a designed object or system. Design ethnography has become a common tool where design is observed as a social practice. It describes a process in which a researcher will partake in traditional observant style ethnography, and observe potential users complete activities that can inform design opportunities and solutions.

[ 29 ] Other ethnographic techniques used by design studies scholars would fall more in line with anthropologists usage of the method. These techniques are observant and participant ethnography . The observant style requires the scholar to observe in an unobtrusive manner. Observations are recorded and further analyzed. The participant style requires the scholar to partake in the activities with their subject. This tactic enables the scholar to record what they see, but also what they themselves experience.

Design ethnography emerged out of a movement in the late 1980s by organizations such as Xerox/ PARC (Palo Alto Research Center], Institute for Research on Learning and Jay Doblin & Associates toward social science approaches in their product design and development efforts.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] In the 1990s, the research and design consultancy E-Lab (founded by former Doblin employees) took this approach further, pioneering a multidisciplinary methodology guided by anthropology and ethnography.

[ 30 ] [ 32 ] [ 31 ] [ 33 ] E-Lab challenged conventional market research by prioritizing real-world user experiences and behaviors uncovered through fieldwork, then analyzing the data for patterns organized by explanatory frameworks.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 30 ] Actor-network theory [ edit ] While it remains a broader theory or concept, actor-network theory can be used by design studies scholars as a research framework. When using this method, scholars will assess a designed object and consider the physical and nonphysical interactions which revolve around the object. The scholar will analyze what the object's impact is on psychological, societal, economical, and political worlds. This widened viewpoint allows the researcher to explore and map out the objects many interactions, identify its role within the network, and in what ways it is connected to stakeholders.

[ 36 ] Semiotics, rhetorical analysis, and discourse theory [ edit ] Design studies scholars may also analyze or research a designed object or system by studying it in terms of representations and their various meanings.

Semiotics studies acts of communication between the designer, the thing, and the user or users. This concept branches out into a rhetorical analysis of the designed thing. Scholars such as Richard Buchanan argue that design can be studied in such a way due to the existence of a design argument.

[ 37 ] The design argument is made up by the designer, the user, and the applicability to "practical life".

[ 37 ] The scholar would pull these segments apart and thoroughly analyze each component and their interactions.

Discourse analysis and Foucauldian discourse analysis can be adopted by the design studies scholar to further explore the above components. A Foucauldian approach specifically will analyze the power structures put in place, manipulated by, or used within a designed thing or object. This process can be particularly useful when the scholar intends to understand if the designed thing has agency or enables others to have agency.

Societies [ edit ] The Design Research Society (DRS) is a learned society committed to promoting and developing design research. It is the longest established, multi-disciplinary worldwide society for the design research community, founded in the UK in 1966. The purpose of the DRS is to promote "the study of and research into the process of designing in all its many fields".

[ 38 ] The Design History Society is an organization that promotes the study of global design histories, and brings together and supports all those engaged in the subject—students, researchers, educators, designers, designer-makers, critics, and curators. The Society aims to play an important role in shaping an inclusive design history.

[ 39 ] References [ edit ] ^ Yelavich, Susan (2012-01-04).

"What Is/Are Design Studies?" . Retrieved 18 October 2017 .

^ Cross, Nigel (1982).

"Designerly ways of knowing" (PDF) .

Design Studies .

3 (4): 221– 7.

doi : 10.1016/0142-694x(82)90040-0 .

^ a b c d e f g Clark, Hazel; Brody, David Eric (2009).

Design studies: a reader (English ed.). Oxford: Berg.

ISBN 978-1-84788-236-3 .

OCLC 268792485 .

^ a b Sparke, Penny, and Fiona Fisher (eds.).

The Routledge Companion to Design Studies . London, New York: Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group, 2016.

ISBN 978-0-367-20168-5 ^ Margolin, Victor.

The Politics of the Artificial: Essays on Design and Design Studies . University of Chicago Press. 2002.

^ Margolin, Victor (1992). "Design History or Design Studies: Subject Matter and Methods".

Design Studies .

13 (2): 104– 116.

doi : 10.1016/0142-694X(92)90250-E .

^ Forty, Adrian (1993). "A Reply to Victor Margolin".

Journal of Design History .

6 (2): 131– 132.

doi : 10.1093/jdh/6.2.131 .

^ Buchanan, R; Doordan, D; Margolin, V, eds. (1995). "Introduction".

Design Issues .

11 (1).

^ Whiteley, Nigel (1995). "Design History or Design Studies?".

Design Issues .

1 (1): 38– 42.

doi : 10.2307/1511614 .

JSTOR 1511614 .

^ Frith, S. (1995). Speaking Volumes: New Society (1962–87) THE 27 January 1995. Penny Sparke credits Banham as a major influence on her own work, describing his work as "pivotal". Sparke, P & DHS (2007). Oral History Project Interview with Penny Sparke; Track 1. From Gooding, J. V., Design History in Britain From the 1970s to 2012: Context, Formation and Development , Ph.D. Dissertation University of Northumbria, Newcastle (January 2012) p.  200–203.

^ "Faculty and Research" .

weatherhead.case.edu .

^ Margolin, Victor (2010).

Discovering design: explorations in design studies. Edited by Richard W. Buchanan . Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-07815-1 .

^ Cross, Nigel (1982).

"Designerly ways of knowing" (PDF) .

Design Studies .

3 (4): 221– 7.

doi : 10.1016/0142-694x(82)90040-0 .

^ Dilnot, Clive (2004).

The archeworks papers . Tigerman, Stanley, 1930, Archeworks (Chicago, Ill.). Chicago: Archeworks.

ISBN 978-0-9753405-1-6 .

OCLC 224949665 .

^ Forty, Adrian (1995). "Debate: A Reply to Victor Margolin".

Design Issues .

11 (1): 16– 18.

doi : 10.2307/1511611 .

JSTOR 1511611 .

^ Forty, Adrian (1992).

Objects of desire: design and society since 1750 . New York, N.Y.: Thames and Hudson.

ISBN 978-0-500-27412-5 .

^ Tony, Fry (1999).

A new design philosophy: an introduction to defuturing . Sydney: UNSW Press.

ISBN 978-0-86840-753-1 .

OCLC 47009406 .

^ Sparke, Penny (2014-03-12).

"John Heskett obituary" .

the guardian . Retrieved October 31, 2017 .

^ "CMU Design Lecture Series: How do you Design the Future" . Retrieved Oct 31, 2017 .

^ Papanek, Victor (1984).

Design for the real world: human ecology and social change . Academy Chicago.

ISBN 978-0-89733-153-1 .

^ Sanders, Elizabeth B.-N.; Stappers, Pieter Jan (2012).

Convivial toolbox: generative research for the front end of design . Amsterdam: BIS Publishers.

ISBN 978-90-6369-284-1 .

^ "Design Research: What is it? What is it for?" .

DRS2016 . Retrieved 2017-11-14 .

^ Yelavich, Susan; Adams, Barbara (2014-11-20).

Design as future-making . Yelavich, Susan. London.

ISBN 978-0-85785-839-9 .

OCLC 858895940 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Latour, Bruno (1996). "On actor-network theory: A few clarifications".

Soziale Welt .

47 (4): 369– 381.

JSTOR 40878163 .

^ Strangely familiar: design and everyday life . Blauvelt, Andrew, 1964-, Walker Art Center., Carnegie Museum of Art., Musée de l'Hospice Comtesse. (1st ed.). Minneapolis, Minn.: Walker Art Center. 2003.

ISBN 978-0-935640-75-5 .

OCLC 51931174 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ "Editorial Statement" .

Decolonising Design . Retrieved 2017-11-13 .

^ "What a Decolonisation of Design Involves: Two Programmes for Emancipation" .

www.decolonisingdesign.com . Retrieved 2018-12-09 .

^ "Design and Culture:Decolonizing Design:10(1)2018" .

^ "Design's Ethnographic Turn" .

Design Observer . Retrieved 2017-11-14 .

^ a b c Cefkin, Melissa. "Business, Anthropology, and the Growth of Corporate Ethnography," in Ethnography and the Corporate Encounter: Reflection on Research in and of Corporations , Melissa Cefkin (ed.), New York: Berghahn Books, 2009.

^ a b Blomberg, Jeanette and Mark Burrell. "An Ethnographic Approach to Design," in The Human-Computer Interaction Handbook , Andrew Sears and Julie A. Jacko, eds., New York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2008, p. 965–86. Retrieved September 14, 2023.

^ Sunderland, Patricia L. and Rita M. Denny.

Doing Anthropology in Consumer Research , Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press, 2007.

^ Littman, Margaret.

"Shopping Science," Crain's Chicago Business , January 9, 1999. Retrieved September 19, 2023.

^ Posner, Bruce G.

"The Future of Marketing Is Looking at You," Fast Company , October 1996. Retrieved September 14, 2023.

^ Bezaitis, Maria. "Practice, Products and the Future of Ethnographic Work," Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference Proceedings , American Anthropological Association, 2009.

^ Callon M. (1986) The Sociology of an Actor-Network: The Case of the Electric Vehicle. In: Callon M., Law J., Rip A. (eds) Mapping the Dynamics of Science and Technology . Palgrave Macmillan, London.

^ a b Buchanan, Richard (1985). "Declaration by Design: Rhetoric, Argument, and Demonstration in Design Practice".

Design Issues .

2 (1): 4– 22.

doi : 10.2307/1511524 .

JSTOR 1511524 .

S2CID 55994402 .

^ Design Research Society , Accessed November 12, 2017.

^ Design History Society , Accessed November 6, 2017.

External links [ edit ] Journals [ edit ] CoDesign : "research and scholarship into principles, procedures and techniques relevant to collaboration in design or that relate to its theoretical underpinnings; encompassing collaborative, co-operative, participatory, socio-technical and community design".

Design and Culture : "reflects the state of scholarship in the field of design and nurtures new or overlooked lines of inquiry that redefine our understanding of design".

Design Issues : "examines design history, theory, and criticism, and provokes inquiry into the cultural and intellectual issues surrounding design".

The Design Journal : "aims to publish thought-provoking work which will have a direct impact on design knowledge and which challenges assumptions and methods".

Design Studies : "focused on developing understanding of design processes; studies design activity across all domains of application, including engineering and product design, architectural and urban design, computer artefacts and systems design".

International Journal of Design : "devoted to publishing research papers in all fields of design, including industrial design, visual communication design, interface design, animation and game design, architectural design, urban design, and other design related fields".

Journal of Design History : "plays an active role in the development of design history, including the history of crafts and applied arts, as well as contributing to the broader fields of visual and material culture studies".

Journal of Design Research : "emphasising human aspects as a central issue of design through integrative studies of social sciences and design disciplines".

She Ji: The Journal of Design, Economies, and Innovation : "focusing on economics and innovation, design process, and design thinking in today's complex socio-technical environment".

Architecture : "aims to provide an advanced forum for studies related to architectural research, including landscape architecture, architecture design, civil engineering design, systems architecture, industrial design, community and regional planning, interior design, sustainable design, and technology, sustainability, pedagogy, visual culture and artistic practices of architecture".

v t e Design Outline Designer Disciplines Communication design Advertising Book design Brand design Exhibit design Film title design Graphic design Motion Postage stamp design Print design Illustration Information design Instructional design News design Photography Retail design Signage / Traffic sign design Typography / Type design Video design Visual merchandising Environmental design Architecture Architectural lighting design Building design Passive solar Ecological design Environmental impact design Garden design Computer-aided Healthy community design Hotel design Interior architecture Interior design EID Keyline design Landscape architecture Sustainable Landscape design Spatial design Urban design Industrial design Automotive design Automotive suspension design CMF design Corrugated box design Electric guitar design Furniture design Sustainable Hardware interface design Motorcycle design Packaging and labeling Photographic lens design Product design Production design Sensory design Service design Interaction design Experience design EED Game design Level design Video game design Hardware interface design Icon design Immersive design Information design Interactive design Sonic interaction design User experience design User interface design Web design Other applied arts Public art design Ceramic / glass design Fashion design Costume design Jewellery design Floral design Game art design Property design Scenic design Sound design Stage/set lighting design Textile design Other design & engineering Algorithm design Behavioural design Boiler design Database design Drug design Electrical system design Experimental design Filter design Geometric design Work design Integrated circuit design Circuit design Physical design Power network design Mechanism design Nuclear weapon design Nucleic acid design Organization design Process design Processor design Protein design Research design Social design Software design Spacecraft design Strategic design Systems design Test design Approaches Active Activity-centered Adaptive web Affective Brainstorming By committee By contract C-K theory Closure Configuration Contextual Continuous Cradle-to-cradle Creative problem-solving Creativity techniques Critical Design fiction Defensive Design–bid–build Design–build architect-led Diffuse Domain-driven Ecological design Energy neutral Engineering design process Probabilistic design Ergonomic Error-tolerant Evidence-based Fault-tolerant Feminist For assembly For behaviour change For manufacturability For Six Sigma For testing For the environment For X Framework-oriented Functional Generative Geodesign HCD High-level Hostile Inclusive Integrated Integrated topside Intelligence-based Iterative KISS principle Low-level Metadesign Mind mapping Modular New Wave Object-oriented Open Over Parametric Participatory Platform-based Policy-based Prevention through Process-centered Public interest Opinion poll Public opinion Rational Regenerative Reliability engineering Research-based Responsibility-driven RWD Safe-life Speculative Sustainable Systemic SOD Tableless web Theory of constraints Top-down and bottom-up Transformation Transgenerational TRIZ Universal Design for All Usage-centered Use-centered User-centered Empathic User innovation Value-driven Value sensitive Privacy by Quality by Secure by Design choice computing controls culture flow justice leadership management marker methods pattern research science sprint strategy theory thinking Tools Intellectual property Organizations Awards Tools AAD Architectural model Blueprint Comprehensive layout CAD CAID Virtual home design software CAutoD Design quality indicator Electronic design automation Flowchart Mockup Design specification Design system Prototype Sketch Storyboard Technical drawing HTML editor Website wireframe Intellectual property Clean-room design Community design Design around Design infringement Design patent Fashion design copyright Geschmacksmuster Industrial design rights European Union Organizations American Institute of Graphic Arts Chartered Society of Designers Design and Industries Association Design Council International Forum Design Design Research Society Awards European Design Award German Design Award Good Design Award (Museum of Modern Art) Good Design Award (Chicago Athenaeum) Graphex IF Product Design Award James Dyson Award Prince Philip Designers Prize Related topics Agile Concept art Conceptual design Creative industries Cultural icon .design Dominant design Enterprise architecture Form factor Futures studies Indie design Innovation management Intelligent design Lean startup New product development OODA loop Philosophy of design Process simulation Reference design Slow design STEAM fields Unintelligent design Visualization Wicked problem Design attributes brief change classic competition architectural student director education elements engineer firm history knowledge language life load museum optimization paradigm principles rationale review specification studies studio technology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Design_studies&oldid=1297835281 " Categories : Design studies Academic disciplines Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: others Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 20:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Design studies 2 languages Add topic

