Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Russia Toggle Russia subsection 1.1 Russian Empire 1.2 Soviet Union 2 China Toggle China subsection 2.1 Imperial China 2.1.1 Qing genocide of Dzungars 2.1.2 Jindandao massacre of Mongols 2.2 Communist China 3 Prejudice elsewhere 4 Derogatory terms Toggle Derogatory terms subsection 4.1 In Korean 4.2 In Arabic 4.3 In Greek 4.4 In Quebec French 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Sources Toggle the table of contents Anti-Mongolian sentiment Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Anti-Mongolianism ) Dislike, otherwise opposition to the Mongols and the Mongol regime This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( March 2022 ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Anti-Mongolian sentiment" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Anti-Mongol , Anti-Mongoloid , Anti-Mongolism , Anti-Mongolianism or also Anti-Mongolian sentiment , is the term used to describe, in general, the prejudice against or hatred toward Mongolia or its people. It has been built throughout history by the expansions of the Mongol Empire and its divisions such as the Golden Horde , being prevalently made by grievancies with countries that were attacked or conquered in said times, which by extent lists most of Europe.

Russia [ edit ] Russian Empire [ edit ] The Tsardom of Russia , the Russian Empire , and the Soviet Union performed many atrocities against the Mongols [ 1 ] (assimilate, reduce the population, extinguish the language, culture, tradition, history, religion and ethnic identity ). During the existence of the Russian Empire , Tsar Peter the Great said: "The headwaters of the Yenisei River must be Russian land".

[ 2 ] The Russian Empire sent the Kalmyks and Buryats to war to reduce the populations ( World War I and other wars).

[ 3 ] Soviet Union [ edit ] See also: Stalinist repressions in Mongolia Soviet Russian scientists attempted to convince the Kalmyks and Buryats that they were not Mongols during the 20th century (demongolization policy). 35,000 Buryats were killed during the rebellion of 1927 and around one-third of Buryat population in Russia died in the 1900s–1950s.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In 1919 the Buryats established a small theocratic Balagad state in Kizhinginsky District of Russia and the Buryat's state fell in 1926. In 1958, the name "Mongol" was removed from the name of the Buryat-Mongol Autonomous Soviet Socialist Republic.

On 22 January 1922 Mongolia proposed to migrate the Kalmyks during the Kalmykian Famine but Russia refused. 71–93,000 (around half of the population) Kalmyks died during the famine.

[ 6 ] The Kalmyks revolted against Russia in 1926, 1930 and 1942–1943. On 23 April 1923 Joseph Stalin , the General Secretary of the Soviet Union at the time, said "We are carrying out a wrong policy on the Kalmyks who related to the Mongols. Our policy is too peaceful".

[ 7 ] In March 1927, the Soviet government deported 20,000 Kalmyks to Siberia and Karelia . The Kalmyks founded sovereign Republic of Oirat-Kalmyk on 22 March 1930.

[ 7 ] The Oirat State created a military and clashed with the Soviet Red Army. 200 Kalmyk soldiers defeated 1,700 Soviet soldiers in the Durvud province of Kalmykia but the Oirat State was destroyed by the Red Army in 1930.

The Soviet Union deported all Kalmyks to Siberia in 1943 and around half of (97–98,000) Kalmyk people deported to Siberia died before being allowed to return home in 1957.

[ 8 ] The government of the Soviet Union forbade teaching Kalmyk language during their time in Siberia. The Kalmyks' main purpose was to migrate to Mongolia and many Kalmyks joined the German Army. Marshal Khorloogiin Choibalsan attempted to migrate the deportees to Mongolia and he met with them in Siberia during his visit to Russia. Under the Law of the Russian Federation of April 26, 1991 "On Rehabilitation of Exiled Peoples," repressions against Kalmyks and other peoples were qualified as an act of genocide.

China [ edit ] Imperial China [ edit ] Qing genocide of Dzungars [ edit ] Main article: Dzungar genocide The Dzungars Mongols lived in an area that stretched from the west end of the Great Wall of China to present-day eastern Kazakhstan and from present-day northern Kyrgyzstan to southern Siberia (most of which is located in present-day Xinjiang ), and were the last nomadic empire to threaten China , which they did from the early 17th century through the middle of the 18th century.

[ 9 ] After a series of inconclusive military conflicts that started in the 1680s, the Dzungars were subjugated by the Manchu -led Qing dynasty (1644–1912) in the late 1750s.

Clarke argued that the Qing campaign in 1757–58 "amounted to the complete destruction of not only the Dzungar state but of the Dzungars as a people." [ 10 ] After the Qianlong Emperor led Qing forces to victory over the Dzungar Oirat (Western) Mongols in 1755, he originally was going to split the Dzungar Khanates into four tribes headed by four Khans. The Khoit tribe was to have the Dzungar leader Amursana as its Khan. Amursana rejected the Qing arrangement and rebelled since he wanted to be leader of a united Dzungar nation. The Qianlong Emperor then issued his orders for the genocide and eradication of the entire Dzungar nation and name, Qing Manchu Bannermen and Khalkha (Eastern) Mongols enslaved Dzungar women and children while slaying the other Dzungars.

[ 11 ] The Qianlong Emperor then ordered the genocide of the Dzungars , moving the remaining Dzungar people to the mainland and ordering the generals to kill all the men in Barkol or Suzhou , and divided their wives and children to Qing forces, which were made out of Manchu Bannermen and Khalkha Mongols .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Qing scholar Wei Yuan estimated the total population of Dzungars before the fall at 600,000 people or 200,000 households. Oirat officer Saaral betrayed and battled against the Oirats. In a widely cited [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] account of the war, Wei Yuan wrote that about 40% of the Dzungar households were killed by smallpox , 20% fled to Russia or Kazakh tribes, and 30% were killed by the Qing army of Manchu Bannermen and Khalkha Mongols , leaving no yurts in an area of several thousand li except those of the surrendered.

[ 17 ] During this war Kazakhs attacked dispersed Oirats and Altays . Based on this account, Wen-Djang Chu wrote that 80% of the 600,000 or more Dzungars (especially Choros , Olot , Khoid , Baatud and Zakhchin ) were destroyed by disease and attack [ 18 ] which Michael Clarke described as "the complete destruction of not only the Dzungar state but of the Dzungars as a people." [ 19 ] Historian Peter Perdue attributed the decimation of the Dzungars to an explicit policy of extermination launched by the Qianlong Emperor, but he also observed signs of a more lenient policy after mid-1757.

[ 15 ] Mark Levene, a historian whose recent research interests focus on genocide, has stated that the extermination of the Dzungars was "arguably the eighteenth century genocide par excellence".

[ 20 ] The Dzungar genocide was completed by a combination of a smallpox epidemic and the direct slaughter of Dzungars by Qing forces made out of Manchu Bannermen and (Khalkha) Mongols.

[ 21 ] Anti-Dzungar Uyghur rebels from the Turfan and Hami oases had submitted to Qing rule as vassals and requested Qing help for overthrowing Dzungar rule. Uyghur leaders like Emin Khoja were granted titles within the Qing nobility, and these Uyghurs helped supply the Qing military forces during the anti-Dzungar campaign.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] The Qing employed Khoja Emin in its campaign against the Dzungars and used him as an intermediary with Muslims from the Tarim Basin to inform them that the Qing were only aiming to kill Dzungars and that they would leave the Muslims alone, and also to convince them to kill the Dzungars themselves and side with the Qing since the Qing noted the Muslims' resentment of their former experience under Dzungar rule at the hands of Tsewang Araptan .

[ 25 ] It was not until generations later that Dzungaria rebounded from the destruction and near liquidation of the Dzungars after the mass slayings of nearly a million Dzungars.

[ 26 ] Historian Peter Perdue has shown that the decimation of the Dzungars was the result of an explicit policy of extermination launched by the Qianlong Emperor, [ 27 ] Perdue attributed the decimation of the Dzungars to a "deliberate use of massacre" and has described it as an "ethnic genocide".

[ 28 ] Although this "deliberate use of massacre" has been largely ignored by modern scholars, [ 27 ] Dr. Mark Levene, a historian whose recent research interests focus on genocide, [ 29 ] has stated that the extermination of the Dzungars was "arguably the eighteenth century genocide par excellence".

[ 30 ] The Qing "final solution" of genocide to solve the problem of the Dzungars made the Qing-sponsored settlement of millions of Han, Hui, Turkestani Oasis people (Uyghurs) and Manchu Bannermen in Dzungaria possible, since the land was now devoid of Dzungars.

[ 27 ] The Dzungarian basin, which used to be inhabited by Dzungars is currently inhabited by Kazakhs.

[ 31 ] In northern Xinjiang, the Qing brought in Han, Hui, Uyghur, Xibe, and Kazakh colonists after they exterminated the Dzungar Oirat Mongols in the region, with one-third of Xinjiang's total population consisting of Hui and Han in the northern are, while around two-thirds were Uyghurs in southern Xinjiang's Tarim Basin.

[ 32 ] In Dzungaria, the Qing established new cities like Ürümqi and Yining.

[ 33 ] The Qing were the ones who unified Xinjiang and changed its demographic situation.

[ 34 ] The depopulation of northern Xinjiang after the Buddhist Oirats were slaughtered, led to the Qing settling Manchu , Sibo ( Xibe ), Daurs (a sub-Mongolic people), Solons , Han Chinese, Hui Muslims, and Turkic Muslim Taranchis in the north, with Han Chinese and Hui migrants making up the greatest number of settlers. Since it was the crushing of the Buddhist Öölöd (Dzungars) by the Qing which led to the promotion of Islam and the empowerment of the Muslim Begs in southern Xinjiang, and migration of Muslim Taranchis to northern Xinjiang, it was proposed by Henry Schwarz that "the Qing victory was, in a certain sense, a victory for Islam".

[ 35 ] Xinjiang was a unified defined geographic identity created and developed by the Qing. It was the Qing who led to Turkic Muslim power in the region increasing since the Mongol power was crushed by the Qing while Turkic Muslim culture and identity were tolerated or even promoted by the Qing.

[ 36 ] The Qianlong Emperor explicitly commemorated the Qing conquest of the Dzungars as having reclaimed former territory in Xinjiang for "China", defining China as a multi-ethnic state, rejecting the idea that China only meant Han areas in "China proper", meaning that according to the Qing, both Han and non-Han peoples were part of "China", which included Xinjiang which the Qing conquered from the Dzungars.

[ 37 ] After the Qing were done conquering Dzungaria in 1759, they proclaimed that the new land which formerly belonged to the Dzungars was now absorbed into "China" (Dulimbai Gurun) in a Manchu language memorial.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] The Qing expounded on their ideology that they were bringing together the "outer" non-Han Chinese like the Inner Mongols, Eastern Mongols, Oirat Mongols, and Tibetans together with the "inner" Han Chinese, into "one family" united in the Qing state, showing that the diverse subjects of the Qing were all part of one family, the Qing used the phrase "Zhong Wai Yi Jia" 中外一家 or "Nei Wai Yi Jia" 內外一家 ("interior and exterior as one family"), to convey this idea of "unification" of the different peoples.

[ 41 ] In the Manchu official Tulisen 's Manchu language account of his meeting with the Torghut leader Ayuka Khan , it was mentioned that while the Torghuts were unlike the Russians, the "people of the Central Kingdom" (dulimba-i gurun 中國, Zhongguo) were like the Torghut Mongols, and the "people of the Central Kingdom" referred to the Manchus.

[ 42 ] The Inner Mongolian Chahar leader Ligdan Khan , a descendant of Genghis Khan, opposed and fought against the Qing until he died of smallpox in 1634. Thereafter, the Inner Mongols under his son Ejei Khan surrendered to the Qing and was given the title of Prince (Qin Wang, 親王), and Inner Mongolian nobility became closely tied to the Qing royal family and intermarried with them extensively. Ejei Khan died in 1661 and was succeeded by his brother Abunai. After Abunai showed disaffection with Manchu Qing rule, he was placed under house arrested in 1669 in Shenyang and the Kangxi Emperor gave his title to his son Borni. Abunai then bid his time and then he and his brother Lubuzung revolted against the Qing in 1675 during the Revolt of the Three Feudatories , with 3,000 Chahar Mongol followers joining in on the revolt. The revolt was put down within two months, the Qing then crushed the rebels in a battle on April 20, 1675, killing Abunai and all his followers. Their title was abolished, all Chahar Mongol royal males were executed even if they were born to Manchu Qing princesses, and all Chahar Mongol royal females were sold into slavery except the Manchu Qing princesses. The Chahar Mongols were then put under the direct control of the Qing Emperor unlike the other Inner Mongol leagues which maintained their autonomy.

Jindandao massacre of Mongols [ edit ] Ordinary Mongols were not allowed to travel outside their own leagues. During the eighteenth century, growing numbers of Han Chinese settlers had illegally begun to move into the Inner Mongolian steppe. By 1791 there had been so many Han Chinese settlers in the Front Gorlos Banner that the jasak had petitioned the Qing government to legalize the status of the peasants who had already settled there.

[ 43 ] The first half of the 19th century saw the heyday of the Qing order. Both Inner and Outer Mongolia continued to supply the Qing armies with cavalry , although the government had tried to keep the Outer Mongols apart from the empire's wars in that century. Since the dynasty placed the Mongols well under its control, the government no longer feared them. At the same time, as the ruling Manchus had become increasingly sinicized and population pressure in China proper emerged, the dynasty began to abandon its earlier attempts to block Han Chinese trade penetration and settlement in the steppe . After all, Han Chinese economic penetration served the dynasty's interests, because it not only provided support of the government's Mongolian administrative apparatus but also bound the Mongols more tightly to the rest of the empire. The Qing administrators, increasing in league with Han Chinese trading firms, solidly supported Chinese commerce . There was little that ordinary Mongols, who remained in the banners and continued their lives as herdsmen, could do to protect themselves against the growing exactions that banner princes, monasteries, and Han creditors imposed upon them, and ordinary herdsmen had little resource against exorbitant taxation and levies. In the 19th century, agriculture had been spread in the steppe and pastureland was increasingly converted to agricultural use. Even during the 18th century a growing number of Han settlers had already illegally begun to move into the Inner Mongolian steppe and to lease land from monasteries and banner princes, slowly diminishing the grazing areas for the Mongols' livestock. While the alienation of pasture in this way was largely illegal, the practice continued unchecked. By 1852, Han Chinese merchants had deeply penetrated Inner Mongolia, and the Mongols had run up unpayable debts . The monasteries had taken over substantial grazing lands, and monasteries , merchants and banner princes had leased many pasture lands to Han Chinese as farmland , although there was also popular resentment against oppressive taxation, Han usurpers, shrinkage of pasture, as well as debts and abuse of the banner princes' authority. Northern parts of what are today's Chinese provinces of Shaanxi , Shanxi and Hebei were ethnically cleansed of Mongols, with the erasing of nomadic minorities legacies in these regions so as to dispel the notion of borderlands as traditionally Mongolian inhabited. Increasingly during the nineteenth century, the Manchurians were becoming increasingly sinicized themselves, and faced with the Russian threat, they began to encourage Han Chinese farmers to settle in both Mongolia and Manchuria . This policy was followed by subsequent governments. The railroads that were being built in these regions were especially useful to the Han Chinese settlers. Land was either sold by Mongol Princes, or leased to Han Chinese farmers, or simply taken away from the nomads and given to Han Chinese farmers. Many impoverished Mongols also began to take up farming in the steppe, renting farmlands from their banner princes or from Han merchant landlords who had acquired them for agriculture as settlement for debts. Qing rule with tacit continuous Han illegal settlement over the 18th and 19th centuries, had led to a wave of incidents culminating in Mongol ethnic cleansing and displacement.

All these incidents culminated in the Jindandao Incident , where an ethnic Han Chinese secret society called Jindandao ( 金 丹 道 ) rose up and revolted in Inner Mongolia in November 1891. The Chinese rebels massacred 150,000 Mongols and destroyed many Mongol lama temples before being suppressed by government forces in late December.

[ 44 ] The outbreak of the rebellion took place in November, 1891 when rebels attacked the government office of the Aukhan Banner . They slaughtered the jasagh (head) of the banner, Prince Daghchin, who was concurrently the head of the Juu Uda League, and vandalized his ancestral tomb. They quickly rampaged southward into the Ongniud banners (and Chifeng County within them), and then into the Kharachin Left Banner . Around the same time, another group of rebels captured Chaoyang County within the Tümed Right Banner , the Josutu League. They moved into the neighboring Tümed banner and two Kharachin banners while annihilating Mongol communities.

[ 44 ] They openly employed anti-Mongol and anti-dynastic slogans including "Defeat the Qing and wipe of the Mongols" ( 平 清 掃 胡 ) and "Kill Mongols in revenge" ( 仇 殺 蒙 古 ).

[ 45 ] The Jindandao devastated Mongol communities in the southeastern borderland and forced many Mongols to take refuge in northern banners .

[ 45 ] Anyway, the Qing attitude towards Han Chinese colonization of Mongolian lands grew more and more favourable under pressure of events, particularly after the Amur Annexation by Russia in 1860. This would reach a peak during the early 20th century, under the name of xinzheng or "New Administration". Several NGO and human rights groups monitor happening in the autonomous region today.

Communist China [ edit ] See also: 2011 Inner Mongolia unrest and 2020 Inner Mongolia protests During the Cultural Revolution , Mongol separatist political parties and ethnic Mongols were targeted and killed by the Red Guards throughout inner Mongolia, at least 346,000 ethnic Mongols were arrested of which at least 27,900 of them were officially executed and another 120,000 were crippled. An even larger number of ethnic Mongols were tortured or beaten to death, died of sexual violence, worked to death in labour camps or committed suicide, but were unrecorded. Recent researchers estimate that the Red Guards killed about 100,000 to 300,000 Mongols during the Cultural Revolution.

[ 46 ] Traditional Mongol lands within the PRC extend further than Inner Mongolia, often up to the old Ming border and further south and west in places like Gansu , Xinjiang the Datong area of Shaanxi and Kalgan . There are also remnants of Möngke Khan 's grand army in Sichuan and Yunnan , yet little recognition of the Mongol legacy in these areas.

[ 47 ] There has been riots over what has been perceived by ethnic Mongols of increasing marginalisation by Han Chinese and cultural appropriation disputes over hotpot and throat singing [ 48 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] There has been continuing efforts by the CPC to dispel separatism and notions of Pan-Mongolism between the indigenous Mongols of China, with other Mongol groups .

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] Prejudice elsewhere [ edit ] The use of the term " Mongoloid " as a pejorative still pervades many cultures today, with stereotypes of Mongolians as superstitious alcoholics .

[ 53 ] Mongoloid is also used as a highly offensive slur against people with Down syndrome .

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] Perhaps the image of Mongolians being barbaric or underdeveloped has pervaded in part to their nomadic lifestyle which has survived partly into modernity.

[ 58 ] Mongolic peoples have also received prejudice over the ages for their practice of traditional customs and Shamanism as backwards or paganistic, along with their historical willingness to embrace multiple faiths at the same time.

[ 59 ] Derogatory terms [ edit ] In Korean [ edit ] Orangkae ( Korean : 오랑캐 ) – literally "Barbarian", derogatory term used against Han , Mongol and Manchu peoples.

In Arabic [ edit ] مغولي - Translated: "Mongolian" or "Maghuli," used to describe an unintelligent brute. Not exclusively used against Mongolian people .

In Greek [ edit ] Μογγόλος - Translated: "Mongolian" or "Mongol," derogatory term used against Turkish people .

In Quebec French [ edit ] Kâliss de mongol - Translated: "Damn Mongolian" or "Mongol," derogatory term used against idiots.

References [ edit ] ^ Mongolian Historical Society, "The History of Mongolia", Ulaanbaatar, 2010 ^ L.Jamsran, Mongol states in Russia, 1995 ^ N.N. Mikheyev, "The Kalmyks and Buryats in the Wars of Russia", Moscow, 2002 ^ Войны ХХ века и их жертвы /тысяч человек/ (Russian) ^ Буриад-Монголын үндэстний хөдөлгөөн, тулгамдсан асуудлууд Archived 2013-12-03 at the Wayback Machine (Mongolian) ^ XX зууны 20, 30-аад онд халимагуудын 98 хувь аймшигт өлсгөлөнд автсан (Mongolian) ^ a b Халимагийн эмгэнэлт түүхээс Archived 2014-12-27 at the Wayback Machine (Mongolian) ^ "Regions and territories: Kalmykia" . 29 November 2011 . Retrieved 24 March 2023 – via news.bbc.co.uk.

^ Chapters 3–7 of Perdue 2005 describe the rise and fall of the Dzungar Khanate and its relations with other Mongol tribes, the Qing dynasty , and the Russian Empire .

^ Clarke 2004 , p. 37.

^ Millward 2007 , p. 95.

^ 大清高宗純皇帝實錄, 乾隆二十四年 ^ 平定準噶爾方略 ^ Lattimore, Owen (1950).

Pivot of Asia; Sinkiang and the inner Asian frontiers of China and Russia . Little, Brown. p.

126 .

^ a b Perdue 2005 , p.

283 -287 ^ ed. Starr 2004 , p. 54.

^ Wei Yuan , 聖武記 Military history of the Qing dynasty , vol.4. "計數十萬戶中，先痘死者十之四，繼竄入俄羅斯哈薩克者十之二，卒殲於大兵者十之三。除婦孺充賞外，至今惟來降受屯之厄鲁特若干戶，編設佐領昂吉，此外數千里間，無瓦剌一氊帳。" ^ Chu, Wen-Djang (1966).

The Moslem Rebellion in Northwest China 1862-1878 . Mouton & co. p. 1.

^ "Michael Edmund Clarke, In the Eye of Power (blic/02Whole.pdf" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on April 10, 2008.

^ Levene 2008 , p.

188 ^ Lorge 2006 , p.

165 .

^ Saintly Brokers: Uyghur Muslims, Trade, and the Making of Qing Central Asia ...

ISBN 9781109101263 .

^ Saintly Brokers: Uyghur Muslims, Trade, and the Making of Qing Central Asia ...

ISBN 9781109101263 .

^ Saintly Brokers: Uyghur Muslims, Trade, and the Making of Qing Central Asia ...

ISBN 9781109101263 .

^ Kim 2008 , p. 139.

^ Tyler 2004 , p. 55.

^ a b c Perdue 2009 , p. 285.

^ Perdue, Peter C. (2005).

China Marches West .

ISBN 9780674016842 .

^ Dr. Mark Levene Archived December 16, 2008, at the Wayback Machine , Southampton University , see "Areas where I can offer Postgraduate Supervision". Retrieved 2009-02-09.

^ Dirk Moses, A. (2008).

Empire, Colony, Genocide .

ISBN 9781845454524 .

^ Tyler 2004 , p. 4.

^ ed. Starr 2004 , p. 243.

^ Millward 1998 , p. 102.

^ Liu & Faure 1996 , p. 71.

^ Liu & Faure 1996 , p. 72.

^ Liu & Faure 1996 , p. 76.

^ Zhao 2006 , pp. 11,12.

^ Dunnell 2004 , p. 77.

^ Dunnell 2004 , p. 83.

^ Elliott 2001 , p. 503.

^ Dunnell 2004 , pp. 76-77.

^ Perdue 2009 , p. 218.

^ The Cambridge History of China . Vol. 10. Cambridge University Press. 1978. p. 356.

^ a b Paul Hyer, The Chin-tan-tao Movement -- A Chinese Revolt in Mongolia (1891) , Altaica, pp. 105--112, 1977.

^ a b Borjigin Burensain, The Complex Structure of Ethnic Conflict in the Frontier: Through the Debates around the 'Jindandao Incident' in 1891 , Inner Asia, Vol. 6, No.1, pp. 41-60, 2004.

^ Shizuoka ^ "Inner Mongolia beset by ethnic conflict" .

www.cnn.com . Retrieved 24 March 2023 .

^ "Inner Mongolians culture clash - CNN Video" .

CNN . 18 April 2012.

^ "China's Inner Mongolia 'under heavy security' " .

BBC News . 30 May 2011.

^ "China responds to ethnic riots in Inner-Mongolia" .

International Business Times . 2 June 2011.

^ Brian Spegele (31 May 2011).

"China Seeks to Calm Inner Mongolia - WSJ" .

WSJ .

^ "China Launches 'Anti-Terror' Operation in Inner Mongolia" .

Radio Free Asia . Retrieved 24 March 2023 .

^ "No Blacks, Mongolians Allowed At Beijing Bars: Report" .

The Huffington Post . 11 August 2008.

^ Smay, Diana; Armelagos, George.

"Galileo Wept: A Critical Assessment of the Use of Race in Forensic Anthropology" (PDF) . Emory University. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-08-18 . Retrieved 2012-10-10 .

^ Lieberman, Leonard (1997). "Out of Our Skulls: Caucasoid, Mongoloid, Negroid?".

Anthropology News .

38 (9): 56.

doi : 10.1111/an.1997.38.9.56 .

^ Templeton, Alan R.

"Human Races: A Genetic and Evolutionary Perspective" (PDF) .

Washington University . Realfuture.org.

^ Keevak, Michael. "Becoming Yellow: A Short History of Racial Thinking". Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2011.

ISBN 978-0-691-14031-5 .

^ "Southern Mongolian Human Rights Information Center" .

www.smhric.org . Retrieved 24 March 2023 .

^ "China Launches 'Strike Hard' Anti-Rumor Campaign in Inner Mongolia" .

Radio Free Asia . Retrieved 24 March 2023 .

Sources [ edit ] Clarke, Michael Edmund (2004).

In the Eye of Power: China and Xinjiang from the Qing Conquest to the 'New Great Game' for Central Asia, 1759–2004 (PDF) (Thesis). Griffith University, Brisbane: Dept. of International Business & Asian Studies. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2008-04-10.

Levene, Mark (2008).

"Empires, Native Peoples, and Genocides" . In Moses, A. Dirk (ed.).

Empire, Colony, Genocide: Conquest, Occupation, and Subaltern Resistance in World History . Oxford and New York: Berghahn. pp.

183– 204.

ISBN 978-1-84545-452-4 . Retrieved 22 April 2014 .

Lorge, Peter (29 March 2006).

War, Politics and Society in Early Modern China, 900–1795 . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-134-37286-7 .

v t e Racism Types of racism Aversive Colorism Covert Cultural Cyber Environmental Formal Gendered Institutional Internalized Patent Laissez-faire Linguistic Neocolonial Romantic Scientific Societal Substantive Symbolic Manifestations of racism Anti-miscegenation laws Apartheid Biological determinism Discrimination based on nationality Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic jokes Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Hate crime Hate speech Hate group Hypodescent / Hyperdescent Racial capitalism Racialization Racial hierarchy Racial nationalism Racial profiling Racial segregation Racism by region Global apartheid Africa South Africa Zimbabwe Asia China Japan North Korea South Korea Thailand Vietnam Arab world Libya Saudi Arabia Sudan Australia Europe Denmark France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Russia Soviet Union Spain Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Iran Israel Palestine Turkey North America Canada United States Mexico South America Argentina Brazil Chile Racism by target Arab Asians Chinese Chinese Americans Zainichi Chinese Japanese Japanese Americans Japanese Koreans Korean Zainichi Koreans Vietnamese Black African Americans Arab Women Mexican Native Americans Jewish Anti-racism Jewish Americans In Jewish communities LGBT Middle Eastern Muslim Romani Slavic Wine industry Racial supremacy Black supremacy White supremacy White Related topics Ableism Alt-right Anti-racism Casteism Ethnic plastic surgery Go back to where you came from Herrenvolk democracy Interminority racism in the United States Hispanics/Latinos Lynching Passing Perpetual foreigner Psychometrics of racism Race and sexuality Race card Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racial misrepresentation Racial figleaf Racial integration Racial quota Racism in sport in Australia Reverse racism Sociology of race and ethnic relations Xenophobia Category Commons Index v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Mongolian_sentiment&oldid=1306292270 " Categories : Anti–East Asian sentiment Anti-Mongolian sentiment Foreign relations of Mongolia Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia introduction cleanup from March 2022 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from March 2022 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles needing additional references from October 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with excerpts Articles containing Korean-language text This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 00:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Mongolian sentiment Add languages Add topic

