Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Writings 2 Notes 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Praxiphanes 9 languages Català Ελληνικά Español Français Italiano Nederlands Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek philosopher Praxiphanes ( Greek : Πραξιφάνης ) a Peripatetic philosopher, was a native of Mytilene , who lived a long time in Rhodes .

[ 1 ] He lived in the time of Demetrius Poliorcetes and Ptolemy I Soter , and was a pupil of Theophrastus , about 322 BC.

[ 2 ] He subsequently opened a school himself, in which Epicurus is said to have been one of his pupils.

[ 3 ] Praxiphanes paid special attention to grammatical studies, and is hence named along with Aristotle as the founder and creator of the science of grammar.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Writings [ edit ] Of the writings of Praxiphanes, which appear to have been numerous, two are especially mentioned, a Dialogue ποιητῶν ( Poiitón , 'Poetry') [ 6 ] in which Plato and Isocrates were the speakers, and an historical work cited by Marcellinus in his Life of Thucydides [ 7 ] under the title of Περὶ ἱστορίας ( Perí istorías , 'About History').

[ 5 ] Praxiphanes also wrote a works titled On Friendship , [ 8 ] On Rare Words , [ 9 ] On the Universe , [ 10 ] On Poems , and commentaries on Homer 's Odyssey , Hesiod 's Works and Days , Sophocles ' Oedipus at Colonus , and Plato 's Timaeus .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ Algra, K., The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy . Page 36. Cambridge University Press. (1999). Cf. Clement of Alexandria, i.; Strabo, xiv.

^ Proclus, i.

in Timaeum ; John Tzetzes, ad Hesiod. Op. et Dies , 1.

^ Diogenes Laërtius, x. 13 ^ Clement of Alexandria, i.

^ a b Smith 1870 .

^ Diogenes Laërtius, iii. 8 ^ Marcellinus, Thucydides , §29 ^ Carneiscus, Philistas fr. 95 ^ Demetrius, De elocutione 55-58 ^ Epiphanius, De fide 9.35-39 ^ Proclus, In Timaeum, 5c ^ Matelli 2018 , p. 76-78.

References [ edit ] Smith, William , ed. (1870).

"Praxiphanes" .

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .

Laërtius, Diogenes .

"Plato" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 1:3. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library.

Matelli, Elisabetta (12 January 2018). "Praxiphanes of Mytilene (called "of Rhodes"): The Sources, Text, and Translation".

Praxiphanes of Mytilene and Chamaeleon of Heraclea: Text, Translation, and Discussion . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-351-49713-8 . Retrieved 3 August 2023 .

Further reading [ edit ] Preller, Ludwig (1842).

De Praxiphane peripatetico inter antiquissimos grammaticos nobili disputatio. (Index scholarum in Univ. litt. Caesarea Dorpatensi) (in Latin). Schünmann . Retrieved 3 August 2023 .

Martano, Andrea, ed. (12 January 2018).

Praxiphanes of Mytilene and Chamaeleon of Heraclea: Text, Translation, and Discussion . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-351-49713-8 . Retrieved 3 August 2023 .

v t e Peripatetic philosophers Greek era Aristotle Eudemus Theophrastus Aristoxenus Chamaeleon Echecratides Phaenias Praxiphanes Neleus of Scepsis Dicaearchus Nicomachus Demetrius of Phalerum Strato of Lampsacus Clearchus Archestratus (music theorist) Hieronymus of Rhodes Lyco of Troas Aristo of Ceos Satyrus Critolaus Calliphon Diodorus of Tyre Erymneus Roman era Xenarchus of Seleucia Cratippus Apellicon of Teos Andronicus of Rhodes Aristo of Alexandria Boethus of Sidon Athenaeus Mechanicus Ammonius of Athens Alexander of Aegae Aristocles of Messene Aristocles of Pergamon Aristoxenus of Cyrene Aspasius Aristotle of Mytilene Adrastus Herminus Sosigenes Alexander of Aphrodisias Ptolemy-el-Garib Themistius Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Netherlands Norway Croatia Israel Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Praxiphanes&oldid=1253712615 " Categories : Ancient Greek grammarians Metic philosophers in Classical Athens Ancient Mytileneans Peripatetic philosophers 4th-century BC Greek philosophers Philosophers in ancient Rhodes Hellenistic-era philosophers in Athens Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers CS1 Latin-language sources (la) This page was last edited on 27 October 2024, at 13:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Praxiphanes 9 languages Add topic

