Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Judaism Toggle Judaism subsection 1.1 Contemporary Hasidic perspectives 2 Christianity Toggle Christianity subsection 2.1 The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints 3 Islam Toggle Islam subsection 3.1 Ahmadiyya 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Messianic Age 14 languages العربية Català Español Esperanto فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia עברית Malagasy مصرى Polski Português Русский Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Future period of time on Earth Part of a series on Eschatology Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Christian Biblical texts Book of Revelation Book of Daniel Olivet Discourse Sheep and Goats Major figures Jesus Two witnesses Four Horsemen Antichrist Different views Preterism Idealism Historicism Futurism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Other events Events of Revelation ( Apocalypse ) Rapture Armageddon Seven Seals Second Coming Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Pralaya Shiva Islamic Figures Beast of the Earth Dhul-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Isa Israfil Mahdi Dajjal Muhammad Al-Qa'im Sufyani Yajuj and Majuj Events Swallowing in Bayda Coming of the Mahdi Return of Isa Resurrection Jewish Biblical texts Book of Isaiah Book of Ezekiel Book of Zechariah Book of Daniel Other sources Rabbinic literature ( Mishnah , Talmud , Midrash ) Medieval Jewish scholars Kabbalah Figures Elijah the Prophet , Messiah ( Mashiach Ben David , Mashiach Ben Yosef ), Gog and Magog , Armilus Events and terms Atchalta De'Geulah , Kibbutz Galuyot , Third Temple , War of Gog and Magog , Resurrection of the dead , Olam Haba Norse Figures and items Bound monster Gjallarhorn Líf and Lífþrasir Naglfar Events Fimbulwinter Ragnarök Vígríðr Taoist Li Hong Divine Incantations Scripture Zoroastrian Frashokereti Saoshyant Inter-religious 2012 phenomenon Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Gog and Magog Last Judgment Messianism ( Messiah / Age ) Millenarianism Universal resurrection v t e In Abrahamic religions , the Messianic Age ( Hebrew : יְמוֹת הַמָשִׁיחַ ) is the future eternal period of time on Earth in which the messiah will reign and bring universal peace and brotherhood, without any evil (through mankind's own terms). Some refer to it as the consummate " kingdom of God " or the " world to come ".

Jews believe that such a figure is yet to come, while Christians believe that this figure is Jesus Christ .

Judaism [ edit ] According to Jewish tradition, the Messianic Era will be one of global peace and harmony; an era free of strife and hardship, conducive to the furtherment of the knowledge of the Creator. The theme of the Messiah ushering in an era of global peace is encapsulated in two of the most famous scriptural passages from the Book of Isaiah : They shall beat their swords into plowshares and their spears into pruning hooks; nation will not lift sword against nation and they will no longer study warfare.

— Isaiah 2:4 The wolf will live with the lamb, the leopard will lie down with the goat, the calf and the lion and the yearling together; and a little child will lead them. The cow will feed with the bear, their young will lie down together, and the lion will eat straw like the ox. The infant will play near the hole of the cobra, and the young child put his hand into the viper's nest. They will neither harm nor destroy on all my holy mountain, for the earth will be full of the knowledge of the Lord as the waters cover the sea.

— Isaiah 11:6-9 In his Mishneh Torah , Maimonides describes the Messianic Era: And at that time there will be no hunger or war, no jealousy or rivalry. For the good will be plentiful, and all delicacies available as dust.
The entire occupation of the world will be only to know God... the people Israel will be of great wisdom; they will perceive the esoteric truths and comprehend their Creator's wisdom as is the capacity of man. As it is written (Isaiah 11:9): "For the earth shall be filled with the knowledge of God, as the waters cover the sea.

— Mishneh Torah, Laws of Kings 12:5 According to the Talmud , [ 1 ] the Midrash , [ 2 ] and the Kabbalistic work, the Zohar , [ 3 ] the Messiah must arrive before the year 6000 from the time of creation. In Orthodox Jewish belief, the Hebrew calendar dates to the time of creation, making this correspond to the year 2240 on the Gregorian calendar .

The Midrash comments: "Six eons for going in and coming out, for war and peace. The seventh eon is entirely Shabbat and rest for life everlasting." [ 2 ] There is a kabbalistic tradition [ 4 ] that maintains that each of the seven days of the week, which are based upon the seven days of creation, correspond to the seven millennia of creation. The tradition teaches that the seventh day of the week, the Sabbath day of rest, corresponds to the seventh millennium, the age of universal 'rest' - the Messianic Era. The seventh millennium perforce begins with the year 6000, and is the latest time the Messiah can come. Supporting and elaborating on this theme are numerous early and late Jewish scholars, including Rabbeinu Bachya , [ 5 ] Abraham ibn Ezra , [ 6 ] the Ramban , [ 7 ] Isaac Abrabanel , [ 8 ] the Ramchal , [ 9 ] the Vilna Gaon , [ 10 ] Aryeh Kaplan , [ 11 ] and the Lubavitcher Rebbe .

[ 12 ] Contemporary Hasidic perspectives [ edit ] In contemporary Hasidic perspectives, particularly within Chabad thought, the concept of the Messianic Age is intimately tied to the doctrine of Dira Batachtonim —the idea that the divine purpose of creation is the establishment of a dwelling place for God within the material world. The Lubavitcher Rebbe , Rabbi Menachem Mendel Schneerson, emphasized that the world was on the threshold of redemption, and that human initiative through acts of goodness and mitzvot could directly precipitate the Messianic era. This approach placed a greater emphasis on human agency in bringing about redemption, contrasting with earlier Jewish traditions that, while acknowledging that human merit could hasten the Messiah’s arrival, ultimately regarded its timing as determined by divine will.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] The event that marked the start of the building of the messianic era was destruction of the 2nd Temple by the Romans in 70 CE and by subsequent times of the exile. They last until today. According to Yehuda Leib Schapiro, dean of the Yeshiva Gedola Rabbinical College of Greater Miami, what was old had to be destroyed to give room to the construction of the New Messianic Temple and to the future revelation of Ha-Shem that will surpass anything which is known until now. That is the meaning of the festival of Tisha B'Av .

[ 15 ] The Arizal teaches that the 7 Nations in Pentateuch [ 16 ] are 10: he includes also the Kenites and “the Mixed Multitude, [they] were the "Egyptians" [and others] that accompanied the Jewish peoples on their exodus from Egypt. Since their motives for conversion were not pure” .

[ 17 ] The Arizal has “a vision” about 2 people of the Kenites. The peoples of Amaleck are not really identified because that of Seir is about the Hittites, i.e.

Edom , “ Rome ”; this is not clear today because the exegesis of 70 Nations of Bible is the best in the Rabbanut-view, so it can’t be explained other.

Christianity [ edit ] Viktor Vasnetsov , the Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse See also: Messiah § Christianity , and Christian eschatology Christian understanding of the messianic age heavily depends on Jewish Scriptures , especially the prophets . The characteristic of the messianic age, as shown in the Scriptures, was to be an extraordinary outpouring of the Spirit on all people. It should bring them special gifts and charisms. Most eminent prophecies are found in the Book of Zechariah 4:6b; 6:8 and the Book of Joel 3:1-2 (cf. Nb 11:29).

Acts of the Apostles refer to them proclaiming that the word of the prophets was made flesh in Jesus on the day of Pentecost. Now, "he has received from the Father the Holy spirit, who was promised." (Acts 2:16-21.17.33) According to Isaiah , the messianic age was to have its anointed leader, the Messiah, who would be filled with the gifts of the spirit to be able to accomplish his saving work. (Is 11:1-3; 42:1; 61:1; see also Mt 3:16) [ 18 ] Jesus used miracles to convince people that he was inaugurating the messianic age. (cf. Mt 12:28). Scholars have described Jesus' miracles as establishing the kingdom during his lifetime.

[ 19 ] According to the Book of Ezekiel , apart from bestowing special charismatic gifts, the Spirit would build the messianic age in the hearts of people by exercising their inward renewal resulting in exceptional adherence to the Law of God (cf. Ezk 11:19; 36:26-27; 37:14; Ps 51:12-15; Is 32:15-19; Zc 12:10). According to the Book of Jeremiah , messianic times would be sealed by the new covenant , final and eternal one, written ″on their hearts″ (Jr 31:31). Paul spoke about that new covenant in his Second Epistle to the Corinthians 3:6.

Isaiah used the image of the life-giving water "poured out on the thirsty soil". People, "like willows on the banks of a stream" would have access to the Spirit which would enable them to bring fruits of integrity and holiness (Is 44:3) The Gospel of John would refer to that in the meeting of Jesus with the Samaritan woman at the well of Jacob : "the water that I shall give will become a spring of water within, welling up for eternal life." (Jn 4:14) Ezekiel would say that the holiness of the people would in turn be met by special love, favour and protection from God: "I will make a covenant of peace" and "set up my sanctuary among them for ever." (Ezk 37:24; 39:29) [ 18 ] Christian eschatology points out to gradual character of the Messianic Age. According to realized eschatology , the Messianic Era, a time of universal peace and brotherhood on the earth, without crime, war and poverty, to some extent, is already here. With the crucifixion of Jesus the Messianic Era had begun, but according to inaugurated eschatology it will be completed and brought to perfection by the parousia of Christ.

[ 20 ] In the past, the messianic age was sometimes interpreted in terms of Millenarianism . The Book of Revelation 20:2-3 gives an image of a 1000-year period in which Satan is to be bound so that he cannot influence those living on the Earth, and Jesus Christ will reign on the Earth with resurrected saints.  After that Satan will be defeated once and for all, the Earth and heaven will pass away,  and people will face judgment by Jesus Christ to determine whether or not they will enter the new heaven and earth that will be established. (Revelation 21) According to the Nicene Creed (381), professed by most Christians , after his ascension , enthronement at the Right hand of God , the time will come when Jesus will return to fully establish the Kingdom of God of the World to Come .

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints [ edit ] Members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints believe that after the second coming of Jesus, there will be a 1000-year period of peace on the Earth where Jesus reigns as king. Their beliefs of this time are very similar to the beliefs of Judaism and mainstream Christianity, but have a few additional thoughts: We believe in the literal gathering of Israel and in the restoration of the Ten Tribes ; that Zion (the New Jerusalem ) will be built upon the American continent; that Christ will reign personally upon the earth; and, that the earth will be renewed and receive its paradisiacal glory.

— Articles of Faith 1:10) During this time: Israel will be gathered (Isaiah 5:26, Jeremiah 30:3, Ezekiel 28:25, 1 Nephi 19:16).

The New Jerusalem will be built on the American continent (Revelation 3:12, 21:1-5, 3 Nephi 20:22, Ether 13:3-6, 10, Moses 7:62).

Earth will be restored to a state of paradise as it was in the Garden of Eden (Ezekiel 36:35).

The righteous dead will be resurrected as Jesus was (Revelation 20:4, D&C 29:11).

Satan will be bound and have no power over men (Revelation 20:1-3, D&C 45:55, 1 Nephi 22:26, 30:18).

Those who have not had a chance to receive the gospel of Jesus Christ have an opportunity to be taught and accept Him (Isaiah 11:9). Faithful disciples will aid in teaching the gospel (Isaiah 42:7, 61:1, Luke 4:18).

Salvation for the dead will be brought forth (1 Corinthians 15:29, Isaiah 49:9).

Islam [ edit ] The Quran states that Jesus was the Messiah and prophet sent to the Jews.

[ Quran 3:45 ] Muslims believe he is alive in Heaven, and will return to Earth to defeat the Masih ad-Dajjal , an anti-messiah comparable to the Christian Antichrist. It is disputed whether Isa's Messianic age will be for 40 days or for 40 years.

A hadith in Abu Dawud (37:4310) says: Narrated Abu Hurayrah: The Prophet said: There is no prophet between me and him, that is, Jesus. He will descend (to the earth). When you see him, recognise him: a man of medium height, reddish hair, wearing two light yellow garments, looking as if drops were falling down from his head though it will not be wet. He will fight for the cause of Islam. He will break the cross , kill the swine, and put an end to war (in another tradition, there is the word Jizyah instead of Harb (war), meaning that he will abolish jizyah); God will perish all religions except Islam. He [Jesus] will destroy the Antichrist who will live on the earth for forty days and then he will die. The Muslims will pray behind him.

Both Sunni and Shia Muslims agree the Mahdi will arrive first, and after him, Jesus. Jesus will proclaim that the true leader is the Mahdi. A war, literally jihad (Jihade Asghar) will be fought, the Dajjal against the Mahdi and Jesus. This war will mark the approach of the coming of the Last Day . After Jesus slays the Dajjāl at the Gate of Lud, he will bear witness and reveal that Islam is the true and final word from Allah to humanity as Yusuf Ali 's translation reads: [ Quran 4:159 ( Translated by Yusuf Ali )] And there is none of the People of the Book but must believe in him before his death; and on the Day of Judgment He will be a witness against them.― (159) He will live for several years, marry, have children, and will be buried in the fourth spot next to the Islamic prophet Muhammad and the first two caliphs Abu Bakr and Omar under the Green Dome in the Masjid Nabawi , Medina.

[ 21 ] A hadith in Sahih Bukhari (Sahih al-Bukhari, 4:55:658) says: Allah's Apostle said "How will you be when the son of Mary descends amongst you and your Imam is from amongst you." Very few scholars outside of mainstream Islam reject all the quotes (hadith) attributed to Muhammad that mention the second return of Jesus, the Dajjal and Imam Mahdi, believing that they have no Quranic basis. However, Quran emphatically rejects the implication of termination of Jesus' life when he was allegedly crucified. Yusuf Ali's translation reads: That they said (in boast), "We killed Christ Jesus the son of Mary, the Messenger of Allah";― but they killed him not, nor crucified him, but so it was made to appear to them and those who differ therein are full of doubts, with no (certain) knowledge, but only conjecture to follow, for of a surety they killed him not. (157) Nay, Allah raised him up unto Himself; and Allah is Exalted in Power, Wise. (158) [ Quran 4:157–158 ] So Peace is on me the day I was born, the day that I die and the day that I shall be raised up to life (again).

[ Quran 19:33 ] Many classical commentators such as Ibn Kathir , At-Tabari , al-Qurtubi , Suyuti , al-Undlusi (Bahr al-Muhit), Abu al-Fadl al-Alusi (Ruh al-Maani) clearly mention that sura az-Zukhruf verse 43:61 of the Quran refers to the descent of Jesus before the Day of Resurrection, indicating that Jesus would be the Sign that the Hour is close.

And (Jesus) shall be a Sign (for the coming of) the Hour (of Judgment): therefore have no doubt about the (Hour)...

[ Quran 43:61 ] Ahmadiyya [ edit ] In Ahmadiyya , the present age (the Messianic age) has been a witness to the wrath of God with the occurrence of the World Wars and the frequency of natural disasters.

[ 22 ] In Ahmadiyya, Ghulam Ahmad K.

(d.1908) is seen as the promised Messiah whose teachings will establish spiritual reform and ultimately establish an age of peace upon earth. This age continues for around a thousand years as per Judeo-Christian prophecies; and is characterised by the assembling of mankind under one faith as per Ahmadiyya belief.

[ 23 ] See also [ edit ] Millennialism is a belief held by some Christian denominations that there will be a Golden Age or Paradise on Earth in which "Christ will reign" for 1000 years prior to the final judgment.

References [ edit ] ^ Babylonian Talmud Rosh Hashana 31a and Sanhedrin 97a ^ a b Pirke De Rabbi Eliezer, Gerald Friedlander, Sepher-Hermon Press, New York, 1981, p. 141.

^ Zohar (1:117a) and Zohar Vayera 119a ^ Zohar, Vayera 119a ^ Bachya on Genesis 2:3 ^ Ramban quoting Ibn Ezra at Leviticus (25:2) ^ Ramban on Genesis (2:3) ^ Abarbanel on Genesis 2 ^ Derech Hashem 4:7:2 ^ Safra D'Tzniusa, Ch. 5 ^ Page 318, The Real Messiah, online access ^ Sefer HaSichos 5750:254 ^ "What Does It Mean to "Bring Moshiach"?" .

Chabad.org . Kehot Publication Society . Retrieved 2025-06-05 .

^ "Making a Dwelling in the Lowest Realms" .

Chabad.org . Kehot Publication Society . Retrieved 2025-06-05 .

^ Schapiro, Yehuda Leib.

"The Chassidic Approach to the Three Weeks and Tisha B'Av. Why Tisha B'Av will be a festival in the messianic era?" .

Chabad.org . Jewish.tv . Retrieved 2018-07-19 .

The teachings of chassidus look beyond the surface of the terrible destruction of the Holy Temple and the subsequent exile, which we mourn during the 3 weeks, and finds the hidden good embedded inside — offering insight into why they'll ultimately be transformed into joyous holidays in the times of Moshiach.

^ Deuteronomy 7 : the Hittites, the Girgashites, the Amorites, the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Hivites and the Jebusites ^ Evil among the Nations (www.kabbalaonline.org) ^ a b "Footnote f to Ezk 36:27".

The New Jerusalem Bible . London: Darton, Longman & Todd. 1985. p. 1451.

^ Brown, Raymond E.

; et al. (1990).

The New Jerome Biblical Commentary, ch. 78:20; 81:106,112,113,117 . Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice Hall.

ISBN 0-13-614934-0 .

^ George Eldon Ladd , A Theology of the New Testament (1993) ISBN 0-8028-0680-5 , page 70 .

^ "Isa", Encyclopedia of Islam ^ "Prophecies of the Promised Messiah -- www.aaiil.org" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-05-26 . Retrieved 2010-03-27 .

^ The Review of Religions , January 2009, Vol.104, issue 1. p. 18-22 v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Messianic_Age&oldid=1297996159 " Categories : Apocalypticism Bahá'í terminology Christian eschatology Christian terminology Islamic terminology Islamic eschatology Messianism Jewish eschatology Judaism terminology Biblical cosmology Mythical utopias Periodization Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Hebrew-language text This page was last edited on 29 June 2025, at 21:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Messianic Age 14 languages Add topic

