Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Prelude 2 Battle 3 Aftermath 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Battle of Munychia 5 languages Español Italiano Nederlands Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 37°56′28″N 23°39′22″E ﻿ / ﻿ 37.941°N 23.656°E ﻿ / 37.941; 23.656 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 404/403 BC Athenian defeat of the pro-Spartan Thirty Tyrants This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Battle of Munychia" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2024 ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Battle of Munychia" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Battle of Munychia Part of Phyle Campaign Map showing the three battles of the Phyle Campaign Date 404 BC or 403 BC Location Munychia hill, in Piraeus Result Athenian exile victory Belligerents Athenian exiles Thirty Tyrants Commanders and leaders Thrasybulus Critias † Strength 1,000 [ citation needed ] Several thousand Casualties and losses Light 70 killed v t e Phyle Campaign Phyle Munychia Piraeus The Battle of Munychia was fought between Athenians exiled by the oligarchic government of the Thirty Tyrants and the forces of that government, supported by a Spartan garrison.  In the battle, a substantially superior force composed of the Spartan garrison of Athens and the army of the oligarchic government attacked a hill in Piraeus (the Munychia ) which had been seized by 1,000 exiles under Thrasybulus , but was defeated.  After this defeat, the Thirty Tyrants were forced to flee to Eleusis .

Prelude [ edit ] In late 404 BC, Thrasybulus, with other Athenian exiles, had seized Phyle , a strong point on the Athenian border.  He and his men resisted an abortive attempt to dislodge them and then, as their numbers were swelled by new recruits, ambushed the Spartan garrison of Athens, which had been dispatched to watch them.  Shortly after this victory, the men from Phyle, now 1,000 strong, marched by night to Piraeus, the port of Athens.  There, being too few to defend the entire port, they seized one of its prominent hills, the Munychia.  The next morning, the forces of the Thirty marched out to meet them.

[ 1 ] Battle [ edit ] The Athenian exiles drew up for battle in a formation ten ranks deep at the top of the Munychia, with light troops and spear throwers behind them.  Below, in one of the markets of Piraeus, the joint Spartan-oligarchic force drew up in a formation of equal width, but fifty ranks deep.  The Spartan garrison held the right, the forces of the Thirty the left.  Xenophon's account of the battle states that Thrasybulus, to inspire his men, reminded them that the enemy right was composed of men whom they had routed a few days before, while the left was made up of men who had wrongly driven them from their country.

[ 2 ] The oligarchic forces advanced up the road towards the top of the hill, but before they reached the top the men from Phyle charged down the hill at them.  This charge broke the oligarchic line, and the exiles pursued their enemies down the hill onto the level ground.  In this rout, seventy men of the Thirty's force were killed.  Among the dead was Critias , the leader of the Thirty; several other prominent oligarchic leaders were also killed, including Charmides .

[ 3 ] Aftermath [ edit ] After this battle, the prestige of the Thirty, already weakened by the earlier defeat near Phyle, was irreparably damaged.  The next day the Thirty were deposed by a vote of the larger oligarchic governing body, the council of three thousand.  The Thirty fled to Eleusis , and a governing board of ten was elected in their place.  This new government, however, was not ready to compromise with the men in Piraeus, so envoys were sent to Sparta to request aid.  A Spartan force under Pausanias was dispatched to deal with the situation; after a face saving  victory at the Battle of Piraeus , Pausanias arranged a settlement between the oligarchs and exiles and restored democracy in Athens.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Xenophon, Hellenica 2.4.10-11 ^ Xenophon, Hellenica 2.4.11-14 ^ Xenophon, Hellenica 2.4.18-19 References [ edit ] Buck, Robert J., Thrasybulus and the Athenian Democracy:  the life of an Athenian statesman .  (Franz Steiner Verlag, 1998) ISBN 3-515-07221-7 Fine, John V.A.

The Ancient Greeks: A critical history (Harvard University Press, 1983) ISBN 0-674-03314-0 Hornblower, Simon, and Anthony Spawforth ed., The Oxford Classical Dictionary (Oxford University Press, 2003) ISBN 0-19-866172-X Xenophon (1890s) [original 4th century BC].

Hellenica . Translated by Henry Graham Dakyns – via Wikisource .

37°56′28″N 23°39′22″E ﻿ / ﻿ 37.941°N 23.656°E ﻿ / 37.941; 23.656 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Battle_of_Munychia&oldid=1297529919 " Categories : Battles involving ancient Athens Battles involving Sparta 404 BC 403 BC 400s BC conflicts Battles of the Phyle Campaign History of Piraeus Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking reliable references from July 2024 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2010 Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 June 2025, at 19:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Battle of Munychia 5 languages Add topic

