Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 UN Habitat 3 Implementations Toggle Implementations subsection 3.1 South Africa 3.2 United States 3.3 Nigeria 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Right to housing 39 languages العربية অসমীয়া Bikol Central Català Čeština Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Fulfulde Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Македонски Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Twi Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economic, social and cultural right Logo of the Plataforma d'Afectats per la Hipoteca, a Catalan housing rights advocacy group, which means "Stop Evictions" Part of a series on Housing Types House ( detached semi-detached terraced ) Apartment Bungalow Cottage Ecohouse Executive Green home Human outpost I-house Ranch Tenement Luxury Mixed-use development Hotel Hostel Castle Flophouse Shack Slum Shanty town Villa Ownership Community land trust Condominium Cooperative Informal Owner-occupancy Public housing Squat Issues Environmental Design Planning Racism Security Healthiness Crisis Affordability By country Index Subsidized Home mortgage interest deduction Inequality Housing discrimination Redlining Development Building code Economics Permit Planning Participatory Conflict Impact fee NIMBY YIMBY Zoning Rent Control Regulation Strike Tenants union Investing Appraisal Bubble Price index Subprime lending Sustainable Architecture Development Living City Homelessness Eviction Just cause Tenant right to counsel Housing First Stress Rapid Re-Housing Right to housing Other 15-minute city Alternative lifestyle Assisted living Boomtown Cottage homes Eco-cities Ecovillage Foster care Green building Group home Halfway house Healthy community design Homeless shelter Hospital Local community Log house Natural building Nursing home Orphanage Prison Psychiatric hospital Residential care Residential treatment center Retirement community Retirement home Supportive housing Supported living Housing portal v t e Rights Theoretical distinctions Claim rights and liberty Individual and group Natural rights and legal Negative and positive Human rights Civil and political Economic, social and cultural Three generations Rights by beneficiary Accused Animals Autistic Children Consumers Creditors Deaf Disabled Elders Family Fetus Farmers Humans Indigenous Intersex Kings LGBTQ Transgender Life Men Minorities Parents Fathers Mothers Patients Peasants Plants Prisoners Robots States Students Victims Effective remedy Women Workers Youth Other groups of rights Assembly Association Asylum Civil liberties Clothing Development Digital Education Environment Fair trial Food Free migration Guns Health Housing Linguistic Movement Property Public participation Repair Resist Rest and leisure Revolution Security Sexual and Reproductive Abortion Reproductive Sexuality Self defense Self-determination Speech Water and sanitation v t e The right to housing (occasionally right to shelter [ 1 ] ) is the economic, social and cultural right to adequate housing and shelter . It is recognized in some national constitutions and in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights .

[ 2 ] The right to housing is regarded as a freestanding right in the International human rights law which was clearly in the 1991 General Comment on Adequate Housing by the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights. The aspect of the right to housing under ICESCR include: availability of services, infrastructure, material and facilities; legal security of tenure; habitability; accessibility; affordability ; location and cultural adequacy.

[ 3 ] The UN Human Settlement Programme is known as UN-HABITAT.

[ 4 ] At least 84 states make an explicit reference to housing rights in their constitutions.

[ 5 ] Definition [ edit ] Homeless sleeping on Paulista Avenue, São Paulo , Brazil "Housing Is A Human Right" Article 25 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights recognizes the right to housing.

It states that: Everyone has the right to a standard of living adequate for the health and well-being of himself and of his family, including food, clothing, housing and medical care and necessary social services, and the right to security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of livelihood in circumstances beyond his control.

Sleeping, homeless children in early 20th-century New York City taken by Jacob Riis In the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR), article 11(1) also guarantees the right to housing.

[ 6 ] In international human rights law the right to housing is regarded as a freestanding right. This was clarified in the 1991 General Comment no 4 on Adequate Housing by the UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights .

[ 7 ] The Yogyakarta Principles on the application of international human rights law in relation to sexual orientation and gender identity affirm that: [ 8 ] Everyone has the right to adequate housing, including protection from eviction , without discrimination and that States shall a) take all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures to ensure security of tenure and access to affordable , habitable, accessible, culturally appropriate and safe housing, not including shelters and other emergency accommodation, without discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation, gender identity or material or family status; b) take all necessary legislative, administrative and other measures to prohibit the execution of evictions that are not in conformity with their international human rights obligations, and ensure that adequate and effective legal or other appropriate remedies are available to any person claiming that a right to protection against forced evictions has been violated or is under threat of violation, including the right to resettlement, which includes the right to alternative land of better or equal quality and to adequate housing, without discrimination.

The right to housing is also enshrined in Article 28 of the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities , Article 16 of the European Social Charter (Article 31 of the Revised European Social charter) and in the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights .

[ 9 ] According to UN Committee on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, aspects of right to housing under ICESCR include: legal security of tenure ; availability of services, materials, facilities and infrastructure; affordability; habitability; accessibility; location and cultural adequacy.

[ 3 ] As a political goal, right to housing was declared in F. D. Roosevelt's 1944 speech on the Second Bill of Rights .

UN Habitat [ edit ] The simplified logo of UN Habitat The right to adequate housing was a main theme in the Istanbul Agreement and Habitat Agenda. This includes a rule to "promote, protect and ensure the full and progressive realisation of the right to adequate housing" in Paragraph 61. The UN Human Settlement Programme was created during 2001. The programme is the most important international forum for the right to housing.

[ 10 ] Implementations [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( January 2019 ) South Africa [ edit ] One of the seven focus areas by the South African human right is The Right to Adequate House and this is beyond the mere provision of building materials.

The rights such as the right to public participation, equality, human dignity, and access to information are amongst the cross cutting rights linked with right to adequate housing as noted by the Constitutional Court in Government of the Republic of South Africa and Others v Grootboom and Others 2001 (1) SA 46 (CC) [ 11 ] In South Africa , section 26 of Chapter Two of the Constitution establishes that "everyone has the right to have access to adequate housing". The Department of Human Settlements is tasked with implementing this mandate. Based on recent data, around 3.6 million South Africans still live in shacks or informal settlements (2013 data), [ 12 ] while it is estimated that around 200,000 are homeless or living on the streets (2015 data).

[ 13 ] Based on a survey of human rights experts administered by the Human Rights Measurement Initiative in 2019, South Africa is doing only 69.6% of what should be possible at its level of income on the right to housing.

[ 14 ] United States [ edit ] 2020 protest against evictions in Minneapolis , Minnesota Further information: Subsidized housing in the United States Most jurisdictions in the United States have no right to shelter. One exception is Massachusetts , where families (but not homeless individuals) do have the right to shelter.

[ 15 ] In California , runaway children have the right to be admitted to emergency shelters without parental consent .

[ 16 ] New York City also recognizes a right to emergency shelter, established in the 1981 consent decree for Callahan v. Carey .

[ 17 ] Nigeria [ edit ] The right to housing is recognized in the 1999 constitution , specifically in section 43 which states that "every citizen of Nigeria shall have the right to acquire and own immovable property anywhere in Nigeria".

[ 18 ] It further stated in section 44 that 'no movable property or any interest in immovable property shall be taken possession of compulsorily and no right over or interest in any such property shall be acquired compulsorily in any part of Nigeria except in the manner and for purposes prescribed by law that, among other things:  requires the prompt payment of compensation and ensures parties access to the court for the determination of his interest in the property and the amount of compensation payable". The provisions of Section 16(2)(d) of the constitution in the Fundamental Objectives and Directive Principles of State Policy , which states that "the state shall direct its policy towards ensuring that suitable and adequate shelter is provided for all citizens" implies the recognition of the need to provide shelter for citizens but such right excludes right to adequate housing .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Additionally, Section 6(6)  (c)  of the constitution declared the Fundamental Objectives and Directive Principles non-justiciable.

[ 19 ] The housing conditions of people in Nigeria falls short of the international human rights law and standards, particularly vulnerable groups such as women, indigenous people , LGBTQ , internally displaced persons and people living with disability (PLW) in the rural settings of Abuja , Lagos and Port Harcourt .

[ 20 ] In 2014, WHO and UNICEF stated that 69% of the urban population of Nigeria were living in ' slums ' without basic amenities like potable water, sanitation services, electricity, garbage collection , and paved roads . Also, the 2013 Nigerian Demographic and Health Survey revealed that 57 million and 130 million Nigerians had no access to safe water and adequate sanitation respectively.

[ 20 ] According to the Federal Mortgage Bank of Nigeria , there was a deficit of 22 million housing units in 2019. The Lagos state government stated that the housing deficit in the state is at 2.5 million units, with 70 percent of its total population living in informal housing. There is a 20 percent yearly housing demand increase in Abuja , Ibadan and Kano . Generally, private market housing can only be affordable by a few. There is scarce rental housing which demand tenants to have advance rent of more than one year. Rent control or caps are not given attention in addition to landlord–tenant relations, with regulation laws poorly enforced.

[ 20 ] Based on a survey of human rights experts administered by the Human Rights Measurement Initiative in 2019, Nigeria is doing only 35.5% of what should be possible at its level of income on the right to housing.

[ 21 ] See also [ edit ] Civil Rights Act of 1968 – U.S. legislation which includes the Fair Housing Act Dahiya doctrine Housing Benefit Housing estate Housing First Housing crisis Public housing Section 8 Subsidized housing Tenants unions References [ edit ] ^ Mishra, Prafulla C. (1998).

"Right to Shelter: A Human Richt Perspective" .

Journal of the Indian Law Institute .

40 (1/4): 230– 242.

ISSN 0019-5731 .

JSTOR 43953319 .

^ Edgar, Bill; Doherty, Joe; Meert, Henk (2002).

Access to housing: homelessness and vulnerability in Europe .

The Policy Press . pp.

16– 17.

ISBN 978-1-86134-482-3 .

^ a b The right to adequate housing (Art.11 (1)). CESCR General comment 4 – see para. 8 ^ Edgar 2002, p. 17 ^ Pattillo, Mary (2024).

"Housing as a Right" .

Journal of the American Planning Association .

90 (4): 782.

doi : 10.1080/01944363.2024.2386911 .

ISSN 0194-4363 .

^ Edgar 2002, p. 16 ^ Terminski, Bogumil (2011).

"The right to adequate housing in international human rights law: Polish transformation experiences" (PDF) .

Revista Latinoamericana de Derechos Humanos .

22 (2): 219– 241.

ISSN 1659-4304 . Retrieved December 20, 2014 .

^ The Yogyakarta Principles, Principle 15. The Right to Adequate Housing ^ ACHR decision in case SERAC v. Nigeria – see para. 60 (p. 25) Archived 2012-02-20 at the Wayback Machine ^ Edgar 2002, p. 17 ^ "Legal case in South Africa" .

Researchgate .

^ Informal settlements in South Africa (PDF) (Report). Housing Development Agency. August 2013.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 April 2016.

^ "Homelessness in South Africa" .

wp.wpi.edu . Retrieved 2019-06-19 .

^ "Quality of Life Overview - South Africa" .

Rights Tracker . Human Rights Measurement Initiative . Retrieved 4 May 2023 .

^ "Who is eligible under right to shelter" ^ A Handbook on California's "Right to Shelter Law" ^ "Opinion | A Right to Shelter in New York" .

The New York Times . 2016-05-24.

Archived from the original on 2023-04-30.

^ a b "Fundamental Right To Property And Right To Housing In Nigeria – A Discourse" .

ResearchGate . Retrieved 2022-03-05 .

^ a b Emeka Chegwe (March 2014).

"The right to housing in the context of Nigerian law and human rights practice" .

Acta Juridica Hungarica .

55 (1): 21– 37.

doi : 10.1556/AJur.55.2014.1.2 – via ResearchGate.

^ a b c "OHCHR | Visit to the Republic of Nigeria by Ms. Leilani Farha, Special Rapporteur on adequate housing as a component of the right to an adequate standard of living, and on the right to non-discrimination in this context" .

www.ohchr.org . Retrieved 2022-03-05 .

^ "Quality of Life Overview - Nigeria" .

Rights Tracker . Human Rights Measurement Initiative . Retrieved 4 May 2023 .

External links [ edit ] Special Rapporteur on adequate housing as a component of the right to an adequate standard of living , UN Report to UN HRC, 2008. A/HRC/7/16 Report to UN HRC, 2009. A/HRC/13/20 International standards of the right to housing Housing Rights Legislation: Review of International and National Legal Instruments CESCR General comments: The right to adequate housing (Art.11 (1)). CESCR General comment 4 , 1991 The right to adequate housing (Art.11.1): forced evictions. CESCR General comment 7 , 1997 Factsheet on right to housing , UN CoE Commissioner for Human Rights: Recommendation on the implementation of the right to housing , 2009 Housing Rights: The Duty to Ensure Housing for All , 2008 "No one should have to be homeless – adequate housing is a right" , 2007 Interpretation and application of Article 31 of RESC //Digest of the Case Law of the European Committee on Social Rights, 2008. pp. 169–173, 349—355 Right to Housing Geneva: CETIM, 2007.

Housing is a human right: How Finland is eradicating homelessness .

Canadian Broadcasting Corporation (CBC). Published 24 January 2020.

v t e Substantive human rights What is considered a human right is in some cases controversial; not all the topics listed are universally accepted as human rights Civil and political Equality before the law Freedom from arbitrary arrest and detention Freedom of assembly Freedom of association Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Freedom from discrimination Freedom of information Freedom of movement Freedom of religion Freedom from slavery Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from torture LGBT rights Liberty Nationality Personhood Presumption of innocence Access to justice Right of asylum Right to die Right to a fair trial Right to counsel Right to family life Right to keep and bear arms Right to life Right to petition Right to privacy Right to protest Right to refuse medical treatment Right to resist Right of return Right of self-defense Right to truth Security of person Speedy trial Suffrage right to be a candidate Right to homeland Economic, social and cultural Digital rights Equal pay for equal work Fair remuneration Labor rights Right to an adequate standard of living Right to clothing Right to development Right to education Right to food Right to health Right to a healthy environment Right to housing Right to Internet access Right to property Right to public participation Right of reply Right to rest and leisure Right of return Right to science and culture Right to social security Right to water Right to work Sexual and reproductive Abortion Family planning Family rights Freedom from involuntary female genital mutilation Freedom from forced circumcision Intersex human rights LGBT rights Sexual and reproductive health Right to sexuality v t e Homelessness People Aged people Beggar Cyber-homeless Families Gutter punk McRefugee Mole people Street people Street children Social orphan Vagrants Bergie Tramps Hobos Youth Issues Anti-homelessness legislation Bill of Rights Bumvertising Discrimination Mental health Patient dumping Popular culture Spirituality Vulnerability Index Pets Survival sex Social cleansing Slum clearance Responses Soup kitchen Hygiene program Homeless ministry Homelessness services List Street newspaper List Shelters Homeless shelter Cooling center Drop-in center Four penny coffin Two-penny hangover Penny sit-up Warming center Women's shelter Homeless Friendly Precincts Housing Foyers Housing First Rapid Re-Housing Right to housing Single-room occupancy (SRO) Squatting Tent city Transitional housing Awareness Homelessness Action Week Homeless Persons' Week Homeless World Cup International Year of Shelter for the Homeless Street Child World Cup Youth Homelessness Matters Day By country Africa Algeria Egypt Ghanaian children South Africa Americas Canada Vancouver Latin American children United States LGBTQ youth Veterans Women California San Francisco Colorado Columbus Florida Minneapolis New Mexico Oregon Seattle Elsewhere Asia Bangladeshi children China India children Indonesia Iraq Israel Japan North Korea Filipino children Thai children Europe East Eastern European children Hungary Russia North Denmark Finland Ireland Sweden United Kingdom England Scotland South Greece Portugal Spain Vatican City West France Germany Netherlands Switzerland Oceania Australia Papua New Guinea New Zealand Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Right_to_housing&oldid=1297352336 " Categories : Right to housing Housing Human rights by issue Housing rights activism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles to be expanded from January 2019 All articles to be expanded This page was last edited on 25 June 2025, at 17:14 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Right to housing 39 languages Add topic

