Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concepts Toggle Concepts subsection 1.1 Network-based theories 1.2 Other modern theorists 2 See also 3 Endnotes 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Urbanism 38 languages العربية Asturianu বাংলা Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Fulfulde Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua עברית Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi தமிழ் ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of peoples interactions with their city's infrastructure This article is about the character of urban life. For other uses, see Urbanism (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Orbanism .

Urbanism is the study of how inhabitants of urban areas, such as towns and cities , interact with the built environment . It is a direct component of disciplines such as urban planning , a profession focusing on the design and management of urban areas, and urban sociology , an academic field which studies urban life.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Many architects , planners , geographers , and sociologists investigate the way people live in densely populated urban areas . There is a wide variety of different theories and approaches to the study of urbanism.

[ 3 ] However, in some contexts internationally, urbanism is synonymous with urban planning , and urbanist refers to an urban planner .

The term urbanism originated in the late nineteenth century with the Spanish civil engineer Ildefons Cerdà , whose intent was to create an autonomous activity focused on the spatial organization of the city.

[ 4 ] Urbanism's emergence in the early 20th century was associated with the rise of centralized manufacturing , mixed-use neighborhoods , social organizations and networks, and what has been described as "the convergence between political, social and economic citizenship ".

[ 5 ] Urbanism can be understood as placemaking and the creation of place identity at a citywide level, however as early as 1938 Louis Wirth wrote that it is necessary to stop 'identify[ing] urbanism with the physical entity of the city', go 'beyond an arbitrary boundary line ' and consider how 'technological developments in transportation and communication have enormously extended the urban mode of living beyond the confines of the city itself.' [ 6 ] Concepts [ edit ] Urbanism theory writers of the late 20th century Network-based theories [ edit ] Gabriel Dupuy applied network theory to the field of urbanism and suggests that the single dominant characteristic of modern urbanism is its networked character, as opposed to segregated conceptions of space (i.e.

zones , boundaries and edges).

[ 7 ] Stephen Graham and Simon Marvin [ who?

] argue that we are witnessing a post-urban environment where decentralized, loosely connected neighborhoods and zones of activity assume the former organizing role played by urban spaces. Their theory of splintering urbanism involves the "fragmentation of the social and material fabric of cities" into "cellular clusters of globally connected high-service enclaves and network ghettos " driven by electronic networks that segregate as much as they connect. Dominique Lorrain argues that the process of splintering urbanism began towards the end of the 20th century with the emergence of the gigacity , a new form of a networked city characterised by three-dimensional size, network density and the blurring of city boundaries.

[ 8 ] Manuel Castells suggested that within a network society , "premium" infrastructure networks (high-speed telecommunications , "smart" highways , global airline networks ) selectively connect together the most favored users and places and bypass the less favored.

[ 8 ] Graham and Marvin argue that attention to infrastructure networks is reactive to crises or collapse , rather than sustained and systematic, because of a failure to understand the links between urban life and urban infrastructure networks.

Other modern theorists [ edit ] Douglas Kelbaugh identifies three paradigms within urbanism: New Urbanism , Everyday Urbanism , and Post-Urbanism.

[ 9 ] Paul L. Knox refers to one of many trends in contemporary urbanism as the " aestheticization of everyday life ".

[ 10 ] Alex Krieger states that urban design is less a technical discipline than a mind-set based on a commitment to cities.

[ 11 ] Other contemporary urbanists such as Edward Soja and Liz Ogbu focus on urbanism as a field for applying principles of community building and spatial justice .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] See also [ edit ] New urbanism Ecological urbanism extends on concepts of Landscape urbanism Feminist urbanism Green urbanism Landscape urbanism , an urbanism where cities are seen though the lens of landscape architecture and ecology Latino urbanism Principles of Intelligent Urbanism Sustainable Urbanism Unitary urbanism , a critique of urbanism as a technology of power by the situationists Urban economics , the application of economic models and tools to analyse the urban issues such as crime, house and public transit Urban geography Urbanate , a living environment envisioned by the Technocracy movement Urban vitality World Urbanism Day Endnotes [ edit ] ^ Wirth, Louis (1938).

"Urbanism as a Way of Life" (PDF) .

American Journal of Sociology .

^ "Urbanism" .

obo . Retrieved 2023-08-05 .

^ Barnett, Jonathan (April 2011). "A Short Guide to 60 of the Newest Urbanisms".

Planning .

77 (4): 19– 21.

ISSN 0001-2610 .

OCLC 1762461 .

^ Caves, R. W. (2004).

Encyclopedia of the City . Routledge. p. 734.

ISBN 978-0415862875 .

^ Blokland-Potters, Talja, and Savage, Mike (2008).

Networked Urbanism: Social Capital in the City.

Ashgate Publishing.

^ Wirth, Louis (1938).

"Urbanism as a Way of Life" (PDF) .

American Journal of Sociology .

44 (1): 1– 24.

doi : 10.1086/217913 .

ISSN 0002-9602 .

S2CID 145174761 .

^ Dupuy, Gabriel (2008).

Urban networks : network urbanism . J. van Schaick, I. T. Klaasen, Technische Universiteit Delft. Faculteit der Bouwkunde. Amsterdam, the Netherlands: Techne Press.

ISBN 978-90-8594-019-7 .

OCLC 179789433 .

^ a b Graham, Steve; Marvin, Simon (2001).

Splintering Urbanism: Networked Infrastructures, Technological Mobilities and the Urban Condition (1st ed.). London: Routledge.

doi : 10.4324/9780203452202 .

ISBN 978-0-203-45220-2 .

^ Kelbaugh, Douglas (2009), Three Urbanisms and the Public Realm [ ISBN missing ] ^ Knox, Paul L. (2010-07-12).

Cities and Design (1st ed.). Routledge. p. 10.

doi : 10.4324/9780203848555 .

ISBN 978-1-136-94917-3 .

^ Krieger, Alex; Saunders, William S. (2009-01-01).

Urban Design . U of Minnesota Press. p. 113.

ISBN 978-1-4529-1412-1 .

^ Soja, Edward (2003). "Writing the city spatially".

City .

7 (3): 269– 280.

doi : 10.1080/1360481032000157478 .

S2CID 144964310 .

^ Cary, John (2018).

"Design Journeys: Liz Ogbu" .

American Institute of Graphic Arts .

[ permanent dead link ] External links [ edit ] International Forum on Urbanism v t e Urban planning History Theories Index Outline General Urban area City Metropolitan area Suburb Land use Planning Planning and zoning commission Growth management World Urbanism Day Labor market area Major branches General Land-use planning Comprehensive planning (US) History of urban planning Spatial planning (Eur) Redevelopment Urban design Urban green space Urbanism Rural Conservation development Preservation development Rural housing Village design statement (UK) Regional planning Regional Planning Association of America Environmental planning Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Recreation resource planning Sustainable development Transportation planning Transportation forecasting Trip distribution Rational planning model Transit-oriented development Professional transportation planner Urban freight distribution Economic development Community economic development Concepts/ theories Movements Athens Charter Car-free movement City Beautiful movement Dark-sky movement Garden city movement Indigenous planning NIMBY New Urbanism Settlement movement Smart growth Structuralism Transition towns YIMBY Theories Collaborative planning Context theory Ekistics Intelligent urbanism Livable streets Market urbanism Radical planning Urban renewal Cities by type Company town / Monotown Commuter town Ghost town Global city Mining community Pit village Man camp Logging camp Model village Planned community (New town) Intentional community Arcology Urban village Boomtown Concepts Affordable housing Cityscape Cluster development Complete Communities Conservation community Creative city Eminent domain (US) Filtering (housing) Gentrification / Brusselization Infill Healthy cities / Healthy community design LEED-ND Leapfrog development Mixed-use development Permeability Placemaking Planning gain Planning Permission Rural flight Temporary use Third place Tract housing Transferable development rights Urban decay Urban growth boundary Urban sprawl / Peri-urbanisation Urban vitality Urbanization Verticalization / High-rise urbanism Zoning People Theorists/ practitioners Edward Bassett Andrés Duany Clarence Perry Clarence Stein Colin Buchanan Daniel Burnham Donald Appleyard Ebenezer Howard Edmund Bacon Guy Benveniste Ian McHarg James Rouse Konstantinos Doxiadis Kevin A. Lynch Le Corbusier Loretta Lees Peter Calthorpe Patrick Geddes Raymond Unwin Thomas Adams List of urban theorists List of urban planners Critics Elizabeth Farrelly Jane Jacobs James Howard Kunstler Lewis Mumford Randal O'Toole Training Planning education Planning Accreditation Board Real estate education Professional organizations Places Countries Australia China Czech Republic Russia Serbia Singapore United Kingdom Taiwan Cities Barcelona Shanghai Sydney Other Africa Communist countries Nazi Germany Ancient Egypt Related fields Architecture Civil engineering Development economics Environmental social science Geography Land development Landscape architecture Marine spatial planning Public health Public policy Real estate development Social sciences Urban ecology Urban economics Cities portal Category List of planned cities List of planning journals Commons Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Urbanism&oldid=1306194006 " Categories : Urban planning 2010s fads and trends 2020s fads and trends Hidden categories: Pages with missing ISBNs All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from May 2018 This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 12:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Urbanism 38 languages Add topic

