Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins Toggle Origins subsection 1.1 Derrida 1.2 Foucault 1.3 French feminism 2 Theory Toggle Theory subsection 2.1 Haraway 2.2 Butler 2.3 Frug 3 Criticism 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Postmodern feminism 18 languages العربية বাংলা Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն עברית Кыргызча Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Feminism that rejects a universal female subject This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Postmodern feminism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Postmodernism Preceded by Modernism Postmodernity Deconstruction Hypermodernity Hyperreality Posthumanism Post-structuralism Fields Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Criminology Dance Feminism Film Television Literature ( Picture books ) Music International relations Philosophy Anarchism Marxism Postpositivism Psychology Political science Theatre Theology and Religion Reactions Criticism Metamodernism Post-postmodernism Remodernism v t e Postmodern feminism is a branch of feminism that opposes a universal female subject.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Drawing on postmodern philosophy , postmodern feminism questions traditional ideas about gender, identity, and power, while emphasizing the socially constructed and fluid nature of these concepts.

[ 2 ] Postmodern feminists argue that language constructs reality and that power is embedded in social norms, shaping identities and limiting agency. They seek to challenge traditional binary oppositions (e.g., man/woman, culture/nature) and deconstruct hierarchies.

[ 1 ] The inclusion of postmodern theory into feminist theory is not readily accepted by all feminists—some believe postmodern thought undermines the attacks that feminism attempts to create, while other feminists are in favor of the union.

[ 4 ] Origins [ edit ] Derrida [ edit ] Jacques Derrida (1930-2004) challenged the idea of a singular, objective truth or "transcendental signifier ," arguing instead that meaning is constructed through an endless chain of signifiers that refer only to each other. He introduced the concept of différance to illustrate how language operates through contrasts and perpetual deferral of meaning. His work underscores the idea that language does not represent reality but actively constructs it.

[ 1 ] Foucault [ edit ] Michel Foucault (1926-1984) viewed power as a diffuse and pervasive force that shapes individual subjectivity. In his framework, power is not merely repressive but productive, operating through institutions, norms, and internalized self-surveillance. He suggested that recognizing these power dynamics can enable individuals to challenge and reconstitute their subjectivities.

[ 1 ] French feminism [ edit ] Main article: French feminist theory French feminism, as it is known today, is not a self-defined school of thought originating in France, but rather an Anglo-American construct. It describes a certain body of theory associated with French-speaking thinkers—particularly Hélène Cixous , Luce Irigaray , and Julia Kristeva .

[ 5 ] Their work is deeply rooted in Freudian and Lacanian psychoanalysis , focusing on pre-Oedipal experiences, maternal representation, and the unconscious .

[ 5 ] The term was coined by Alice Jardine to identify an emerging trend in French intellectual circles in the 1980s, where the failure of Enlightenment ideals was being re-theorized.

[ 6 ] For feminism, this meant revisiting the sameness/difference debate through new lenses.

[ 5 ] Toril Moi 's book Sexual/Textual Politics (1986) further shaped French feminism by including only Cixous, Irigaray, and Kristeva.

[ 7 ] [ 5 ] Moi also made official a distinction between Anglo-American and French feminism: while Anglo-American feminists wanted to find a "woman-centered perspective", French feminists believed there was no identity for women but that "the feminine can be identified where difference and otherness are found." [ 5 ] Elaine Marks, an academic in the field of Women's Studies, noted another difference between French and American feminists: French feminists, specifically radical feminists , criticized and attacked the systems that benefit men, along with widespread misogyny as a whole, more intensely than their American counterparts.

[ 8 ] Theory [ edit ] Haraway [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( March 2024 ) Donna Haraway 's 1985 essay " A Cyborg Manifesto " is a reflection on the politics of feminism in postmodernity . Haraway uses the cyborg, a hybrid of nature and culture, as a metaphor to criticize binary thinking and totalizing identities.

[ 9 ] First published in Socialist Review , in 1985, the Manifesto was a response to the rising conservatism of the 1980s. She argues that women were no longer on the outside along a hierarchy of privileged binaries but rather deeply imbued, exploited by and complicit within networked hegemony, and had to form their politics as such.

[ 10 ] Butler [ edit ] Postmodern feminism's major departure from other branches of feminism is perhaps the argument that sex , or at least gender , is itself constructed through language , a view notably propounded in Judith Butler 's 1990 book, Gender Trouble . They draw on and critique the work of Simone de Beauvoir , Michel Foucault , and Jacques Lacan , as well as on Irigaray's argument that what we conventionally regard as "feminine" is only a reflection of what is constructed as masculine.

[ 11 ] [ 3 ] Butler criticises the distinction drawn by previous feminisms between (biological) sex and (socially constructed) gender. They ask why we assume that material things (such as the body) are not subject to processes of social construction themselves. Butler argues that this does not allow for a sufficient criticism of essentialism : though recognizing that gender is a social construct, feminists assume it is always constructed in the same way. Butler's argument implies that women 's subordination has no single cause or single solution; postmodern feminism is thus criticized for offering no clear path to action.  Butler rejects the term "postmodernism" as too vague to be meaningful.

[ 12 ] Paula Moya argues that Butler derives this rejection to postmodernism from misreadings of Cherríe Moraga 's work. "She reads Moraga's statement that 'the danger lies in ranking the oppressions' to mean that we have no way of adjudicating among different kinds of oppressions—that any attempt to casually relate or hierarchize the varieties of oppressions people suffer constitutes an imperializing, colonizing, or totalizing gesture that renders the effort invalid…thus, although Butler at first appears to have understood the critiques of women who have been historically precluded from occupying the position of the 'subject' of feminism, it becomes clear that their voices have been merely instrumental to her" (Moya, 790). Moya contends that because Butler feels that the varieties of oppressions cannot be summarily ranked, that they cannot be ranked at all; and takes a short-cut by throwing out the idea of not only postmodernism, but women in general.

[ 13 ] Frug [ edit ] Legal scholar Mary Joe Frug , a founding member of a group of legal scholars known as the Fem-Crits, itself a part of the critical legal studies movement, [ 14 ] suggested that one "principle" of postmodernism is that human experience is located "inescapably within language". Power is exercised not only through direct coercion, but also through the way in which language shapes and restricts our reality. She also stated that because language is always open to re-interpretation, it can also be used to resist this shaping and restriction, and so is a potentially fruitful site of political struggle.

Frug's second postmodern principle is that sex is not something natural, nor is it something completely determinate and definable. Rather, sex is part of a system of meaning, produced by language. Frug argues that "cultural mechanisms ... encode the female body with meanings", and that these cultural mechanisms then go on to explain these meanings "by an appeal to the 'natural' differences between the sexes, differences that the rules themselves help to produce".

[ 15 ] Criticism [ edit ] See also: Postmodern philosophy § Definitional issues There have been many critiques of postmodern feminism since it originated in the 1990s. Most of the criticism has been from modernists and feminists supporting modernist thought. However, the very term "postmodernism" has been criticised by some theorists who have themselves been labelled as postmodern feminists.

[ 12 ] Feminist activist Gloria Steinem Modernist critics have put a focus on the themes of relativism and nihilism as defined by postmodernism. They believe that through abandoning the values of Enlightenment thought postmodern feminism "precludes the possibility of liberating political action." [ 16 ] This concern can be seen in critics such as Meaghan Morris , who have argued that postmodern feminism runs the risk of undercutting the basis of a politics of action based upon gender difference, through its very anti-essentialism.

[ 17 ] Alison Assiter published the book Enlightened Women (1995) to critique postmodernists and postmodern feminists alike, saying that there should be a return to Enlightenment values and modernist feminism.

[ 18 ] Gloria Steinem has also criticized feminist theory, and especially postmodernist feminist theory, as being overly academic, where discourse that is full of jargon and inaccessible is helpful to no one.

[ 19 ] As with criticism of postmodernism in general [ citation needed ] , postmodern feminism also faces criticism with its heavy focus on sexism in language .

See also [ edit ] Alison Assiter Cyborg feminism Écriture féminine Feminist metaphysics Individualist feminism Nancy Fraser Post-structural feminism Standpoint feminism Structuralist feminism Third-wave feminism References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Tong, Rosemarie (1989).

Feminist thought : a comprehensive introduction . Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press. pp.

217 –224.

ISBN 9780429493836 .

OCLC 1041706991 .

^ a b Ebert, Teresa L. (Dec 1991). "The "Difference" of Postmodern Feminism".

College English .

53 (8): 886– 904.

doi : 10.2307/377692 .

ISSN 0010-0994 .

JSTOR 377692 .

^ a b Digeser, Peter (September 1994). "Performativity Trouble: Postmodern Feminism and Essential Subjects".

Political Research Quarterly .

47 (3): 655– 673.

doi : 10.1177/106591299404700305 .

S2CID 144691426 .

^ Sands, Roberta; Nuccio, Kathleen (Nov 1992). "Postmodern Feminist Theory and Social Work: A Deconstruction".

Social Work .

37 : 489.

doi : 10.1093/sw/40.6.831 .

ISSN 1545-6846 .

^ a b c d e Gambaudo, Sylvie A. (May 2007).

"French Feminism vs Anglo-American Feminism: A Reconstruction" (PDF) .

European Journal of Women's Studies .

14 (2): 93– 108.

doi : 10.1177/1350506807075816 .

S2CID 144756187 .

^ Jardine, Alice (1982).

"Gynesis" .

Diacritics .

12 (2): 54– 65.

doi : 10.2307/464680 .

JSTOR 464680 .

^ Moi, Toril (2002).

Sexual/textual politics: feminist literary theory (2nd ed.). London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415280112 .

OCLC 49959398 .

^ Marks, Elaine; Isabelle De Courtivron, eds. (1980).

New French feminisms : an anthology . Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press.

ISBN 978-0870232800 .

OCLC 5051713 .

^ Tolliver, Nicholas D. (2022-05-16).

"Cyborg Liberation: Donna Haraway's Cyborg Feminism as an Emancipatory Model of Identity" .

Columbia Social Work Review .

20 (1): 141– 153.

doi : 10.52214/cswr.v20i1.9646 .

ISSN 2164-1250 .

^ Haraway, Donna Jeanne (1991).

Simians, cyborgs, and women : the reinvention of nature . Internet Archive. New York : Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-90387-5 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Gutting, G. (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Foucault (2002), p. 389.

^ a b Butler, Judith, "Contingent Foundations", in Seyla Benhabib et al., Feminist Contentions: A Philosophical Exchange (New York: Routledge, 1995), pp. 35–58.

^ Moya, Paula M. L.

From Postmodernism, 'Realism,' and the Politics of Identity: Cherríe Moraga and Chicana Feminism , in Gilbert, Susan M.

; Gubar, Susan Eds (2007).

Feminist literary theory and criticism : a Norton reader (1st ed.). New York: W.W. Norton. pp.

787– 797.

ISBN 9780393927900 .

^ Baumgardner, Paul (October 2019).

"Ronald Reagan, the Modern Right, and ... the Rise of the Fem-Crits" .

Laws .

8 (4): 26.

doi : 10.3390/laws8040026 .

^ Frug, Mary Joe (March 1992). "A Postmodern Feminist Manifesto (An Unfinished Draft)".

Harvard Law Review .

105 (5): 1045– 1075.

doi : 10.2307/1341520 .

JSTOR 1341520 .

^ Hekman, Susan J. (1990).

Gender and Knowledge . Boston: Northeastern University Press. pp.

152– 153.

^ Schmidt, K. (2005).

The Theater of Transformation . pp.

129 –130.

^ Assiter, Alison (1995).

Enlightened Women . London: Routledge.

^ Denes, Melissa (2005-01-17).

" 'Feminism? It's hardly begun' " .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2019-03-29 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Nicholson, Linda (1990).

Feminism/postmodernism . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415900591 .

Assiter, Alison (1996).

Enlightened women: modernist feminism in a postmodern age . London New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415083386 .

Kottiswari, W. S. (2008).

Postmodern feminist writers . New Delhi: Sarup & Sons.

ISBN 9788176258210 .

Williams, Susan; Williams, David (1 January 1996).

"A Feminist Theory of Malebashing" .

Michigan Journal of Gender & Law .

4 (1): 35– 127.

ISSN 1095-8835 .

External links [ edit ] 'Postmodern Feminism in 3 pages' v t e Feminist theory Academic fields Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Film theory Literary criticism Biology Composition studies Criminology Digital humanities Economics FPDA Geography History International relations ( Constructivism ) Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Existentialism Metaphysics Science Political ecology Political theory Postmodernism Psychology Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology Womanist Asian Feminism portal Related subjects Ecofeminism Feminist method Hegemonic masculinity Women's history Women's studies Feminist theorists Elizabeth Anderson Karen Barad Simone de Beauvoir Wendy Brown Nancy Bauer Judith Butler Kimberlé Crenshaw Hélène Cixous Alice Crary Andrea Dworkin Cynthia Enloe Martha Fineman Nancy Fraser Germaine Greer Donna Haraway Sandra Harding Patricia Hill Collins bell hooks Luce Irigaray Julia Kristeva Catharine A. MacKinnon Martha Nussbaum Val Plumwood Diana E. H. Russell Dorothy E. Smith Marilyn Waring Lists Women's studies journals Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Postmodern_feminism&oldid=1305761987 " Categories : Postmodern feminism Third-wave feminism Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2018 All articles needing additional references Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles to be expanded from March 2024 All articles to be expanded All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 23:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Postmodern feminism 18 languages Add topic

