Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Death 3 Work 4 Selected works 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Frans Pourbus the Younger 16 languages Български Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara Français Italiano Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Svenska Українська West-Vlams Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Flemish painter (1569–1622) Frans Pourbus the Younger Detail from Charles d'Arenberg and Anne de Croy with family , possibly a self-portrait of the painter Born c. September to November 1569 Antwerp Died buried on 19 February 1622 (1622-02-19) (aged 53) Paris Nationality Flemish Known for Portrait painting Patron(s) Archduke Albert and the Infanta Isabella; Vincenzo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua ; Marie de' Medici, Queen of France Frans Pourbus the Younger or Frans Pourbus (II) ( Antwerp , 1569 – Paris , 1622) [ 1 ] was a Flemish painter , specialised in portrait painting. He was the third generation of a prominent family of religious and portrait painters.

[ 2 ] Pourbus was a successful court painter for, successively, the Archdukes in Brussels , the Gonzaga Duke of Mantua (1600–1609), and then the French court. The majority of his work was royal portraits, many full-length, but he also painted some altarpieces .  He painted the Brussels -based Spanish Regents of the Netherlands , the Duke of Mantua and Marie de' Medici , Queen of France.

Pourbus produced portraits that were pleasing to his patrons, but somewhat static with no dramatic situations, or landscape backgrounds.

[ 3 ] He is noted for his depiction of costume, jewellery and draperies, as in his portrait of Henry IV of France (below).

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Life [ edit ] Frans was born in Antwerp as the son of Frans the Elder (1545 – 1581) and Suzanna Floris.  Both his parents came from prominent artist families.

[ 6 ] His father was an important portrait and genre painter and his grandfather Pieter Pourbus (1523 – 1584) was the leading portrait and history painter in Bruges in the second half of the 16th century.

[ 2 ] His mother was a niece of his father's master, the Antwerp painter Frans Floris and daughter of Cornelis Floris de Vriendt , an influential sculptor and architect.

[ 6 ] He had two younger sisters.  His mother died in 1674 after which his father remarried and had another son.

[ 6 ] His father died at the young age of 36 when Frans was only 12. There is no record of his artistic training, but he was likely an apprentice in his grandfather's workshop. He was admitted as a master in the Guild of St. Luke of Antwerp in the guild year 1591–92, when he was 22.

[ 7 ] At the end of the 16th century, he worked for Archduke Albert and the Infanta Isabella in Brussels.

[ 5 ] On 27 June 1600, he was paid for a portrait of the Infanta. This work was subsequently presented to Anne of Denmark (wife of James VI and I ) by the Ambassador of the Spanish Netherlands and remains in the Royal Collection until today.

[ 8 ] In 1600, he was recruited as court painter in Mantua by Vincenzo Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua who met him when Gonzaga was on a visit to the Netherlands buying works of art.

[ 9 ] Within months of his appointment, Peter Paul Rubens arrived at the Mantuan court, but there is no evidence of hostility between the two.

[ 3 ] In 1609, Pourbus moved to Paris at the instigation of Marie de' Medici, Queen of France.

[ 5 ] It was here that he perfected his style.

[ 4 ] He worked as Marie de' Medici, Queen of France's court painter until his death.

Death [ edit ] He died in Paris and was buried on 19 February 1622.The exact date of his death is unknown.

[ 1 ] Work [ edit ] Works of his can be found in the Royal Collection , the National Museum in Warsaw , the Louvre , the Prado , the Rijksmuseum , the Royal College of Art and the Metropolitan Museum of Art .

[ 10 ] [ 8 ] Selected works [ edit ] Portrait of Eleonora de' Medici Gonzaga , 1600–1602 Louis XIII , King of France (with the Sash and Badge of the Order of Saint Esprit ) Councilors of Paris Margarita Gonzaga Portrait of Guillaume du Vair , Magistrate of the Parliament, Keeper of the Seals of France under Louis XIII Anne of Austria Portrait of the Italian poet Giambattista Marino Portrait of a man Portrait of Margherita Gonzaga Infanta Isabella Marie de' Medici St Francis of Assisi receiving the stigmata References [ edit ] ^ a b Frans Pourbus (II) at the Netherlands Institute for Art History ^ a b Raffaella Morselli, Frans Pourbus in Mantua (1600-1608) , London 2015, Catalogue of the Weiss Gallery, Maastricht 2015: essay on Pourbus in Mantua and a new portrait of Margherita Gonzaga of Lorena (1606), p. 10 ^ a b Oppenheimer, Paul (2002).

Rubens: A Portrait . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 166.

^ a b Berger, Robert W (1999).

Public Access to Art in Paris . Pennsylvania State University Press. p. 236.

^ a b c Your Paintings ^ a b c Gaëlle Brackez, Frans Pourbus de oudere (1545-1581) Een blik op zijn leven en oeuvre volume i: tekst , Masterproef voorgelegd aan de Faculteit Letteren en Wijsbegeerte, Vakgroep Kunst -, Muziek-  en Theaterwetenschappen, voor het verkrijgen van de graad van Master, Universiteit Gent Academiejaar 2011 -2012 (in Dutch) ^ van Puyvelde, Leo; van Puyvelde, Thierry (1971).

Flemish painting, the age of Rubens and Van Dyck . McGraw-Hill. p. 152.

^ a b "The Infanta Isabella Clara Eugenia" .

Royal Collection Trust . Inventory no. 407377.

^ Furlotti, Barbara (2008).

The Art of Mantua . Getty Publications.

^ Murray, P. & L. (1996), Dictionary of art and artists . Penguin Books.

ISBN 0-14-051300-0 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Frans Pourbus (II) at Wikimedia Commons ‹ The template below ( Authority control (arts) ) is being considered for deletion. See templates for discussion to help reach a consensus. › Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Artists ULAN RKD Artists KulturNav Städel Prado People Netherlands Deutsche Biographie Other SNAC Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Frans_Pourbus_the_Younger&oldid=1289718137 " Categories : 1569 births 1622 deaths 16th-century Flemish painters Flemish court painters Flemish portrait painters Flemish history painters 17th-century Flemish painters Painters from Antwerp Hidden categories: Articles with Dutch-language sources (nl) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Commons link is locally defined This page was last edited on 10 May 2025, at 11:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Frans Pourbus the Younger 16 languages Add topic

