Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Academia 2 Political science position paper 3 Law 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Position paper 9 languages العربية বাংলা Español فارسی 한국어 Italiano עברית Tagalog 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Essay which presents an opinion and arguments for it A position paper (sometimes position piece for brief items) is an essay that presents an arguable opinion about an issue – typically that of the author or some specified entity. Position papers are published at academia , in politics , in law and other domains. The goal of a position paper is to convince the audience that the opinion presented is valid and worth listening to. Ideas for position papers that one is considering need to be carefully examined when choosing a topic, developing an argument , and organizing the paper.

Position papers range from the simplest format of a letter to the editor , through to the most complex in the form of an academic position paper.

[ 1 ] Position papers are also used by large organizations to make public the official beliefs and recommendations of the group.

[ 2 ] Academia [ edit ] Position papers in academia enable discussion on emerging topics without the experimentation and original research normally present in an academic paper . Commonly, such a document will substantiate the opinions or positions put forward with evidences from an extensive objective discussion of the topic.

Political science position paper [ edit ] A position paper lies somewhere on a spectrum between a green paper and a white paper because it affirms opinions and proposes solutions without specifying exactly how they should be implemented.

Position papers can lead to a deep understanding of the views of another person or organization which is why they are commonly used by political campaigns, [ 3 ] government organizations, [ 4 ] in the diplomatic world, [ 5 ] and in efforts to change values (e.g. through public service announcements) and organisational branding.

[ 6 ] They are used in the government of the European Union . They are an important part of the Model United Nations process.

[ 7 ] Law [ edit ] In international law , the term for a position paper is an aide-mémoire , a memorandum setting forth the minor points of a proposed discussion or disagreement, used especially in undiplomatic communications.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Sanders, Tingloo & Verhulst 2005 , p.

11 , "The simplest form is the letter to the editor... The most complex type of position paper is the academic position paper in which arguments and evidence are presented to support the writer's views." ^ An example of a position paper published by an organization: Information Literacy: A Position Paper on Information Problem Solving , American Association of School Librarians, archived from the original on 2008-04-22 ^ Steely 2000 , p.

186 , "Through the use of position papers, telephone briefings, audio and video tapes and personal appearances Newt was able to share his ideas, ... ." ^ Government position papers , Brake: the Road Safety Charity , retrieved 2008-08-24 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Bond 1998 , "..., writing position papers and talking points, ... are examples of non-classified work which is carried out at virtually every diplomatic post." ^ Newsom & Haynes 2004 , p.

163 , "Another special area is the use of position papers as the locus for image ads and public service announcements (PSAs) for an organization." ^ How to Write a Position Paper , United Nations Association of the United States of America, archived from the original on April 10, 2008 , retrieved 2008-08-25 References [ edit ] Bond, Michele T. (September 14, 1998), Public Diplomacy , Defense Technical Information Center Newsom, Doug; Haynes, Jim (2004), Public Relations Writing: Form and Style , Thomson Wadsworth, ISBN 0-534-61296-2 Sanders, Marianne; Tingloo, Andrée; Verhulst, Hans (2005), Advanced Writing in English: A Guide for Dutch Authors , Coronet Books Inc, ISBN 90-5350-761-2 Steely, Mel (2000), The Gentleman from Georgia:The Biography of Newt Gingrich , Mercer University Press, ISBN 0-86554-671-1 External links [ edit ] Writing a Position Paper , University of Hawai‘i - West O‘ahu, archived from the original on March 16, 2007 , retrieved 2008-08-25 Sample Position Paper , United Nations Association of the United States of America, archived from the original on April 10, 2008 , retrieved 2008-08-25 v t e Academic publishing Journals Academic journal Public health Papers Paper Abstract Review article Position paper Literature review Grey literature Working paper White paper Technical report Annual report Pamphlet Essay Lab notes Other publication types Thesis Collection of articles Patent Biological Chemical Book Monograph Chapter Treatise Poster session Proceedings Impact and ranking Acknowledgment index Altmetrics Article-level metrics Author-level metrics Bibliometrics C-score Journal ranking Eigenfactor g-index h -index Impact factor Rankings of academic publishers Science-wide author databases of standardized citation indicators Scientometrics SCImago Journal Rank Citation cartel Reform and access Academic journal publishing reform Open access Citation advantage Serials crisis Sci-Hub #ICanHazPDF Versioning Preprint Postprint Version of record Erratum Retraction Indexes and search engines Google Scholar AMiner BASE CORE Semantic Scholar Scopus Web of Science Paperity OpenAlex Index Copernicus ERIH PLUS Sherpa Romeo OpenAIRE Related topics Imprint Scientific writing Peer review Scholarly communication Scientific literature Learned society Open research Open scientific data ORCID Electronic publishing Ingelfinger rule Least publishable unit " Publish or perish " Lists Academic databases and search engines Academic journals Copyright policies Highly Cited Researchers Open-access journals Preprint policies Scientific journals Style/formatting guides University presses Authority control databases NARA Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Position_paper&oldid=1304753259 " Categories : Political communication Technical communication Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 23:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Position paper 9 languages Add topic

