Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Taxonomic history 2 Description 3 Habitat and distribution Toggle Habitat and distribution subsection 3.1 Sightings in the United States 4 Ecology 5 Reproduction 6 Threats and conservation 7 Communication and behavior 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents North American cougar 14 languages العربية Español Euskara فارسی Français Interlingua Italiano עברית Kotava Português Русский Scots Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subspecies of carnivore North American cougar A cougar at Wildlife Prairie Park in Illinois Conservation status Secure ( NatureServe ) [ 2 ] (Western and Central North America) Critically Imperiled ( NatureServe ) [ 3 ] (Yuma population) Scientific classification Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Order: Carnivora Suborder: Feliformia Family: Felidae Subfamily: Felinae Genus: Puma Species: P. concolor Subspecies: P. c. couguar [ 1 ] Trinomial name Puma concolor couguar [ 1 ] ( Kerr , 1792) Synonyms P. c. arundivaga P. c. aztecus P. c. browni P. c. californica P. c. costaricensis ( Merriam , 1901) P. c. floridana P. c. hippolestes P. c. improcera P. c. kaibabensis P. c. mayensis P. c. missoulensis P. c. olympus P. c. oregonensis P. c. schorgeri P. c. stanleyana P. c. vancouverensis P. c. youngi The North American cougar ( Puma concolor couguar ) is a cougar subspecies in North America . It is the biggest cat in North America ( North American jaguars are fairly small), [ 4 ] [ 5 ] and the second largest cat in the New World .

[ 6 ] It was once common in eastern North America and is still prevalent in the western half of the continent. This subspecies includes populations in western Canada , the western United States , Florida , Mexico and Central America , and possibly South America northwest of the Andes Mountains .

[ 7 ] It thus includes the extirpated eastern cougar and extant Florida panther populations .

Taxonomic history [ edit ] Further information: Eastern cougar § History of taxonomy , and Florida panther § Taxonomic status As of 2017, P. c. cougar was recognised as being valid by the Cat Classification Taskforce of the Cat Specialist Group.

P. c. costaricensis had been regarded as a subspecies in Central America.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Description [ edit ] In Costa Rica , Central America The North American cougar has a solid tawny-colored coat without spots, though the color can vary from buff to cinnamon-brown and juveniles may have mild leftover spotting. It weighs 25–80 kg (55–176 pounds).

[ 9 ] Females average 45 kg (99 lb), about the same as a jaguar in the Chamela-Cuixmala Biosphere Reserve on the Mexican Pacific coast.

[ 5 ] Habitat and distribution [ edit ] The North American cougar lives in various places and habitats .

[ 9 ] Several populations still exist and are thriving in the western United States , Southern Florida , and western Canada , but the North American cougar was once commonly found in eastern portions of the United States. It was believed to be extirpated there in the early 1900s. In Michigan, it was thought to have been killed off and extinct in the early 1900s. Today there is evidence to support that cougars could be on the rise in Mexico and could have a substantial population in years to come. Some mainstream scientists believe that small relict populations may exist (around 50 individuals), especially in the Appalachian Mountains and eastern Canada.

[ 10 ] Recent scientific findings in hair traps in Fundy National Park in New Brunswick have confirmed the existence of at least three cougars in New Brunswick.

[ 10 ] The Ontario Puma Foundation estimates that there are currently 850 cougars in Ontario .

The Quebec wildlife services also considers cougars to be present in the province as a threatened species after multiple DNA tests confirmed cougar hair in lynx mating sites.

[ 11 ] The only unequivocally known eastern population is the critically endangered Florida panther . There have been unconfirmed sightings in Elliotsville Plantation, Maine (north of Monson ) and as early as 1997 in New Hampshire .

[ 12 ] Sightings in the United States [ edit ] Reported sightings of cougars in the United States continue today, including in locations of their former range where they are considered extirpated.

California The California Department of Fish and Game has roughly estimated 4,000 to 6,000 cougars present in California since 1972 [ 13 ] In 2021, a cougar was sighted walking through a San Francisco neighborhood [ 14 ] In 2022, a cougar was sighted at a school in Daly City [ 14 ] Minnesota In Southern Minnesota there have been a few sightings by deer hunters; the Department of Natural Resources has verified 14 cougar sightings since 2007.

[ 15 ] Connecticut In 2011, a cougar was sighted in Greenwich, Connecticut , and later killed by an SUV in Milford after allegedly travelling 1,500 miles (2,400 km) from South Dakota.

[ 16 ] Illinois On April 14, 2008, a cougar triggered a flurry of reports before being cornered and killed in the Chicago neighborhood of Roscoe Village while officers tried to contain it. The cougar was the first sighted in the city limits of Chicago since the city was founded [ broken anchor ] in 1833.

[ 17 ] On November 22, 2013, a cougar was found on a farm near Morrison in Whiteside County, Illinois . An Illinois Department of Natural Resources officer subsequently shot and killed the cougar after determining it posed a risk to the public.

[ 18 ] Michigan According to the Michigan Department of Natural Resources , there were fifteen confirmed cougar sightings in the state in 2020 and, as of October, there had been ten confirmed sightings in the Upper Peninsula in 2021. The Department said that the steep increase in sightings may be attributable to the proliferation of trail cameras .

[ 19 ] Tennessee On September 26, 2015, a hair sample was submitted by a hunter in Carroll County, Tennessee ; DNA analysis indicated it was a female with genetics similar to cougars in South Dakota.

[ 20 ] Bobcats in this state currently reside in regions that were once roamed by cougars.

Wisconsin Genetic analysis of DNA from a cougar sighting in Wisconsin in 2008 indicated that a cougar was in Wisconsin and that it was not a captive animal . The cougar is thought to have migrated from a native population in the Black Hills of South Dakota ; however, the genetic analysis could not affirm that hypothesis. Whether other, perhaps breeding, cougars are present is also uncertain. A second sighting was reported and tracks were documented in a nearby Wisconsin community. Unfortunately, a genetic analysis could not be done and a determination could not be made.

[ 21 ] This cougar later made its way south into the northern Chicago suburb of Wilmette .

On June 3, 2013, a verified sighting was made in Florence County , Wisconsin. The cougar was photographed by an automatic trail camera, and confirmed by DNR biologists in October, 2013.

[ 22 ] In December, 2020, two sightings, one verified, were made in Dane County, in and around Stoughton, Wisconsin . The cougar was photographed by an individual, and confirmed by the Wisconsin DNR .

In November 2021, a DNR representative told WDJT-TV that the Department confirms about 15 cougar sightings per year in the state.

[ 23 ] While the origins of these animals are unknown, some cougar experts believe some are captive animals that have been released or escaped.

[ 24 ] Ecology [ edit ] A cougar in the snow at North Cedar Brook in Boulder, Colorado , the USA The North American Cougar is a carnivore and its main sources of prey are deer, elk, mountain goats, moose and bighorn sheep.

[ 25 ] Despite being a large predator, the North American Cougar can also be the prey of larger predators like wolves and bears.

[ 26 ] The North American cougar usually hunts at night and sometimes travels long distances in search of food. They are short distance sprinters and can remain hidden for hours to surprise unsuspecting prey and pounce when they least expect it.

[ 25 ] They use their strong jaws and large canines to puncture the neck of their prey, breaking the neck and efficiently killing their prey. They also grab their prey by the throat to suffocate it.

[ 25 ] It is fast and can maneuver quite easily and skillfully.

[ 8 ] Depending on the abundance of prey , such as deer , it shares the same prey as the jaguar in Central or North America.

[ 27 ] Other sympatric predators include the grizzly bear and American black bears .

[ 28 ] Cougars are known to prey on bear cubs.

[ 29 ] Cougars in the Great Basin have been recorded to prey on feral horses , [ 30 ] as well as feral donkeys in the Sonoran and Mojave Deserts .

[ 31 ] Rivalry between the cougar and grizzly bear was a popular topic in North America. Fights between them were staged, and those in the wilderness were recorded by people, including native peoples .

[ 32 ] The North American Cougar plays an important role in regulating ecosystems as a large predator. The presence of the cougar as a predator prevents the overpopulation of herbivorous prey, like deer, in an ecosystem. Overpopulation of prey can result in the destruction of vegetation and biodiversity in an ecosystem.

[ 25 ] Reproduction [ edit ] Adult male cougars can breed with multiple female cougars any time of the year, however the peak breeding season is in the months of January and August. When cougars are 2–3 years old, they reach the level of sexual maturity. The breeding process does not last a long time, with the male accompanying the female in heat for up to a week after which they separate. After mating, the male cougar plays no further role except driving off male intruders and the female cougar bears the full responsibility of raising her young. The average litter size is three cubs and each of the babies weigh a little over a pound (500 grams). Cougars have a 90–96 day gestation period, allowing the breeding process to continue throughout the year.

[ 25 ] Threats and conservation [ edit ] At Beulah Wildlife Management Unit in Malheur County, Oregon , the USA The primary causes of the declining population of cougars is due to hunting and loss of habitat.

[ 26 ] Trophy hunting and loss of territory reflect the most significant threats upon the cougar extinction status. Most of the cougars’ prey is found near humans. Whether it be through sport hunting or through the protection of livestock, humans frequently kill cougars intentionally. Though indirect killings through vehicle collisions do occur, the intentional human impact is far more drastic. Humans continue to affect the declining cougar population through the occupation of their habitats. Cougars tend to occupy areas that are prime for development and expansion. From mountains to deserts, humans utilize the cougar territory to build new sites and structures for their purposes.

[ 33 ] As a consequence, cougars lose their habitats which leads to conflict with humans.

Even though conservation efforts of the cougar have decreased against the "more appealing" jaguar, it is hunted less frequently because it has no spots, and is thus less desirable to hunters.

[ 8 ] Despite the declining population of cougars, the potential extinction of the North American Cougar is not seen as a large concern.

[ 26 ] In Oregon , a population of 5,000 individuals was reported in 2006, exceeding a target of 3,000.

[ 34 ] California has actively sought to protect the cat and has an estimated population of 4,000 to 6,000.

[ 35 ] With the increase of human development and infrastructure growth in California, the cougar population in the state is becoming more isolated from one another.

[ 36 ] The Bay Area Puma Project aims to obtain information on cougar populations in the San Francisco Bay area and the animals' interactions with habitat, prey, humans, and residential communities.

[ 37 ] A study on wildlife ecologists showed that urban cougar populations exist around the Los Angeles metropolitan area , with individuals of these populations having the smallest home ranges recorded for any cougars studied, and being primarily nocturnal and not crepuscular, most likely adaptations to avoid humans in high-density areas.

[ 38 ] Communication and behavior [ edit ] Cougars rely on scent, noises, and posture to communicate with each other to exchange messages. Each message depends on how the cougar delivers the sound. Growling, snarling and hissing is understood as a threat by other animals. Mother cougars chirp to communicate with their kittens. The caterwaul is a screeching sound made by female cougars during the mating season when competing males are present.

[ 25 ] Cougars use various methods to signal and communicate with each other. When cougars perceive a looming threat or danger nearby, they flatten their ears and either maintain eye contact with the threat or retreat to a less visible location in preparation to attack.

[ 39 ] See also [ edit ] Shasta (mascot) South American cougar American cheetah (extinct species related to the cougar, despite its name) Felinae References [ edit ] ^ Wozencraft, W. C.

(2005).

"Subspecies Puma concolor couguar " . In Wilson, D. E.

; Reeder, D. M. (eds.).

Mammal Species of the World: A Taxonomic and Geographic Reference (3rd ed.). Johns Hopkins University Press. pp.

544– 545.

ISBN 978-0-8018-8221-0 .

OCLC 62265494 .

^ " Puma concolor " .

explorer.natureserve.org .

Canada: N5, United States: N5 ^ " Puma concolor browni " .

explorer.natureserve.org .

^ Barrett, J. (1998).

Cougar .

Blackbirch Press .

ISBN 1567112587 .

^ a b Rodrigo Nuanaez; Brian Miller; Fred Lindzey (2000).

"Food habits of jaguars and pumas in Jalisco, Mexico" .

Journal of Zoology .

252 (3): 373– 379.

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-7998.2000.tb00632.x . Retrieved 2006-08-08 .

^ "Cougars" .

www.rollinghillszoo.org . Retrieved 2024-12-18 .

^ a b Kitchener, A. C.; Breitenmoser-Würsten, C.; Eizirik, E.; Gentry, A.; Werdelin, L.; Wilting, A.; Yamaguchi, N.; Abramov, A. V.; Christiansen, P.; Driscoll, C.; Duckworth, J. W.; Johnson, W.; Luo, S.-J.; Meijaard, E.; O’Donoghue, P.; Sanderson, J.; Seymour, K.; Bruford, M.; Groves, C.; Hoffmann, M.; Nowell, K.; Timmons, Z.; Tobe, S. (2017).

"A revised taxonomy of the Felidae: The final report of the Cat Classification Task Force of the IUCN Cat Specialist Group" (PDF) .

Cat News (Special Issue 11): 33– 34.

^ a b c "Cougar Subspecies" . Panthera. Archived from the original on 2014-05-31 . Retrieved 2014-05-30 .

^ a b Sunquist, Mel; Sunquist, Fiona (2002).

Wild Cats of the World . The University of Chicago Press . p.

452 .

ISBN 0-226-77999-8 .

^ a b Lang, Le Duing; Tessier, Nathalie; Gauthier, Marc; Wissink, Renee; Jolicoeur, Hélène; Lapointe, François-Joseph (September 2013). "Genetic Confirmation of Cougars ( Puma concolor ) in Eastern Canada".

Northeastern Naturalist .

20 (3): 383– 396.

doi : 10.1656/045.020.0302 .

S2CID 84214196 .

^ "Your part in helping endangered species" . Ministry of Wildlife and Natural Resources, Quebec, Canada. 2010. Archived from the original on February 3, 2011 . Retrieved January 7, 2010 .

^ Davidson, Rick (2009).

"NH Sightings Catamount" (PDF) . Beech River Books. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 7, 2009 . Retrieved March 20, 2009 .

^ Dellinger, Justin A.; Torres, Steven G. (2020-01-05).

"A retrospective look at mountain lion populations in California (1906–2018)" .

California Fish and Wildlife Journal .

106 (1).

doi : 10.51492/cfwj.106.6 .

ISSN 2689-4203 .

S2CID 250398737 .

^ a b Pridgen, Andrew (2022-10-05).

"How California created a 'genetic mix-up' of mountain lion population" .

SFGATE . Retrieved 2023-10-23 .

^ "Cougars in Minnesota" .

Minnesota Department of Natural Resources . Retrieved 2024-06-28 .

^ Mountain lion killed in Conn. had walked from S. Dakota . Content.usatoday.com (2011-07-26). Retrieved on 2012-12-29.

^ Manier, Jeremy; Shah, Tina (15 April 2008).

"Cops kill cougar on North Side" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved 2008-04-15 .

^ Times Staff (22 November 2013).

"Cougar shot in Whiteside County" . Retrieved 26 November 2013 .

^ Barghouthi, Hani (November 7, 2021).

"Do increased cougar sightings mean more are roaming Michigan?" .

The Detroit News . Retrieved 29 November 2021 .

^ "Cougars in Tennessee - TN.Gov" .

www.tn.gov . Archived from the original on 2017-12-01 . Retrieved 2016-06-07 .

^ "Hills Mountain Lion May Have Migrated To Wisconsin" .

CougarNetwork . Archived from the original on 2008-05-22 . Retrieved 2007-06-11 .

^ "Cougars in Wisconsin" . Retrieved 2013-11-22 .

^ Becker, Amanda (November 10, 2021).

"Wisconsin DNR confirms West Bend trail camera picture is a cougar" .

CBS58 . Retrieved 29 November 2021 .

^ "Northeast Confirmation Reports" .

CougarNetwork . Archived from the original on 2007-07-31 . Retrieved 2007-06-11 .

^ a b c d e f "Cougar Biology & Behavior" .

Western Wildlife Outreach . Retrieved 2023-10-23 .

^ a b c "Eastern Cougars Declared Extinct—But That Might Not be Bad" .

Animals . 2018-01-25. Archived from the original on February 27, 2021 . Retrieved 2023-10-23 .

^ Gutiérrez-González, Carmina E.; López-González, Carlos A. (2017).

"Jaguar interactions with pumas and prey at the northern edge of jaguars' range" .

PeerJ .

5 : e2886.

doi : 10.7717/peerj.2886 .

PMC 5248577 .

PMID 28133569 .

^ Grant, Richard (October 2016).

"The Return of the Great American Jaguar" .

Smithsonian Magazine .

^ Servheen, C.; Herrero, S.; Peyton, B. (1999).

Bears: Status Survey and Conservation Action Plan (PDF) . Missoula, Montana: IUCN/SSC Bear Specialist Group.

ISBN 978-2-8317-0462-3 .

^ "JWM: Cougars prey on feral horses in the Great Basin" . 20 August 2021.

^ "DO COUGARS AFFECT ECOSYSTEMS BY PREYING ON FERAL DONKEYS?" . 10 May 2023.

^ Tracy Irwin Storer; Lloyd Pacheco Tevis (1996).

California Grizzly .

University of California Press . pp.

71– 151.

ISBN 978-0-520-20520-8 .

^ "Threats" .

WildFutures . Retrieved 2023-10-23 .

^ "Cougar Management Plan" .

Wildlife Division: Wildlife Management Plans . Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife. 2006.

Archived from the original on June 30, 2007 . Retrieved May 20, 2007 .

^ "Mountain Lions in California" . California Department of Fish and Game. 2004. Archived from the original on April 30, 2007 . Retrieved May 20, 2007 .

^ Ernest, H. B.; Vickers, T. W.; Morrison, S. A.; Buchalski, M. R.; Boyce, W. M. (2014).

"Fractured Genetic Connectivity Threatens a Southern California Puma ( Puma concolor ) Population" .

PLOS One .

9 (10): e107985.

Bibcode : 2014PLoSO...9j7985E .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0107985 .

PMC 4189954 .

PMID 25295530 .

^ "Bay Area Puma Project (BAPP)" .

Felidae Conservation Fund . Archived from the original on March 23, 2010 . Retrieved March 8, 2009 .

^ Walker, E. (2021).

"Big cats adapt to city life" .

wildlife.org . Retrieved 26 October 2021 .

^ "Understanding a Mountain Lion's "Body Language" " .

www.hunter-ed.com . Retrieved 2023-10-23 .

Sources Wright, Bruce S. The Eastern Panther: A Question of Survival. Toronto: Clarke, Irwin and Company, 1972.

External links [ edit ] Eastern Cougar Foundation National Heritage Information Centre: General Element Report: Puma concolor Archived 2015-09-04 at the Wayback Machine New York State Department of Environmental Conservation: Eastern Cougar Fact Sheet The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species Photograph of a black or dark cougar in Costa Rica Largest North American Cat: Mountain Lion (Cougar) v t e Extant Carnivora species Kingdom: Animalia Phylum: Chordata Class: Mammalia Infraclass: Eutheria Superorder: Laurasiatheria Feliformia ("cat-like" carnivorans) Feliformia African palm civet ( Nandinia binotata ) Feloidea Prionodon (Asiatic linsangs) Banded linsang ( P. linsang ) Spotted linsang ( P. pardicolor ) Felidae (cats) Pantherinae Neofelis Sunda clouded leopard ( N. diardi ) Clouded leopard ( N. nebulosa ) Panthera Snow leopard ( P. uncia ) Tiger ( P. tigris ) Jaguar ( P. onca ) Lion ( P. leo ) Leopard ( P. pardus ) Felinae sensu stricto Bay cat lineage Pardofelis Marbled cat ( P. marmorata ) Catopuma Bay cat ( C. badia ) Asian golden cat ( C. temminckii ) Caracal lineage Serval ( Leptailurus serval ) Caracal African golden cat ( C. aurata ) Caracal ( C. caracal ) Leopardus Pampas cat ( L. colocola ) Geoffroy's cat ( L. geoffroyi ) Kodkod ( L. guigna ) Southern tiger cat ( L. guttulus ) Andean mountain cat ( L. jacobita ) Ocelot ( L. pardalis ) Oncilla ( L. tigrinus ) Margay ( L. wiedii ) Lynx Canada lynx ( L. canadensis ) Eurasian lynx ( L. lynx ) Iberian lynx ( L. pardinus ) Bobcat ( L. rufus ) Puma lineage Acinonyx Cheetah ( A. jubatus ) Jaguarundi ( Herpailurus yagouaroundi ) Puma Cougar ( P. concolor ) Leopard cat lineage Pallas's cat ( Otocolobus manul ) Prionailurus Leopard cat ( P. bengalensis ) Sunda leopard cat  ( P. javanensis ) Flat-headed cat ( P. planiceps ) Rusty-spotted cat ( P. rubiginosus ) Fishing cat ( P. viverrinus ) Felis Chinese mountain cat ( F. bieti ) Domestic cat ( F. catus ) Jungle cat ( F. chaus ) African wildcat ( F. lybica ) Sand cat ( F. margarita ) Black-footed cat ( F. nigripes ) European wildcat ( F. silvestris ) Viverroidea see below↓ Viverroidea Viverridae Palm civets Hemigalinae Owston's palm civet ( Chrotogale owstoni ) Otter civet ( Cynogale bennettii ) Hose's palm civet ( Diplogale hosei ) Banded palm civet ( Hemigalus derbyanus ) Paradoxurinae Binturong ( Arctictis binturong ) Small-toothed palm civet ( Arctogalidia trivirgata ) Sulawesi palm civet ( Macrogalidia musschenbroekii ) Masked palm civet ( Paguma larvata ) Paradoxurus Asian palm civet ( P. hermaphroditus ) Brown palm civet ( P. jerdoni ) Golden palm civet ( P. zeylonensis ) Viverrinae sensu lato Viverrinae sensu stricto Small Indian civet ( Viverricula indica ) African civet ( Civettictis civetta ) Viverra Malabar large-spotted civet ( V. civettina ) Large-spotted civet ( V. megaspila ) Malayan civet ( V. tangalunga ) Large Indian civet ( V. zibetha ) Genettinae Poiana (African linsangs) Central African oyan ( P. richardsonii ) West African oyan ( P. leightoni ) Genetta (genets) subgenus Genetta (paraphyletic) Abyssinian genet ( G. abyssinica ) Common genet ( G. genetta ) South African small-spotted genet ( G. felina ) subgenus Eugenetta (paraphyletic) Angolan genet ( G. angolensis ) Cape genet ( G. tigrina ) subgenus Herpailuropoda (paraphyletic) Bourlon's genet ( G. bourloni ) Johnston's genet ( G. johnstoni ) Hausa genet ( G. thierryi ) Giant forest genet ( G. victoriae ) subgenus Pardogale (paraphyletic) Pardine genet ( G. pardina ) King genet ( G. poensis ) subgenus Prionailuropoda Letaba genet ( G. letabae ) Rusty-spotted genet ( G. maculata ) Schouteden's genet ( G. schoutedeni ) subgenus Leptailuropoda (paraphyletic) Crested servaline genet ( G. cristata ) Servaline genet ( G. servalina ) subgenus Osbornictis Aquatic genet ( G. piscivora ) Herpestoidea see below↓ Herpestoidea Hyaenidae (hyenas) Proteles Aardwolf ( P. cristata ) Hyaeninae (bone-crushing hyenas) Striped hyena ( Hyaena hyaena ) Brown hyena ( Parahyaena brunnea ) Crocuta Spotted hyena ( C. crocuta ) Herpestidae sensu lato Eupleridae (Malagasy carnivorans) Euplerinae (Malagasy civets) Fossa ( Cryptoprocta ferox ) Malagasy civet ( Fossa fossana ) Eupleres (falanoucs) Eastern falanouc ( E. goudotii ) Western falanouc ( E. major ) Galidiinae (vontsira) Ring-tailed vontsira ( Galidia elegans ) Galidictis Broad-striped Malagasy mongoose ( G. fasciata ) Grandidier's mongoose ( G. grandidieri ) Narrow-striped mongoose ( Mungotictis decemlineata ) Salanoia Brown-tailed mongoose ( S. concolor ) Durrell's vontsira ( S. durrelli ) Herpestidae sensu stricto (mongooses) Mungotinae Suricata Meerkat ( S. suricatta ) Liberian mongoose ( Liberiictus kuhni ) Mungos Gambian mongoose ( M. gambianus ) Banded mongoose ( M. mungo ) Pousargues's mongoose ( Dologale dybowskii ) Helogale Ethiopian dwarf mongoose ( H. hirtula ) Common dwarf mongoose ( H. parvula ) Crossarchus (kusimanses) Alexander's kusimanse ( C. alexandri ) Angolan kusimanse ( C. ansorgei ) Common kusimanse ( C. obscurus ) Flat-headed kusimanse ( C. platycephalus ) Herpestinae Marsh mongoose ( Atilax paludinosus ) Long-nosed mongoose ( Xenogale naso ) Urva (Asian mongooses) Small Indian mongoose ( U. auropunctata ) Short-tailed mongoose ( U. brachyura ) Indian grey mongoose ( U. edwardsii ) Indian brown mongoose ( U. fusca ) Javan mongoose ( U. javanica ) Collared mongoose ( U. semitorquata ) Ruddy mongoose ( U. smithii ) Crab-eating mongoose ( U. urva ) Stripe-necked mongoose ( U. vitticolla ) White-tailed mongoose ( Ichneumia albicauda ) Yellow mongoose ( Cynictis penicillata ) Selous's mongoose ( Paracynictis selousi ) Meller's mongoose ( Rhynchogale melleri ) Bdeogale Bushy-tailed mongoose ( B. crassicauda ) Jackson's mongoose ( B. jacksoni ) Black-footed mongoose ( B. nigripes ) Herpestes (slender mongooses) Angolan slender mongoose ( H. flavescens ) Egyptian mongoose ( H. ichneumon ) Somalian slender mongoose ( H. ochracea ) Cape gray mongoose ( H. pulverulenta ) Common slender mongoose ( H. sanguinea ) Caniformia ("dog-like" carnivorans) Canidae (dogs) Urocyon Gray fox ( U. cinereoargenteus ) Island fox ( U. littoralis ) Vulpini Bat-eared fox ( Otocyon megalotis ) Nyctereutes (raccoon dogs) Common raccoon dog ( N. procyonoides ) Japanese raccoon dog ( N. viverrinus ) Vulpes (true foxes ) Bengal fox ( V. bengalensis ) Blanford's fox ( V. cana ) Cape fox ( V. chama ) Corsac fox ( V. corsac ) Tibetan fox ( V. ferrilata ) Arctic fox ( V. lagopus ) Kit fox ( V. macrotis ) Pale fox ( V. pallida ) Rüppell's fox ( V. rueppelli ) Swift fox ( V. velox ) Red fox ( V. vulpes ) Fennec fox ( V. zerda ) Canini (true dogs) Cerdocyonina (zorro) Maned wolf ( Chrysocyon brachyurus ) Speothos Bush dog ( S. venaticus ) Short-eared dog ( Atelocynus microtis ) Crab-eating fox ( Cerdocyon thous ) Lycalopex (South American foxes) Culpeo ( L. culpaeus ) Darwin's fox ( L. fulvipes ) South American gray fox ( L. griseus ) Pampas fox ( L. gymnocercus ) Sechuran fox ( L. sechurae ) Hoary fox ( L. vetulus ) Canina (wolf-like canids) Lupulella Side-striped jackal ( L. adustus ) Black-backed jackal ( L. mesomelas ) Lycaon African wild dog ( L. pictus ) Dhole ( Cuon alpinus ) Canis Golden jackal ( C. aureus ) Domestic dog ( C. familiaris ) Coyote ( C. latrans ) African wolf ( C. lupaster ) Wolf ( C. lupus ) Eastern wolf ( C. lycaon ) Red wolf ( C. rufus ) Ethiopian wolf ( C. simensis ) Arctoidea Ursidae (bears) Ailuropoda Giant panda ( A. melanoleuca ) Tremarctos Spectacled bear ( T. ornatus ) Ursinae Sloth bear ( Melursus ursinus ) Sun bear ( Helarctos malayanus ) Ursus American black bear ( U. americanus ) Asian black bear ( U. thibetanus ) Brown bear ( U. arctos ) Polar bear ( U. maritimus ) Mustelida Pinnipedia (seals) see below↓ Musteloidea see below↓ Pinnipedia (seals) Odobenidae Walrus ( Odobenus rosmarus ) Otariidae (eared seals) Callorhinus (northern fur seals ) Northern fur seal ( C. ursinus ) Otariinae ( sea lions ) Steller sea lion ( Eumetopias jubatus ) Zalophus California sea lion ( Z. californianus ) Galápagos sea lion ( Z. wollebaeki ) South American sea lion ( Otaria flavescens ) Neophoca Australian sea lion ( N. cinerea ) New Zealand sea lion ( Phocarctos hookeri ) Arctocephalus (southern fur seals ) South American fur seal ( A. australis ) Australasian fur seal ( A. forsteri ) Galápagos fur seal ( A. galapagoensis ) Antarctic fur seal ( A. gazella ) Juan Fernández fur seal ( A. philippii ) Brown fur seal ( A. pusillus ) Guadalupe fur seal ( A. townsendi ) Subantarctic fur seal ( A. tropicalis ) Phocidae (earless seals or true seals) Phocinae ("northern seals") Bearded seal ( Erignathus barbatus ) Hooded seal ( Cystophora cristata ) Phocini Harp seal ( Pagophilus groenlandicus ) Ribbon seal ( Histriophoca fasciata ) Grey seal ( Halichoerus grypus ) Phoca Spotted seal ( P. largha ) Harbor seal ( P. vitulina ) Pusa Caspian seal ( P. caspica ) Ringed seal ( P. hispida ) Baikal seal ( P. sibirica ) Monachinae ("southern seals") Monachini (monk seals) Mediterranean monk seal ( Monachus monachus ) Neomonachus Hawaiian monk seal ( N. schauinslandi ) Mirounga (elephant seals) Northern elephant seal ( M. angustirostris ) Southern elephant seal ( M. leonina ) Lobodontini (Antarctic seals) Leopard seal ( Hydrurga leptonyx ) Weddell seal ( Leptonychotes weddellii ) Crabeater seal ( Lobodon carcinophagus ) Ross seal ( Ommatophoca rossi ) Musteloidea Ailuridae Red panda ( Ailurus fulgens ) Mephitidae ( skunks ) Conepatus (hog-nosed skunks) Molina's hog-nosed skunk ( C. chinga ) Humboldt's hog-nosed skunk ( C. humboldtii ) American hog-nosed skunk ( C. leuconotus ) Striped hog-nosed skunk ( C. semistriatus ) Mephitis Hooded skunk ( M. macroura ) Striped skunk ( M. mephitis ) Mydaus (stink badgers) Sunda stink badger ( M. javanensis ) Palawan stink badger ( M. marchei ) Spilogale (spotted skunks) Southern spotted skunk ( S. angustifrons ) Western spotted skunk ( S. gracilis ) Eastern spotted skunk ( S. putorius ) Pygmy spotted skunk ( S. pygmaea ) Procyonidae Kinkajou ( Potos flavus ) Bassariscus Ringtail ( B. astutus ) Cacomistle ( B. sumichrasti ) Procyon (raccoons) Crab-eating raccoon ( P. cancrivorus ) Raccoon ( P. lotor ) Cozumel raccoon ( P. pygmaeus ) Bassaricyon (olingos) Eastern lowland olingo ( B. alleni ) Northern olingo ( B. gabbii ) Western lowland olingo ( B. medius ) Olinguito ( B. neblina ) Nasuina (coatis) Nasua White-nosed coati ( N. narica ) South American coati ( N. nasua ) Nasuella (mountain coatis) Eastern mountain coati ( N. meridensis ) Western mountain coati ( N. olivacea ) Mustelidae see below↓ Mustelidae Mustelidae American badger ( Taxidea taxus ) Mellivora Honey badger ( M. capensis ) Melinae Arctonyx (hog badgers) Northern hog badger ( A. albogularis ) Greater hog badger ( A. collaris ) Sumatran hog badger ( A. hoevenii ) Meles (Eurasian badgers) Japanese badger ( M. anakuma ) Caucasian badger ( M. canescens ) Asian badger ( M. leucurus ) European badger ( M. meles ) Melogale (ferret-badgers) Vietnam ferret-badger ( M. cucphuongensis ) Bornean ferret badger ( M. everetti ) Chinese ferret-badger ( M. moschata ) Javan ferret-badger ( M. orientalis ) Burmese ferret-badger ( M. personata ) Formosan ferret-badger ( M. subaurantiaca ) Guloninae Tayra ( Eira barbara ) Pekania Fisher ( P. pennanti ) Gulo Wolverine ( G. gulo ) Martes (martens) American marten ( M. americana ) Pacific marten ( M. caurina ) Yellow-throated marten ( M. flavigula ) Beech marten ( M. foina ) Nilgiri marten ( M. gwatkinsii ) European pine marten ( M. martes ) Japanese marten ( M. melampus ) Sable ( M. zibellina ) Ictonychinae Lyncodontini Patagonian weasel ( Lyncodon patagonicus ) Galictis (grisons) Lesser grison ( G. cuja ) Greater grison ( G. vittata ) Ictonychini (African polecats) Vormela Marbled polecat ( V. peregusna ) African striped weasel ( Poecilogale albinucha ) Ictonyx Saharan striped polecat ( I. libycus ) Striped polecat ( I. striatus ) Lutrinae (otters) Giant otter ( Pteronura brasiliensis ) Lontra North American river otter ( L. canadensis ) Marine otter ( L. felina ) Neotropical otter ( L. longicaudis ) Southern river otter ( L. provocax ) Enhydra Sea otter ( E. lutris ) Spotted-necked otter ( Hydrictis maculicollis ) Lutra Eurasian otter ( L. lutra ) Hairy-nosed otter ( L. sumatrana ) Lutrogale Smooth-coated otter ( L. perspicillata ) Aonyx African clawless otter ( A. capensis ) Asian small-clawed otter ( A. cinereus ) Congo clawless otter ( A. congicus ) Mustelinae Neogale (New World weasels) Amazon weasel ( N. africana ) Colombian weasel ( N. felipei ) Long-tailed weasel ( N. frenata ) American mink ( N. vison ) Mustela (weasels) subgenus Mustela (paraphyletic) Sichuan weasel ( M. aistoodonnivalis ) Mountain weasel ( M. altaica ) Stoat/Beringian ermine ( M. erminea ) Haida ermine ( M. haidarum ) Yellow-bellied weasel ( M. kathiah ) Least weasel ( M. nivalis ) American ermine ( M. richardsonii ) subgenus Lutreola (paraphyletic) Japanese weasel ( M. itatsi ) European mink ( M. lutreola ) Indonesian mountain weasel ( M. lutreolina ) Malayan weasel ( M. nudipes ) Siberian weasel ( M. sibirica ) Back-striped weasel ( M. strigidorsa ) subgenus Putorius Steppe polecat ( M. eversmannii ) Ferret ( M. furo ) Black-footed ferret ( M. nigripes ) European polecat ( M. putorius ) See also: Mink Polecat Taxon identifiers Puma concolor couguar Wikidata : Q2044439 Wikispecies : Puma concolor cougar BioLib: 1997 CoL : 5KSLV EoL : 1240079 GBIF : 6164590 iNaturalist : 143589 ITIS : 622093 MSW : 14000209 NatureServe : 2.103622 NCBI : 694476 Open Tree of Life : 736439 Species+ : 12325 Puma concolor costaricensis Wikidata : Q3235287 Wikispecies : Puma concolor costaricensis CoL : 5KSLT GBIF : 6164624 ITIS : 552782 MSW : 14000208 Species+ : 12230 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=North_American_cougar&oldid=1304089889 " Categories : NatureServe secure species NatureServe critically imperiled species Cougar Felids of Central America Mammals described in 1792 Mammals of Canada Mammals of the United States Mammals of Mexico Taxa named by Robert Kerr (writer) Fur trade Fauna of California Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats Pages with broken anchors Pages containing broken anchor template with unsupported parameters Webarchive template wayback links Taxonbars with multiple manual Wikidata items This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 22:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents North American cougar 14 languages Add topic

