Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Criticism by different schools of thought Toggle Criticism by different schools of thought subsection 2.1 Anarchism 2.2 Conservatism and traditionalism 2.3 Fascism 2.4 Liberalism 2.5 Marxism 2.6 Religion 2.7 Socialism 3 Topics of criticism Toggle Topics of criticism subsection 3.1 Democracy and freedom 3.2 Exploitation of workers 3.3 Imperialism, political oppression, and genocide 3.4 Inefficiency, irrationality, and unpredictability 3.4.1 Market failure 3.5 Inequality 3.6 Market instability 3.7 Property 3.8 Environmental sustainability 3.9 Profit motive 3.10 Comparison to slavery 3.11 Supply and demand 3.12 Surveillance 3.13 Racism 3.14 Underdevelopment 4 Counter-criticism Toggle Counter-criticism subsection 4.1 Austrian School 4.2 Ayn Rand 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Works cited 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Criticism of capitalism 18 languages العربية Català Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Nederlands پښتو Polski Português Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Arguments against the economic system of capitalism This article is about criticism of capitalism. For the political movement opposed to capitalism, see Anti-capitalism .

Karl Marx 's three volume Das Kapital is one of the most famous written critiques of capitalism.

Criticism of capitalism typically ranges from expressing disagreement with particular aspects or outcomes of capitalism to rejecting the principles of the capitalist system in its entirety.

[ 1 ] Criticism comes from various political and philosophical approaches, including anarchist , socialist , religious , and nationalist viewpoints. Some believe that capitalism can only be overcome through revolution while others [ who?

] believe that structural change can come slowly through political reforms . Some critics believe there are merits in capitalism and wish to balance it with some form of social control, typically through government regulation (e.g. the social market movement).

Prominent among critiques of capitalism are accusations that capitalism is inherently exploitative , alienating , unstable, unsustainable, and creates massive economic inequality , commodifies people, is anti-democratic , leads to an erosion of human rights and national sovereignty while it incentivises imperialist expansion and war , and that it benefits a small minority at the expense of the majority of the population. There are also criticisms from environmental scientists and activists , leftists , degrowthers and others [ who?

] , that it depletes resources, causes climate change , biodiversity loss , topsoil loss, eutrophication , and generates massive amounts of pollution and waste.

History [ edit ] Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Early critics of capitalism, such as Friedrich Engels , claim that rapid industrialization in Europe created working conditions viewed as unfair, including 14-hour work days , child labor and shanty towns .

[ 2 ] Some modern economists argue that average living standards did not improve, or only very slowly improved, before 1840.

[ 3 ] Criticism by different schools of thought [ edit ] Anarchism [ edit ] See also: Anarchism and Libertarian socialism French anarchist Pierre-Joseph Proudhon opposed government privilege that protects capitalist, banking and land interests and the accumulation or acquisition of property (and any form of coercion that led to it) which he believed hampers competition and keeps wealth in the hands of the few. The Spanish individualist anarchist Miguel Giménez Igualada sees "capitalism is an effect of government; the disappearance of government means capitalism falls from its pedestal vertiginously ... That which we call capitalism is not something else but a product of the State, within which the only thing that is being pushed forward is profit, good or badly acquired. And so to fight against capitalism is a pointless task, since be it State capitalism or Enterprise capitalism, as long as Government exists, exploiting capital will exist. The fight, but of consciousness, is against the State".

[ 4 ] Within anarchism, there emerged a critique of wage slavery which refers to a situation perceived as quasi- voluntary slavery , [ citation needed ] where a person's livelihood depends on wages , especially when the dependence is total and immediate.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] It is a negatively connoted term used to draw an analogy between slavery and wage labor by focusing on similarities between owning and renting a person. The term "wage slavery" has been used to criticize economic exploitation and social stratification , with the former seen primarily as unequal bargaining power between labor and capital (particularly when workers are paid comparatively low wages, e.g. in sweatshops ) [ 7 ] and the latter as a lack of workers' self-management , fulfilling job choices and leisure in an economy.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Libertarian socialists believe if freedom is valued, then society must work towards a system in which individuals have the power to decide economic issues along with political issues. Libertarian socialists seek to replace unjustified authority with direct democracy , voluntary federation and popular autonomy in all aspects of life, [ 10 ] including physical communities and economic enterprises. With the advent of the Industrial Revolution , thinkers such as Proudhon and Marx elaborated the comparison between wage labor and slavery in the context of a critique of societal property not intended for active personal use, [ 11 ] Luddites emphasized the dehumanization brought about by machines while later Emma Goldman famously denounced wage slavery by saying: "The only difference is that you are hired slaves instead of block slaves".

[ 12 ] American anarchist Emma Goldman believed that the economic system of capitalism was incompatible with human liberty. "The only demand that property recognizes", she wrote in Anarchism and Other Essays , "is its own gluttonous appetite for greater wealth, because wealth means power; the power to subdue, to crush, to exploit, the power to enslave, to outrage, to degrade".

[ 13 ] She also argued that capitalism dehumanized workers, "turning the producer into a mere particle of a machine, with less will and decision than his master of steel and iron".

[ 13 ] Noam Chomsky contends that there is little moral difference between chattel slavery and renting one's self to an owner or "wage slavery". He feels that it is an attack on personal integrity that undermines individual freedom. He holds that workers should own and control their workplace.

[ 8 ] Many libertarian socialists argue that large-scale voluntary associations should manage industrial manufacture while workers retain rights to the individual products of their labor.

[ 14 ] As such, they see a distinction between the concepts of "private property" and " personal possession ". Whereas "private property" grants an individual exclusive control over a thing whether it is in use or not and regardless of its productive capacity, "possession" grants no rights to things that are not in use.

[ 15 ] In addition to anarchist Benjamin Tucker 's "big four" monopolies (land, money, tariffs and patents) that have emerged under capitalism, neo- mutualist economist Kevin Carson argues that the state has also transferred wealth to the wealthy by subsidizing organizational centralization in the form of transportation and communication subsidies. He believes that Tucker overlooked this issue due to Tucker's focus on individual market transactions, whereas Carson also focuses on organizational issues. The theoretical sections of Studies in Mutualist Political Economy are presented as an attempt to integrate marginalist critiques into the labor theory of value .

[ 16 ] Carson has also been highly critical of intellectual property .

[ 17 ] The primary focus of his most recent work has been decentralized manufacturing and the informal and household economies.

[ 18 ] Carson holds that "[c]apitalism, arising as a new class society directly from the old class society of the Middle Ages , was founded on an act of robbery as massive as the earlier feudal conquest of the land. It has been sustained to the present by continual state intervention to protect its system of privilege without which its survival is unimaginable".

[ 19 ] Carson coined the pejorative term "vulgar libertarianism", a phrase that describes the use of a free market rhetoric in defense of corporate capitalism and economic inequality . According to Carson, the term is derived from the phrase "vulgar political economy", which Karl Marx described as an economic order that "deliberately becomes increasingly apologetic and makes strenuous attempts to talk out of existence the ideas which contain the contradictions [existing in economic life]".

[ 20 ] Conservatism and traditionalism [ edit ] See also: Conservatism and Traditionalist conservatism In Conservatives Against Capitalism , Peter Kolozi relies on Norberto Bobbio 's definition of right and left, dividing the two camps according to their preference for equality or hierarchy. Kolozi argued that capitalism has faced persistent criticism from the right since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution. Such critics, while heterogeneous, are united in the belief “that laissez-faire capitalism has undermined an established social hierarchy governed by the virtuous or excellent".

[ 21 ] In September 2018, Murtaza Hussain wrote in The Intercept about "Conservatives Against Capitalism", stating: For all their differences, there is one key aspect of the intellectual history charted in "Conservatives Against Capitalism" that deals with an issue of shared concern on both the left and the right: the need for community. One of the grim consequences of the Social Darwinian pressures unleashed by free-market capitalism has been the destruction of networks of community, family, and professional associations in developed societies. ... These so-called intermediate institutions have historically played a vital role giving ordinary people a sense of meaning and protecting them from the structural violence of the state and the market. Their loss has led to the creation of a huge class of atomized and lonely people, cut adrift from traditional sources of support and left alone to contend with the power of impersonal economic forces.

[ 22 ] In June 2023, Bridget Ryder wrote in The European Conservative about the degrowth movement , stating: [ 23 ] The capitalist-critical conservative, however, sees possibilities for technological progress and personal freedoms that lie beyond market-driven economics, finding inspiration in European traditions that have been supplanted by industrialisation. Despite the gains in efficiency made within capitalism, many conservatives remain sceptical of the possibility of endless economic growth, particularly given that God is infinite and his creatures, including petroleum and other minerals, are not.

Fascism [ edit ] See also: Economics of fascism , Fascism , and Fascism and ideology Fascists opposed both international socialism and free-market capitalism , arguing that their views represented a Third Position [ 24 ] and claiming to provide a realistic economic alternative that was neither laissez-faire capitalism nor communism .

[ 25 ] They favored corporatism and class collaboration , believing that the existence of inequality and social hierarchy was natural (contrary to the views of socialists ) [ 26 ] [ 27 ] while also arguing that the state had a role in mediating relations between classes (contrary to the views of economic liberals ).

[ 28 ] Liberalism [ edit ] See also: History of liberalism and Liberalism During the Age of Enlightenment , some proponents of liberalism were critics of wage slavery .

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] However, classical liberalism itself was very much an ideology of capitalism, supporting the free market and laissez-faire .

Marxism [ edit ] Main articles: Critique of political economy § Marx's critique of political economy , and Marxian economics Part of a series on Marxian economics Concepts Abstract labour and concrete labour Capital ( accumulation ) Capitalist mode of production Class process Commodity Constant capital Critique of political economy Exchange value Exploitation Labour power Labour theory of value Law of accumulation Law of value Means of production Mode of production Monopoly capitalism Organic composition of capital Productive forces Profit Prices of production Primitive accumulation Rate of exploitation Rate of profit Real prices and ideal prices Relations of production Reproduction Reserve army of labour Socially necessary labour time Socialist mode of production Socialization Simple commodity production Surplus value Surplus labour Surplus product Use value Wage labour Wage slavery Value-form Value product Variable capital Topics Capital controversy Crisis theory Economic determinism Immiseration thesis Imperialism Historical materialism Okishio's theorem Overaccumulation Overdetermination Overproduction Kondratiev wave Technological determinism Technological unemployment Temporal single-system interpretation Falling profit-rate tendency Transformation problem Underconsumption Value Variants Analytical Marxism Classical Marxism Orthodox Marxism Neo-Marxian economics Works A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Das Kapital Grundrisse Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 The Accumulation of Capital Monopoly Capital The Theory of Capitalist Development Finance Capital People Karl Marx Friedrich Engels Vladimir Lenin Rosa Luxemburg Rudolf Hilferding Leon Trotsky Karl Kautsky Ernest Mandel Antonie Pannekoek János Kornai Andrew Kliman Richard D. Wolff Nikolai Kondratiev Paul Sweezy Nobuo Okishio Ian Steedman John Roemer David Laibman Paul A. Baran Stephen Resnick Michał Kalecki Journals Cambridge Journal of Economics International Journal of Political Economy Monthly Review New School Economic Review Real-World Economics Review Rethinking Marxism Science and Society Related topics Evolutionary economics Classical economics Marxism Marxist sociology Neoclassical economics Perspectives on capitalism Political economy Schools of economic thought Socialist economics Critiques of capitalism Communism portal Economics portal v t e The " Pyramid of Capitalist System " cartoon made by the Industrial Workers of the World (1911) is an example of a socialist critique of capitalism and of social stratification .

Karl Marx considered capitalism to be a historically specific mode of production (the way in which the productive property is owned and controlled, combined with the corresponding social relations between individuals based on their connection with the process of production).

[ citation needed ] The "capitalistic era" according to Marx dates from 16th-century merchants and small urban workshops.

[ 31 ] Marx knew that wage labour existed on a modest scale for centuries before capitalist industry. For Marx, the capitalist stage of development or " bourgeois society" represented the most advanced form of social organization to date, but he also thought that the working classes would come to power in a worldwide socialist or communist transformation of human society as the end of the series of first aristocratic, then capitalist and finally working class rule was reached.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Following Adam Smith , Marx distinguished the use value of commodities from their exchange value in the market. According to Marx, capital is created with the purchase of commodities for the purpose of creating new commodities with an exchange value higher than the sum of the original purchases. For Marx, the use of labor power had itself become a commodity under capitalism and the exchange value of labor power, as reflected in the wage, is less than the value it produces for the capitalist.

This difference in values, he argues, constitutes surplus value , which the capitalists extract and accumulate. In his book Capital , Marx argues that the capitalist mode of production is distinguished by how the owners of capital extract this surplus from workers—all prior class societies had extracted surplus labor , but capitalism was new in doing so via the sale-value of produced commodities.

[ 34 ] He argues that a core requirement of a capitalist society is that a large portion of the population must not possess sources of self-sustenance that would allow them to be independent and are instead forced to sell their labor for a wage.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] In conjunction with his criticism of capitalism was Marx's belief that the working class, due to its relationship to the means of production and numerical superiority under capitalism, would be the driving force behind the socialist revolution.

[ 38 ] In Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1916), Vladimir Lenin further developed Marxist theory and argued that capitalism necessarily led to monopoly capitalism and the export of capital—which he also called "imperialism"—to find new markets and resources, representing the last and highest stage of capitalism.

[ 39 ] Some 20th-century Marxian economists consider capitalism to be a social formation where capitalist class processes dominate, but are not exclusive.

[ 40 ] To these thinkers, capitalist class processes are simply those in which surplus labor takes the form of surplus value, usable as capital; other tendencies for utilization of labor nonetheless exist simultaneously in existing societies where capitalist processes predominate. However, other late Marxian thinkers argue that a social formation as a whole may be classed as capitalist if capitalism is the mode by which a surplus is extracted, even if this surplus is not produced by capitalist activity as when an absolute majority of the population is engaged in non-capitalist economic activity.

[ 41 ] In Limits to Capital (1982), David Harvey outlines an overdetermined, "spatially restless" capitalism coupled with the spatiality of crisis formation and resolution.

[ 42 ] Harvey used Marx's theory of crisis to aid his argument that capitalism must have its "fixes", but that we cannot predetermine what fixes will be implemented, nor in what form they will be. His work on contractions of capital accumulation and international movements of capitalist modes of production and money flows has been influential.

[ 43 ] According to Harvey, capitalism creates the conditions for volatile and geographically uneven development.

[ 44 ] Sociologists such as Ulrich Beck envisioned the society of risk as a new cultural value which saw risk as a commodity to be exchanged in globalized economies. This theory suggested that disasters and capitalist economy were inevitably entwined. Disasters allow the introduction of economic programs which otherwise would be rejected as well as decentralizing the class structure in production.

[ 45 ] Religion [ edit ] See also: Christian communism , Christian left , Christian socialism , Islamic socialism , Jewish left , Liberation theology , Religious communism , and Social Gospel Many organized religions have criticized or opposed specific elements of capitalism. Traditional Judaism , Christianity , and Islam forbid lending money at interest , [ 46 ] [ 47 ] although alternative methods of banking have been developed. Some Christians have criticized capitalism for its materialist aspects and its inability to account for the wellbeing of all people.

[ 48 ] Many of Jesus' parables deal with economic concerns: farming, shepherding, being in debt, doing hard labor, being excluded from banquets and the houses of the rich and have implications for wealth and power distribution.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] Catholic scholars and clergy have often criticized capitalism because of its disenfranchisement of the poor, often promoting distributism as an alternative. In his 84-page apostolic exhortation Evangelii gaudium , Catholic Pope Francis described unfettered capitalism as "a new tyranny" and called on world leaders to fight rising poverty and inequality, stating: [ 51 ] Some people continue to defend trickle-down theories which assume that economic growth, encouraged by a free market, will inevitably succeed in bringing about greater justice and inclusiveness in the world. This opinion, which has never been confirmed by the facts, expresses a crude and naive trust in the goodness of those wielding economic power and in the sacralized workings of the prevailing economic system. Meanwhile, the excluded are still waiting.

[ 52 ] The Catholic Church forbids usury .

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] [ 55 ] As established by papal encyclicals Rerum Novarum and Quadragesimo Anno , Catholic social teaching does not support unrestricted capitalism, primarily because it is considered part of liberalism and secondly by its nature, which goes against social justice. In 2013, Pope Francis said that more restrictions on the free market were required because the "dictatorship" of the global financial system and the "cult of money" were making people miserable.

[ 56 ] In his encyclical Laudato si' , Pope Francis denounced the role of capitalism in furthering climate change.

[ 57 ] Islam forbids lending money at interest ( riba ), the mode of operation of capitalist finance.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] Socialism [ edit ] Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Syndicalism Precursors Guild socialism Orthodox Marxism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Variants Anarchist Council communism De Leonism Fascist Green Nationalist Sorelianism Economics Co-operative economics Labour economics General strike Labour rights Labour unionisation Workers' self-management Mutual aid Organisations International Workingmen's Association (1864–1876) IWA–AIT and affiliates Argentine Regional Workers' Federation (FORA) Brazilian Workers Confederation (COB) Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (CNT–AIT, Spain) Confederation of Revolutionary Anarcho-Syndicalists (CRAS, Russia) Free Workers' Union (FAU, Germany) Norsk Syndikalistisk Forbund (NSF–IAA, Norway) Solidarity Federation (SF–IWA, Britain) Confédération Générale du Travail (CGT, France) General Confederation of Labour (CGT, Spain) Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) IWW-Chile IWW-South Africa Irish Transport and General Workers' Union (ITGWU) Fagoppositionens Sammenslutning (FS, Denmark) National Workers' Union (UON, Portugal) Sveriges Arbetares Centralorganisation (SAC, Sweden) People Bain Berth De Ambris De Leon Delesalle Fitzgerald Griffuelhes Haywood Janvion Jouhaux Lagardelle Larkin Monatte García Panunzio Pelloutier Rocker Sorel Valois Related subjects Communism Copyleft Corporatism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of copyright Critique of work Fascism Labour power Libertarian socialism Post-capitalism Revisionism Socialism Organized Labour portal Politics portal v t e Socialists argue that the accumulation of capital generates waste through externalities that require costly corrective regulatory measures. They also point out that this process generates wasteful industries and practices that exist only to generate sufficient demand for products to be sold at a profit (such as high-pressure advertisement), thereby creating rather than satisfying economic demand.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] Socialists argue that capitalism consists of irrational activity, such as the purchasing of commodities only to sell at a later time when their price appreciates (known as speculation ), rather than for consumption. Therefore, a crucial criticism often made by socialists is that making money, or accumulation of capital, does not correspond to the satisfaction of demand (the production of use-values ).

[ 62 ] The fundamental criterion for economic activity in capitalism is the accumulation of capital for reinvestment in production. This spurs the development of new, non-productive industries that do not produce use-value and only exist to keep the accumulation process afloat. An example of a non-productive industry is the financial industry , which contributes to the formation of economic bubbles.

[ 63 ] Socialists view private property relations as limiting the potential of productive forces in the economy. According to socialists, private property becomes obsolete when it concentrates into centralized, socialized institutions based on private appropriation of revenue (but based on cooperative work and internal planning in allocation of inputs) until the role of the capitalist becomes redundant.

[ 64 ] With no need for capital accumulation and a class of owners, private property of the means of production is perceived as being an outdated form of economic organization that should be replaced by a free association of individuals based on public or common ownership of these socialized assets.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] Private ownership imposes constraints on planning, leading to uncoordinated economic decisions that result in business fluctuations, unemployment and a tremendous waste of material resources during crisis of overproduction .

[ 67 ] Excessive disparities in income distribution lead to social instability and require costly corrective measures in the form of redistributive taxation. This incurs heavy administrative costs while weakening the incentive to work, inviting dishonesty and increasing the likelihood of tax evasion (the corrective measures) while reducing the overall efficiency of the market economy.

[ 68 ] These corrective policies limit the market's incentive system by providing things such as minimum wages , unemployment insurance , taxing profits and reducing the reserve army of labor, resulting in reduced incentives for capitalists to invest in more production. In essence, social welfare policies cripple capitalism's incentive system and are thus unsustainable in the long-run.

[ 69 ] Marxists argue that the establishment of a socialist mode of production is the only way to overcome these deficiencies. Socialists and specifically Marxian socialists, argue that the inherent conflict of interests between the working class and capital prevent optimal use of available human resources and leads to contradictory interest groups (labor and business) striving to influence the state to intervene in the economy at the expense of overall economic efficiency.

Early socialists ( utopian socialists and Ricardian socialists ) criticized capitalism for concentrating power and wealth within a small segment of society [ 70 ] who do not utilize available technology and resources to their maximum potential in the interests of the public.

[ 66 ] Albert Einstein advocated for a socialist planned economy with his 1949 article " Why Socialism?

" In the May 1949 issue of the Monthly Review titled " Why Socialism?

", Albert Einstein wrote: [ 71 ] I am convinced there is only one way to eliminate (the) grave evils (of capitalism), namely through the establishment of a socialist economy, accompanied by an educational system which would be oriented toward social goals. In such an economy, the means of production are owned by society itself and are utilized in a planned fashion. A planned economy, which adjusts production to the needs of the community, would distribute the work to be done among all those able to work and would guarantee a livelihood to every man, woman, and child. The education of the individual, in addition to promoting his own innate abilities, would attempt to develop in him a sense of responsibility for his fellow-men in place of the glorification of power and success in our present society.

Topics of criticism [ edit ] Democracy and freedom [ edit ] Further information: Criticism of the free market Economist Branko Horvat stated that "[I]t is now well known that capitalist development leads to the concentration of capital, employment and power. It is somewhat less known that it leads to the almost complete destruction of economic freedom".

[ 72 ] Critics argue that capitalism is in fact not a democracy , but a plutocracy , because in capitalism there is a lack of political , democratic and economic power for the vast majority of the population. They say that this is because in capitalism the means of production are owned privately by a minority of the population, with the vast majority of the population having no control of the economy . Critics argue that capitalism creates large concentrations of money and property in the hands of the elite , leading to vast wealth and income inequalities between the elite and the majority of the population.

[ 73 ] Evidence for the fact that capitalism is plutocratic can be seen in policies that benefit capitalists at the expense of workers, such as policies where taxes are raised on workers and reduced for capitalists, and the retirement age being increased despite it being against the will of the people. " Corporate capitalism " and " inverted totalitarianism " are terms used by the aforementioned activists and critics of capitalism to describe a capitalist marketplace—and society—characterized by the dominance of hierarchical , bureaucratic , large corporations , which are legally required to pursue profit without concern for social welfare. Corporate capitalism has been criticized for the amount of power and influence corporations and large business interest groups have over government policy, including the policies of regulatory agencies and influencing political campaigns. Many social scientists have criticized corporations for failing to act in the interests of the people; they claim the existence of large corporations seems to circumvent the principles of democracy, which assumes equal power relations between all individuals in a society.

[ 74 ] As part of the political left , activists against corporate power and influence work towards a decreased income gap and improved economical equity .

[ citation needed ] "Capitalism is the astounding belief that the most wickedest of men will do the most wickedest of things for the greatest good of everyone".

— John Maynard Keynes [ 75 ] The rise of giant multinational corporations has been a topic of concern among the aforementioned scholars, intellectuals and activists, who see the large corporation as leading to deep, structural erosion of such basic human rights and civil rights as equitable wealth and income distribution , equitable democratic political and socio-economic power representation and many other human rights and needs. They have pointed out that in their view large corporations create false needs in consumers and—they contend—have had a long history of interference in and distortion of the policies of sovereign nation states through high-priced legal lobbying and other almost always legal , powerful forms of influence peddling . In their view, evidence supporting this belief includes invasive advertising (such as billboards , television ads, adware , spam , telemarketing , child-targeted advertising and guerrilla marketing ), massive open or secret corporate political campaign contributions in so-called "democratic" elections, corporatocracy , the revolving door between government and corporations, regulatory capture , " too big to fail " (also known as " too big to jail "), massive taxpayer-provided corporate bailouts , socialism/communism for the very rich and brutal, vicious, Darwinian capitalism for everyone else, and—they claim—seemingly endless global news stories about corporate corruption ( Martha Stewart and Enron , among other examples).

[ citation needed ] Anti-corporate-activists express the view that large corporations answer only to large shareholders, giving human rights issues, social justice issues, environmental issues and other issues of high significance to the bottom 99% of the global human population virtually no consideration.

[ 74 ] [ 76 ] American political philosopher Jodi Dean says that contemporary economic and financial calamities have dispelled the notion that capitalism is a viable economic system, adding that "the fantasy that democracy exerts a force for economic justice has dissolved as the US government funnels trillions of dollars to banks and European central banks rig national governments and cut social programs to keep themselves afloat." [ 77 ] According to Quinn Slobodian , one way capitalism undermines democracy is by "punching holes in the territory of the nation state" to create special economic zones , of which there are 5,400 around the globe, ranging from tax havens to "sites for low-wage production . . . often ringed by barbed wire," that he describes as "zones of exception with different laws and often no democratic oversight." [ 78 ] [ 79 ] David Schweickart wrote: "Ordinary people [in capitalist societies] are deemed competent enough to select their political leaders-but not their bosses. Contemporary capitalism celebrates democracy, yet denies us our democratic rights at precisely the point where they might be utilized most immediately and concretely: at the place where we spend most of the active and alert hours of our adult lives".

[ 80 ] Thomas Jefferson , one of the founders of the United States , said "I hope we shall crush ... in its birth the aristocracy of our moneyed corporations, which dare already to challenge our government to a trial of strength and bid defiance to the laws of our country".

[ 81 ] In a 29 April 1938 message to the U. S. Congress , Franklin D. Roosevelt warned that the growth of private power could lead to fascism , arguing that "the liberty of a democracy is not safe if the people tolerate the growth of private power to a point where it becomes stronger than their democratic state itself. That, in its essence, is fascism—ownership of government by an individual, by a group, or by any other controlling private power.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] Statistics of the Bureau of Internal Revenue reveal the following figures for 1935: "Ownership of corporate assets: Of all corporations reporting from every part of the Nation, one-tenth of 1 percent of them owned 52 percent of the assets of all of them".

[ 82 ] [ 84 ] U. S. President Dwight D. Eisenhower criticized the notion of the confluence of corporate power and de facto fascism [ 85 ] and in his 1961 Farewell Address to the Nation brought attention to the "conjunction of an immense military establishment and a large arms industry " in the United States [ 86 ] and stressed "the need to maintain balance in and among national programs—balance between the private and the public economy, balance between cost and hoped for advantage".

[ 86 ] In a 1986 debate on Socialism vs Capitalism with John Judis vs Harry Binswanger and John Ridpath , intellectual Christopher Hitchens said: capitalism as a system has coexisted with and in on occasion sponsored feudalism , monarchy , fascism , slavery , apartheid , and under development . It has also been the great engine of progress, development and innovation in a certain few heartland countries. This means that it must be a system studied as a system and not as an idea. Its claims to be the sponsor of freedom are purely contingent. It's good propaganda but it's not very good political science [ 87 ] Exploitation of workers [ edit ] See also: Wage slavery and Sweatshop "Of usury", from Sebastian Brant 's Stultifera Navis ( the Ship of Fools ; woodcut attributed to Albrecht Dürer ) Critics of capitalism view the system as inherently exploitative . In an economic sense, exploitation is often related to the expropriation of labor for profit and based on Karl Marx 's version of the labor theory of value . The labor theory of value was supported by classical economists like David Ricardo and Adam Smith who believed that "the value of a commodity depends on the relative quantity of labor which is necessary for its production".

[ 88 ] "In capitalism, workers are separated from the means of production, implying that they must compete in labour markets to sell their labour power to capitalists in order to earn a living." —Thomas Wiedmann, lead author of "Scientists’ warning on affluence" [ 89 ] In Das Kapital , Marx identified the commodity as the basic unit of capitalist organization. Marx described a "common denominator" between commodities, in particular that commodities are the product of labor and are related to each other by an exchange value (i.e.

price ).

[ 90 ] By using the labor theory of value, Marxists see a connection between labor and exchange value, in that commodities are exchanged depending on the socially necessary labor time needed to produce them.

[ 91 ] However, due to the productive forces of industrial organization, laborers are seen as creating more exchange value during the course of the working day than the cost of their survival (food, shelter, clothing and so on).

[ 92 ] Marxists argue that capitalists are thus able to pay for this cost of survival while expropriating the excess labor (i.e.

surplus value ).

[ 91 ] Marxists further argue that due to economic inequality , the purchase of labor cannot occur under "free" conditions. Since capitalists control the means of production (e.g. factories, businesses, machinery and so on) and workers control only their labor, the worker is naturally coerced into allowing their labor to be exploited.

[ 93 ] Critics argue that exploitation occurs even if the exploited consents, since the definition of exploitation is independent of consent. In essence, workers must allow their labor to be exploited or face starvation. Since some degree of unemployment is typical in modern economies, Marxists argue that wages are naturally driven down in free market systems. Hence, even if a worker contests their wages, capitalists are able to find someone from the reserve army of labor who is more desperate.

[ 94 ] The act (or threat) of striking has historically been an organized action to withhold labor from capitalists, without fear of individual retaliation.

[ 95 ] Some critics of capitalism, while acknowledging the necessity of trade unionism , believe that trade unions simply reform an already exploitative system, leaving the system of exploitation intact.

[ 96 ] [ 11 ] Lysander Spooner argued that "almost all fortunes are made out of the capital and labour of other men than those who realize them. Indeed, large fortunes could rarely be made at all by one individual, except by his sponging capital and labour from others".

[ 97 ] Some labor historians and scholars have argued that unfree labor —by slaves , indentured servants , prisoners , or other coerced persons—is compatible with capitalist relations.

Tom Brass argued that unfree labor is acceptable to capital.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] Historian Greg Grandin argues that capitalism has its origins in slavery, saying that "[w]hen historians talk about the Atlantic market revolution, they are talking about capitalism. And when they are talking about capitalism, they are talking about slavery." [ 100 ] Some scholars, including Edward E. Baptist , Sven Beckert and Matthew Desmond , assert that slavery was an integral component in the violent development of American and global capitalism.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] [ 103 ] The Slovenian continental philosopher Slavoj Žižek posits that the new era of global capitalism has ushered in new forms of contemporary slavery , including migrant workers deprived of basic civil rights on the Arabian Peninsula , the total control of workers in Asian sweatshops and the use of forced labor in the exploitation of natural resources in Central Africa .

[ 104 ] Academics such as the developmental psychologist Howard Gardner have proposed the adoption of upper limits in individual wealth as "a solution that would make the world a better place".

[ 105 ] Marxian economist Richard D. Wolff postulates that capitalist economies prioritize profits and capital accumulation over the social needs of communities, and that capitalist enterprises rarely include the workers in the basic decisions of the enterprise.

[ 106 ] Political economist Clara E. Mattei of the New School for Social Research demonstrates that the imposition of fiscal, monetary and industrial austerity policies meant to discipline labor by reinforcing hierarchal wage relations and therefore protect the capitalist system through wage repression and the weakening of collective bargaining power by workers can increase their exploitation while boosting the profits of the ownership class, which she says is one of the primary drivers of the "global inequality trend". As an example, Mattei shows that over the last four decades in the United States the profit share of national output increased while labor's share plummeted, demonstrating a symmetrical relationship between owner profit and worker loss, where the former was taking from the latter. She adds that “an increase in exploitation was also evident, with real wages grossly lagging behind labor productivity.” [ 107 ] Imperialism, political oppression, and genocide [ edit ] Near the start of the 20th century, Vladimir Lenin wrote that state use of military power to defend capitalist interests abroad was an inevitable corollary of monopoly capitalism.

[ 39 ] He argued that capitalism needs imperialism to survive.

[ 108 ] According to Lenin, the export of financial capital superseded the export of commodities; banking and industrial capital merged to form large financial cartels and trusts in which production and distribution are highly centralized; and monopoly capitalists influenced state policy to carve up the world into spheres of interest. These trends led states to defend their capitalist interests abroad through military power.

According to economic anthropologist Jason Hickel , capitalism requires the accumulation of excess wealth in the hands of economic elites for the purpose of large scale investment, continuous growth and expansion, and enormous amounts of cheap labor. As such, there was never and could never have been a gradual or peaceful transition to capitalism, and that "organized violence, mass impoverishment, and the destruction of self-sufficient subsistence economies" ushered in the capitalist era. Its emergence was fueled by immiseration and extreme violence that accompanied enclosure and colonization , with colonized peoples becoming enslaved workers producing products that were then processed by European peasants, dispossessed by enclosure, who filled the factories in desperation as exploited cheap labor. Hickel adds that there was fierce resistance to these developments, as that the period 1500 to the 1800s, "right into the Industrial Revolution, was among the bloodiest, most tumultuous times in world history." [ 109 ] [ 110 ] Sociologist David Nibert argues that while capitalism "turned out to be every bit as violent and oppressive as the social systems dominated by the old aristocrats", it also included "an additional and pernicious peril—the necessity for continuous growth and expansion". As an example of this, Nibert points to the mass killing of millions of buffalo on the Great Plains and the subjugation and expulsion of the indigenous population by the U.S. military in the 19th century for the purpose of expanding ranching operations, and rearing livestock for the purpose of profit.

[ 111 ] Capitalism and capitalist governments have also been criticized by socialists as oligarchic in nature, [ 112 ] [ 113 ] due to the inevitable inequality.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] The military–industrial complex , mentioned in Dwight D. Eisenhower 's presidential farewell address, appears to play a significant role in the American capitalist system. It may be one of the driving forces of American militarism and intervention abroad.

[ 116 ] The United States has used military force and has encouraged and facilitated state terrorism and mass violence to entrench neoliberal capitalism in the Global South , protect the interests of U.S. economic elites, and to crush any possible resistance to this entrenchment, especially during the Cold War , [ 117 ] [ 118 ] [ 119 ] with significant cases being Brazil , Chile and Indonesia .

[ 118 ] [ 120 ] [ 121 ] [ 122 ] Inefficiency, irrationality, and unpredictability [ edit ] Some opponents criticize capitalism's inefficiency . They note a shift from pre-industrial reuse and thriftiness before capitalism to a consumer-based economy that pushes "ready-made" materials.

[ 123 ] It is argued that a sanitation industry arose under capitalism that deemed trash valueless—a significant break from the past when much "waste" was used and reused almost indefinitely.

[ 123 ] In the process, critics say, capitalism has created a profit driven system based on selling as many products as possible.

[ 124 ] Critics relate the "ready-made" trend to a growing garbage problem in which, as of 2008, 4.5 pounds of trash are generated per person each day (compared to 2.7 pounds in 1960).

[ 125 ] Anti-capitalist groups with an emphasis on conservation include eco-socialists and social ecologists .

Planned obsolescence has been criticized as a wasteful practice under capitalism. By designing products to wear out faster than need be, new consumption is generated.

[ 123 ] This would benefit corporations by increasing sales while at the same time generating excessive waste. A well-known example is the charge that Apple designed its iPod to fail after 18 months.

[ 126 ] Critics view planned obsolescence as wasteful and an inefficient use of resources.

[ 127 ] Other authors such as Naomi Klein have criticized brand-based marketing for putting more emphasis on the company's name-brand than on manufacturing products.

[ 128 ] Some economists, most notably Marxian economists , argue that the system of perpetual capital accumulation leads to irrational outcomes and a mis-allocation of resources as industries and jobs are created for the sake of making money as opposed to satisfying actual demands and needs.

[ 129 ] Market failure [ edit ] Market failure is a term used by economists to describe the condition where the allocation of goods and services by a market is not efficient .

Keynesian economist Paul Krugman views this scenario in which individuals' pursuit of self-interest leads to bad results for society as a whole.

[ 130 ] John Maynard Keynes preferred economic interventionism by government to free markets.

[ 131 ] Some believe that the lack of perfect information and perfect competition in a free market is grounds for government intervention. Others perceive certain unique problems with a free market including: monopolies , monopsonies , insider trading and price gouging .

[ 132 ] Inequality [ edit ] See also: Economic inequality and Social inequality A man at the protest event Occupy Wall Street Critics argue that capitalism is associated with the unfair distribution of wealth and power; a tendency toward market monopoly or oligopoly (and government by oligarchy ); imperialism, counter-revolutionary wars and various forms of economic and cultural exploitation; repression of workers and trade unionists and phenomena such as social alienation , economic inequality, unemployment and economic instability. Critics have argued that there is an inherent tendency toward oligopolistic structures when laissez-faire is combined with capitalist private property . Capitalism is regarded by many socialists to be irrational in that production and the direction of the economy are unplanned, creating many inconsistencies and internal contradictions and thus should be controlled through public policy .

[ 133 ] In the early 20th century, Vladimir Lenin argued that state use of military power to defend capitalist interests abroad was an inevitable corollary of monopoly capitalism.

[ 39 ] In 2019, Marxian Economist Richard D. Wolff argued that Capitalism is unstable, Capitalism is unequal, and fundamentally Undemocratic.

[ 134 ] In a 1965 letter to Carlos Quijano , editor of Marcha , a weekly newspaper published in Montevideo, Uruguay, Che Guevara wrote: The laws of capitalism, which are blind and are invisible to ordinary people, act upon the individual without he or she being aware of it. One sees only the vastness of a seemingly infinite horizon ahead. That is how it is painted by capitalist propagandists who purport to draw a lesson from the example of Rockefeller —whether or not it is true—about the possibilities of individual success. The amount of poverty and suffering required for a Rockefeller to emerge, and the amount of depravity entailed in the accumulation of a fortune of such magnitude, are left out of the picture, and it is not always possible for the popular forces to expose this clearly. ... It is a contest among wolves. One can win only at the cost of the failure of others.

[ 135 ] Wealth inequality in the United States increased from 1989 to 2013.

[ 136 ] A modern critic of capitalism is Ravi Batra , who focuses on inequality as a source of immiserization but also of system failure. Batra popularised the concept "share of wealth held by richest 1%" as an indicator of inequality and an important determinant of depressions in his best-selling books in the 1980s.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] The scholars Kristen Ghodsee and Mitchell A. Orenstein suggest that left to its own devices, capitalism will result in a small group of economic elites capturing the majority of wealth and power in society.

[ 139 ] Dylan Sullivan and Jason Hickel argue that poverty continues to exist in the contemporary global capitalist system in spite of it being highly productive because it is undemocratic and has maintained conditions of extreme inequality where masses of working people, who have no ownership or control over the means of production, have their labor power "appropriated by a ruling class or an external imperial power," and are cut off from common land and resources.

[ 140 ] They further contend that capitalism needs significant levels of inequality as capital accumulation requires access to cheap labor, and lots of it, as without it the system would be crippled.

[ 141 ] "Since value is produced only by workers, capitalists can extract, appropriate and accumulate the surplus part of this value only through exploitation. And exploitation, by definition, negates equality." — Jonathan Nitzan and Shimshon Bichler .

[ 142 ] In the United States, the shares of earnings and wealth of the households in the top 1 percent of the corresponding distributions are 21 percent (in 2006) and 37 percent (in 2009), respectively.

[ 143 ] Critics, such as Ravi Batra, argue that the capitalist system has inherent biases favoring those who already possess greater resources. The inequality may be propagated through inheritance and economic policy. Rich people are in a position to give their children a better education and inherited wealth and that this can create or increase large differences in wealth between people who do not differ in ability or effort. One study shows that in the United States 43.35% of the people in the Forbes magazine "400 richest individuals" list were already rich enough at birth to qualify.

[ 144 ] Another study indicated that in the United States wealth, race and schooling are important to the inheritance of economic status, but that IQ is not a major contributor and the genetic transmission of IQ is even less important.

[ 145 ] Batra has argued that the tax and benefit legislation in the United States since the Reagan presidency has contributed greatly to the inequalities and economic problems and should be repealed.

[ 146 ] Market instability [ edit ] Critics of capitalism, particularly Marxists, identify market instability as a permanent feature of capitalist economy.

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] Marx believed that the unplanned and explosive growth of capitalism does not occur in a smooth manner, but is interrupted by periods of overproduction in which stagnation or decline occur (i.e.

recessions ).

[ 149 ] In the view of Marxists, several contradictions in the capitalist mode of production are present, particularly the internal contradiction between anarchy in the sphere of capital (i.e.

free market ) and socialised production in the sphere of labor (i.e.

industrialism ).

[ 150 ] In The Communist Manifesto , Marx and Engels highlighted what they saw as a uniquely capitalist juxtaposition of overabundance and poverty: "Society suddenly finds itself put back into a state of momentary barbarism. And why? Because there is too much civilization, too much means of subsistence, too much industry, too much commerce".

[ 149 ] Some scholars blame the 2008 financial crisis on the neoliberal capitalist model.

[ 157 ] Following the banking crisis of 2007, economist and former Chair of the Federal Reserve , Alan Greenspan told the United States Congress on 23 October 2008 that "[t]his modern risk-management paradigm held sway for decades. The whole intellectual edifice, however, collapsed in the summer of last year", [ 158 ] and that "I made a mistake in presuming that the self-interests of organizations, specifically banks and others, were such that they were best capable of protecting their own shareholders and their equity in firms ... I was shocked".

[ 159 ] Property [ edit ] Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and Friedrich Engels argue that the free market is not necessarily free, but weighted towards those who already own private property.

[ 94 ] [ 160 ] They view capitalist regulations, including the enforcement of private property on land and exclusive rights to natural resources, as unjustly enclosing upon what should be owned by all, forcing those without private property to sell their labor to capitalists and landlords in a market favorable to the latter, thus forcing workers to accept low wages to survive.

[ 161 ] In his criticism of capitalism, Proudhon believed that the emphasis on private property is the problem. He argued that property is theft , arguing that private property leads to despotism: "Now, property necessarily engenders despotism—the government of caprice, the reign of libidinous pleasure. That is so clearly the essence of property that, to be convinced of it, one need but remember what it is, and observe what happens around him. Property is the right to use and abuse".

[ 160 ] Many left-wing anarchists, such as anarchist communists , believe in replacing capitalist private property with a system where people can lay claim to things based on personal use and claim that "[private] property is the domination of an individual, or a coalition of individuals, over things; it is not the claim of any person or persons to the use of things" and "this is, usufruct, a very different matter. Property means the monopoly of wealth, the right to prevent others using it, whether the owner needs it or not".

[ 162 ] Mutualists and some anarchists support markets and private property, but not in their present form.

[ 163 ] They argue that particular aspects of modern capitalism violate the ability of individuals to trade in the absence of coercion. Mutualists support markets and private property in the product of labor, but only when these markets guarantee that workers will realize for themselves the value of their labor.

[ 160 ] In recent times, most economies have extended private property rights to include such things as patents and copyrights . Critics see these so-called intellectual property laws as coercive against those with few prior resources. They argue that such regulations discourage the sharing of ideas and encourage nonproductive rent seeking behavior, both of which enact a deadweight loss on the economy, erecting a prohibitive barrier to entry into the market.

[ 164 ] Not all pro-capitalists support the concept of copyrights, but those who do argue that compensation to the creator is necessary as an incentive.

[ 164 ] Environmental sustainability [ edit ] See also: Degrowth and Steady-state economy Gullfaks oil field in the North Sea. As petroleum is a non-renewable natural resource the industry is faced with an inevitable eventual depletion of the world's oil supply.

Many aspects of capitalism have come under attack from the anti-globalization movement , which is primarily opposed to corporate capitalism .

Environmentalists and scholars have argued that capitalism requires continual economic growth and that it will inevitably deplete the finite natural resources of Earth and cause mass extinctions of animal and plant life.

[ 165 ] [ 166 ] [ 167 ] [ 168 ] Such critics argue that while neoliberalism , the ideological backbone of contemporary globalized capitalism, has indeed increased global trade, it has also destroyed traditional ways of life, exacerbated inequality, increased global poverty , and that environmental indicators indicate massive environmental degradation since the late 1970s.

[ 169 ] [ 170 ] [ 171 ] [ 172 ] A placard criticising capitalism held by a climate change protester in Australia Some scholars argue that the capitalist approach to environmental economics does not take into consideration the preservation of natural resources [ 173 ] and that capitalism creates three ecological problems: growth, technology, and consumption.

[ 174 ] The growth problem results from the nature of capitalism, as it focuses around the pursuit of limitless economic growth and the accumulation of capital.

[ 174 ] [ 175 ] The innovation of new technologies has an impact on the environmental future as they serve as a capitalist tool in which environmental technologies can result in the expansion of the system.

[ 176 ] Consumption is focused around the capital accumulation of commodities and neglects the use-value of production.

[ 174 ] Professor Radhika Desai, director of the Geopolitical Economy Research Group at the University of Manitoba , contends that ecological crises such as climate change , pollution and biodiversity loss occur when "capitalist firms compete to appropriate and plunder the free resources of nature and when this very appropriation and plunder forces working people to overexploit their ever-shrinking share of these resources." [ 177 ] One of the main modern criticism to the sustainability of capitalism is related to the so-called commodity chains, or production/consumption chains.

[ 178 ] [ 179 ] These terms refer to the network of transfers of materials and commodities that is currently part of the functioning of the global capitalist system. Examples include high tech commodities produced in countries with low average wages by multinational firms and then being sold in distant high income countries; materials and resources being extracted in some countries, turned into finished products in some others and sold as commodities in further ones; and countries exchanging with each other the same kind of commodities for the sake of consumers' choice (e.g. Europe both exporting and importing cars to and from the United States). According to critics, such processes, all of which produce pollution and waste of resources, are an integral part of the functioning of capitalism (i.e. its " metabolism ").

[ 180 ] Critics note that the statistical methods used in calculating ecological footprint have been criticized and some find the whole concept of counting how much land is used to be flawed, arguing that there is nothing intrinsically negative about using more land to improve living standards (rejection of the intrinsic value of nature).

[ 181 ] [ 182 ] Under what anti-capitalists such as Murray Bookchin call the "grow or die" imperative of capitalism, they say there is little reason to expect hazardous consumption and production practices to change in a timely manner. They also claim that markets and states invariably drag their feet on substantive environmental reform and are notoriously slow to adopt viable sustainable technologies.

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] Immanuel Wallerstein , referring to the externalization of costs as the "dirty secret" of capitalism, claims that there are built-in limits to ecological reform and that the costs of doing business in the world capitalist economy are ratcheting upward because of deruralization and democratization.

[ 185 ] A team of Finnish scientists hired by the UN Secretary-General to aid the 2019 Global Sustainable Development Report assert that capitalism as we know it is moribund, primarily because it focuses on short term profits and fails to look after the long term needs of people and the environment which is being subjected to unsustainable exploitation. Their report goes on to link many seemingly disparate contemporary crises to this system, including environmental factors such as global warming and accelerated species extinctions and also societal factors such as rising economic inequality , unemployment , sluggish economic growth, rising debt levels, and impuissant governments unable to deal with these problems. The scientists say a new economic model, one which focuses on sustainability and efficiency and not profit and growth, will be needed as decades of robust economic growth driven by abundant resources and cheap energy is rapidly coming to a close.

[ 186 ] [ 187 ] Another group of scientists contributing to the 2020 "Scientists warning on affluence" argue that a shift away from paradigms fixating on economic growth and the "profit-driven mechanism of prevailing economic systems" will be necessary to mitigate human impacts on the environment , and suggest a range of ideas from the reformist to the radical, with the latter consisting of degrowth , eco-socialism and eco-anarchism .

[ 89 ] Some scientists contend that the rise of capitalism, which itself developed out of European imperialism and colonialism of the 15th and 16th centuries, marks the emergence of the Anthropocene epoch, in which human beings started to have significant and mostly negative impacts on the earth system.

[ 188 ] Others have warned that contemporary global capitalism "requires fundamental changes" to mitigate the worst environmental impacts, including the "abolition of perpetual economic growth, properly pricing externalities , a rapid exit from fossil-fuel use, strict regulation of markets and property acquisition, reining in corporate lobbying, and the empowerment of women".

[ 189 ] [ 190 ] Jason Hickel writes that capitalism creates pressures for population growth : "more people means more labour, cheaper labour, and more consumers." He argues that continued population growth makes the challenge of sustainability even more difficult, but adds that even if the population leveled off, capitalism will simply get already existing consumers to increase their consumption, as consumption rates have always outpaced population growth rates.

[ 191 ] In 2024 a group of experts including Michael E. Mann and Naomi Oreskes published "An urgent call to end the age of destruction and forge a just and sustainable future". They made an extensive review of existing scientific literature about the issue. They put the blame for the ecological crisis on "imperialism, extractive capitalism, and a surging population" and proposed a paradigm shift that replaces it with a socio-economic model prioritizing sustainability, resilience, justice, kinship with nature, communal well-being. They described many ways in which the transition can be achieved.

[ 192 ] Profit motive [ edit ] The majority of criticisms against the profit motive centre on the idea that the profit motive encourages selfishness and greed , rather than serving the public good or necessarily creating an increase in net wealth. Critics of the profit motive argue that companies disregard morals or public safety in the pursuit of profits. Capitalists seek to reduce spending to increase profits, often coming at the expense of workers, such as the cutting of wages and downsizing , causing unemployment . The reason why the profit motive is harmful is because of the fundamental contradiction between the interests of capitalists and workers, as capitalists want to pay their workers as little as possible and work them as much as possible to increase profits, whereas workers want to be paid fairly and have their increased productivity result in fewer working hours. This fundamental contradiction, critics argue, shows how illogical capitalism is, as it is a system in which two classes have fundamentally opposite interests which create conflict.

[ 193 ] [ 194 ] [ 195 ] [ 196 ] Recently, a compelling criticism of unmoderated capitalism has emerged: it prioritizes capital over human well-being, except where human well-being contributes to capital production. Critics argue that such a system tends to reward sociopathic behavior. Consequently, they contend that pure (unmoderated) capitalism is inherently unsuitable as a foundation for society. As pure capitalistic models develop, they foster an increase in sociopathic behavior, which ultimately degrades societal functioning, defined by the well-being of most of its members. The detrimental processes associated with excessive sociopathic behavior include the spread of disinformation, the implementation of policies that create severe economic inequalities, and the manipulation of legal and judicial systems to benefit capital flow without regard for the majority's welfare. In response to this criticism, some advocate for moderated capitalism, which promotes policies that value human well-being. This approach creates reward structures that are not solely tied to capital. However, one counterargument is that in a global society with diverse economic models, pure capitalism might prevail over moderated capitalism in the long run because it generates more economic power.

[ 197 ] [ 198 ] [ 199 ] [ 200 ] [ 201 ] [ 202 ] Comparison to slavery [ edit ] Main articles: Critique of work , Wage slavery , and Refusal of work Pinkerton guards escort strikebreakers in Buchtel, Ohio , 1884.

Wage labor has long been compared to slavery.

[ 203 ] As a result, the phrase " wage slavery " is often utilized as a pejorative for wage labor.

[ 204 ] Similarly, advocates of slavery looked upon the "comparative evils of Slave Society and of Free Society, of slavery to human Masters and slavery to Capital" [ 205 ] and proceeded to argue that wage slavery was actually worse than chattel slavery .

[ 206 ] Slavery apologists like George Fitzhugh contended that workers only accepted wage labor with the passage of time as they became "familiarised and inattentive to the infected social atmosphere they continually inhale".

[ 205 ] Scholars have debated the exact relationship between wage labor, slavery, and capitalism at length, especially for the Antebellum South .

[ 207 ] With the advent of the Industrial Revolution , thinkers such as Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and Karl Marx elaborated the comparison between wage labor and slavery in the context of a critique of societal property not intended for active personal use [ 11 ] while Luddites emphasized the dehumanisation brought about by machines. Before the American Civil War , Southern defenders of African American slavery invoked the concept of wage slavery to favorably compare the condition of their slaves to workers in the North.

[ citation needed ] The United States abolished slavery during the Civil War, but labor union activists found the metaphor useful. According to Lawrence Glickman , in the Gilded Age "references abounded in the labor press, and it is hard to find a speech by a labour leader without the phrase".

[ 208 ] The slave, together with his labour-power, was sold to his owner once for all. ... The [wage] labourer, on the other hand, sells his very self, and that by fractions. ... He [belongs] to the capitalist class; and it is for him ... to find a buyer in this capitalist class.

[ 209 ] — Karl Marx According to Noam Chomsky , analysis of the psychological implications of wage slavery goes back to the Enlightenment era. In his 1791 book On the Limits of State Action , liberal thinker Wilhelm von Humboldt explained how "whatever does not spring from a man's free choice, or is only the result of instruction and guidance, does not enter into his very nature; he does not perform it with truly human energies, but merely with mechanical exactness" and so when the laborer works under external control, "we may admire what he does, but we despise what he is".

[ 210 ] Both the Milgram and Stanford experiments have been found useful in the psychological study of wage-based workplace relations.

[ citation needed ] Additionally, as per anthropologist David Graeber , the earliest wage labor contracts known about were in fact contracts for the rental of chattel slaves (usually the owner would receive a share of the money and the slave another, with which to maintain his or her living expenses). According to Graeber, such arrangements were quite common in New World slavery as well, whether in the United States or Brazil.

[ 211 ] C. L. R. James argued in The Black Jacobins that most of the techniques of human organisation employed on factory workers during the Industrial Revolution were first developed on slave plantations.

[ 212 ] Girl pulling a coal tub in mine, from official report of the British parliamentary commission in the mid-19th century [ 213 ] Some anti-capitalist thinkers claim that the elite maintain wage slavery and a divided working class through their influence over the media and entertainment industry, [ 214 ] [ 215 ] educational institutions, unjust laws, nationalist and corporate propaganda , pressures and incentives to internalize values serviceable to the power structure, state violence, fear of unemployment [ 216 ] and a historical legacy of exploitation and profit accumulation/transfer under prior systems, which shaped the development of economic theory.

Adam Smith noted that employers often conspire together to keep wages low: [ 217 ] The interest of the dealers ... in any particular branch of trade or manufactures, is always in some respects different from, and even opposite to, that of the public ... [They] have generally an interest to deceive and even to oppress the public ... We rarely hear, it has been said, of the combinations of masters, though frequently of those of workmen. But whoever imagines, upon this account, that masters rarely combine, is as ignorant of the world as of the subject. Masters are always and everywhere in a sort of tacit, but constant and uniform combination, not to raise the wages of labor above their actual rate ... It is not, however, difficult to foresee which of the two parties must, upon all ordinary occasions, have the advantage in the dispute, and force the other into a compliance with their terms.

To Marxist and anarchist thinkers like Mikhail Bakunin and Peter Kropotkin , wage slavery was a class condition in place due to the existence of private property and the state . This class situation rested primarily on: The existence of property not intended for active use.

The concentration of ownership in few hands.

The lack of direct access by workers to the means of production and consumption goods.

The perpetuation of a reserve army of unemployed workers .

For Marxists, labor as commodity, which is how they regard wage labor, [ 218 ] provides a fundamental point of attack against capitalism.

[ 219 ] "It can be persuasively argued", noted one concerned philosopher, "that the conception of the worker's labour as a commodity confirms Marx's stigmatization of the wage system of private capitalism as 'wage-slavery;' that is, as an instrument of the capitalist's for reducing the worker's condition to that of a slave, if not below it".

[ 220 ] That this objection is fundamental follows immediately from Marx's conclusion that wage labor is the very foundation of capitalism: "Without a class dependent on wages, the moment individuals confront each other as free persons, there can be no production of surplus value; without the production of surplus-value there can be no capitalist production, and hence no capital and no capitalist!".

[ 221 ] Supply and demand [ edit ] A hypothetical market which cannot be described in the standard theory of supply and demand. The Sonnenschein–Mantel–Debreu theorem implies the existence of such a market.

At least two assumptions are necessary for the validity of the standard model: first, that supply and demand are independent; and second, that supply is "constrained by a fixed resource". If these conditions do not hold, then the Marshallian model cannot be sustained.

Sraffa's critique focused on the inconsistency (except in implausible circumstances) of partial equilibrium analysis and the rationale for the upward slope of the supply curve in a market for a produced consumption good.

[ 222 ] The notability of Sraffa's critique is also demonstrated by Paul A. Samuelson 's comments and engagements with it over many years, stating: What a cleaned-up version of Sraffa (1926) establishes is how nearly empty are all of Marshall's partial equilibrium boxes. To a logical purist of Wittgenstein and Sraffa class, the Marshallian partial equilibrium box of constant cost is even more empty than the box of increasing cost.

[ 223 ] Aggregate excess demand in a market is the difference between the quantity demanded and the quantity supplied as a function of price. In the model with an upward-sloping supply curve and downward-sloping demand curve, the aggregate excess demand function only intersects the axis at one point, namely at the point where the supply and demand curves intersect. The Sonnenschein–Mantel–Debreu theorem shows that the standard model cannot be rigorously derived in general from general equilibrium theory .

[ 224 ] The model of prices being determined by supply and demand assumes perfect competition . However, "economists have no adequate model of how individuals and firms adjust prices in a competitive model. If all participants are price-takers by definition, then the actor who adjusts prices to eliminate excess demand is not specified".

[ 225 ] Goodwin, Nelson, Ackerman and Weisskopf write: If we mistakenly confuse precision with accuracy , then we might be misled into thinking that an explanation expressed in precise mathematical or graphical terms is somehow more rigorous or useful than one that takes into account particulars of history, institutions or business strategy. This is not the case. Therefore, it is important not to put too much confidence in the apparent precision of supply and demand graphs. Supply and demand analysis is a useful precisely formulated conceptual tool that clever people have devised to help us gain an abstract understanding of a complex world. It does not—nor should it be expected to—give us in addition an accurate and complete description of any particular real world market.

[ 226 ] Surveillance [ edit ] According to Harvard academic Shoshana Zuboff , a new genus of capitalism, surveillance capitalism monetizes data acquired through surveillance .

[ 227 ] [ 228 ] [ 229 ] She states that it was first discovered and consolidated at Google , emerged due to the "coupling of the vast powers of the digital with the radical indifference and intrinsic narcissism of the financial capitalism and its neoliberal vision that have dominated commerce for at least three decades, especially in the Anglo economies" [ 228 ] and depends on the global architecture of computer mediation which produces a distributed and largely uncontested new expression of power she calls "Big Other".

[ 230 ] New information technologies continuously create conflict between privacy, the control over personal information disclosure, and surveillance.

[ 231 ] In a current capitalistic society, power is harnessed through a combination of both control and freedom. This fusion of control and freedom, seen through changes in sexuality and race, is a response to the growing privatization of data, networks, public services, and physical spaces, and also to the simultaneous entry of publicity and paranoia into people's lives.

[ 232 ] Racism [ edit ] Main articles: Racial capitalism and Economic discrimination According to Immanuel Wallerstein , institutional racism has been "one of the most significant pillars" of the capitalist system and serves as "the ideological justification for the hierarchization of the work-force and its highly unequal distributions of reward".

[ 233 ] Critics of capitalism argue that racism benefits capitalists in several ways. Racism divides the working class and prevents them from uniting to demand better wages and working conditions. Capitalists benefit from competition and hostility between workers because it reduces their bargaining power and ability to organise. Racism was used to justify the exploitation and oppression of certain groups of people for economic gain, such as in the era of slavery in the United States . Capitalists benefitted from the scapegoating of Jewish people as a way to divert attention from the real cause of the problems. An example of this is Henry Ford , founder of the Ford Motor Company , who spread Anti-Semitic propaganda in his newspaper The Dearborn Independent .

Vladimir Lenin argued that Antisemitism was being used in Tsarist Russia to distract the workers from the true problems which are inherent to capitalism by blaming the Jews.

[ 234 ] Others argue that while capitalism generally used or transformed pre-existing racism depending on local circumstances, racism is not necessary for capitalism.

[ 235 ] Many theorists supportive of capitalism believed that a free market is a remedy for racism in a functioning society, because if some business owners engaged in discriminatory wage practices targeting minority ethnic groups, other entrepreneurs would take advantage of the opportunity to hire an equally-capable worker for a lower cost, increasing the profitability of the latter. According to Jim Sidanius and Felicia Pratto, despite the fluidity of this theory, reconciling the free market theory with the observed data presents challenges, as those who are in support of free market capitalism also often exhibit a higher likelihood of discriminating against ethnic minorities.

[ 236 ] Left-wing commentators have argued that capitalism promotes racism alongside culture wars over issues such as immigration and representation of ethnic minorities whilst refusing to address economic inequalities .

[ 237 ] [ 238 ] Underdevelopment [ edit ] Main articles: Uneven and combined development , Underdevelopment , Unequal exchange , and Dependency theory Marxist and Neo-Marxist theorists including Wallerstein, Andre Frank and Samir Amin have linked underdevelopment with capitalism, emphasising the relationship between the metropolist centre and the periphery colony, theory of 'unequal exchange' and constituents of a single world capitalist system.

[ 239 ] [ 240 ] Dependency theory posits that peripheral economies are subordinated to the interests of the capitalist world economy which was initially established by European colonialism.

[ 241 ] Using the Latin American dependency model, the Guyanese Marxist historian Walter Rodney , in his book How Europe Underdeveloped Africa , described in 1972 an Africa that had been consciously exploited by European imperialists, leading directly to the modern underdevelopment of most of the continent.

[ 242 ] The concept of uneven development derived from the political theories of Leon Trotsky .

[ 243 ] This concept was developed in combination with the related theory of permanent revolution to explain the historical context of Russia. He would later elaborate on this theory to explain the specific, capitalist laws of uneven development in 1930.

[ 244 ] According to biographer Ian Thatcher, this theory would be later generalised to "the entire history of mankind".

[ 245 ] Counter-criticism [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( April 2024 ) Austrian School [ edit ] Austrian School economists have argued that capitalism can organize itself into a complex system without an external guidance or central planning mechanism.

Friedrich Hayek considered the phenomenon of self-organisation as underpinning capitalism. Prices serve as a signal as to the urgent and unfulfilled wants of people and the opportunity to earn profits if successful, or absorb losses if resources are used poorly or left idle, gives entrepreneurs incentive to use their knowledge and resources to satisfy those wants. Thus, the activities of millions of people, each seeking their own interest, are coordinated.

[ 246 ] Ayn Rand [ edit ] The novelist Ayn Rand made positive moral defenses of laissez-faire capitalism, most notably in her 1957 novel Atlas Shrugged and in her 1966 collection of essays Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal . She argued that capitalism should be supported on moral grounds, not just on the basis of practical benefits.

[ 247 ] [ 248 ] Her ideas have had significant influence over conservative and libertarian supporters of capitalism, especially within the American Tea Party movement .

[ 249 ] Rand defined capitalism as "a social system based on the recognition of individual rights, including property rights, in which all property is privately owned".

[ 250 ] According to Rand, the role of government in a capitalist state has three broad categories of proper functions: first, the police "to protect men from criminals"; second, the armed services "to protect men from foreign invaders"; and third, the law courts "to settle disputes among men according to objective laws".

[ 251 ] See also [ edit ] Almighty dollar Anarchism and capitalism Anti-globalisation Capital in the Twenty-First Century Capitalism: A Love Story Capitalocene The Corporation Corporatocracy Crisis theory Criticisms of corporations Critique of work Culture of capitalism Economic calculation problem Economic democracy Late capitalism Market fundamentalism Market socialism Mixed economy Post-capitalism Social criticism Social democracy Socialism for the rich and capitalism for the poor Technological fix § Concerns The Big One The Theory of the Leisure Class This Changes Everything: Capitalism vs. the Climate Why Socialism?

References [ edit ] ^ "Does the Left Have Any Better Ideas Than Obama's?" .

New York . Retrieved 28 December 2019 .

^ Engels, Frederick.

"The Condition of the Working Class in England" . Retrieved 16 April 2008 .

^ Clark Nardinelli, economist at the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

"Industrial Revolution and the Standard of Living" .

The concise encyclopedia of economics . The Library of Economics and Liberty . Retrieved 20 April 2008 .

^ " el capitalismo es sólo el efecto del gobierno; desaparecido el gobierno, el capitalismo cae de su pedestal vertiginosamente ... Lo que llamamos capitalismo no es otra cosa que el producto del Estado, dentro del cual lo único que se cultiva es la ganancia, bien o mal habida. Luchar, pues, contra el capitalismo es tarea inútil, porque sea Capitalismo de Estado o Capitalismo de Empresa, mientras el Gobierno exista, existirá el capital que explota. La lucha, pero de conciencias, es contra el Estado.

" Anarquismo by Miguel Gimenez Igualada Archived 31 January 2017 at the Wayback Machine ^ "wage slave" .

Merriam Webster . Retrieved 4 March 2013 .

^ "wage slave" .

Dictionary.com . Retrieved 4 March 2013 .

^ Sandel, Michael J (1996).

Democracy's Discontent . Harvard University Press. p. 184.

ISBN 978-0674197459 .

^ a b "Conversation with Noam Chomsky" . Globetrotter.berkeley.edu. p. 2. Archived from the original on 19 September 2019 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ "The Bolsheviks and Workers Control, 1917–1921: The State and Counter-revolution" .

Spunk Library . Retrieved 4 March 2013 .

^ Harrington, Austin, et al.

Encyclopedia of Social Theory Routledge (2006) p. 50 ^ a b c Luxembourg, Rosa.

"Chapter VII: Co-operatives, Unions, Democracy – Reform or Revolution" . Retrieved 10 March 2008 .

^ Goldman, Emma (2003).

Falk, Candace (ed.).

Emma Goldman: A Documentary History of the American Years, Volume I: Made for America, 1890–1901 . Berkeley & Los Angeles, CA: University of California Press . p. 283.

ISBN 978-0520086708 .

^ a b Goldman, Emma.

Anarchism and Other Essays . 3rd ed. 1917. New York: Dover Publications Inc., 1969., p. 54.

^ Lindemann, Albert S.

A History of European Socialism Yale University Press (1983) p. 160 ^ Ely, Richard et al. 'Property and Contract in Their Relations to the Distribution of Wealth' The Macmillan Company (1914) ^ Kevin A. Carson, Studies in Mutualist Political Economy Archived 15 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine chs. 1–3 ^ Carson, Kevin.

"Intellectual Property – A Libertarian Critique" . c4ss.org . Retrieved 23 May 2009 .

^ Carson, Kevin.

"Industrial Policy: New Wine in Old Bottles" . c4ss.org . Retrieved 26 May 2009 .

^ Richman, Sheldon, Libertarian Left Archived 14 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine , The American Conservative (March 2011) ^ Marx, Theories of Surplus Value, III , p. 501.

^ Hawley, George (2 October 2017).

"Some Conservatives Have Been Against Capitalism for Centuries" .

The American Conservative . Retrieved 30 December 2018 .

^ Hussain, Murtaza (30 September 2018).

"How the Trump Era Lays Bare the Tension in the Marriage Between Conservatism and Capitalism" .

The Intercept . Retrieved 30 December 2018 .

^ Ryder, Bridget (24 June 2023).

"Degrowth Is Growing, From Top and Bottom" .

The European Conservative . Retrieved 30 June 2023 .

^ Payne, Stanley G., Fascism: Comparison and Definition. (Madison, Wisconsin; London: University of Wisconsin Press, 1980) p. 162.

^ Philip Morgan, Fascism in Europe, 1919–1945 , New York, Taylor & Francis, 2003, p. 168.

^ "The Doctrine of Fascism".

Enciclopedia Italiana . Rome: Istituto Giovanni Treccani. 1932.

"[Fascism] affirms the irremediable, fruitful and beneficent inequality of men" ^ John Weiss, "The Fascist Tradition" , Harper & Row, New York, 1967. pp. 14 ^ Calvin B. Hoover, The Paths of Economic Change: Contrasting Tendencies in the Modern World , The American Economic Review, Vol. 25, No. 1, Supplement, Papers and Proceedings of the Forty-Seventh Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association. (March 1935), pp. 13–20.

^ Chomsky, Noam (1993).

Year 501: The Conquest Continues . Verso. p. 19.

ISBN 978-0860916802 .

^ Rodriguez, Junius P. (2007).

Slavery in the United States: A Social, Political, and Historical Encyclopedia .

1 . ABC-CLIO. p. 500.

ISBN 978-1851095445 .

^ An Introduction to Marxist Economic Theory . Resistance Books. 2002.

ISBN 978-1876646301 .

Archived from the original on 11 December 2016 . Retrieved 27 August 2016 – via Google Books.

^ The Communist Manifesto ^ "To Marx, the problem of reconstituting society did not arise from some prescription, motivated by his personal predilections; it followed, as an iron-clad historical necessity—on the one hand, from the productive forces grown to powerful maturity; on the other, from the impossibility further to organize these forces according to the will of the law of value ." — Leon Trotsky , "Marxism in our Time", 1939 (Inevitability of Socialism), WSWS.org Archived 13 November 2008 at the Wayback Machine ^ Karl Marx.

"Capital. V. 3. Chapter 47: Genesis of capitalist ground rent" . Marxists.

Archived from the original on 7 March 2008 . Retrieved 26 February 2008 .

^ Karl Marx. Chapter Twenty-Five: The General Law of Capitalist Accumulation.

Das Kapital .

^ Dobb, Maurice, 1947.

Studies in the Development of Capitalism . New York, International Publishers Co.

^ David Harvey 1989 The Condition of Postmodernity ^ Wheen, Francis.

Books That Shook the World: Marx's Das Kapital • 1st ed.

, London, Atlantic Books, 2006.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ a b c Vladimir Lenin (1916).

"Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism" . Marxists.

Archived from the original on 11 October 2016 . Retrieved 11 January 2014 .

^ See, for example, the works of Stephen Resnick and Richard Wolff.

^ Ste. Croix; G. E. M. de (1982).

The Class Struggle in the Ancient Greek World . pp.

52– 53.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ David Harvey .

The Limits to Capital .

Verso , 2007.

ISBN 1844670953 ^ Lawson, Victoria.

Making Development Geography (Human Geography in the Making) . New York: A Hodder Arnold Publication, 2007. Print.

^ Harvey, David (2005).

Spaces of Neoliberalization: Towards a Theory of Uneven Geographical Development . Franz Steiner Verlag. p. 56.

ISBN 978-3-515-08746-9 . Retrieved 21 June 2025 .

^ Beck, U. (1992).

Risk society: Towards a new modernity (Vol. 17). Sage.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Baba Metzia 61b ^ Moehlman, 1934, pp. 6–7.

^ "Catechism of the Catholic Church: III. The Social Doctrine of the Church" .

Vatican Publishing House .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

[2425] The Church has rejected the totalitarian and atheistic ideologies associated in modem times with 'communism' or 'socialism.' She has likewise refused to accept, in the practice of 'capitalism,' individualism and the absolute primacy of the law of the marketplace over human labor.206 Regulating the economy solely by centralized planning perverts the basis of social bonds; regulating it solely by the law of the marketplace fails social justice, for 'there are many human needs which cannot be satisfied by the market.' 207 Reasonable regulation of the marketplace and economic initiatives, in keeping with a just hierarchy of values and a view to the common good, is to be commended.

^ Gittins, Ross (9 April 2012).

"What Jesus said about capitalism" . Business.

The Sydney Morning Herald .

Fairfax Media .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

It's certainly true that Jesus was always blessing the poor, challenging the rich, mixing with despised tax-gatherers and speaking of a time when the social order is overturned and 'the last shall be first'. It's also true, as Myers reminds us, that many of Jesus's parables deal with clearly economic concerns: farming, shepherding, being in debt, doing hard labour, being excluded from banquets and the houses of the rich.

^ Thomas Gubleton, archbishop of Detroit speaking in Capitalism: A Love Story ^ O'Leary, Naomi (26 November 2013).

"Pope attacks 'tyranny' of markets in manifesto for papacy" . Business News.

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

Pope Francis attacked unfettered capitalism as 'a new tyranny' and beseeched global leaders to fight poverty and growing inequality, in a document on Tuesday setting out a platform for his papacy and calling for a renewal of the Catholic Church.

^ Goldfarb, Zachary A.; Boorstein, Michelle (26 November 2013).

"Pope Francis denounces 'trickle-down' economic theories in sharp criticism of inequality" . Business.

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

^ Moehlman, Conrad Henry (1934). "The Christianization of Interest".

Church History .

3 (1): 6.

doi : 10.2307/3161033 .

JSTOR 3161033 .

S2CID 162381369 .

^ "First Council of Nicea (A.D. 325)" .

New Advent . Retrieved 4 September 2019 .

^ "Third Lateran Council – 1179 A.D. – Papal Encyclicals" .

papalencyclicals.net . Papal Encyclicals Online. 5 March 1179 . Retrieved 4 September 2019 .

^ Squires, Nick (18 May 2013).

Pope blames tyranny of capitalism for making people miserable .

The Age . Retrieved 18 May 2013.

^ "Encyclical Letter Laudato Si' Of The Holy Father Francis On Care For Our Common Home (official English-language text of encyclical)" . Retrieved 18 June 2015 .

^ "Riba in Islam" . Learndeen.com. 29 May 2008. Archived from the original on 23 February 2013 . Retrieved 20 November 2012 .

^ Last Sermon of Muhammad given on 10 Dul-hajj 10 hijra, mentioned in all book of Hadith. Sahih Bukhari mentions parts of it. Musnad Imam Ahmed recorded the longest and complete speech.

^ [1] Archived 16 July 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ Fred Magdoff and Michael D. Yates (November 2009).

"What Needs To Be Done: A Socialist View" .

Monthly Review . Retrieved 23 February 2014 .

^ Let's produce for use, not profit . Retrieved 7 August 2010, from worldsocialism.org: "Let's produce for use, not profit Article page Socialist Standard May 2010 Vol. 106 Issue No. 1269" . Archived from the original on 16 July 2010 . Retrieved 18 August 2015 .

^ Professor Richard D. Wolff (29 June 2009).

"Economic Crisis from a Socialist Perspective" . Rdwolff.com. Archived from the original on 28 February 2014 . Retrieved 23 February 2014 .

^ Engels, Fredrich.

Socialism: Utopian and Scientific . Retrieved 30 October 2010, from Marxists.org: http://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1880/soc-utop/ch03.htm , "The bourgeoisie demonstrated to be a superfluous class. All its social functions are now performed by salaried employees." ^ The Political Economy of Socialism , by Horvat, Branko. 1982. Chapter 1: Capitalism, The General Pattern of Capitalist Development (pp. 15–20) ^ a b Marx and Engels Selected Works, Lawrence and Wishart, 1968, p. 40. Capitalist property relations put a "fetter" on the productive forces.

^ The Political Economy of Socialism , by Horvat, Branko. 1982. (p. 197) ^ The Political Economy of Socialism , by Horvat, Branko. 1982. (pp. 197–198) ^ Market Socialism: The Debate Among Socialists , 1998. pp. 60–61" ^ in Encyclopædia Britannica (2009). Retrieved 14 October 2009, from Encyclopædia Britannica Online: https://www.britannica.com/EBchecked/topic/551569/socialism , "Main" summary: "Socialists complain that capitalism necessarily leads to unfair and exploitative concentrations of wealth and power in the hands of the relative few who emerge victorious from free-market competition—people who then use their wealth and power to reinforce their dominance in society." ^ Einstein, Albert (May 1949).

"Why Socialism?" , Monthly Review .

^ Horvat, Branko, The Political Economy of Socialism (Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, Inc.) p. 11.

^ Bakan, Joel (writer) The Corporation (2003) (Documentary) ^ a b Abeles, Marc (2006).

"Globalization, Power, and Survival: an Anthropological Perspective" (PDF) .

Anthropological Quarterly .

79 (3): 484– 486.

doi : 10.1353/anq.2006.0030 .

S2CID 144220354 .

^ The Origin of Wealth: Evolution, Complexity, and the Radical Remaking of Economics , by Eric D. Beinhocker, Harvard Business Press, 2006, ISBN 157851777X , p. 408.

^ "The International Journal of Inclusive Democracy" . Inclusivedemocracy.org . Retrieved 23 February 2014 .

^ Dean, Jodi (2012).

The Communist Horizon .

Verso . p. 21.

ISBN 978-1844679546 .

^ Slobodian 2023 , pp. 1–3.

^ Gane, Nicholas (2023).

"Capitalism, Democracy, and Territorial Forms of Exception: Quinn Slobodian, Crack-Up Capitalism" .

Theory, Culture & Society .

40 ( 7– 8): 269– 277.

doi : 10.1177/02632764231201334 .

^ Weiss, Adam (4 May 2005).

"A Comparison of Economic Democracy and Participatory Economics" .

ZMag . Archived from the original on 29 July 2009 . Retrieved 26 June 2008 .

^ "Home – Thomas Jefferson" .

etext.virginia.edu . UVa Research Portal at UVa Library . Retrieved 11 January 2014 .

^ a b Franklin D. Roosevelt, "Recommendations to the Congress to Curb Monopolies and the Concentration of Economic Power", April 29, 1938, in The Public Papers and Addresses of Franklin D. Roosevelt , ed. Samuel I. Rosenman, vol. 7, (New York, MacMillan: 1941), pp. 305–315.

^ "Anti-Monopoly" .

Time . 9 May 1938. Archived from the original on 5 May 2008 . Retrieved 23 February 2014 .

^ a b Franklin D. Roosevelt, "Appendix A: Message from the President of the United States Transmitting Recommendations Relative to the Strengthening and Enforcement of Antitrust Laws" , The American Economic Review , Vol. 32, No. 2, Part 2, Supplement, Papers Relating to the Temporary National Economic Committee (Jun., 1942), pp. 119–128.

^ Ira Chernus , "Eisenhower's Ideology in World War II", Armed Forces & Society (1997) 23(4): 595–613 ^ a b "Military-Industrial Complex Speech, Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1961" . coursesa.matrix.msu.edu. Archived from the original on 12 August 2013 . Retrieved 11 January 2014 .

^ "Socialism Versus Capitalism" .

C-SPAN .

^ Ricardo, David.

"Chapter 1: On Value – On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation" . Retrieved 10 March 2008 .

^ a b Wiedmann et al. 2020 .

^ Marx, Karl (1992).

Chapter 1: Commodities – Capital, Volume 1 . Penguin Classics.

ISBN 978-0140445688 .

^ a b Marx, Karl.

"Value, Price, and Profit" . Retrieved 10 March 2008 .

^ Marx, Karl.

"Wage Labour and Capital" . Retrieved 10 March 2008 .

^ Engels, Frederick.

"Competition – The Condition of the Working Class in England" . Retrieved 10 March 2008 .

^ a b Engels, Frederick.

"Historical Materialism – Socialism: Utopian and Scientific" . Retrieved 10 March 2008 .

^ Kautsky, Karl.

"Trade Unions and Socialism" . Retrieved 10 March 2008 .

^ Smith, Sharon (2006).

Subterranean Fire: A History of Working Class Radicalism in the United States .

Haymarket Books . p. 320.

ISBN 978-1931859233 .

^ Martin, James J.

Men Against the State , p. 173 ^ Cass, Towards a Comparative Political Economy of Unfree Labor (1999) ^ Marcel van der Linden (Fall 2003).

"Labour History as the History of Multitudes" .

Labour/Le Travail .

52 : 235– 244.

doi : 10.2307/25149390 .

JSTOR 25149390 .

S2CID 43371533 . Archived from the original on 17 December 2007 . Retrieved 26 February 2008 .

^ Grandin, Greg (1 August 2014).

"Capitalism and Slavery: An Interview with Greg Grandin" .

Jacobin (Interview). Interviewed by Alex Gourevitch.

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

There's many ways this happens. Deceit, through contraband , is absolutely key to the expansion of slavery in South America. When historians talk about the Atlantic market revolution, they are talking about capitalism. And when they are talking about capitalism, they are talking about slavery. And when they are talking about slavery, they are talking about corruption and crime. Not in a moral sense, in that the slave system was a crime against humanity. That it was. But it was also a crime in a technical sense: probably as many enslaved Africans came into South America as contraband, to avoid taxes and other lingering restrictions, as legally.

^ Edward E. Baptist.

The Half Has Never Been Told: Slavery And The Making Of American Capitalism , Archived 24 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine Basic Books , 2014.

ISBN 046500296X .

^ Beckert, Sven ; Rockman, Seth, eds. (2016).

Slavery's Capitalism: A New History of American Economic Development .

University of Pennsylvania Press .

ISBN 978-0812224177 .

Archived from the original on 6 March 2019 . Retrieved 3 March 2019 .

^ Desmond, Matthew (14 August 2019).

"In order to understand the brutality of American capitalism, you have to start on the plantation" .

The New York Times Magazine . Retrieved 19 February 2025 .

During slavery, "Americans built a culture of speculation unique in its abandon," writes the historian Joshua Rothman in his 2012 book, "Flush Times and Fever Dreams." That culture would drive cotton production up to the Civil War, and it has been a defining characteristic of American capitalism ever since. It is the culture of acquiring wealth without work, growing at all costs and abusing the powerless. It is the culture that brought us the Panic of 1837, the stock-market crash of 1929 and the recession of 2008. It is the culture that has produced staggering inequality and undignified working conditions. If today America promotes a particular kind of low-road capitalism — a union-busting capitalism of poverty wages, gig jobs and normalized insecurity; a winner-take-all capitalism of stunning disparities not only permitting but awarding financial rule-bending; a racist capitalism that ignores the fact that slavery didn't just deny black freedom but built white fortunes, originating the black-white wealth gap that annually grows wider — one reason is that American capitalism was founded on the lowest road there is.

^ Žižek, Slavoj (2018).

The Courage of Hopelessness: A Year of Acting Dangerously . Melville House. p. 29.

ISBN 978-1612190037 .

Archived from the original on 27 July 2020 . Retrieved 11 July 2018 .

^ "When the Rich Make Too Much: Is it Time for a Maximum Wage?" . alternet.org. 19 November 2009 . Retrieved 11 January 2014 .

^ Frances Goldin, Debby Smith, Michael Smith (2014).

Imagine: Living in a Socialist USA , Harper Perennial .

ISBN 0062305573 pp. 49–50.

^ Mattei 2022 , pp. 16–19.

^ Lenin's Selected Works, Progress Publishers, 1963, Moscow, Volume 1, pp. 667–766 ^ Hickel, Jason (2021). "Capitalism: A Creation Story".

Less is More: How Degrowth Will Save the World . Windmill Books. pp.

39– 80.

ISBN 978-1786091215 .

^ Hickel, Jason (2018). "The Great Dispossession".

The Divide: Global Inequality from Conquest to Free Markets .

W. W. Norton & Company . pp.

76– 82.

ISBN 978-0393651362 .

^ Nibert, David (2011).

"Origins and Consequences of the Animal Industrial Complex" . In Steven Best ; Richard Kahn; Anthony J. Nocella II; Peter McLaren (eds.).

The Global Industrial Complex: Systems of Domination .

Rowman & Littlefield . pp.

198– 199.

ISBN 978-0739136980 .

^ Gorman, Connor (14 January 2018).

"Guest Commentary: Capitalism is Economic Oligarchy, Socialism is Economic Democracy" .

Davis Vanguard .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

^ O'Reilly, Jim (21 August 2016).

Capitalism as Oligarchy: 5,000 Years of Diversion and Suppression (1 ed.). Jor.

ISBN 978-0692514269 .

Archived from the original on 27 July 2020 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 – via Google Books.

^ Muller, Jerry Z. (March–April 2013).

"Capitalism and Inequality: What the Right and the Left Get Wrong" .

Foreign Affairs (Essay). Vol. 92, no. 2.

Council of Foreign Relations .

ISSN 0015-7120 .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

Inequality is indeed increasing almost everywhere in the postindustrial capitalist world. But despite what many on the left think, this is not the result of politics, nor is politics likely to reverse it, for the problem is more deeply rooted and intractable than generally recognized. Inequality is an inevitable product of capitalist activity, and expanding equality of opportunity only increases it—because some individuals and communities are simply better able than others to exploit the opportunities for development and advancement that capitalism affords.

^ Satherly, Dan (19 January 2015).

"Inequality inevitable under capitalism – expert" .

Newshub . Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

^ "The Doctrine of Armed Exceptionalism" .

Common Dreams . Retrieved 2 February 2017 .

^ Blakeley, Ruth (2009).

State Terrorism and Neoliberalism: The North in the South .

Routledge . pp.

4 , 20–23 , 88 .

ISBN 978-0415686174 .

^ a b Bevins, Vincent (2020).

The Jakarta Method: Washington's Anticommunist Crusade and the Mass Murder Program that Shaped Our World .

PublicAffairs . pp.

238– 243.

ISBN 978-1541742406 .

^ Prashad, Vijay (2020).

Washington Bullets: A History of the CIA, Coups, and Assassinations .

Monthly Review Press . pp.

83– 88.

ISBN 978-1583679067 .

^ Klein, Naomi (2008).

The Shock Doctrine: The Rise of Disaster Capitalism , Picador .

ISBN 0312427999 p. 105 ^ Farid, Hilmar (2005). "Indonesia's original sin: mass killings and capitalist expansion, 1965–66".

Inter-Asia Cultural Studies .

6 (1): 3– 16.

doi : 10.1080/1462394042000326879 .

S2CID 145130614 .

^ Robinson, Geoffrey B. (2018).

The Killing Season: A History of the Indonesian Massacres, 1965–66 . Princeton University Press. p. 177.

ISBN 978-1400888863 .

^ a b c Rogers, Heather.

"The Conquest of Garbage" .

isreview.org . International Socialist Review (1997). Archived from the original on 10 May 2021 . Retrieved 13 March 2008 .

^ Hawken, Paul.

"Natural Capitalism" . Retrieved 13 March 2008 .

^ U.S. EPA.

"Municipal Solid Waste (MSW) Pie Chart" . Archived from the original on 8 July 2003 . Retrieved 13 March 2008 .

^ Inman, Phillip (30 September 2006).

"When your iPod isn't all that it's cracked up to be" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 13 March 2008 .

^ McMinn, David.

"Planned Obsolescence: The Ultimate Economic Inefficiency" . Retrieved 13 March 2008 .

^ PBS Frontline (9 November 2004).

"Interview with Naomi Klein" .

PBS . Retrieved 13 March 2008 .

^ Shutt, Harry (2010).

Beyond the Profits System: Possibilities for a post-capitalist era . Zed Books.

ISBN 978-1848134171 .

^ Krugman, Paul, Wells, Robin, Economics , Worth Publishers, New York, (2006) ^ Keynes, John Maynard (2007).

The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money .

Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 978-0230004764 .

^ Rea, K.J.

"Monopoly, Imperfect Competition, and Oligopoly" . Archived from the original on 12 June 2010 . Retrieved 11 March 2008 .

^ Brander, James A. Government policy toward business. 4th ed. Mississauga, Ontario: John Wiley & Sons Canada, Ltd., 2006. Print.

^ "Capitalism vs. Socialism - Richard Wolff vs. Gene Epstein" .

YouTube . 14 November 2019 . Retrieved 25 March 2023 .

^ GUevara, Che (12 March 1965).

"From Algiers, for Marcha: The Cuban Revolution Today" . Retrieved 19 August 2020.

^ "Trends in Family Wealth, 1989 to 2013" .

Congressional Budget Office . 18 August 2016.

Archived from the original on 11 November 2019 . Retrieved 31 July 2019 .

^ McDowell, Edwin (6 January 1988).

"Best Sellers From 1987's Book Crop" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 13 October 2011 .

^ Ravi Batra (1990).

Regular economic cycles : money, inflation, regulation and depressions, Venus Books, 1985 . Investment Library.

ISBN 978-1863500289 . Retrieved 13 October 2011 .

^ Ghodsee, Kristen; Orenstein, Mitchell A. (2021).

Taking Stock of Shock: Social Consequences of the 1989 Revolutions .

Oxford University Press . p. 192.

doi : 10.1093/oso/9780197549230.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0197549247 .

Without an accompanying welfare state in which social programs funded by a progressive income tax redistribute from the rich to the poor, capitalism can be a deeply unfair system where a small, well-connected elite captures a majority of the wealth and power, and not necessarily through meritocratic processes.

^ Sullivan & Hickel 2023 .

^ Hickel, Jason; Sullivan (1 July 2023).

"Capitalism, Global Poverty, and the Case for Democratic Socialism" .

Monthly Review . Retrieved 28 April 2025 .

^ Nitzan & Bichler 2009 , p. 29.

^ "Working Paper No. 589" (PDF) . Levyinstitute.org . Retrieved 23 February 2014 .

^ [2] Archived 28 August 2006 at the Wayback Machine ^ "The Inheritance of Inequality" (PDF) . Retrieved 23 February 2014 .

^ Ravi Batra.

" "The Occupy Wall Street Movement and the Coming Demise of Crony Capitalism", Foreign Affairs , October 11, 2011" . Archived from the original on 13 October 2011 . Retrieved 13 October 2011 .

^ Engels, Frederick.

"On the Question of Free Trade" . Retrieved 11 March 2008 .

^ Easterling, Earl.

"Marx's Theory of Economic Crisis" . International Socialist Review. Archived from the original on 27 February 2021 . Retrieved 13 March 2008 .

^ a b Marx, Karl.

"The Communist Manifesto" . Retrieved 11 March 2008 .

^ Engels, Frederick.

"Part III: Socialism (Theoretical) – Anti-Duhring" . Retrieved 11 March 2008 .

^ Lavoie, Marc (Winter 2012–2013). "Financialization, neo-liberalism, and securitization".

Journal of Post Keynesian Economics .

35 (2): 215– 233.

doi : 10.2753/pke0160-3477350203 .

JSTOR 23469991 .

S2CID 153927517 .

^ Stein, Howard (25 July 2012).

"The Neoliberal Policy Paradigm and the Great Recession" .

Panoeconomicus .

59 (4): 421– 440.

doi : 10.2298/PAN1204421S .

S2CID 26437908 .

The role of deregulation and related neoliberal policies as a both a source of massive financialization of the economy and cause of the Great Recession is widely recognized in the literature (David M. Kotz 2009; Bill Lucarelli 2009; Joseph Stiglitz 2010; William Tabb 2012). Some authors aptly call it the 'crisis of neoliberal capitalism' (Kotz 2010).

^ Susan Braedley and Meg Luxton, Neoliberalism and Everyday Life Archived 13 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine ( McGill-Queen's University Press , 2010), ISBN 0773536922 , p. 3 Archived 19 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine ^ Manfred B. Steger and Ravi K. Roy.

Neoliberalism: A Very Short Introduction . ( Oxford University Press , 2010.) ISBN 019956051X . p. 123.

^ Gérard Duménil and Dominique Lévy, The Crisis of Neoliberalism , Archived 9 October 2016 at the Wayback Machine ( Harvard University Press , 2013), ISBN 0674072243 ^ David M Kotz, The Rise and Fall of Neoliberal Capitalism Archived 12 February 2020 at the Wayback Machine ( Harvard University Press , 2015), ISBN 0674725654 ^ [ 151 ] [ 152 ] [ 153 ] [ 154 ] [ 155 ] [ 156 ] ^ Andrews, Edmund L.

(23 October 2008).

"Greenspan Concedes Error on Regulation" . Economy.

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

He noted that the immense and largely unregulated business of spreading financial risk widely, through the use of exotic financial instruments called derivatives , had gotten out of control and had added to the havoc of today's crisis. As far back as 1994, Mr. Greenspan staunchly and successfully opposed tougher regulation on derivatives. But on Thursday, he agreed that the multitrillion-dollar market for credit default swaps , instruments originally created to insure bond investors against the risk of default, needed to be restrained. 'This modern risk-management paradigm held sway for decades,' he said. 'The whole intellectual edifice, however, collapsed in the summer of last year.' ^ Knowlton, Brian; Grynbaum, Michael M. (23 October 2008).

"Greenspan 'shocked' that free markets are flawed" . International Business.

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

Pressed by Waxman , Greenspan conceded a more serious flaw in his own philosophy that unfettered free markets sit at the root of a superior economy. 'I made a mistake in presuming that the self-interests of organizations, specifically banks and others, were such as that they were best capable of protecting their own shareholders and their equity in the firms,' Greenspan said. ... 'In other words, you found that your view of the world, your ideology, was not right, it was not working,' Waxman said. 'Absolutely, precisely,' Greenspan replied. "You know, that's precisely the reason I was shocked, because I have been going for 40 years or more with very considerable evidence that it was working exceptionally well.' ^ a b c Proudhon, Pierre-Joseph.

"What Is Property? An Inquiry Into the Principle of Right and Government" . Retrieved 10 March 2008 .

^ D'Amato, Paul (2006).

The Meaning of Marxism .

Haymarket Books . p.

60 .

ISBN 978-1931859295 .

^ Anarchist Essays , pp. 22–23, 40. Freedom Press, London, 2000.

^ Carson, Kevin (2007).

Studies in Mutualist Political Economy . BookSurge Publishing.

ISBN 978-1419658693 .

^ a b Landes, William M.; Posner, Richard A.

"An Economic Analysis of Property Law" . Retrieved 10 March 2008 .

^ Hickel, Jason (2021).

Less is More: How Degrowth Will Save the World . Windmill Books. pp.

19– 23.

ISBN 978-1786091215 .

^ McMurty, John (1999).

The Cancer Stage of Capitalism . Pluto Press.

ISBN 978-0745313474 .

^ Monbiot, George (1 October 2014).

"It's time to shout stop on this war on the living world" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

^ Dawson, Ashley (2016).

Extinction: A Radical History .

OR Books . p. 41.

ISBN 978-1944869014 .

Archived from the original on 17 September 2016 . Retrieved 20 August 2016 .

^ Gérard, Duménil (30 March 2010).

"The crisis of neoliberalism" (Transcript). Interviewed by Paul Jay.

The Real News .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

When we speak of neoliberalism, we speak of contemporary capitalism. Neoliberalism, it's a new stage of capitalism which began around 1980. It began in big countries like United Kingdom and the United States. Then it was implemented in Europe, and later in Japan, and later around the world in general. So this is a new phase of capitalism.

^ Jones, Campbell; Parker, Martin; Ten Bos, Rene (2005).

For Business Ethics .

Routledge . p. 101.

ISBN 978-0415311359 .

^ Stephen Haymes, Maria Vidal de Haymes and Reuben Miller (eds), The Routledge Handbook of Poverty in the United States , Archived 17 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine (London: Routledge, 2015), ISBN 0415673445 , pp. 1–2 Archived 27 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Udland, Myles (27 May 2016).

"IMF: The last generation of economic policies may have been a complete failure" .

Business Insider .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

Neoliberalism—which IMF researchers Jonathan Ostry, Prakash Loungani, and Davide Furceri loosely define as the opening of economies to foreign capital along with a reduction in government debt burdens—has been the dominant trend in economic policymaking over the past 30 years. ... But now it seems some at the IMF aren't so sure this tradition is all it's been cracked up to be. In their paper, Ostray, Loungani, and Furceri argue that these goals have both hampered the economic growth that neoliberalism champions and exacerbated the rise of inequality.

^ Castro, Carlos J. (June 2004). "Sustainable Development".

Organization & Environment .

17 (2): 195– 225.

doi : 10.1177/1086026604264910 .

ISSN 1086-0266 .

S2CID 143645829 .

^ a b c Jones, Andrew W. (March 2011). "Solving the Ecological Problems of Capitalism: Capitalist and Socialist Possibilities".

Organization & Environment .

24 (1): 54– 73.

Bibcode : 2011OrgEn..24...54J .

doi : 10.1177/1086026611402010 .

ISSN 1086-0266 .

S2CID 154749910 .

^ Bell, Karen (2015).

"Can the capitalist economic system deliver environmental justice?" .

Environmental Research Letters .

10 (12): 125017.

Bibcode : 2015ERL....10l5017B .

doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/10/12/125017 .

hdl : 1983/5c7c9d17-dec3-4182-9d35-5efd75830ac8 .

^ Harris, Jerry (1 January 2014). "Can Green Capitalism Build a Sustainable Society?*".

Perspectives on Global Development and Technology .

13 ( 1– 2): 43– 60.

doi : 10.1163/15691497-12341288 .

ISSN 1569-1500 .

^ Desai, Radhika (2022).

Capitalism, Coronavirus and War: A Geopolitical Economy .

Routledge . p. 53.

doi : 10.4324/9781003200000-2 .

ISBN 9781032059501 .

Ecological crises occur when capitalist firms compete to appropriate and plunder the free resources of nature and when this very appropriation and plunder forces working people to overexploit their ever-shrinking share of these resources leading to climate change, pollution and biodiversity loss.

^ "de beste bron van informatie over it-environment. Deze website is te koop!" (PDF) . it-environment.org. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 December 2012 . Retrieved 23 February 2014 .

^ "Geregistreerd via Argeweb" . Unpop.nl. Archived from the original on 28 September 2007 . Retrieved 11 January 2014 .

^ "Industrial metabolism: Restructuring for sustainable development" . unu.edu . Retrieved 11 January 2014 .

^ Jeroen C.J.M. van den Bergh and Harmen Verbruggen (28 September 1998).

"EconPapers: Spatial Sustainability, Trade and Indicators" . Econpapers.repec.org . Retrieved 18 January 2014 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Planning and Markets: Peter Gordon and Harry W. Richardson" . -pam.usc.edu. Archived from the original on 27 June 2010 . Retrieved 11 January 2014 .

^ [3] Archived 25 December 2005 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Capitalism's Environmental Crisis – Is Technology the Answer?" . monthlyreview.org. December 2000 . Retrieved 11 January 2014 .

^ [4] Archived 28 January 2006 at the Wayback Machine ^ Ahmed, Nafeez (27 August 2018).

"Scientists Warn the UN of Capitalism's Imminent Demise" .

Vice . Retrieved 30 August 2018 .

^ Paddison, Laura (31 August 2018).

"We Cannot Fight Climate Change With Capitalism, Says Report" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved 2 September 2018 .

^ Maslin, Mark; Lewis, Simon (25 June 2020).

"Why the Anthropocene began with European colonisation, mass slavery and the 'great dying' of the 16th century" .

The Conversation .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2020 . Retrieved 25 August 2020 .

^ Weston, Phoebe (13 January 2021).

"Top scientists warn of 'ghastly future of mass extinction' and climate disruption" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 13 January 2021 .

^ Bradshaw, Corey J. A.; Ehrlich, Paul R.; Beattie, Andrew; Ceballos, Gerardo; Crist, Eileen; Diamond, Joan; Dirzo, Rodolfo; Ehrlich, Anne H.; Harte, John; Harte, Mary Ellen; Pyke, Graham; Raven, Peter H.; Ripple, William J.; Saltré, Frédérik; Turnbull, Christine; Wackernagel, Mathis; Blumstein, Daniel T. (2021).

"Underestimating the Challenges of Avoiding a Ghastly Future" .

Frontiers in Conservation Science .

1 615419.

Bibcode : 2021FrCS....1.5419B .

doi : 10.3389/fcosc.2020.615419 .

^ Hickel, Jason (2021).

Less is More: How Degrowth Will Save the World . Windmill Books. pp.

110– 111.

ISBN 978-1786091215 .

^ Fletcher, Charles; Ripple, William J.; Newsome, Thomas; Barnard, Phoebe; Beamer, Kamanamaikalani; Behl, Aishwarya; Bowen, Jay; Cooney, Michael; Crist, Eileen; Field, Christopher; Hiser, Krista; Karl, David M.; King, David A.; Mann, Michael E.; McGregor, Davianna P.; Mora, Camilo; Oreskes, Naomi; Wilson, Michael (4 April 2024).

"Earth at risk: An urgent call to end the age of destruction and forge a just and sustainable future" .

PNAS Nexus .

3 (4): pgae106.

doi : 10.1093/pnasnexus/pgae106 .

PMC 10986754 .

PMID 38566756 . Retrieved 4 April 2024 .

^ " 'Occupy Wall Street' Protests Give Voice to Anger Over Greed, Corporate Culture" .

PBS NewsHour . PBS. 5 October 2011.

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

^ Rollert, John Paul (7 April 2014).

"Greed is Good: A 300-Year History of a Dangerous Idea" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

^ Szalavitz, Maia (28 February 2012).

"Why the Rich Are Less Ethical: They See Greed as Good" . Healthland.

Time .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

^ Norton, Michael I.

(1 March 2014). "Why Greed Begets More Greed".

Scientific American .

25 (2): 24– 25.

doi : 10.1038/scientificamericanmind0314-24 .

^ Piketty, Thomas (2014).

Capital in the Twenty-First Century . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674430006 .

^ Wilkinson, Richard; Pickett, Kate (2009).

The Spirit Level: Why More Equal Societies Almost Always Do Better . London: Allen Lane.

ISBN 978-1846140396 .

^ Bakan, Joel (2004).

The Corporation: The Pathological Pursuit of Profit and Power . New York, NY: Free Press.

ISBN 978-0743247467 .

^ Chomsky, Noam (1999).

Profit Over People: Neoliberalism and Global Order . New York, NY: Seven Stories Press.

ISBN 978-1888363821 .

^ Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2012).

The Price of Inequality: How Today's Divided Society Endangers Our Future . New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0393088694 .

^ Rodrik, Dani (2011).

The Globalization Paradox: Democracy and the Future of the World Economy . New York, NY: W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0393071610 .

^ The International Standard Bible Encyclopedia . Geoffrey W. Bromiley. Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing, 1995.

ISBN 0802837840 . p. 543.

^ Roediger 2007a .

The term is not without its critics, as Roediger 2007b , p. 247, notes: "[T]he challenge to loose connections of wage (or white) slavery to chattel slavery was led by Frederick Douglass and other Black, often fugitive, abolitionists. Their challenge was mercilessly concrete. Douglass, who tried out speeches in work places before giving them in halls, was far from unable to speak to or hear white workers, but he and William Wells Brown did challenge metaphors regarding white slavery sharply. They noted, for example, that their escapes from slavery had left job openings and wondered if any white workers wanted to take the jobs." ^ a b Fitzhugh 1857 , p.

xvi ^ Carsel 1940 .

^ Leccese, Stephen R. (28 July 2015).

"Capitalism and Slavery in the United States (Topical Guide)" .

H-Net .

Archived from the original on 6 April 2018 . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

^ Lawrence B. Glickman (1999).

A Living Wage: American Workers and the Making of Consumer Society . Cornell UP. p. 19.

ISBN 978-0801486142 .

Archived from the original on 18 October 2015 . Retrieved 27 June 2015 .

^ Marx 1847 , Chapter 2 ^ Chomsky (1993).

Year 501: The Conquest Continues . Verso. p. 19.

ISBN 978-0860916802 .

^ Graeber 2004 , p.

71 ^ Graeber 2007 , p. 106.

^ Testimony Gathered by Ashley's Mines Commission Archived 19 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine Laura Del Col, West Virginia University ^ "Democracy Now" .

Democracy Now!

. 19 October 2007. Archived from the original on 13 November 2007.

^ Chomsky, Noam (1992).

"Interview" . Archived from the original on 21 July 2006.

^ "Thought Control" .

Socio-Politics . Question Everything.

Archived from the original on 16 February 2016 . Retrieved 25 March 2015 .

^ "Adam Smith – An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations – The Adam Smith Institute" . Archived from the original on 1 October 2009.

^ Marx 1990 , p. 1006: "[L]abour-power, a commodity sold by the worker himself." ^ Another one, of course, being the capitalists' theft from workers via surplus-value .

^ Nelson 1995 , p. 158. This Marxist objection is what motivated Nelson's essay, which argues that labor is not, in fact, a commodity .

^ Marx 1990 , p. 1005. Emphasis in the original.

See also p. 716: "[T]he capitalist produces [and reproduces] the worker as a wage-labourer. This incessant reproduction, this perpetuation of the worker, is the absolutely necessary condition for capitalist production." ^ Cohen, Avi J. (1983). " 'The Laws of Returns under Competitive Conditions': Progress in Microeconomics since Sraffa (1926)?".

Eastern Economic Journal .

9 (3): 213– 220.

JSTOR 40324868 .

^ Paul A. Samuelson, "Reply" in Critical Essays on Piero Sraffa's Legacy in Economics (edited by H.D. Kurz), Cambridge University Press, 2000 ^ Kirman, Alan (1989). "The Intrinsic Limits of Modern Economic Theory: The Emperor has No Clothes".

The Economic Journal .

99 (395): 126– 139.

doi : 10.2307/2234075 .

hdl : 1814/23029 .

JSTOR 2234075 .

^ Kirman, Alan P (1 May 1992). "Whom or What Does the Representative Individual Represent?".

Journal of Economic Perspectives .

6 (2): 117– 136.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.401.3947 .

doi : 10.1257/jep.6.2.117 .

JSTOR 2138411 .

^ Goodwin, N, Nelson, J; Ackerman, F; & Weisskopf, T: Microeconomics in Context 2d ed.

Sharpe 2009 ISBN 978-0765623010 ^ Powles, Julia (2 May 2016).

"Google and Microsoft have made a pact to protect surveillance capitalism" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 11 February 2017 . Retrieved 9 February 2017 .

^ a b Zuboff, Shoshana (5 March 2016).

"Google as a Fortune Teller: The Secrets of Surveillance Capitalism" .

Faz.net . Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung.

Archived from the original on 11 February 2017 . Retrieved 9 February 2017 .

^ Sterling, Bruce (8 March 2016).

"Shoshanna Zuboff condemning Google 'surveillance capitalism' " .

Wired .

Archived from the original on 11 February 2017 . Retrieved 9 February 2017 .

^ Zuboff, Shoshana (9 April 2015).

"Big other: surveillance capitalism and the prospects of an information civilization" .

Journal of Information Technology .

30 (1): 75– 89.

doi : 10.1057/jit.2015.5 .

S2CID 15329793 .

SSRN 2594754 .

^ Humphreys, Lee (August 2011).

"Who's Watching Whom? A Study of Interactive Technology and Surveillance" .

Journal of Communication .

61 (4): 575– 595.

doi : 10.1111/j.1460-2466.2011.01570.x .

^ Chun, Wendy Hui Kyong (23 December 2005).

Control and Freedom: Power and Paranoia in the Age of Fiber Optics . The MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-28858-3 .

^ Wallerstein, Immanuel (1983).

Historical Capitalism .

Verso Books . p. 78.

ISBN 978-0860917618 .

^ "Lenin's speech on antisemitism" .

YouTube . November 2018.

^ Conroy, William (2024).

"Race, Capitalism, and the Necessity/Contingency Debate" .

Theory, Culture & Society .

41 : 39– 58.

doi : 10.1177/02632764221140780 .

^ Sidanius, Jim; Pratto, Felicia (1993).

"Racism and Support of Free-Market Capitalism: A Cross-Cultural Analysis" .

Political Psychology .

14 (3): 381– 401.

doi : 10.2307/3791704 .

ISSN 0162-895X .

JSTOR 3791704 .

^ Rathgeb, Philip (29 February 2024).

How the Radical Right Has Changed Capitalism and Welfare in Europe and the USA . Oxford University Press. p. 10.

ISBN 978-0-19-269138-5 .

^ Pabst, Adrian (5 September 2023).

"Capitalism is driving the culture wars" .

New Statesman .

^ Patnaik, Utsa (1982).

" 'Neo-Marxian' Theories of Capitalism and Underdevelopment: Towards a Critique" .

Social Scientist .

10 (11): 3– 32.

doi : 10.2307/3516858 .

ISSN 0970-0293 .

JSTOR 3516858 .

^ Warke, Thomas W. (1973).

"The Marxian Theory of Underdevelopment: A Review Article" .

The Journal of Developing Areas .

7 (4): 699– 710.

ISSN 0022-037X .

^ Martins, Carlos Eduardo (January 2022).

"The Longue Durée of the Marxist Theory of Dependency and the Twenty-First Century" .

Latin American Perspectives .

49 (1): 18– 35.

doi : 10.1177/0094582X211052029 .

ISSN 0094-582X .

^ Rodney, W. (1972). "How Europe underdeveloped Africa".

Beyond borders: Thinking critically about global issues , 107-125.

^ Peck, Jamie; Varadarajan, Latha (6 March 2017). "Uneven Regional Development".

International Encyclopedia of Geography . John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. pp.

1– 13.

doi : 10.1002/9781118786352.wbieg0721 .

ISBN 9780470659632 .

^ Cultures of Uneven and Combined Development: From International Relations to World Literature . BRILL. 8 July 2019. pp.

1– 20.

ISBN 978-90-04-38473-6 .

^ "Talk of uneven development becomes dominant in Trotskii's writings from 1927 onwards. From this date, whenever the law is mentioned, the claim consistently made for it is that 'the entire history of mankind is governed by the law of uneven development'." – Ian D. Thatcher , "Uneven and combined development", Revolutionary Russia , Vol. 4 No. 2, 1991, p. 237.

^ Walberg, Herbert (2003).

"4, What is Capitalism?" .

Education and Capitalism . Hoover Institution Press. pp.

87– 89.

ISBN 978-0817939724 .

Archived from the original on 19 July 2013 . Retrieved 4 March 2013 .

^ Burns, Jennifer (2006). "Godless Capitalism: Ayn Rand and the Conservative Movement". In Lichtenstein, Nelson (ed.).

American Capitalism: Social Thought and Political Economy in the Twentieth Century . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. pp.

282– 283.

ISBN 978-0812239232 .

^ Den Uyl, Douglas & Rasmussen, Douglas (1984). "Capitalism". In Den Uyl, Douglas & Rasmussen, Douglas (eds.).

The Philosophic Thought of Ayn Rand . Chicago: University of Illinois Press. pp.

173–174 .

ISBN 978-0252010330 .

OCLC 9392804 .

^ Weiss, Gary (2012).

Ayn Rand Nation: The Hidden Struggle for America's Soul . New York: St. Martin's Press. pp.

14–16 .

ISBN 978-0312590734 .

OCLC 740628885 .

^ Ayn Rand, "What Is Capitalism?” Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal, 19 ^ Ayn Rand, "Nature of Government", Virtue of selfishness.

Works cited [ edit ] Carsel, Wilfred (1940). "The Slaveholders' Indictment of Northern Wage Slavery".

Journal of Southern History .

6 (4): 504– 520.

doi : 10.2307/2192167 .

JSTOR 2192167 .

Fitzhugh, George (1857).

Cannibals All! or, Slaves Without Masters . Richmond, VA: A. Morris.

ISBN 9781429016438 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) George, Henry (1898) [1883].

Social Problems . New York: Doubleday and McClure.

Graeber, David (2004).

Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology . Prickly Paradigm Press.

ISBN 978-0-9728196-4-0 .

Graeber, David (2007).

Possibilities: Essays on Hierarchy, Rebellion and Desire . AK Press.

ISBN 978-1-904859-66-6 .

Marx, Karl (1847).

Wage Labour and Capital .

Marx, Karl (1990) [1867].

Capital, Volume I . London: Penguin Classics .

ISBN 978-0-140-44568-8 .

Mattei, Clara E. (2022).

The Capital Order: How Economists Invented Austerity and Paved the Way to Fascism .

University of Chicago Press .

ISBN 978-0226818399 .

Nelson, John O. (1995). "That a Worker's Labour Cannot Be a Commodity".

Philosophy .

70 (272): 157– 165.

doi : 10.1017/s0031819100065359 .

JSTOR 3751199 .

S2CID 171054136 .

Nitzan, Jonathan ; Bichler, Shimshon (2009).

Capital as Power: A Study of Order and Creorder .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0415496803 .

Roediger, David (2007a) [1991].

The Wages of Whiteness: Race and the Making of the American Working Class (revised and expanded ed.). London & New York: Verso .

ISBN 978-1-844-67145-8 .

Roediger, David (2007b). "An Outmoded Approach to Labour and Slavery".

Labour/Le Travail .

60 : 245– 250.

JSTOR 25149808 .

Slobodian, Quinn (2023).

Crack-Up Capitalism: Market Radicals and the Dream of a World Without Democracy .

Metropolitan Books .

ISBN 978-1250753892 .

Sullivan, Dylan; Hickel, Jason (2023).

"Capitalism and extreme poverty: A global analysis of real wages, human height, and mortality since the long 16th century" .

World Development .

161 106026.

doi : 10.1016/j.worlddev.2022.106026 .

Wiedmann, Thomas; Lenzen, Manfred; Keyßer, Lorenz T.; Steinberger, Julia K. (2020).

"Scientists' warning on affluence" .

Nature Communications .

11 (3107): 3107.

Bibcode : 2020NatCo..11.3107W .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-020-16941-y .

PMC 7305220 .

PMID 32561753 .

Further reading [ edit ] Chang, Ha-Joon (2012).

23 Things They Don't Tell You About Capitalism .

Bloomsbury Publishing .

ISBN 978-1608193387 .

Chiapello, Eve (2013). "Capitalism and Its Criticisms".

New Spirits of Capitalism? Crises, Justifications, and Dynamics .

Oxford University Press . pp.

60– 81.

ISBN 9780191750755 .

Chomsky, Noam ; Waterstone, Marv (2021).

Consequences of Capitalism: Manufacturing Discontent and Resistance .

Haymarket Books .

ISBN 978-1642592634 .

Desai, Radhika (2022).

Capitalism, Coronavirus and War: A Geopolitical Economy .

Routledge .

doi : 10.4324/9781003200000 .

ISBN 9781032059501 .

S2CID 254306409 .

Fisher, Mark (2009).

Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative?

.

John Hunt Publishing .

ISBN 978-1846943171 .

Fraser, Nancy (2022).

Cannibal Capitalism: How Our System Is Devouring Democracy, Care, and the Planet—and What We Can Do About It .

Verso .

ISBN 978-1839761232 .

Greene, Julie (April 2020). "Bookends to a Gentler Capitalism: Complicating the Notion of First and Second Gilded Ages".

The Journal of the Gilded Age and Progressive Era .

19 (2).

Cambridge University Press : 197– 205.

doi : 10.1017/S1537781419000628 .

Nibert, David , ed. (2017).

Animal Oppression and Capitalism .

Praeger Publishing .

ISBN 978-1440850738 .

Raposo, Bruna Ferraz; Filho, Niemeyer Almeida; Amaral, Marisa Silva (November 2021). Chilcote, Ronald (ed.). "The Pattern of Capital Reproduction in Dependent and Financialized Capitalism".

Latin American Perspectives .

48 (6).

SAGE Publications : 166– 181.

doi : 10.1177/0094582X211061878 .

ISSN 1552-678X .

S2CID 244769729 .

Sanders, Bernie (2023).

It's OK to Be Angry About Capitalism .

Crown Publishing Group .

ISBN 978-0593238714 .

External links [ edit ] A Reconsideration of the Theory of Entrepreneurship: a participatory approach – critique of capitalism (archived 18 February 2006) How The Miners Were Robbed – 1907 anti-capitalist pamphlet by John Wheatley Information and Economics: A Critique of Hayek Archived 9 April 2014 at the Wayback Machine by Allin F. Cottrell and W. Paul Cockshott Value, Price and Profit – Karl Marx on the basic features of capitalism Crisis of Capitalism by David Harvey .

Royal Society of Arts . 28 June 2010.

Richard Wolff on Curing Capitalism .

Moyers & Company . 22 March 2013.

Occupy was right: capitalism has failed the world .

Andrew Hussey .

The Guardian . 12 April 2014 (interview with Thomas Piketty ).

Unless It Changes, Capitalism Will Starve Humanity By 2050 .

Forbes . 9 February 2016.

New Zealand's new prime minister calls capitalism a 'blatant failure' .

The Independent . 22 October 2017.

Capitalism in crisis: U.S. billionaires worry about the survival of the system that made them rich .

The Washington Post . 20 April 2019 Broken Capitalism series in The Guardian .

The Influence of Environmental Toxicity, Inequity and Capitalism on Reproductive Health .

Center for Biological Diversity . 2022.

Articles related to Criticism of capitalism v t e Syndicalism Precursors Guild socialism Orthodox Marxism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Variants Anarchist Council communism De Leonism Fascist Green Nationalist Sorelianism Economics Co-operative economics Labour economics General strike Labour rights Labour unionisation Workers' self-management Mutual aid Organisations International Workingmen's Association (1864–1876) IWA–AIT and affiliates Argentine Regional Workers' Federation (FORA) Brazilian Workers Confederation (COB) Confederación Nacional del Trabajo (CNT–AIT, Spain) Confederation of Revolutionary Anarcho-Syndicalists (CRAS, Russia) Free Workers' Union (FAU, Germany) Norsk Syndikalistisk Forbund (NSF–IAA, Norway) Solidarity Federation (SF–IWA, Britain) Confédération Générale du Travail (CGT, France) General Confederation of Labour (CGT, Spain) Industrial Workers of the World (IWW) IWW-Chile IWW-South Africa Irish Transport and General Workers' Union (ITGWU) Fagoppositionens Sammenslutning (FS, Denmark) National Workers' Union (UON, Portugal) Sveriges Arbetares Centralorganisation (SAC, Sweden) People Bain Berth De Ambris De Leon Delesalle Fitzgerald Griffuelhes Haywood Janvion Jouhaux Lagardelle Larkin Monatte García Panunzio Pelloutier Rocker Sorel Valois Related topics Communism Copyleft Corporatism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of copyright Critique of work Fascism Labour power Libertarian socialism Post-capitalism Revisionism Socialism Anarchism portal Communism portal Labour economics Organized Labour Politics portal Socialism portal Syndicalism v t e Anarchism Concepts Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence Schools of thought Classical Individualist Egoist Illegalist Naturist Philosophical Mutualist Social Collectivist Communist Magonist Post-classical Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Independence Insurrectionary Pacifist Religious Christian Buddhist Jewish Without adjectives Contemporary Black Free-market Postcolonial Post-anarchist Post-left Queer Types of federation Affinity group Anarcho-syndicalism Platformism Anarchist synthesis Union of egoists Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Category Outline v t e Capitalism Aspects and perspectives General Anarchy of production Business cycle Centralization Competition Competition law Depression definitions of capitalism Deregulation Economic bubble Economic development Economic liberalism Economic planning Entrepreneurship Ecopreneurship Externality Financial crisis Financial Revolution Globalization Global labor arbitrage History of capitalist theory Industrial Revolution Invention Market economy Market failure Merchantilism Meritocracy Multinational corporation Nationalization Oligopoly Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Privatization Profit Property rights Recession Regulation Wage labour Wealth Ideology Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Conservative Corporate Democratic Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neo Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social State State-sponsored Welfare Cultural aspects Advertising American Dream Black Friday Consumerism Decentralization Economic freedom Economic mobility Individualism Liberalism Liberty Mainstream Philanthropy Private foundation Private property Rule of law Social alienation Spontaneous order Social aspects Corporatism Economic inequality Employment Freedom of association Labour market flexibility Labour supply Productivity Prosperity Syndicate Social venture capital Unemployment Criticism Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Critique of political economy Critique of work Market fundamentalism Marxism Wage slavery Antithesis Anarchism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-syndicalism Collectivist anarchism Communalism Communism Economic democracy Eco-socialism Free-market socialism Green anarchism Individualist anarchism Libertarian socialism Market anarchism Market socialism Mutualism Post-capitalism Post-scarcity economy Sharing economy Social anarchism Socialism Syndicalism v t e Critique of political economy 18th–19th-century Friedrich Engels Karl Marx Thomas Carlyle John Ruskin Paul Lafargue Erik Johan Stagnelius 20th–21st-century Jean Baudrillard Guy Debord Mahatma Gandhi André Gorz Moishe Postone Étienne Balibar Neue Marx-Lektüre Helmut Reichelt Hans-Georg Backhaus Robert Kurz Michael Heinrich Mark Fisher Roman Rosdolsky Claus Peter Ortlieb Georges Bataille Katrine Marçal Concepts Abstract labour and concrete labour Capitalist mode of production Commodity Chrematistics Dismal Science Illth Law of value Socially necessary labour time Valorisation Value-form Written works Unto This Last Sarvodaya The Right to Be Lazy Das Kapital Grundrisse Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Mirror of Production A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Critique of Economic Reason Discourse on Inequality The Accursed Share Who Cooked Adam Smith's Dinner?

Related Assume a can opener Classical economics Chrematistics Criticism of capitalism Critique of work Economic anthropology Economics Mainstream economics Occam's razor v t e Critique of work Historical persons Abbie Hoffman Edward Bellamy Alfredo M. Bonanno André Gorz Bob Black Günther Anders Guy Debord Heinrich Böll Ivan Illich Mikhail Bakunin Paul Lafargue Walter Benjamin Antonio Negri Bertrand Russell Friedrich Nietzsche Henry David Thoreau Herbert Marcuse Jerry Rubin Josef Pieper Karl Marx Max Stirner Max Weber Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Raoul Vaneigem Renzo Novatore Zo d'Axa Contemporary persons Franco Berardi L. Susan Brown Madeleine Bunting David Graeber Michael Hardt Maurizio Lazzarato Claus Peter Ortlieb Roland Paulsen Jeremy Rifkin Penelope Rosemont Mark Slouka Nick Srnicek Claire Wolfe John Zerzan Terminology and related topics 996 working hour system Absenteeism Abusive supervision Aktion Arbeitsscheu Reich All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy Autonomism Bare minimum Monday Bullshit job Career catfishing Coffee badging Corporatocracy Conscious quitting Cycle of poverty Dolce far niente Effects of overtime Eight-hour day Employee ghosting Extermination through labour Career cushioning Careerism Flextime Forced labour Four-day workweek Funemployment Ghost job Uberisation / Gig worker Glass cliff Happiness economics Honeymoon-hangover effect Hush trip Infinite workday Job crafting Job cuffing Jobless employed Karoshi Loud quitting Neijuan Microretirement Occupational burnout Occupational safety and health Occupational stress Orange S.A. suicides Overwork Performance punishment Post-work society Precariat Presenteeism Digital presenteeism Productivity theater Professional abuse Protestant work ethic Psychological safety Quick quitting Quiet hiring Quiet promotion Quiet quitting Quiet thriving Lazy girl job Rage applying Refusal of work Resenteeism Right to rest and leisure Sampo generation Sunday scaries Six-hour day Tang ping Technological unemployment Toxic workplace Narcissism Psychopathy Wage slavery Work ethic Workaholic Working poor Work–life interface Theater, movies, music and art À Nous la Liberté Office Space Swedish Public Freedom Service " Take This Job and Shove It " The Future of Work and Death The Main Thing Is Work!

The Working Class Goes to Heaven Yama—Attack to Attack Literature Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral Bartleby, the Scrivener Bonjour paresse Bullshit Jobs The Conquest of Bread Critique of Economic Reason Fight Club Future Primitive and Other Essays In Praise of Idleness and Other Essays Inventing the Future Manifesto Against Work New Escapologist On the Poverty of Student Life The Society of the Spectacle Steal This Book The Abolition of Work The End of Work The Human Use of Human Beings The Idler The Revolution of Everyday Life The Right to Be Lazy The Soul at Work: From Alienation to Autonomy Communities R/antiwork CrimethInc.

Situationist International See also Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Job strain v t e Liberalism Ideas Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history Schools Classical Economic Fiscal Neo Equity feminism Georgist Radical Anti-clerical Civic nationalism Republican Utilitarian Whig Physiocratic Encyclopaedist Conservative Liberal conservatism National Ordo Social Green Liberal feminism Ecofeminism Liberal socialism Social democracy Progressivism Third Way Other Constitutional Constitutional patriotism Cultural Corporate International Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Geolibertarianism Neoclassical liberalism Paleolibertarianism Right-libertarianism Radical centrism Religious Christian Islamic Secular Techno By region Africa Egypt Nigeria Senegal South Africa Tunisia Zimbabwe Asia China Hong Kong India Iran Israel Japan South Korea Anti- Chinilpa Centrist reformist Progressive Philippines Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech lands Denmark Estonia Finland France Orléanist Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Italy Berlusconism Liberism Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Moldova Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Muscular Radical Whiggist Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Brazil Lulism Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay North America Canada United States Jacksonian Jeffersonian Libertarian Modern Progressive Oceania Australia Small-l New Zealand Philosophers Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organisations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism Portal v t e Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Marxist Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Trade union Tripartisme Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Ambedkar Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blair Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Chávez Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman Jaurès Jenkins Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (father) Liebknecht (son) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Morales Myrdal Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Rustin Sanders Savage Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Woodsworth Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Party of European Socialists Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists By region Austria Germany United States Related Communism " The Internationale " Socialism Types of socialism Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal Portals : Business Capitalism Economics Politics NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐666f86d675‐cnhpt
Cached time: 20250816230802
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.935 seconds
Real time usage: 3.226 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16955/1000000
Revision size: 169789/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1024556/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 180114/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 56/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 884630/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.891/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19496641/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2509.315      1 -total
 42.83% 1074.700      1 Template:Reflist
 18.90%  474.361     19 Template:Excerpt
 17.24%  432.558      1 Template:Navboxes
 16.66%  418.001     13 Template:Navbox
 13.88%  348.275     65 Template:Cite_book
 11.60%  290.968     67 Template:Cite_web
 11.31%  283.716      4 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.04%  226.823      1 Template:Anarchism
  7.16%  179.738     31 Template:Cite_journal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3079085:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816230802 and revision id 1304244589. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Criticism_of_capitalism&oldid=1304244589 " Categories : Criticism of capitalism Capitalism Issues in anarchism Marxian economics Social philosophy Socialism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages with missing ISBNs All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2022 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with excerpts Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2021 Articles to be expanded from April 2024 All articles to be expanded CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 21:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Criticism of capitalism 18 languages Add topic

