Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples 2 Algebraic properties 3 Uses Toggle Uses subsection 3.1 Graph theory and algebra 3.2 Mathematical logic and computability theory 3.3 Number theory 3.4 Computer science 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Integer-valued function 2 languages Deutsch Galego Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Integer-valued function" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2013 ) The floor function on real numbers. Its discontinuities are pictured with white discs outlines with blue circles.

Function x ↦ f ( x ) History of the function concept Types by domain and codomain X → 𝔹 𝔹 → X 𝔹 n → X X → ℤ ℤ → X X → ℝ ℝ → X ℝ n → X X → ℂ ℂ → X ℂ n → X Classes/properties Constant Identity Linear Polynomial Rational Algebraic Analytic Smooth Continuous Measurable Injective Surjective Bijective Constructions Restriction Composition λ Inverse Generalizations Relation ( Binary relation ) Set-valued Multivalued Partial Implicit Space Higher-order Morphism Functor List of specific functions v t e In mathematics , an integer-valued function is a function whose values are integers .  In other words, it is a function that assigns an integer to each member of its domain .

The floor and ceiling functions are examples of integer-valued functions of a real variable , but on real numbers and, generally, on (non-disconnected) topological spaces integer-valued functions are not especially useful. Any such function on a connected space either has discontinuities or is constant . On the other hand, on discrete and other totally disconnected spaces integer-valued functions have roughly the same importance as real-valued functions have on non-discrete spaces.

Any function with natural , or non-negative integer values is a partial case of an integer-valued function.

Examples [ edit ] Integer-valued functions defined on the domain of all real numbers include the floor and ceiling functions, the Dirichlet function , the sign function and the Heaviside step function (except possibly at 0).

Integer-valued functions defined on the domain of non-negative real numbers include the integer square root function and the prime-counting function .

Algebraic properties [ edit ] On an arbitrary set X , integer-valued functions form a ring with pointwise operations of addition and multiplication, [ 1 ] and also an algebra over the ring Z of integers. Since the latter is an ordered ring , the functions form a partially ordered ring : f ≤ ≤ g ⟺ ⟺ ∀ ∀ x : f ( x ) ≤ ≤ g ( x ) .

{\displaystyle f\leq g\quad \iff \quad \forall x:f(x)\leq g(x).} Uses [ edit ] Graph theory and algebra [ edit ] Integer-valued functions are ubiquitous in graph theory . They also have similar uses in geometric group theory , where length function represents the concept of norm , and word metric represents the concept of metric .

Integer-valued polynomials are important in ring theory .

Mathematical logic and computability theory [ edit ] In mathematical logic , such concepts as primitive recursive functions and μ-recursive functions represent integer-valued functions of several natural variables or, in other words, functions on N n .

Gödel numbering , defined on well-formed formulae of some formal language , is a natural-valued function.

Computability theory is essentially based on natural numbers and natural (or integer) functions on them.

Number theory [ edit ] In number theory , many arithmetic functions are integer-valued.

Computer science [ edit ] In computer programming , many functions return values of integer type due to simplicity of implementation.

See also [ edit ] Integer-valued polynomial Semi-continuity Rank (disambiguation)#Mathematics Grade (disambiguation)#In mathematics References [ edit ] ^ Dummit, David S.; Foote, Richard M. (July 2003).

Abstract Algebra (3rd ed.). John Wiley and Sons, Inc. p. 225.

ISBN 978-0-471-43334-7 .

Further reading [ edit ] https://webusers.imj-prg.fr/~michel.waldschmidt/articles/pdf/SurveyIntegerValuedEntireFunctions.pdf Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Integer-valued_function&oldid=1250171425 " Category : Types of functions Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from June 2013 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 8 October 2024, at 21:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Integer-valued function 2 languages Add topic

