Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contents Toggle Contents subsection 1.1 First section 1.2 Second section 2 Nordicism Toggle Nordicism subsection 2.1 Grant's view of Nordicism 3 Reception and influence 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents The Passing of the Great Race 9 languages العربية Deutsch Español 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Lingua Franca Nova Русский Suomi Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1916 book on race by Madison Grant The Passing of the Great Race Title page of the first 1916 edition of The Passing of the Great Race .

Author Madison Grant Language English Subject Ethnology Europe Publisher Charles Scribner's Sons Publication date 1916 Publication place United States OCLC 400188 LC Class GN575 .G75 1921 Part of a series on Eugenics in the United States States States California Minnesota North Carolina Oregon Law Court cases Buck v. Bell Skinner v. Oklahoma Madrigal v. Quilligan Poe v. Lynchburg Training School & Hospital Stump v. Sparkman Doe ex. rel. Tarlow v. District of Columbia History Institutions American Birth Control League American Eugenics Society Eugenics Record Office Race Betterment Foundation Human Betterment Foundation Society for Biodemography and Social Biology Pioneer Fund Human Betterment League Heredity Commission AASPIM General Jukes family Average Young American Male (1921) The Relf Sisters Oneida stirpiculture Selective Reproduction of Slaves Virginia Sterilization Act of 1924 Literature Books The Kallikak Family Eugenics manifesto The Bell Curve The Passing of the Great Race The Rising Tide of Color Journals Annals of Eugenics Proponents Academics Harry H. Laughlin Joseph DeJarnette David Starr Jordan Edwin Katzen-Ellenbogen Charles Goethe Charles Benedict Davenport Gertrude Crotty Davenport Frederick Osborn Madison Grant Politicians Guy W. Bailey Wallace H. Kuralt. Sr.

Related Scientific racism Social degeneration theory Social purity movement Feeble-minded Racial nationalism " Race suicide " Sterilization of Latinas Sterilization of Native American women United States portal Category Index v t e The Passing of the Great Race: Or, The Racial Basis of European History is a 1916 racist and pseudoscientific [ 1 ] [ 2 ] book by American lawyer, anthropologist , and proponent of eugenics Madison Grant (1865–1937). Grant expounds a theory of Nordic superiority , claiming that the " Nordic race " is inherently superior to other human "races" . The theory and the book were praised by Adolf Hitler and other Nazis , Hitler referring to it as "his Bible".

Contents [ edit ] First section [ edit ] Cover of the 1st edition (1916) The first section deals with the basis of race as well as Grant's own stances on political issues of the day ( eugenics ). These center around the growing numbers of immigrants from non-Nordic Europe. Grant claims that the members of contemporary American Protestant society who could trace their ancestry back to Colonial times were being out-bred by immigrant and "inferior" lower-class White racial stocks. Grant reasons that the United States has always been a Nordic country, consisting of Nordic immigrants from England, Scotland, and the Netherlands in Colonial times and of Nordic immigrants from Ireland and Germany in later times. Grant claims that certain parts of Europe were underdeveloped and a source of racial stocks unqualified for the Nordic political structure of the US.  Grant is also interested in the impact of the expansion of the US Black population into the urban areas of the North .

Grant reasons that the new immigrants were of different races and were creating separate societies within America including ethnic lobby groups, criminal syndicates, and political machines which were undermining the socio-political structure of the country and in turn the traditional Anglo-Saxon colonial stocks, as well as all Nordic stocks.  His analysis of population studies, economic utility factors, labor supply, etc. purports to show that the consequence of this subversion was evident in the decreasing quality of life, lower birth rates , and corruption of the contemporary American society.  He reasons that the Nordic races would become extinct and the United States as it was known would cease to exist, being replaced by a fragmented country, or a corrupted caricature of itself.

Second section [ edit ] The second part of the book reviews European prehistory as it was known at the time of writing of the book, and then postulates the existence of three European races, which Grant defines as Nordic, Alpine, and Mediterranean, as well as their physical and mental characteristics. He then speculates hereditary links between the proposed Nordic people and the Trojans [ 3 ] : 159 and between the Prussians and the Spartans .

[ 3 ] : 160 This part of the book ties together strands of speculation regarding Aryan migration theory, ethnology, anthropology, and history into a broad survey of the historical rise and fall, and expansion and retraction, of the European races from their homelands.

Nordicism [ edit ] Main article: Nordicism "Maximum Expansion of Alpines" — Map from The Passing of the Great Race showing the "essentially peasant" (p. 228) Alpine migrations into Europe.

"Expansion of the Pre-Teutonic Nordics" — Hypothetical early Nordic influence spreading over the continent in Grant's vision.

This section may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( July 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The book elaborates Grant's interpretation of contemporary anthropology and history, which he sees as revolving chiefly around "race" rather than environment. He specifically promotes the idea of the Nordic race as a key social group responsible for human development; thus the subtitle of the book is The Racial Basis of European History . Grant also supports eugenics , advocating the sterilization of "undesirables", a treatment possibly to be extended to "types which may be called weaklings" and  "perhaps ultimately to worthless race types": "A rigid system of selection through the elimination of those who are weak or unfit—in other words social failures—would solve the whole question in one hundred years, as well as enable us to get rid of the undesirables who crowd our jails, hospitals, and insane asylums. The individual himself can be nourished, educated and protected by the community during his lifetime, but the state through sterilization must see to it that his line stops with him, or else future generations will be cursed with an ever increasing load of misguided sentimentalism. This is a practical, merciful, and inevitable solution of the whole problem, and can be applied to an ever widening circle of social discards, beginning always with the criminal, the diseased, and the insane, and extending gradually to types which may be called weaklings rather than defectives, and perhaps ultimately to worthless race types." "Expansion of the Teutonic Nordics and Slavic Alpines"—Further Nordic expansion, as well as the Alpines.

Other messages in his work include recommendations to install civil organizations through the public health system to establish quasi-dictatorships in their particular fields with the administrative powers to segregate unfavorable races in ghettos. He also mentions that the expansion of non-Nordic race types in the Nordic system of freedom would actually mean a slavery to desires, passions, and base behaviors. In turn, this corruption of society would lead to the subjection of the Nordic community to "inferior" races who would in turn long to be dominated and instructed by "superior" ones utilizing authoritarian powers. The result would be the submergence of the indigenous Nordic races under a corrupt and enfeebled system dominated by inferior races.

Grant's view of Nordicism [ edit ] Nordic theory , in Grant's formulation, was largely copied from the work of Arthur de Gobineau that appeared in the 1850s, except that Gobineau used the study of language while Grant used physical anthropology to define races. Both divided mankind into primarily three distinct races: Caucasoids (based in Europe, North Africa, and Western Asia), Negroids (based in Sub-Saharan Africa), and Mongoloids (based in Central and Eastern Asia). Nordic theory, however, further subdivided Caucasoids into three groups: Nordics (who inhabited Scandinavia, northern Germany, parts of England, Scotland and Ireland, Holland, Flanders, parts of northern France, parts of Russia and northern Poland, and parts of Central Europe), Alpines (whose territory stretched from central Europe, parts of northern Italy, southern Poland to the Balkans/Southeastern Europe, central/southern Russia, Turkey and even into Central Asia), and Mediterraneans ("substantial part of the population of the British Isles, the great bulk of the population of the Iberian Peninsula, nearly one-third of the population of France, Liguria, Italy south of the Apennines and all the Mediterranean coasts and islands, in some of which like Sardinia it exists in great purity. It forms the substratum of the population of Greece and of the eastern coast of the Balkan Peninsula.") [ 4 ] [ independent source needed ] "Present Distribution of the European Races"—Grant's vision of the status quo, with the Nordics in red, the Alpines in green, and the Mediterraneans in yellow.

In Grant's view, Nordics probably evolved in a climate which "must have been such as to impose a rigid elimination of defectives through the agency of hard winters and the necessity of industry and foresight in providing the year's food, clothing, and shelter during the short summer. Such demands on energy, if long continued, would produce a strong, virile, and self-contained race which would inevitably overwhelm in battle nations whose weaker elements had not been purged by the conditions of an equally severe environment" (p. 170). The "Proto-Nordic" human, Grant reasoned, probably evolved in "forests and plains of eastern Germany, Poland and Russia" (p. 170).

The Nordic, in his hypothesis, was " Homo europaeus , the white man par excellence.

It is everywhere characterized by certain unique specializations, namely, wavy brown or blond hair and blue, gray or light brown eyes, fair skin, high, narrow and straight nose, which are associated with great stature, and a long skull, as well as with abundant head and body hair." [ 3 ] Grant categorized the Alpines as being the lowest of the three European races, with the Nordics as the pinnacle of civilization: "The Nordics are, all over the world, a race of soldiers, sailors, adventurers, and explorers, but above all, of rulers, organizers, and aristocrats in sharp contrast to the essentially peasant character of the Alpines. Chivalry and knighthood, and their still surviving but greatly impaired counterparts, are peculiarly Nordic traits, and feudalism, class distinctions, and race pride among Europeans are traceable for the most part to the north." Grant, while aware of the hypothesized "Nordic migration" into the Mediterranean, appears to reject this theory as an explanation for the high civilization features of the Greco-Roman world : "The mental characteristics of the Mediterranean race are well known, and this race, while inferior in bodily stamina to both the Nordic and the Alpine, is probably the superior of both, certainly of the Alpines, in intellectual attainments. In the field of art its superiority to both the other European races is unquestioned." [ independent source needed ] Yet, while Grant allowed Mediterraneans to have abilities in art, as quoted above, he remarked later in the text that true Mediterranean achievements were only through admixture with Nordics: "This is the race that gave the world the great civilizations of Egypt, of Crete, of Phoenicia including Carthage, of Etruria and of Mycenean Greece. It gave us, when mixed and invigorated with Nordic elements, the most splendid of all civilizations, that of ancient Hellas, and the most enduring of political organizations, the Roman State. To what extent the Mediterranean race entered into the blood and civilization of Rome, it is now difficult to say, but the traditions of the Eternal City, its love of organization, of law and military efficiency, as well as the Roman ideals of family life, loyalty, and truth, point clearly to a Nordic rather than to a Mediterranean origin." [ independent source needed ] In this manner, Grant appeared to be studiously following scientific theory. Critics warned that Grant used uncritical circular reasoning .

[ 5 ] His desirable characteristics of a people — "family life, loyalty, and truth" — were claimed to be exclusive products of the "Nordic race".

[ 6 ] Thus, whenever such traits were found in a non-Nordic culture, Grant said that they were evidence of a Nordic influence or admixture, rather than casting doubt on their supposed exclusive Nordic origin.

Reception and influence [ edit ] Part of a series on Nazism Organizations Ahnenerbe Artaman League Geheime Staatspolizei Deutscher Fichte-Bund Deutsches Jungvolk Franz Eher Nachfolger Hitler Youth League of German Girls Organisation Todt NSDÄB NSDStB NSRL NSFK NSKK NSF Nazi media organizations Nationalsozialistische Monatshefte Neues Volk NS-Frauen-Warte Das Reich Das Schwarze Korps Nazi Party Sicherheitsdienst (SD) Sturmabteilung (SA) Schutzstaffel (SS) SS Gefolge Waffen-SS History Early timeline National Socialist Program Hitler's rise to power Machtergreifung Gleichschaltung German rearmament Nazi Germany Kirchenkampf Hitler's personality cult Enabling Act of 1933 Night of the Long Knives Nuremberg rallies Nuremberg Laws Anti-Comintern Pact Kristallnacht Anschluss World War II The Holocaust 1938–1939 German expedition to Tibet Tripartite Pact Denazification Nuremberg trials Final solution Concentration camps Deportations Doctors' Trial Extermination camps Genocide Ghettos Human experimentation Labour camps Pogroms Racial segregation Ideology Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-liberalism Anti-pacifism Blood and soil Chauvinism Class collaboration Conspiracism Dolchstoßlegende International Jewry Judeo-Bolshevism Corporatism Counter-Enlightenment Cult of personality Dictatorship Führerprinzip Direct action Economic interventionism Eugenics Geopolitik Heimat Imperialism Greater Germanic Reich Heim ins Reich Lebensraum Pan-Germanism Militarism Morality Nationalism Ethno Racial Palingenetic Revolutionary Ultra New Man New Order One-party state Populism Propaganda Prussianism Racism Antisemitism Anti-Slavic sentiment Aryan race Aryanism Master race Nordicism Nordic Indo-Germanic people Renordification Rassenschande Untermenschen Völkisch equality Völkisch movement Reactionary modernism Romanticism Social Darwinism Social interventionism Social order State capitalism Syncretism Totalitarianism Volksgemeinschaft Volk ohne Raum Volkskörper Politicians Bloem Bormann Daluege Dönitz Drexler Eichmann Esser Fischer Frank Frick Hess Heydrich Himmler Hitler Goebbels Göring Keller Lammers Lutze Mitford von Neurath Quisling von Ribbentrop Röhm Schacht von Schirach Scholtz-Klink Seldte Seyss-Inquart Speer Strasser (Gregor) Strasser (Otto) Streicher Thierack Ideologues Pre- Machtergreifung Arndt Burnouf Chamberlain Drumont Eckart Fritsch de Gobineau Grant von Liebenfels von List Löns Lueger Marr Nietzsche (contentious) Ratzel Riehl Ruskin Wagner Post- Machtergreifung Anacker Baeumler Bergmann Berndt Darré Eggers Eichrodt Feder Ford Grimm Günther Hauer Haushofer Heidegger (contentious) Hentschel Hoche al-Husseini Jung Krannhals Kriek Lindbergh Müller Plenge Rahn Rosenberg Saadeh Schäfer Schmalenbach Schmitt (contentious) von Sebottendorf Schwarz Stapel Wirsing Zimmermann Literature The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century (1899) The Protocols of the Elders of Zion (1903) The Passing of the Great Race (1916) Prussianism and Socialism (1919) " 25-point Program " (1920) The International Jew (1920s) Rassenkunde des deutschen Volkes (1922) Das Dritte Reich (1923) Mein Kampf (1925) Hitlers Zweites Buch (1928) Michael (1929) The Myth of the Twentieth Century (1930) Gelöbnis treuester Gefolgschaft (1933) I Fight (1942) Religion Ariosophy Thule Society Aspects Catholic Church persecution Germany Poland Christmas Esotericism German Evangelical Church Deutsche Christen German Faith Movement Germanic paganism Heathenry Gottgläubig Kirchenkampf Occultism Positive Christianity Religion under Nazism Hitler's views Symbolism Outside Germany Americas Brazil Chile Mexico Europe Greece Sweden Parties Arrow Cross Party Frontist movement German American Bund German National Movement in Liechtenstein Nasjonal Samling National Socialist Movement (Netherlands) National Socialist Movement of Chile National Socialist Workers' Party of Denmark Ossewabrandwag Lists Doctors Last surviving war crime suspects Nazi Party members Nicknames and pseudonyms NSDAP leaders and officials Publishers SS personnel Related topics Analogies Art Architecture Cinema Atsızism " Beefsteak Nazi " Economy Denordification Renordification Glossary Drang nach Osten Generalplan Ost German American Bund Horst-Wessel-Lied Hitler's political views Propaganda and the UK Racial theories Strasserism Women Germany portal Politics portal v t e According to historian Charles C. Alexander writing for the journal Phylon in 1962: "There was nothing very new about The  Passing of the Great Race; Grant's views were essentially a reiteration of the earlier racial polemics of the Comte de Gobineau in France and Houston Stewart Chamberlain in Germany. What gave the book particular significance was the boldness and sweep of the treatment. Grant demonstrated his eclecticism by taking the Anglo-Saxon tradition, borrowing a bit of racial philosophy from one writer, a bit from another, and weaving together a comprehensive view of history. He bade fare well to Christian and democratic values." [ 7 ] By 1937, the book had sold 17,000 copies in the U.S. The book received positive reviews in the 1920s, but Grant's popularity declined in the 1930s. Among those who embraced the book and its message was Adolf Hitler , who wrote to Grant to personally thank him for writing it, referring to the book as "my Bible." [ 8 ] Spiro writes that its sales were limited for various reasons including anti-German sentiments in the United States with the outbreak of the First World War, the book's anti-democratic and anti-Christian messages and its hereditarianism, which ran counter to traditional American pride in democracy and hard work, and its categorization as a "science" work, which alone meant it "never really had a chance at mass popularity".

[ 5 ] : 161 According to Grant, Nordics were in a dire state in the modern world, where after their abandonment of cultural values rooted in religious or superstitious proto-racialism, they were close to committing "race suicide" by miscegenation and being outbred by inferior stock, which was taking advantage of the transition. Nordic theory was strongly embraced by the racial hygiene movement in Germany in the early 1920s and 1930s; however, they typically used the term " Aryan " instead of "Nordic", though the principal Nazi ideologist, Alfred Rosenberg , preferred "Aryo-Nordic" [ citation needed ] or "Nordic-Atlantean".

Stephen Jay Gould described The Passing of the Great Race as "the most influential tract of American scientific racism".

[ 9 ] Grant was involved in many debates on the discipline of anthropology against the anthropologist Franz Boas , who advocated cultural anthropology in contrast to Grant's "hereditarian" branch of physical anthropology . Boas and his students were strongly opposed to racialist notions, holding that any perceived racial inequality was from social rather than biological factors.

[ 10 ] Versions of their debates on the relative influence of biological and social factors persist in contemporary anthropology.

[ 11 ] Grant advocated restricted immigration to the United States through limiting immigration from East Asia and Southern Europe; he also advocated efforts to purify the American population through selective breeding. He served as the vice president of the Immigration Restriction League from 1922 to his death in 1937. Acting as an expert on world racial data, Grant also provided statistics for the Immigration Act of 1924 to set the quotas on immigrants from certain European countries. He also assisted in the passing and prosecution of several anti-miscegenation laws , notably the Racial Integrity Act of 1924 in the state of Virginia , where he sought to codify his particular version of the " one-drop rule " into law.

[ citation needed ] Grant became a part of popular culture in 1920s America. Author F. Scott Fitzgerald made a lightly disguised reference to Grant in The Great Gatsby . In the book, the character Tom Buchanan reads a book called The Rise of the Colored Empires by "this man Goddard", a combination of Grant and his colleague Lothrop Stoddard .  (Grant wrote the introduction to Stoddard's book The Rising Tide of Color Against White World-Supremacy .) "Everybody ought to read it", the character explained. "The idea is if we don't look out the white race will be — will be utterly submerged. It's all scientific stuff; it's been proved." [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Ernest Hemingway might also have alluded to The Passing of the Great Race in the subtitle of his book The Torrents of Spring ; A Romantic Novel in Honor of the Passing of a Great Race . The book was a parody of contemporary writers and would thus be referring to them sarcastically as a "great race".

[ citation needed ] Americans turned against Grant's ideas in the 1930s; his book was no longer sold, and his supporters fell away.

[ 5 ] : 347 In Europe, however, Nordic theory was adopted during the 1930s by the Nazis and others. Grant's book and the genre in general were read in Germany, but eugenicists increasingly turned to Nazi Germany for leadership.

Heinrich Himmler 's Lebensborn ("Fount of Life") Society was formed to preserve typical Nordic genes, such as blond hair and blue eyes, by sheltering blonde, blue-eyed women.

[ 5 ] : 363–64 The book continued to influence the white supremacist movement in the United States in the early 21st century.

[ 14 ] The book was also the earliest emergence of the white genocide conspiracy theory as The Passing of the Great Race specifically focuses on the "race suicide" of Nordics.

[ 15 ] References [ edit ] ^ Hoff, Aliya R. (12 July 2021).

"Embryo Project Encyclopedia: The Passing of the Great Race; or The Racial Basis of European History (1916), by Madison Grant" .

Arizona State University . Archived from the original on 16 February 2022 . Retrieved 16 February 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Alexander, Charles C. (1962). "Prophet of American Racism: Madison Grant and the Nordic Myth".

Phylon .

23 (1).

Clark Atlanta University : 79.

doi : 10.2307/274146 .

JSTOR 274146 .

^ a b c Grant, Madison (1921).

The Passing of the Great Race (4 ed.). C. Scribner's Sons. p. 167.

^ Grant, Madison (1918).

The Passing of the Great Race: Or, The Racial Basis of European History . Charles Scribner's Sons. p. 152.

^ a b c d Spiro, Jonathan P. (2009).

Defending the Master Race: Conservation, Eugenics, and the Legacy of Madison Grant . University of Vermont Press.

ISBN 978-1-58465-715-6 .

^ Madison Grant, The Passing of the Great Race: Or, The Racial Basis of European History (New York, New York:  Charles Scribner's Sons, 1916), p. 139.

^ Alexander, Charles C. (1962).

"Prophet of American Racism: Madison Grant and the Nordic Myth" .

Phylon .

23 (1): 77.

doi : 10.2307/274146 .

JSTOR 274146 . Retrieved 27 May 2022 .

^ Stefan Kühl.

Nazi Connection: Eugenics, American Racism, and German National Socialism (Oxford University Press, 2002) p. 85 ^ Stephen Jay Gould, Bully for Brontosaurus: Reflections in Natural History (New York, New York:  W. W. Norton, 1991), p. 162.

^ Baker (1998), 104-107 ^ Wade, Nicholas (8 October 2002).

"A New Look at Old Data May Discredit a Theory on Race" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 13 March 2018 .

^ Lindgren, Allana; Ross, Stephen (2015-06-05).

The Modernist World . Routledge. pp.

504– 505.

ISBN 978-1-317-69616-2 .

^ Fitzgerald, F. Scott (2003-05-27).

The Great Gatsby: The Only Authorized Edition . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 978-0-7432-4639-2 .

^ Berlet, Chip ; Vysotsky, Stanislav (2006).

"Overview of U.S. White Supremacist Groups" .

Journal of Political and Military Sociology .

34 (1): 14.

^ Serwer, Adam (April 2019).

"Adam Serwer: White Nationalism's Deep American Roots" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved June 11, 2019 .

Further reading [ edit ] Baker, Lee D. (1998).

From Savage to Negro: Anthropology and the Construction of Race . University of California Press.

ISBN 0-520-21168-5 .

Guterl, Matthew Press (2001).

The Color of Race in America, 1900–1940 . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0-674-00615-1 .

Jackson, John P. (2005).

Science for Segregation: Race, Law, and the Case against Brown v. Board of Education .

NYU Press .

ISBN 978-0-8147-4271-6 .

Lay summary in: "Book Review: Science for Segregation: Race, Law, and the Case Against Brown v. Board of Education" .

History Cooperative .

Tucker, William H.

(2007).

The funding of scientific racism: Wickliffe Draper and the Pioneer Fund .

University of Illinois Press .

ISBN 978-0-252-07463-9 .

External links [ edit ] The Passing of the Great Race at Project Gutenberg The Passing of the Great Race public domain audiobook at LibriVox The Passing of the Great Race at the Internet Archive Excerpts from Passing of the Great Race used at the Nuremberg Trials v t e Obsolete definitions of race Racism Scientific racism Pseudoscience Color terminology Black Bronze Brown Olive Red White Concepts Australoid Capoid Caucasoid Alpine Arabid Armenoid Aryan Atlantid Caspian Dinaric East Baltic Ethiopid Hamites Indid Iranid Mediterranean Nordic Semites Turanid Malay Mongoloid Proto-Mongoloid Sinodonty and Sundadonty Negroid Negrito Sociological in India Passing Racial discrimination Racism Racial stereotypes Colorism Master race Nazism and race Racial hygiene Whiteness studies Négritude Writers Louis Agassiz John Baker Erwin Baur John Beddoe Robert Bennett Bean François Bernier Renato Biasutti Johann Friedrich Blumenbach Franz Boas Daniel Garrison Brinton Paul Broca Alice Mossie Brues Halfdan Bryn Georges-Louis Leclerc, Comte de Buffon Charles Caldwell Petrus Camper Samuel A. Cartwright Houston Stewart Chamberlain Sonia Mary Cole Carleton S. Coon Georges Cuvier Jan Czekanowski Charles Davenport Joseph Deniker Egon Freiherr von Eickstedt Anténor Firmin Eugen Fischer Francis Galton Stanley Marion Garn Reginald Ruggles Gates George Gliddon Arthur de Gobineau Madison Grant John Grattan Hans F. K. Günther Ernst Haeckel Frederick Ludwig Hoffman Earnest Hooton Julian Huxley Thomas Henry Huxley Calvin Ira Kephart Robert Knox Robert E. Kuttner Georges Vacher de Lapouge Fritz Lenz Carl Linnaeus Cesare Lombroso Bertil Lundman Felix von Luschan Dominick McCausland John Mitchell Ashley Montagu Lewis H. Morgan Samuel George Morton Josiah C. Nott Karl Pearson Roger Pearson Oscar Peschel Isaac La Peyrère Charles Pickering Ludwig Hermann Plate Alfred Ploetz James Cowles Prichard Otto Reche Gustaf Retzius William Z. Ripley Alfred Rosenberg Benjamin Rush Henric Sanielevici Heinrich Schmidt Ilse Schwidetzky Charles Gabriel Seligman Giuseppe Sergi Samuel Stanhope Smith Herbert Spencer Morris Steggerda Lothrop Stoddard William Graham Sumner Thomas Griffith Taylor Paul Topinard John H. Van Evrie Otmar Freiherr von Verschuer Alexander Winchell Ludwig Woltmann Publications An Essay upon the Causes of the Different Colours of People in Different Climates (1744) The Outline of History of Mankind (1785) Occasional Discourse on the Negro Question (1849) An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races (1855) The Races of Europe (Ripley, 1899) The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century (1899) Race Life of the Aryan Peoples (1907) Heredity in Relation to Eugenics (1911) Castes in India (1916) The Passing of the Great Race (1916) The Rising Tide of Color Against White World-Supremacy (1920) The Myth of the Twentieth Century (1930) Annihilation of Caste (1936) An Investigation of Global Policy with the Yamato Race as Nucleus (1943) The Race Question (1950) Related Ethnogenesis Eugenics Great chain of being History of anthropometry Miscegenation Monogenism Multiracial Polygenism Pre-Adamite Pre-modern conceptions of whiteness Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Passing_of_the_Great_Race&oldid=1305233291 " Categories : 1916 non-fiction books American non-fiction books Books about Europe Conspiracist books Eugenics books Nordicism Pseudoscience literature Race and intelligence controversy Scientific racism White genocide conspiracy theory Proto-Nazism Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking reliable references from July 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 21:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Passing of the Great Race 9 languages Add topic

