Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early years 1.2 Social activism 1.3 Catholic Worker Movement 1.4 Continued activism 1.5 Later years 1.6 Death 2 Beliefs Toggle Beliefs subsection 2.1 Sympathy and identification with anarchists 2.2 Catholic Church property 2.3 Catholic orthodoxy 3 Contributions to the history of feminism Toggle Contributions to the history of feminism subsection 3.1 Lifelong devotion to the oppressed 3.1.1 Life-inspired works 3.1.2 Rejection of gender roles 3.1.3 Radical Catholicism 3.1.4 Social justice 4 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 4.1 Films 4.2 Music 5 Posthumous recognition Toggle Posthumous recognition subsection 5.1 Catholic cause for sainthood 6 Bibliography 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Works cited 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Dorothy Day 40 languages العربية تۆرکجه Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kapampangan ქართული Kaszëbsczi Kiswahili Latina Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Tagalog తెలుగు Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American religious and social activist (1897–1980) For the American plant physiologist, see Dorothy Day (plant physiologist) .

Not to be confused with Doris Day .

Servant of God Dorothy Day OblSB Day in 1916 Born ( 1897-11-08 ) November 8, 1897 New York City, U.S.

Hometown Chicago, Illinois, U.S.

Died November 29, 1980 (1980-11-29) (aged 83) New York City, U.S.

Resting place Cemetery of the Resurrection , New York City This article is part of a series on Anarchism in the United States Ideologies Anarcho-capitalism Anarcho-pacifism Autarchism Chicago idea Green anarchism Individualist anarchism Philosophical anarchism History Cincinnati Time Store Most–Grottkau debate Haymarket affair Homestead strike Assassination of William McKinley Immigration Act of 1903 Ferrer Center and Colony Immigration Act of 1918 Galleanisti First Red Scare 1919 bombings Palmer Raids Sacco and Vanzetti Libertarian Book Club and League Counterculture of the 1960s Protests of 1968 Battle of Seattle Occupy Wall Street Qilombo Capitol Hill Occupied Protest People Abbott Alston Andrews Appleton Austin Balagoon Bari Berkman Best Biehl Bookchin Bushnell Carson Chomsky Cleyre Cornell Czologsz Day Dixon Dolgoff Duffy Turner Emerson Ervin Esteve Fielden Fischer Galleani Goldman Goodman Grace Graeber Greene Hahnel Haldeman-Julius Hammond Harman Heywood (Angela) Heywood (Ezra) Hill Hoffman Holmes Ingalls Kaczynski Konkin Labadie Lingg Lloyd Lum Magón Milstein Most Parsons Perlman Sale Schwab (Justus) Schwab (Michael) Solanas Spies Spooner Thoreau Tucker Waisbrooker Walker Warren Wilson Winn Wolff Zerzan Zinn Active Organizations ABC No Rio Anarcho-Syndicalist Review Anti-Racist Action Beehive Design Collective Catholic Worker Movement Common Ground Collective CrimethInc.

Earth Liberation Front Indecline Industrial Workers of the World Institute for Anarchist Studies Institute for Social Ecology Kate Sharpley Library Labadie Collection Metropolitan Anarchist Coordinating Council MOVE Profane Existence Red Emma's Ruckus Society Zizians Defunct Organizations Cincinnati Time Store Curious George Brigade Diggers Don't Just Vote, Get Active Ferrer Center and Colony George Jackson Brigade Institute for Applied Autonomy International Working People's Association Libertarian Book Club and League Love and Rage New England Non-Resistance Society New York Social Revolutionary Club Portland Anarchist Road Care Qilombo Right to Existence Group Spanish Camp Tenacious Unicorn Ranch Union of Russian Workers Up Against the Wall Motherfucker Vanguard Group Why? Group Youth International Party Media Publications AK Press Autonomedia The Blast Catholic Worker Cronaca Sovversiva Fifth Estate Free Society Freiheit Golos Truda Liberty Loompanics Mother Earth PM Press Regeneración Vanguard The Word Works " Resistance to Civil Government " (1849) " To the Workingmen of America " (1883) Anarchism and Other Essays (1910) Now and After (1929) In Defense of Anarchism (1970) Post-Scarcity Anarchism (1971) " The Abolition of Work " (1986) Industrial Society and Its Future (1995) From Bakunin to Lacan (2001) Understanding Power (2002) Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology (2004) Direct Action: An Ethnography (2009) Related topics American Left Anarchism in Puerto Rico Libertarianism in the U.S.

Labor history of the United States Minarchism Socialism in the U.S.

Anarchism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e This article is part of a series on Christian socialism Variants Christian anarchism Christian communism Catholic Camilism Calderonism Distributism Concepts Liberation theology Latin American Black Dalit Palestinian Theology of struggle Personalism Popular front Postcolonial theology Separation of church and state Two kingdoms doctrine History Diggers Antigonish Movement Tolstoyan movement Social Gospel movement People Abe Arrupe Betto Boer Bruenig Bulgakov Câmara Cardenal Cardenal Coady Cone Costa Day Dimakos Douglas Eagleton Everard Freire Guterres Gutiérrez Hart Hedges Johnson Katayama King Kingsley MacIntyre Maurice Müntzer Nyerere Péguy Pintassilgo Rhodakanaty Scholl Sölle Seassaro Tawney Temple Thomas Torres Tolstoy Tompkins West Wilson Winstanley Peron Major writings Sermon on the Mount Matthew 6:24 Cleansing of the Temple Jesus and the rich young man Acts 2 Epistle of James The Kingdom of God Is Within You Pedagogy of the Oppressed A Theology of Liberation Political parties AGROunia Christian Democracy Canadian Socialist League Christian Social Party (Netherlands) Christian Socialist Party (Hungary) Christian Workers' Union of Finland Citizen Left Community Democratic League Parti du socialisme chrétien Party of Christian Socialists Party of the Christian Left Popular Unitary Action Movement Samoobrona Social Christian Party Social Christians Social-Democratic Party of Wisconsin League of Christian Socialists Workers' Political Movement Organizations Catholic Worker Movement newspaper Christians for National Liberation Christians for Socialism Christians on the Left Christian Socialist Fellowship Covenant of Religious Socialists of Germany Guild of St Matthew Montoneros National Liberation Army PAX Association Sandinistas Society of Christian Socialists United Front of the People Labour Church The Left in the Church of Sweden Related topics Catholic social teaching Social teachings of the papacy Option for the poor Universal destination of goods Social mortgage Catholicism and socialism Christian left Social gospel Sabbath economics Early Christian community of goods Koinonia Omnia sunt communia United Order Christian humanism Christianity portal Socialism portal v t e Dorothy Day , OblSB (November 8, 1897 – November 29, 1980) was an American journalist, social activist and anarchist who, after a bohemian youth, became a Catholic without abandoning her social activism. She was perhaps the best-known political radical among American Catholics .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Day's conversion is described in her 1952 autobiography, The Long Loneliness .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Day was also an active journalist, and described her social activism in her writings. In 1917 she was imprisoned as a member of suffragist Alice Paul 's nonviolent Silent Sentinels . In the 1930s, Day worked closely with fellow activist Peter Maurin to establish the Catholic Worker Movement , [ 5 ] a pacifist movement that combines direct aid for the poor and homeless with nonviolent direct action on their behalf. She practiced civil disobedience , which led to additional arrests in 1955, [ 6 ] 1957, [ 7 ] and in 1973 at age 75.

[ 1 ] As part of the Catholic Worker Movement, Day co-founded the Catholic Worker newspaper in 1933, and served as its editor from 1933 until her death in 1980. In this newspaper, Day advocated the Catholic economic theory of distributism , which she considered a third way between capitalism and socialism .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Pope Benedict XVI used her conversion story as an example of how to "journey towards faith... in a secularized environment." [ 3 ] In an address before the United States Congress , Pope Francis included her in a list of four exemplary Americans who "buil[t] a better future".

[ 10 ] The Catholic Church has opened the cause for Day's possible canonization , which was accepted by the Holy See . For that reason, the Church refers to her with the title Servant of God .

[ 11 ] Biography [ edit ] Early years [ edit ] Dorothy Day Baptism and Confirmation records from the Episcopal Church of Our Saviour, Chicago, circa 1911 Dorothy May Day was born on November 8, 1897, in the Brooklyn Heights neighborhood of Brooklyn , New York.

[ 12 ] She was born into a family described by one biographer as "solid, patriotic, and middle class".

[ 13 ] Her father, John Day, was a Tennessee native of Irish heritage, while her mother, Grace Satterlee, a native of upstate New York, was of English ancestry. Her parents were married in an Episcopal church in Greenwich Village .

[ 14 ] She had three brothers (including Donald S. Day ) and a sister and was the third oldest child. In 1904, her father, a sportswriter devoted to horse racing, took a position with a newspaper in San Francisco. The family lived in Oakland, California , until the San Francisco Earthquake of 1906 destroyed the newspaper's facilities, and her father lost his job. From the spontaneous response to the earthquake's devastation, the self-sacrifice of neighbors in a time of crisis, Day drew a lesson about individual action and the Christian community. The family relocated to Chicago.

[ 15 ] Dorothy Day and sister Della outside the Episcopal Church of Our Saviour, Chicago, circa 1910 Day's parents were nominal Christians who rarely attended church. As a young child, she showed a marked religious streak, reading the Bible frequently. When she was ten, she started to attend the Church of Our Saviour, an Episcopal church in the Lincoln Park neighborhood of Chicago, after its rector convinced her mother to let Day's brothers join the church choir . She was taken with the liturgy and its music. She studied the catechism and was baptized and confirmed in that church in 1911.

[ 16 ] Day was an avid reader in her teens, particularly fond of Upton Sinclair 's The Jungle . She worked from one book to another, noting Jack London 's mention of Herbert Spencer in Martin Eden , and then from Spencer to Darwin and Huxley. She learned about anarchy and extreme poverty from Peter Kropotkin , who promoted the belief that only cooperation and mutual aid could create a truly free society.

[ 17 ] She also enjoyed Russian literature while in university studies, especially Dostoevsky , Tolstoy , and Gorky .

[ 18 ] Day read a lot of socially conscious work, which gave her a background for her future; it helped bolster her support for and involvement in social activism. Day graduated from Robert Waller High School in 1914.

[ 19 ] In 1914, Day attended the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign on a scholarship. She was a reluctant scholar.

[ 20 ] Her reading was chiefly in a Christian radical social direction.

[ 20 ] She avoided campus social life, and supported herself rather than rely on money from her father, buying all her clothing and shoes from discount stores.

[ 21 ] She left the university after two years, and moved to New York City.

[ 20 ] Social activism [ edit ] She settled on the Lower East Side of New York and worked on the staff of several Socialist publications, including The Liberator , [ 22 ] The Masses , and The Call . She "smilingly explained to impatient socialists that she was 'a pacifist even in the class war .

' " [ 23 ] Years later, Day described how she was pulled in different directions: "I was only eighteen, so I wavered between my allegiance to Socialism, Syndicalism (of the Industrial Workers of the World – I.W.W.

) and Anarchism . When I read Tolstoy I was an Anarchist. My allegiance to The Call kept me a Socialist, although a left-wing one, and my Americanism inclined me to the I.W.W. movement." [ 24 ] [ 25 ] She celebrated the February Revolution in Russia in 1917, the overthrow of the monarchy and establishment of a reformist government.

[ 26 ] In November 1917, she was arrested for picketing at the White House on behalf of women's suffrage as part of a campaign called the Silent Sentinels organized by Alice Paul and the National Woman's Party . Sentenced to 30 days in jail, she served 15 days before being released, ten of them on a hunger strike .

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Day spent several months in Greenwich Village, where she became close to Eugene O'Neill , whom she later credited with having produced "an intensification of the religious sense that was in me." [ 29 ] She had a love affair of several years with Mike Gold , a radical writer who later became a prominent Communist.

[ 30 ] Later she credited Gold with being "indirectly involved" in the beginning of the Catholic Worker Movement.

[ 31 ] Day maintained friendships with such prominent American Communists as Anna Louise Strong and Elizabeth Gurley Flynn who became the head of the Communist Party USA .

Initially, Day lived a bohemian life. In 1920, after ending an unhappy love affair with Lionel Moise, and after having an abortion that was "the great tragedy of her life", [ 32 ] she married Berkeley Tobey [ 33 ] in a civil ceremony. She spent the better part of a year with him in Europe, removed from politics, focusing on art and literature, and writing a semi-autobiographical novel, The Eleventh Virgin (1924), based on her affair with Moise. In its "Epilogue", she tried to draw lessons about the status of women from her experience: "I thought I was a free and emancipated young woman and found out I wasn't at all. ... Freedom is just a modernity gown, a new trapping that we women affect to capture the man we want." [ 34 ] She ended her marriage to Tobey upon their return to the United States.

[ 33 ] Day later called The Eleventh Virgin a "very bad book".

[ 35 ] The sale of the movie rights to the novel gave her $2,500, and she bought a beach cottage as a writing retreat on Staten Island, New York .

[ 36 ] Soon she found a new lover, Forster Batterham, an activist and biologist, who joined her there on weekends. She lived there from 1925 to 1929, entertaining friends and enjoying a romantic relationship that foundered when she took passionately to motherhood and religion.

[ 37 ] Day, who had thought herself sterile following her abortion, was delighted to find she was pregnant in mid-1925, while Batterham dreaded fatherhood. While she visited her mother in Florida, separating from Batterham for several months, she intensified her exploration of Catholicism. When she returned to Staten Island, Batterham found her increasing devotion, attendance at Mass, and religious reading incomprehensible. Soon after the birth of their daughter Tamar Teresa, on March 4, 1926, Day encountered a local Sister of Charity , Aloysia Mary Mulhern, and with her help educated herself in the Catholic faith and had her baby baptized in July 1927. Batterham refused to attend the ceremony. His relationship with Day became increasingly unbearable, as her desire for marriage in the Church confronted his antipathy to organized religion, Catholicism most of all. After one last fight in late December, Day refused to allow him to return. On December 28, she underwent conditional baptism in the Catholic Church with Sister Aloysia as her godparent, at the Church of Our Lady Help of Christians .

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ a ] In the summer of 1929, to put Batterham behind her, Day accepted a job writing film dialogue for Pathé Motion Pictures and moved to Los Angeles with Tamar. A few months later, following the 1929 stock market crash , her contract was not renewed. She returned to New York via a sojourn in Mexico and a family visit in Florida. Day supported herself as a journalist, writing a gardening column for the local paper, the Staten Island Advance , and feature articles and book reviews for several Catholic publications, including Commonweal .

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] In 1932, inspired by conversations with Mike Gold's brother George, a leader of the upcoming Hunger March in Washington, D.C., she traveled to Washington to report on the march for Commonweal.

[ 31 ] Her experience there motivated her decision to take a greater role in social activism and Catholicism. During the hunger strikes in D.C. in December 1932, she wrote of being filled with pride watching the marchers, but she could not do much with her conversion. She comments in her autobiography: "I could write, I could protest, to arouse the conscience, but where was the Catholic leadership in the gathering of bands of men and women together, for the actual works of mercy that the comrades had always made part of their technique in reaching the workers?" Later, she visited the National Shrine of the Immaculate Conception in northeast D.C. to offer a prayer to find a way to use her gifts and talents to help her fellow workers and the poor.

[ 43 ] Catholic Worker Movement [ edit ] In 1932, Day met Peter Maurin , the man she always credited as the founder of the movement with which she is identified. Maurin, a French immigrant and something of a vagabond, had entered the Institute of the Brothers of the Christian Schools in his native France, before emigrating, first to Canada, then to the United States.

Despite his lack of formal education, Maurin was a man of deep intellect and decidedly strong views. He had a vision of social justice and its connection with the poor, which was partly inspired by St.

Francis of Assisi . He had a vision of action based on sharing ideas and subsequent action by the poor themselves. Maurin was deeply versed in the writings of the Church Fathers and the papal documents on social matters that had been issued by Pope Leo XIII and his successors. Maurin provided Day with the grounding in Catholic theology of the need for social action they both felt.

Years later Day described how Maurin also broadened her knowledge by bringing "a digest of the writings of Kropotkin one day, calling my attention especially to Fields, Factories, and Workshops . Day observed: "I was familiar with Kropotkin only through his Memoirs of a Revolutionist , which had originally run serially in the Atlantic Monthly . She wrote: "Oh, far day of American freedom, when Karl Marx could write for the morning Tribune in New York, and Kropotkin could not only be published in the Atlantic , but be received as a guest into the homes of New England Unitarians, and in Jane Addams ' Hull House in Chicago!" [ 44 ] Maurin drew Day's attention to French models and literature.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] The Catholic Worker Movement started when the Catholic Worker appeared on May 1, 1933, priced at one cent, and published continuously since then. It was aimed at those suffering the most in the depths of the Great Depression, "those who think there is no hope for the future," and announced to them that "the Catholic Church has a social program. ... There are men of God who are working not only for their spiritual but for their material welfare." It accepted no advertising and did not pay its staff.

[ 47 ] Publication of the first issue was supported in part by a $1 donation from Sister Peter Claver, for whom a Catholic Worker house was later named.

[ 48 ] Day in 1934 Like many newspapers of the day, including those for which Day had been writing, it was an unapologetic example of advocacy journalism. It provided coverage of strikes and explored working conditions, especially women and African American workers, and explained papal teaching on social issues.

[ 47 ] Its viewpoint was partisan and stories were designed to move its readers to take action locally, for example, by patronizing laundries recommended by the Laundry Workers' Union. Its advocacy of federal child labor laws put it at odds with the American Church hierarchy from its first issue. Still, Day censored some of Maurin's attacks on the Church hierarchy and tried to have a collection of the paper's issues presented to Pope Pius XI in 1935.

[ 49 ] The paper's principal competitor in distribution and ideology was the Communist Daily Worker . Day opposed its atheism, its advocacy of "class hatred" and violent revolution, and its opposition to private property. The first issue of the Catholic Worker asked: "Is it not possible to be radical and not atheist?" and celebrated its distribution in Union Square on May Day as a direct challenge to the Communists. Day defended government relief programs like the Civilian Conservation Corps that the Communists ridiculed. The Daily Worker responded by mocking the Catholic Worker for its charity work and expressing sympathy for landlords when calling evictions morally wrong. In this fight, the Church hierarchy backed Day's movement and Commonweal , a Catholic journal that expressed a wide range of viewpoints, said that Day's background positioned her well for her mission: "There are few laymen in this country who are so completely conversant with Communist propaganda and its exponents." [ 50 ] During this time, she became friends with many Catholic authors, including John C. Cort and Harry Sylvester . Sylvester dedicated his fourth novel, Moon Gaffney , to Day and Cort.

Over several decades, the Catholic Worker attracted such writers and editors as Michael Harrington , Ammon Hennacy , Thomas Merton , and Daniel Berrigan . From the publishing enterprise came a " house of hospitality ", a shelter that provided food and clothing to the poor of the Lower East Side and then a series of farms for communal living.

[ 51 ] The movement quickly spread to other cities in the United States and to Canada and the United Kingdom. More than 30 independent but affiliated Catholic Worker communities had been founded by 1941.

[ 52 ] In 1935, the Catholic Worker began publishing articles that articulated a rigorous and uncompromising pacifist position, breaking with the traditional Catholic doctrine of just war theory . The next year, the two sides that fought the Spanish Civil War roughly approximated two of Day's allegiances, with the Church allied with Franco fighting radicals of many stripes, the Catholic and the worker at war with one another. Day refused to follow the Catholic hierarchy in support of Franco against the Republican forces, which were atheist and anticlerical in spirit, led by anarchists and communists (that is, the Republican forces were).

[ 53 ] She acknowledged the martyrdom of priests and nuns in Spain and said she expected the age of revolution she was living in to require more martyrs: [ 54 ] We must prepare now for martyrdom – otherwise, we will not be ready. Who of us, if he were attacked now, would not react quickly and humanly against such attack? Would we love our brother who strikes us? Of all at The Catholic Worker, how many would not instinctively defend himself with any forceful means in his power? We must prepare. We must prepare now. There must be a disarmament of the heart.

The paper's circulation fell as many Catholic churches, schools, and hospitals that had previously served as its distribution points withdrew support.

[ 53 ] Circulation fell from 150,000 to 30,000.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] In 1938, she published an account of the transformation of her political activism into religiously motivated activism in From Union Square to Rome . She recounted her life story selectively, without providing the details of her early years of "grievous mortal sin" when her life was "pathetic, little, and mean." [ 57 ] She presented it as an answer to communist relatives and friends who have asked: "How could you become a Catholic?": [ 58 ] What I want to bring out in this book is a succession of events that led me to His feet, glimpses of Him that I received through many years, which made me feel the vital need of Him and of religion. I will try to trace for you the steps by which I came to accept the faith that I believe was always in my heart.

The Cardinal's Literature Committee of the New York Archdiocese recommended it to Catholic readers.

[ 59 ] Continued activism [ edit ] In the early 1940s, she affiliated with the Benedictines , in 1955 professing as an oblate of St. Procopius Abbey , in Lisle, Illinois .

[ 60 ] This gave her a spiritual practice and connection that sustained her throughout the rest of her life. She was briefly a postulant in the Fraternity of Jesus Caritas, which was inspired by the example of Charles de Foucauld .

[ 61 ] Day felt unwelcome there and disagreed with how meetings were run. When she withdrew as a candidate for the Fraternity, she wrote to a friend: "I just wanted to let you know that I feel even closer to it all, tho it is not possible for me to be a recognized 'Little Sister,' or formally a part of it." [ 62 ] Day reaffirmed her pacifism following the U.S. declaration of war in 1941 and urged noncooperation in a speech that day: [ 63 ] "We must make a start. We must renounce war as an instrument of policy. ... Even as I speak to you, I may be guilty of what some men call treason. But we must reject war. ... You young men should refuse to take up arms. Young women tear down the patriotic posters. And all of you – young and old put away your flags." Her January 1942 column was headlined "We Continue Our Christian Pacifist Stand". She wrote: [ 64 ] We are still pacifists. Our manifesto is the Sermon on the Mount , which means that we will try to be peacemakers. Speaking for many of our conscientious objectors , we will not participate in armed warfare or in making munitions, or by buying government bonds to prosecute the war, or in urging others to these efforts.
But neither will we be carping in our criticism. We love our country, and we love our President. We have been the only country in the world where men of all nations have taken refuge from oppression. We recognize that while in the order of intention we have tried to stand for peace, for love of our brother, in the order of execution, we have failed as Americans in living up to our principles.

The circulation of the Catholic Worker , following its losses during the Spanish Civil War , had risen to 75,000, but now plummeted again. The closing of many of the movement's houses around the country, as staff left to join the war effort, showed that Day's pacifism had limited appeal even within the Catholic Worker community.

[ 65 ] On January 13, 1949, unions representing workers at cemeteries managed by the Archdiocese of New York went on strike . After several weeks, Cardinal Francis Spellman used lay brothers from the local Maryknoll seminary and then diocesan seminarians under his supervision to break the strike by digging graves. He called the union action "Communist-inspired". Employees of the Catholic Worker joined the strikers' picket line, and Day wrote Spellman, telling him he was "misinformed" about the workers and their demands, defending their right to unionize and their "dignity as men", which she deemed far more critical than any dispute about wages. She begged him to take the first steps to resolve the conflict: "Go to them, conciliate them. It is easier for the great to give in than the poor." Spellman stood fast until the strike ended on March 11, when the union members accepted the Archdiocese's original offer of a 48-hour 6-day work week. Day wrote in the Catholic Worker in April: "A Cardinal, ill-advised, exercised so overwhelming a show of force against the union of poor working men. There is a temptation of the devil to that most awful of all wars, the war between the clergy and the laity." Years later, she explained her stance vis-à-vis Spellman: "[H]e is our chief priest and confessor; he is our spiritual leader – of all of us who live here in New York. But he is not our ruler." On March 3, 1951, the Archdiocese ordered Day to cease publication or remove the word Catholic from her publication name. She replied with a respectful letter that asserted as much right to publish the Catholic Worker as the Catholic War Veterans had to their name and their own opinions independent of those of the Archdiocese. The Archdiocese took no action, and later, Day speculated that perhaps church officials did not want members of the Catholic Worker Movement holding prayer vigils for him to relent: "We were ready to go to St. Patrick's, fill up the Church, stand outside it in prayerful meditation. We were ready to take advantage of America's freedoms so that we could say what we thought and do what we believed to be the right thing to do." [ 66 ] Her autobiography, The Long Loneliness , was published in 1952 with illustrations by the Quaker Fritz Eichenberg .

[ 67 ] The New York Times summarized it a few years later: [ 68 ] The autobiography, well and thoughtfully told, of a girl with a conventional upstate New York background whose concern for her neighbors, especially the unfortunate, carried her into the women's suffrage movement, socialism, the I.W.W., communism, and finally into the Church of Rome, where she became a co-founder of the Catholic Worker Movement.

On June 15, 1955, Day joined a group of pacifists in refusing to participate in civil defense drills scheduled that day. Some of them challenged the constitutionality of the law under which they were charged, but Day and six others believed that their refusal was not a legal dispute but one of philosophy. Day said she was doing "public penance" for the United States' first use of an atom bomb. They pleaded guilty on September 28, 1955, but the judge refused to send them to jail, saying, "I'm not making any martyrs." [ 69 ] She did the same in each of the next five years. In 1958, instead of taking shelter, she joined a group picketing the offices of the U.S. Atomic Energy Commission .

[ 70 ] After some years, the sentences were suspended; on another occasion, however, she did serve thirty days in jail.

[ 71 ] In 1956, along with David Dellinger and A. J. Muste , two veteran allies in the pacifist movement, she helped found Liberation magazine.

[ 72 ] In 1960, she praised Fidel Castro 's "promise of social justice". She said: "Far better to revolt violently than to do nothing about the poor destitute." [ 73 ] Several months later, Day traveled to Cuba and reported her experiences in a four-part series in the Catholic Worker . In the first of these, she wrote: "I am most of all interested in the religious life of the people and so must not be on the side of a regime that favors the extirpation of religion. On the other hand, when that regime is bending all its efforts to make a good life for the people, a naturally good life (on which grace can build) one cannot help but be in favor of the measures taken." [ 74 ] Day hoped that the Second Vatican Council would endorse nonviolence as a fundamental tenet of Catholic life and denounce nuclear arms, both their use in warfare and the "idea of arms being used as deterrents, to establish a balance of terror." [ 75 ] She lobbied bishops in Rome and joined with other women in a ten-day fast.

[ 76 ] She was pleased when the Council in Gaudium et spes (1965), its statement on "the Church in the Modern World", said that nuclear warfare was incompatible with traditional Catholic just war theory : "Every act of war directed to the indiscriminate destruction of whole cities or vast areas with their inhabitants is a crime against God and man, which merits firm and unequivocal condemnation." [ 77 ] Day's account of the Catholic Worker Movement, Loaves and Fishes , was published in 1963.

Rose Hill Catholic Worker farm in Tivoli, New York ,1964–1978 Despite her anti-establishment sympathies, Day's judgment of the 60s counterculture was nuanced. She enjoyed it when Abbie Hoffman told her she was the original hippie , accepting it as a form of tribute to her detachment from materialism.

[ 21 ] Simultaneously, she disapproved of many who called themselves hippies. She described some she encountered in 1969 in Minnesota: "They are marrying young – 17 and 18, and taking to the woods up by the Canadian border and building houses for themselves – becoming pioneers again." But she recognized in them the self-indulgence of middle-class affluence, people who had "not known suffering" and lived without principles. She imagined how soldiers returning from Vietnam would want to kill them. Still, she thought what the "flower-people" deserved was "prayer and penance".

[ 78 ] Day struggled as a leader with influence but without direct authority over the Catholic Worker houses, even the Tivoli Catholic Worker Farm that she visited regularly. She recorded her frustration in her diary: "I have no power to control smoking of pot, for instance, or sexual promiscuity, or solitary sins." [ 79 ] In 1966, Spellman visited U.S. troops in Vietnam at Christmas, where he was reported as saying: "This war in Vietnam is... a war for civilization." Day authored a response in the January 1967 issue of the Catholic Worker that avoided direct criticism but cataloged all the war zones Spellman had visited over the years: "It is not just Vietnam, it is South Africa, it is Nigeria, the Congo, Indonesia, all of Latin America." Visiting was "a brave thing to do", she wrote, and asked: "But oh, God, what are all these Americans doing all over the world so far from our own shores?" [ 80 ] In 1970, at the height of American participation in the Vietnam War , she described Ho Chi Minh as "a man of vision, as a patriot, a rebel against foreign invaders" while telling a story of a holiday gathering with relatives where one needs "to find points of agreement and concordance, if possible, rather than the painful differences, religious and political." [ 81 ] Later years [ edit ] In 1971, Day was awarded the Pacem in Terris Award of the Interracial Council of the Catholic Diocese of Davenport , Iowa.

[ 82 ] The University of Notre Dame awarded her its Laetare Medal in 1972.

[ 83 ] And Franciscan University of Steubenville awarded her, alongside Mother Teresa, its Poverello Medal in 1976.

[ 84 ] Despite suffering from poor health, Day visited India, where she met Mother Teresa and saw her work. In 1971, Day visited Poland, the Soviet Union, Hungary, and Romania as part of a group of peace activists, with the financial support of Corliss Lamont , whom she described as a " 'pinko' millionaire who lived modestly and helped the Communist Party USA." [ 85 ] She met with three members of the Writers' Union and defended Alexander Solzhenitsyn against charges that he had betrayed his country. Day informed her readers that: [ 86 ] Solzhenitsin lives in poverty and has been expelled from the Writers Union and cannot be published in his own country. He is harassed continually, and recently his small cottage in the country has been vandalized and papers destroyed, and a friend of his who went to bring some of his papers to him was seized and beaten. The letter Solzhenitsin wrote protesting this was widely printed in the west, and I was happy to see, as a result, a letter of apology by the authorities in Moscow, saying that it was the local police who had acted so violently.

Day visited the Kremlin . She reported: "I was moved to see the names of the Americans, Ruthenberg and Bill Haywood , on the Kremlin Wall in Roman letters, and the name of Jack Reed (with whom I worked on the old Masses ), in Cyrillac [ sic ] characters in a flower-covered grave." Ruthenberg was C. E. Ruthenberg , founder of the Communist Party USA .

Bill Haywood was a key figure in the IWW . Jack Reed was the journalist better known as John Reed , author of Ten Days That Shook the World .

[ 87 ] In 1972, the Jesuit magazine America marked her 75th birthday by devoting an entire issue to Day and the Catholic Worker Movement. The editors wrote: "By now if one had to choose a single individual to symbolize the best in the aspiration and action of the American Catholic community during the last forty years, that one person would certainly be Dorothy Day." [ 88 ] Day had supported the work of Cesar Chavez in organizing California farm laborers from the beginning of his campaign in the mid-1960s. She admired him for being motivated by religious inspiration and committed to nonviolence.

[ 89 ] In the summer of 1973, she joined Chavez in his campaign for farm laborers in the fields of California. She was arrested with other protesters for defying an injunction against picketing [ 90 ] and spent ten days in jail.

[ 91 ] In 1974, Boston's Paulist Center Community named her the first recipient of their Isaac Hecker Award, given to a person or group "committed to building a more just and peaceful world." [ 92 ] Day made her last public appearance at the Eucharistic Congress held on August 6, 1976, in Philadelphia at a service honoring the U.S. Armed Forces on the United States Bicentennial . She spoke about reconciliation and penance and criticized the organizers for failing to recognize that for peace activists, August 6 is the day the first atomic bomb was dropped on Hiroshima , an inappropriate day to honor the military.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] Death [ edit ] Day suffered a heart attack and died on November 29, 1980, at Maryhouse, 55 East 3rd Street in Manhattan.

[ 30 ] [ 95 ] Cardinal Terence Cooke greeted her funeral procession at the Church of the Nativity , the local parish church .

[ 96 ] Day was buried in the Cemetery of the Resurrection on Staten Island just a few blocks from the beachside cottage where she first became interested in Catholicism.

[ 97 ] Her gravestone is inscribed with the words Deo gratias .

[ 98 ] Day's daughter Tamar was with her mother when she died. Tamar and her father joined the funeral procession and attended a later memorial Mass the cardinal celebrated at St. Patrick's Cathedral. Day and Batterham had remained lifelong friends.

[ 99 ] Beliefs [ edit ] Sympathy and identification with anarchists [ edit ] Day encountered anarchism while studying at university. She read The Bomb by Frank Harris , a fictionalized biography of one of the Haymarket anarchists.

[ 100 ] She discussed anarchy and extreme poverty with Peter Kropotkin .

[ 101 ] After moving to New York, Day studied the anarchism of Emma Goldman and attended the Anarchists Ball at Webster Hall .

[ 102 ] Day was saddened by the executions of the anarchists Sacco and Vanzetti in 1927. She wrote that when they died, "All the nation mourned." As a Catholic, she felt a sense of solidarity with them, specifically "the very sense of solidarity which made me gradually understand the doctrine of the Mystical Body of Christ whereby we are all members of one another." [ 103 ] Day's anarchist, [ 104 ] distributist economic views are similar to the anarchist Pierre-Joseph Proudhon 's mutualist economic theory, by whom she was influenced.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] The influence of anarchists, such as Proudhon and Peter Kropotkin, [ 106 ] also led her to label herself an anarchist. Dorothy states: "An anarchist then as I am now, I have never used the vote that the women won by their demonstrations before the White House during that period." [ 107 ] Catholic Church property [ edit ] Bill Kauffman of The American Conservative wrote in 2011 of Day: "She understood that if small is not always beautiful, at least it is always human." [ 108 ] Day's belief in smallness also applied to the property of others, including the Catholic Church, as when she wrote: "Fortunately, the Papal States were wrested from the Church in the last century, but there is still the problem of investment of papal funds. It is always a cheering thought to me that if we have goodwill and are still unable to find remedies for the economic abuses of our time, in our family, our parish, and the mighty church as a whole, God will take matters in hand and do the job for us. When I saw the Garibaldi mountains in British Columbia... I said a prayer for his soul and blessed him for being the instrument of so mighty a work of God. May God use us!" [ 109 ] Jesuit priest Daniel Lyons "called Day 'an apostle of pious oversimplification.' He said that the Catholic Worker 'often distorted beyond recognition' the position of the Popes".

[ 110 ] Catholic orthodoxy [ edit ] Day's commitment to Church discipline is illustrated by an encounter with Fr.

Daniel Berrigan , S.J., while on a Catholic Worker farm in New York. Berrigan was about to celebrate Mass for the community vested only in a stole . Day insisted that he put on the proper vestments before he began. When Berrigan complained about the law regarding liturgical vesture, Day responded, "On this farm, we obey the laws of the Church." He relented and celebrated the Mass fully vested.

[ 111 ] Contributions to the history of feminism [ edit ] Lifelong devotion to the oppressed [ edit ] The beginning of Day's career was inherently radical and rooted personalism and socialism ; [ 112 ] ideologies fundamental to intersectional feminism . Though Day did not explicitly identify as a feminist, this was not unusual for historical contributors to feminist work and philosophy. Much like her gravitation towards Catholicism, Day grew into her feminism; she is a "born again feminist", like Dolores Huerta .

[ 113 ] Day's lifetime of work, especially with the Catholic Worker Movement , aligns with core feminist principles of pushing against the kyriarchy to fight for rights of the oppressed. Her lifetime solidarity with and advocacy for the disadvantaged and marginalized is fundamentally feminist in its nature; providing aid to impoverished communities, supporting and providing a platform for activists and pacifists in her periodical, The Catholic Worker , [ 114 ] and working to reform injustices within Catholicism.

[ 115 ] Day's ethos did not change when she was drawn to Catholicism; rather, her devotion to egalitarian Catholic values only propelled her radical feminism , blending her past with her newfound beliefs and values [ 112 ] Day forged a place for feminist theology in a religious world where women's experiences were largely not accounted for, or at worst, disregarded as anti-Church by male elites.

[ 116 ] Day took gendered, raced, classed experiences into account in her writing and work, providing a framework for a construction of religious theory and ethics which was finally both passable and accurate in reflecting the congregation . Through these acts, Day aligns herself and the Catholic Worker Movement with the ideology and practice of feminism.

[ 117 ] Day lived through several significant events in the history of feminism: women's suffrage, labor rights, and movements in the 50s, 60s, and 70s which crusaded for equality, justice, and egalitarianism; all pillars of feminism. In all these things Day never deviated from The Church's teachings on the sanctity of human life from conception till natural death.

Life-inspired works [ edit ] Day wrote constantly throughout her life, journalling and writing bits for herself.

[ 117 ] She published several autobiographical works: The Eleventh Virgin , From Union Square to Rome , The Long Loneliness , and Loaves and Fishes . The four volumes together form a lifelong portrayal of Day's life. Writing autobiographies, especially about women, can be framed as a feminist act, as it provides direct access to information about prominent figures outside of the academic realm, and allows for greater representation of women in history.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] [ 120 ] [ 121 ] The Eleventh Virgin , a coming of age story published in 1924, is autobiographical. Though Day does not directly refer to herself, the protagonist, June, represents Day. June's experiences mirror Day's youth.

[ 122 ] The Eleventh Virgin is Day's first installment in her series of autobiographical works, but the only that she is reported regretting later in life.

[ 117 ] The raw portrayal of Day's bohemian youth before her conversion to Catholicism did not align with her any longer. The representation of Day's early experiences and growth through adolescence, especially at the time of publication, was uncommon.

The Eleventh Virgin is a feminist text in its narrative and character's experiences, and the access it provided.

[ 117 ] Rejection of gender roles [ edit ] Day was known for her knack for leveraging and undermining gender norms to fight patriarchal and kyriarchal systems in the workplace, politics, social structures , and the Catholic Church.

[ 114 ] From a young age, growing up in a family of journalists, Day was made very aware of her perceived limitations as a woman in the world of journalism.

[ 114 ] Her father played a part in this – speaking to colleagues behind Day's back in an effort to prevent them from hiring her.

[ 123 ] She eventually got her foot in the door as an "office girl", [ 124 ] a position that aligned with both her family and the Church's stance on appropriate work for women outside of the home.

[ 125 ] Day was instructed to "write like a woman", in a simple, declarative manner, but eventually grew her writing, centring on women's and social issues, from both a feminist and personalist perspective.

[ 126 ] She outright rejected what was currently being published about perceived women's issues.

[ 127 ] As girls do not wear trousers, nor shirts, it is a waste of time and of space to tell them how they can save and still look neat by pressing the trousers under the mattress and sleeping on them, and of turning in the cuffs of their shirt. And, anyway, this is not a column, or part column, to tell girls how to give condescendingly helpful hints on how to save and be content in the hall bedroom. It is merely an experience.

Day grew as a writer and a journalist, advancing her career and focusing on the type of journalism she found important, regardless of her gender.

[ 123 ] I was bent on following the journalist's side of the work. I wanted the privileges of the woman and the work of the man without following the work of the woman. I wanted to go on picket lines, to go to jail, to write, to influence others, and so make my mark on the world. How much ambition and how much self-seeking there was in all this!

Radical Catholicism [ edit ] Though Day spent most of her life involved with activism, her radical Catholic social activism is what she is most revered for posthumously.

[ 88 ] During the Vatican II Council , the most recent Ecumenical council of the Catholic church, Day, along with the Catholic Worker Movement and PAX , traveled to Rome. The plan was to persuade Pope John XXIII and the council to do away with the just war doctrine to support pacifism and conscientious objection in the name of Christian values and explicitly denouncing nuclear weapons.

[ 112 ] With the Catholic Worker Movement, Day first focused on labor rights and aiding the disadvantaged, eventually calling for a nonviolent revolution against the industrial economy, militarism, and fascism.

[ 112 ] It was a deep belief of Day's that nonviolence, pacifism, and anarchism aligned with Christianity would result in a radical shift to a new order.

[ 128 ] Day's fight against the system was noticed by the American government.

President Hoover felt particularly threatened, having pushed for Attorney General Harry M. Daugherty to prosecute the Catholic Worker Movement several times for sedition and incitement, despite the Movement's pacifist stance. The FBI monitored the Catholic Worker Movement from 1940 to 1970; Day was jailed four times in this period.

[ 128 ] Day's involvement with the Catholic Worker Movement and commitment to liberation theology fundamentally aligns with the values of feminism: fighting for social and political equality for all people, regardless of race, gender, or class. Her push against the Catholic Church and the military state served to promote egalitarianism and alleviate the oppressed.

[ 129 ] It is Day's commitment to liberation theology. Radical Catholicism contributes to her framing as a feminist and serves to demonstrate the nuance and overlap of both religious and feminist ideologies.

[ 130 ] Social justice [ edit ] Throughout her lifetime, Day's overarching concern was the expression and effects of the elite, of power, over the people. This concern is shared with both liberation theology and feminist ideology . Day called for a shift to anarchism, communism, and pacifism in the name of Christianity and Christian teachings. Her weapon of choice against oppressive systems was her writing, her voice.

[ 117 ] Day wrote about vital happenings, matters of life and death, Japanese Chinese war, Ethiopian war, Spanish Civil War , World War II, Korean War , Vietnam war, labor strikes, on streetcars, in garment factories, sugar refineries, and smelting plants, and policies of conscription .

Day's effort in her writing was to highlight social injustices and serve as a voice for those who could not or did not know how to advocate for themselves, to spark a movement to remedy and protect from further oppression.

[ 114 ] Her advocacy and charity was prominent during tough times in American history, especially at the beginning of the Catholic Worker Movement during the Great Depression.

[ 131 ] Legacy [ edit ] Judith Palache Gregory was Day's executor. Day's papers are housed at Marquette University , along with many records of the Catholic Worker Movement.

[ 132 ] Her diaries and letters were edited by Robert Ellsberg and published by Marquette University Press in 2008 and 2010, respectively.

[ 133 ] A new, 448-page biography appeared in 2020, [ 134 ] which was extensively reviewed.

[ 135 ] Attempts to preserve the Staten Island beach bungalow at the Spanish Camp community where she lived for the last decade of her life failed in 2001.

[ 136 ] Developers knocked her home down just as the New York City Landmarks Preservation Commission was about to declare it a historic landmark. About a half-dozen large, private homes now occupy the land.

[ 137 ] In May 1983, a pastoral letter issued by the U.S. Conference of Catholic Bishops , "The Challenge of Peace", noted her role in establishing nonviolence as a Catholic principle: "The nonviolent witness of such figures as Dorothy Day and Martin Luther King has had profound impact upon the life of the Church in the United States." [ 138 ] Pope Benedict XVI , on February 13, 2013, in the closing days of his papacy, cited Day as an example of conversion. He quoted from her writings and said: "The journey towards faith in such a secularized environment was particularly difficult, but Grace acts nonetheless." [ 139 ] On September 24, 2015, Pope Francis became the first pope to address a joint meeting of the United States Congress . Day was one of four Americans mentioned by the Pope in his speech to the joint session that included Abraham Lincoln , Martin Luther King Jr.

, and Thomas Merton . He said of Day: "Her social activism, her passion for justice and for the cause of the oppressed, were inspired by the Gospel, her faith, and the example of the saints." [ 140 ] Films [ edit ] An independent film about Dorothy Day called Entertaining Angels: The Dorothy Day Story was released in 1996. Day was portrayed by Moira Kelly , and Peter Maurin was portrayed by Martin Sheen .

[ 141 ] A full-length documentary called Dorothy Day: Don't Call Me a Saint premiered in 2005. It was shown at the 2006 Tribeca Film Festival .

[ 142 ] Revolution of the Heart: The Dorothy Day Story , a film by Martin Doblmeier, aired on PBS in March 2020.

[ 135 ] Music [ edit ] A song honoring Dorothy and Peter Maurin (entitled "Dorothy Day and Peter Maurin"), [ 143 ] written by the group The Chairman Dances, was premiered by PopMatters in 2016.

[ 144 ] In late 2021, America magazine and Catholic New York reported that the song was included in materials sent to the Vatican in consideration of Dorothy's canonization.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] Posthumous recognition [ edit ] In 1992, Day received the Courage of Conscience Award from the Peace Abbey.

[ 147 ] In 2001, Day was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame in Seneca Falls, New York .

[ 148 ] Dormitories at Lewis University in Romeoville, Illinois; the University of Scranton in Scranton, Pennsylvania; and Loyola University, Maryland , are named in her honor, as is the campus ministry at Xavier University .

A professorship at St. John's University School of Law is named in her honor.

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] At Marquette University , a dormitory floor bearing Day's name has been reserved for those drawn to social justice issues.

The former Office of Service and Justice at Fordham University bore her name at both of the university's campuses.

[ 151 ] Saint Peter's College of Jersey City, New Jersey , named its Political Science Office the Dorothy Day House.

Broadway Housing Communities, a supportive housing project in New York City, opened the Dorothy Day Apartment Building at 583 Riverside Drive in 2003.

[ 152 ] DC Comics character Leslie Thompkins is, according to her creator, Denny O'Neil , based on Day.

[ 153 ] Dorothy Day Center in Saint Paul, Minnesota , a homeless shelter managed by Catholic Charities .

[ 154 ] In 2018, following the Grand jury investigation of Catholic Church sexual abuse in Pennsylvania , DeSales University renamed its student union formerly named for Bishop Joseph McShea to the Dorothy Day Student Union.

[ 155 ] Dorothy Day is eponymous for the third Staten Island Ferry of the Ollis-class .

[ 156 ] Sacred Heart University in Fairfield, Connecticut , has a residence hall named after her, called Dorothy Day Hall.

[ 157 ] The University of Notre Dame has a room in Geddes Hall, home of the Center for Social Concerns, named for Dorothy Day.

Manhattan College established a Dorothy Day Center for the Study and Promotion of Social Catholicism in 2022.

[ 158 ] Catholic cause for sainthood [ edit ] A proposal for Day's canonization by the Catholic Church was put forth publicly by the Claretian Missionaries in 1983. At the request of Cardinal John J. O'Connor , head of the diocese in which she lived, in March 2000 Pope John Paul II granted the Archdiocese of New York permission to open her cause, allowing her to be called a " Servant of God " in the eyes of the Catholic Church . As canon law requires, the Archdiocese of New York submitted this cause for the endorsement of the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops , which it received in November 2012.

[ 159 ] In 2015, Pope Francis praised Day before a joint session of the US Congress.

[ 135 ] Currently, Day's canonization cause has moved from the diocesan phase to the Roman phase. On December 8, 2021, the Solemnity of the Immaculate Conception , the Archdiocese of New York celebrated the conclusion of the diocesan phase of the canonization cause for Dorothy Day. At a Young Adult Mass held at New York City's St. Patrick's Cathedral , Cardinal Timothy M. Dolan formalized the send-off of the evidence of Dorothy Day's holiness, amassed by the Dorothy Day Guild, to the Congregation for the Causes of Saints in Rome.

[ 160 ] The remaining steps include the Vatican reviewing this evidence, passing the case to the pope, and documenting two miracles attributed to Day.

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] Some members of the Catholic Worker Movement have objected to the canonization process as a contradiction of Day's own values and concerns.

[ 163 ] Others, including Day's granddaughter Martha Hennessy , and longtime friend, Kathleen Jordan, are actively working towards her canonization.

[ 164 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Dorothy Day (1924) The Eleventh Virgin , semi-autobiographical novel; Albert and Charles Boni ; reissued Cottager 2011 Dorothy Day (1938) From Union Square to Rome , Silver Spring, MD: Preservation of the Faith Press Dorothy Day (1939) House of Hospitality, From Union Square to Rome , New York, NY: Sheed and Ward; reprinted 2015 by Our Sunday Visitor Dorothy Day (1948) On Pilgrimage , diaries; reprinted 1999 by Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Dorothy Day (1952) The Long Loneliness : The Autobiography of Dorothy Day , New York, NY: Harper and Brothers Dorothy Day (1963) Loaves and Fishes: The Inspiring Story of the Catholic Worker Movement , New York, NY: Harper and Row; reprinted 1997 by Orbis Books Dorothy Day (1979) Therese: A Life of Therese of Lisieux , Templegate Publishing Dorothy Day, ed. Phyllis Zagano (2002) Dorothy Day: In My Own Words Dorothy Day, ed. Patrick Jordan (2002), Dorothy Day: Writings from Commonweal [1929–1973], Liturgical Press Dorothy Day, ed. Robert Ellsberg (2005) Dorothy Day, Selected Writings Dorothy Day, ed. Robert Ellsberg, (2008) The Duty of Delight: The Diaries of Dorothy Day Dorothy Day, ed. Robert Ellsberg, (2010) All the Way to Heaven: The Selected Letters of Dorothy Day Dorothy Day, ed. Carolyn Kurtz (2017) The Reckless Way of Love: Notes on Following Jesus , Plough Publishing See also [ edit ] Anarchism portal Communism portal Socialism portal Organized Labour portal Biography portal Catholicism portal Society portal List of peace activists Catherine Doherty Catholic social teaching Christian anarchism Christian democracy Christian pacifism Christian politics Christian socialism Committee of Catholics to Fight Anti-Semitism Distributism Mutualism (economic theory) Notes [ edit ] ^ A Russian neighbor's sister had named her daughter Tamar, and Day was impressed by St.

Teresa of Avila , whose biography she had recently read.

[ 40 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Elie (2003), p. 433.

^ Cannon, Virginia (November 30, 2012).

"Day by Day; A Saint for the Occupy Era?" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on October 24, 2020 . Retrieved September 30, 2015 .

^ a b Pope Benedict XVI (February 13, 2013).

"General Audience, 13 February 2013" .

Vatican .

Archived from the original on November 23, 2019 . Retrieved September 30, 2015 .

^ Elie (2003), p. 43.

^ Kreitner, Richard (November 29, 2015).

"November 29, 1980: Dorothy Day Dies" .

ISSN 0027-8378 . Retrieved October 16, 2024 .

^ Elie (2003), pp. 236–37.

^ Elie (2003), p. 279.

^ "G.K. Chesterton and Dorothy Day on Economics: Neither Socialism nor Capitalism (Distributism)" .

cjd.org . October 2001.

Archived from the original on October 3, 2015 . Retrieved October 2, 2015 .

^ "The ChesterBelloc Mandate: Dorothy Day and Distributism" .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2018 . Retrieved October 2, 2015 .

^ Pope Francis (September 24, 2015).

"Visit to the Joint Session of the United States Congress" . Vatican.

Archived from the original on April 3, 2019 . Retrieved September 30, 2015 .

^ "US bishops endorse sainthood cause of Catholic Worker's Dorothy Day" .

Catholic New Service . November 13, 2012. Archived from the original on December 7, 2012 . Retrieved December 1, 2012 .

^ Raboteau, Albert J. (2016).

American Prophets: Seven Religious Radicals and Their Struggle for Social and Political Justice . p. 64.

^ Coles 1987 , p. 1.

^ Miller 1982 , pp. 1–7.

^ Miller 1982 , pp. 9–10, 13–4.

^ Forest 2011 , pp. 14–15.

^ Miller 1982 , pp. 27–8.

^ Day, Dorothy (1981).

The Long Loneliness: the autobiography of Dorothy Day . San Francisco: Harper & Row. p. 43.

^ Day, Dorothy (1952).

The Long Loneliness . Harper & Brothers, Publishers. p. 32.

^ a b c Coles (1987), p. 2.

^ a b "Dorothy Day dead at 83" .

The Bulletin . November 29, 1980. p. 61.

Archived from the original on January 4, 2021 . Retrieved August 31, 2020 .

^ Cornell, Tom.

"A Brief Introduction to the Catholic Worker Movement" .

Catholic Worker . Archived from the original on March 14, 2014 . Retrieved February 21, 2009 .

^ Vance, Laurence (December 4, 2006) Bill Kauffman: American Anarchist Archived June 30, 2020, at the Wayback Machine , LewRockwell.com ^ Forest 2011 , p. 30.

^ Day, Dorothy, "6 – New York" , From Union Square to Rome , archived from the original on July 30, 2020 , retrieved January 27, 2014 ^ Forest 2011 , pp. 32–33.

^ "Suffrage Pickets Freed from Prison" (PDF) .

The New York Times . November 28, 1917.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 9, 2020 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

^ "Cat-and-Mouse Remedy for Hunger-Striking" (PDF) .

The New York Times . November 29, 1917.

Archived (PDF) from the original on January 9, 2020 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

^ Forest 2011 , pp. 44–47.

^ a b Whitman, Alden (November 30, 1980).

"Dorothy Day, Outspoken Catholic Activist, Dies at 83" (PDF) .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on April 10, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2014 .

^ a b Day, Dorothy (June 1967).

"Michael Gold" (PDF) .

Catholic Worker .

2 (8).

Archived (PDF) from the original on July 25, 2021 . Retrieved April 3, 2021 .

^ Wright, Terrence C. (2018).

Dorothy Day: An Introduction to Her Life and Thought . San Francisco: Ignatius Press. p. 19.

^ a b Hinson-Hasty, Elizabeth.

"Timeline of Significant Events in Dorothy Day's Life" (PDF) . The Catholic Worker Movement.

Archived (PDF) from the original on July 25, 2021 . Retrieved April 4, 2021 .

^ Forest 2011 , pp. 56–57  Tobey later helped to found the Literary Guild .

^ Forest 2011 , p. 65.

^ Forest 2011 , pp. 65–66.

^ Forest 2011 , pp. 67 ff..

^ Day, Dorothy (May 1978). "On Pilgrimage".

Catholic Worker : 2.

^ Forest 2011 , pp. 74–86 Her baptism was conditional , because she had already been baptized in the Episcopal Church.

^ Miller 1982 , p. 184 ^ Forest 2011 , pp. 90–95.

^ Patrick Jordan, ed., 2002, Dorothy Day: Writings from Commonweal [1929–1973] Liturgical Press, 1–55 ^ Day, Dorothy (1981).

The Long Loneliness: the autobiography of Dorothy Day . San Francisco: Harper & Row. pp.

165– 166.

^ Loaves and Fishes, 1983 reprint, pp. 13–14.

^ Atkins, Robert (2013). "Dorothy Day's social Catholicism: The formative French influences".

International Journal for the Study of the Christian Church .

13 (2): 96– 110.

doi : 10.1080/1474225X.2013.780400 .

S2CID 143851912 .

^ Atkins, Robert (May 1, 2013). "Dorothy Day's social Catholicism: the formative French influences".

International Journal for the Study of the Christian Church .

13 (2): 96– 110.

doi : 10.1080/1474225X.2013.780400 .

ISSN 1474-225X .

S2CID 143851912 .

^ a b Sheila Webb, "Dorothy Day and the Early Years of the Catholic Worker : Social Action through the Pages of the Press," in U.S. Catholic Historian , Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer, 2003, 71–80, JSTOR Archived January 4, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , accessed January 30, 2014 ^ Fielding, Rosemary.

"Sister Peter Claver Spent Life Working for Poor and Forgotten" .

GodSpy: Faith at the edge .

Archived from the original on December 25, 2017 . Retrieved June 12, 2016 .

^ Sheila Webb, "Dorothy Day and the Early Years of the Catholic Worker : Social Action through the Pages of the Press," in U.S. Catholic Historian , Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer, 2003, 80–84, JSTOR Archived January 4, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , accessed January 30, 2014 ^ Sheila Webb, "Dorothy Day and the Early Years of the Catholic Worker : Social Action through the Pages of the Press," in U.S. Catholic Historian , Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer, 2003, 84–8, JSTOR Archived January 4, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , accessed January 30, 2014 ^ Coles 1987 , pp. 14–15.

^ "List of Catholic Worker Communities" . catholicworker.org. Archived from the original on December 20, 2008 . Retrieved November 30, 2008 .

^ a b Forest 2011 , pp. 152–156.

^ Day, Dorothy (September 1938).

"Explains CW Stand on Use of Force" .

Dorothy Day Collection .

Archived from the original on July 30, 2020 . Retrieved January 31, 2014 .

^ Sheila Webb, "Dorothy Day and the Early Years of the Catholic Worker : Social Action through the Pages of the Press," in U.S. Catholic Historian , Vol. 21, No. 3, Summer, 2003, 84, JSTOR Archived January 4, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , accessed January 30, 2014 ^ Roberts, pp. 179–182; Catholic Worker, "Statement of Ownership, Management, and Circulation," December 2013, p. 2.

^ Day, Dorothy (1938).

From Union Square to Rome: Chapter 1 .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2021 . Retrieved January 29, 2014 .

^ Day, Dorothy (1938).

From Union Square to Rome: Introduction .

Archived from the original on January 4, 2021 . Retrieved January 29, 2014 .

^ "Catholic Readers Get List of Books" (PDF) .

The New York Times . April 2, 1939.

Archived from the original on October 11, 2022 . Retrieved January 27, 2014 .

Dorothy Day, From Union Square to Rome , Silver Spring, MD: Preservation of the Faith Press, 1938 ^ "DOROTHY DAY, OBLATE" .

St. Procopius Abbey . Retrieved May 22, 2023 .

^ Merriman, Bridget O'Shea (1994).

Searching for Christ: The Spirituality of Dorothy Day . Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press. pp.

100– 107, 124– 127.

^ All the Way to Heaven: The Selected Letters of Dorothy Day , Robert Ellsberg, ed., Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, p. 301 ^ December 8, 1941, speech to the Liberal-Socialist Alliance, New York City, quoted in Sandra J. Sarkela, Susan Mallon Ross, Margaret A. Lowe, From Megaphones to Microphones: Speeches of American Women, 1920–1960, 2003, pp. 191–192 ^ Day, Dorothy (January 1942).

"Our Country Passes from Undeclared War to Declared War; We Continue Our Christian Pacifist Stand" .

Dorothy Day Collection .

Archived from the original on July 29, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2014 .

^ Forest 2011 , pp. 161–162.

^ Gregory, David L. "Dorothy Day, Workers' Rights, and Catholic Authenticity".

Fordham Urban Law Journal . Vol 26 Issue 5, 1998, 1371–92, available online Archived February 2, 2014, at the Wayback Machine ^ Fraser, C. Gerald (December 4, 1990).

"Fritz Eichenberg, A Book Illustrator And Educator, 89" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 1, 2019 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

^ "Paperbacks in Review" (PDF) .

The New York Times . January 17, 1960.

Archived from the original on October 11, 2022 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

^ "7 Pacifists Insist on Guilty Pleas" (PDF) .

The New York Times . September 29, 1955.

Archived from the original on October 11, 2022 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

The statute at issue was the New York State Defense Emergency Act.

^ "9 Pacifists Seized in Defying Alert" (PDF) .

The New York Times . May 7, 1958.

Archived from the original on October 11, 2022 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

^ "Pacifists' Dissent Backed" (PDF) .

The New York Times . July 30, 1957.

Archived from the original on October 11, 2022 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

^ Kaufman, Michael T. (May 27, 2004).

"David Dellinger, of Chicago 7, Dies at 88" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on September 15, 2019 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

^ Day, Dorothy (January 1960).

"Letter to an Imprisoned Editor" .

Dorothy Day Collection .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2014 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

^ Day, Dorothy (September 1962).

"Pilgrimage to Cuba—Part I" .

Dorothy Day Collection .

Archived from the original on February 14, 2021 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

^ Day, Dorothy (December 1965).

"On Pilgrimage; Good News" .

Dorothy Day Collection .

Archived from the original on July 29, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2014 .

^ Day, Dorothy (November 1965).

"On Pilgrimage; October First" .

Dorothy Day Collection .

Archived from the original on July 30, 2020 . Retrieved January 28, 2014 .

^ Mark and Louis Zwick, "Introduction" to Dorothy Day, On Pilgrimage (Eerdmans, 1999), p. 51, available online , accessed January 28, 2014 ^ Miller 1982 , p. 491.

^ Duty of Delight , 2011, p. 447.

^ Roberts, Nancy L. (1984).

Dorothy Day and the Catholic Worker . State Univ of New York Press. p.

164 .

ISBN 978-0-87395938-4 .

^ Day, January (January 1970).

"On Pilgrimage; Perkinsville" .

Dorothy Day Collection .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2014 . Retrieved January 28, 2014 .

^ "Pacem In Terris Past Recipients" . Diocese of Davenport. Archived from the original on July 25, 2011 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

^ "Laetare Medal Recipients" . University of Notre Dame Archives.

Archived from the original on March 12, 2012 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

^ "Poverello Medal Recipients" (PDF) . Franciscan University of Steubenville.

Archived (PDF) from the original on November 4, 2020 . Retrieved May 6, 2020 .

^ The Duty of Delight, 2011, pp. 587–88.

^ Day, Dorothy (September 1971).

"On Pilgrimage: First Visit to Soviet Russia" .

Dorothy Day Collection .

Archived from the original on February 3, 2014 . Retrieved January 31, 2014 .

^ Day, Dorothy (October–November 1971).

"On Pilgrimage: Russia, II: Kremlin Wall" .

Dorothy Day Collection .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2021 . Retrieved January 31, 2014 .

^ a b Krupa, Stephen J. (August 27, 2001).

"Celebrating Dorothy Day" .

America .

Archived from the original on January 5, 2014 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

Dorothy Day remains, at the dawn of the new millennium, the radical conscience of American Catholicism.

^ Forest 2011 , pp. 252–60.

^ Caldwell, Earl (August 3, 1973).

"Picket Shot, Many More Arrested in Grape Strike" (PDF) .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on October 11, 2022 . Retrieved January 31, 2014 .

^ Day, Dorothy (September 1973).

"On Pilgrimage" .

Dorothy Day Collection .

Archived from the original on July 30, 2020 . Retrieved January 31, 2014 .

^ McElwee, Joshua J. (January 28, 2013).

"LCWR receives Paulist award for social justice work" .

National Catholic Reporter .

Archived from the original on February 18, 2014 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

^ Eileen Egan, "Dorothy Day: Pilgrim of Peace," in Patrick G. Coy, ed., A Revolution of the Heart: Essays on the Catholic Worker , pp. 69–71 Archived June 27, 2014, at the Wayback Machine ^ Nicholas Rademacher, "'To Relate the Eucharist to Real Living': Mother Teresa and Dorothy Day at the Forty-First International Eucharistic Congress, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania," U.S. Catholic Historian , Volume 27, Number 4, Fall 2009, pp. 59–72 ^ "Dorothy Day's obituary from 1980: 'All Was Grace' " .

America Magazine . December 8, 2022 . Retrieved October 16, 2024 .

^ Harrington, Michael (June 13, 1982).

"Existential Saint" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 4, 2014 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

^ Stone, Elained Murray (2004).

Dorothy Day: Champion of the Poor . Mahwah, NJ: Paulist Press. p. 102.

ISBN 978-0-80916719-7 .

Archived from the original on October 11, 2022 . Retrieved June 16, 2015 .

^ Dorothy Day, Photos Archived February 2, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , Find a grave, accessed January 26, 2014 ^ Riegle, Rosalie G. (2003).

Dorothy Day: Portraits by Those Who Knew Her . Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books. pp.

112– 15.

^ Day, Dorothy (1981).

The Long Loneliness: the autobiography of Dorothy Day . San Francisco: Harper & Row. p. 38.

^ Miller 1982 , pp. 27–28.

^ Elie (2003), p. 17.

^ Elie (2003), p. 57.

^ a b McKay, Iain.

An Anarchist FAQ Volume One . AK Press. 2007. p. 75.

^ Day, Dorothy.

On Pilgrimage . Wm. B. Eerdmans Publishing Co. 1999. pp. 22, 40.

^ Day, Dorothy.

House of Hospitality . Our Sunday Visitor Inc. 2015. p. 41.

^ Terrell, Brian.

Dorothy Day's anarchism is the antidote to disappointing political system . National Catholic Reporter. April 19, 2016. Retrieved July 21, 2018, from: https://www.ncronline.org/blogs/ncr-today/dorothy-days-anarchism-antidote-disappointing-political-system Archived November 12, 2020, at the Wayback Machine ^ Dreher, Rod (June 5, 2006) All-American Anarchists Archived April 29, 2011, at the Wayback Machine , The American Conservative ^ "Hutterite Communities," Catholic Worker (July–August 1969) ^ Roberts, Nancy L. (1984).

Dorothy Day and the Catholic Worker . State Univ of New York Press. p.

161 .

ISBN 978-0-87395938-4 .

^ Becker, Joseph (1997).

The Re-Formed Jesuits . San Francisco: Ignatius Press. p. 82.

ISBN 978-0-89870-627-7 .

^ a b c d Nepstad, Sharon Erickson (2019).

Catholic social activism : progressive movements in the United States . New York: New York University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4798-3086-2 .

OCLC 1105557644 .

^ PBS NewsHour | Dolores Huerta Calls Herself 'a Born-Again Feminist' | Season 2012 , archived from the original on January 16, 2021 , retrieved November 22, 2020 ^ a b c d Dick, Bailey (July 22, 2019).

" "Is It Not Possible to Be a Radical and a Christian?": Dorothy Day's Evolving Relationship with the Patriarchal Norms of Journalism and Catholicism" .

Journalism History .

45 (4): 311– 329.

doi : 10.1080/00947679.2019.1631083 .

ISSN 0094-7679 .

S2CID 200054435 .

Archived from the original on October 11, 2022 . Retrieved December 1, 2020 .

^ Krupa, Stephen J. "Celebrating Dorothy Day".

America .

185 : 7.

^ Ruether, Rosemary Radford (1983).

Sexism and God-talk : toward a feminist theology . Boston: Beacon Press.

ISBN 0-8070-1104-5 .

OCLC 9082665 .

^ a b c d e O'Connor, June E. (1991).

The Moral Vision of Dorothy Day: A Feminist Perspective . New York: Crossroad Publishing Company.

ISBN 978-0824510800 .

^ Jelenik, Estelle.

Women's Autobiography: Essays in Criticism .

^ Jelenik, Estelle.

The Tradition of Women's Autobiography: From Antiquity to Present .

^ Smith, Sidonie.

A Poetics of Women's Autobiography .

^ Mason, Mary G. (December 31, 2019), "1. Positioning the Female Autobiographical Subject The Other Voice: Autobiographies of Women Writers" , Life/Lines , Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, pp.

19– 44, doi : 10.7591/9781501745560-004 , ISBN 978-1-5017-4556-0 , S2CID 210477636 , archived from the original on October 11, 2022 , retrieved December 1, 2020 ^ Day, Dorothy (1924).

The eleventh virgin . Cairns Collection of American Women Writers. New York: A. & Co. Boni.

OCLC 4291463 .

^ a b Day, Dorothy (1981) [1952].

The long loneliness : the autobiography of Dorothy Day . San Francisco: Harper & Row.

ISBN 0-06-061751-9 .

OCLC 7554814 .

^ Miller, William (December 13, 1980). "Dorothy Day,1897-1980 'All Was Grace' ".

America : 382.

^ Leo XIII (May 15, 1891).

Rerum Novarum .

^ Hennessy, Kate (January 24, 2017).

Dorothy Day: the world will be saved by beauty: an intimate portrait of my grandmother (First ed.). New York: Scribner.

ISBN 978-1-5011-3396-1 .

OCLC 944380234 .

^ Day, Dorothy (December 18, 1916). " 'Man Cannot Live By Bread Alone', and Neither Can a Normal Woman".

The New York Call .

^ a b Parrish, Marilyn McKinley (2002).

Creating a Place for Learning: Dorothy Day and the Catholic Worker Movement .

^ Johnson, K. C. P. D. (2009).

Radical social activism, lay Catholic women and American feminism, 1920–1960 .

^ Scott, D. "More Than a Feminist".

Commonweal .

119 : 34.

^ Roberts, Nancy L. (1984).

Dorothy Day and the Catholic worker . Albany: State University of New York Press.

ISBN 0-585-06061-4 .

OCLC 42855411 .

^ "Dorothy Day-Catholic Worker Collection" .

Special Collections & University Archives . Raynor Memorial Libraries.

Archived from the original on February 14, 2014 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

^ " The Duty of Delight " .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2009 . Retrieved January 8, 2009 .

^ Loughery, John; Randolph, Blythe (2020).

Dorothy Day: Dissenting Voice of the American Century . New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 9781982103491 .

^ a b c Baxter, Michael J (May 2020). "Still a sign of contradiction".

Commonweal .

147 (5): 54– 56.

^ Barrett, Wayne (May 1, 2001).

"Sacking a Saint" .

The Village Voice . Archived from the original on June 28, 2015 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

This was not the same bungalow where she was living at the time of her conversion to Catholicism.

^ Somma-Hammel, Jan (October 23, 2018).

"Then and now: Annadale was green, beautiful" .

silive.com .

Archived from the original on October 23, 2018 . Retrieved April 9, 2019 .

^ "The Challenge of Peace: God's Promise and Our Response, May 3, 1983" (PDF) . US Conference of Catholic Bishops. Archived from the original (PDF) on January 24, 2014 . Retrieved January 28, 2014 .

^ McElwee, Joshua J. (February 13, 2013).

"Looking to legacy, pope mentions Dorothy Day" .

National Catholic Reporter .

Archived from the original on February 18, 2014 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

^ "Address of the Holy Father" .

The Vatican . September 24, 2015. Archived from the original on September 25, 2015 . Retrieved September 24, 2015 .

^ Entertaining Angels 1996 at IMDb ^ Dorothy Day: Don't Call Me a Saint 2006 at IMDb ^ "Dorothy Day and Peter Maurin, by the Chairman Dances" .

Archived from the original on December 24, 2021 . Retrieved December 24, 2021 .

^ "The Chairman Dances – "Dorothy Day and Peter Maurin" (Audio) (Premiere), PopMatters" . July 22, 2016.

^ "This band wrote a song in honor of Dorothy Day. Now their album could help make her a saint" . November 29, 2021.

Archived from the original on December 24, 2021 . Retrieved December 24, 2021 .

^ "New Yorkers Should Support This Cause" .

Catholic New York . December 2021.

Archived from the original on December 24, 2021 . Retrieved December 24, 2021 .

^ "The Peace Abbey Courage of Conscience Award Recipients" . The Peace Abbey. Archived from the original on June 10, 2014 . Retrieved October 13, 2009 .

^ "National Women's Hall of Fame, Women of the Hall, Dorothy Day" . National Women's Hall of Fame.

Archived from the original on April 13, 2020 . Retrieved January 26, 2014 .

^ "David L. Gregory" . stjohns.edu. Archived from the original on January 10, 2014 . Retrieved February 25, 2008 .

^ "David L. Gregory Appointed Dorothy Day Professor of Law" . stjohns.org. August 29, 2006. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007 . Retrieved February 25, 2008 .

^ Ostensen, Joergen.

"CCEL Aims to 'Be a Good Neighbor' " .

The Fordham Ram . Retrieved October 23, 2022 .

^ "Broadway Housing Communities" .

Archived from the original on September 23, 2020 . Retrieved September 25, 2020 .

^ O'Neil, Dennis (February 19, 2015).

"Dennis O'Neil: Gotham's Doctor, Batman's Saint" . ComixMix.

Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved May 7, 2016 .

^ Collins, Jon (January 12, 2017).

"Higher Ground, new homeless shelter, open for first night in St. Paul" .

Archived from the original on September 24, 2020 . Retrieved August 24, 2017 .

^ "DeSales University Announces Name Changes to Two Campus Buildings" .

DeSales University .

Archived from the original on January 23, 2022 . Retrieved January 23, 2022 .

^ "Staten Island Ferry Current Ferries" .

www.siferry.com . September 6, 2022. Archived from the original on February 27, 2023 . Retrieved February 27, 2023 .

^ "Christian Witness Commons" .

Sacred Heart University . Retrieved June 7, 2023 .

Christian Witness Commons (CWC) houses 400+  residential sophomore students. It consists of three buildings: Jean Donovan Hall, Oscar Romero Hall and Dorothy Day Hall.

^ "Manhattan College Establishes the Dorothy Day Center | Manhattan College" .

manhattan.edu . November 14, 2022 . Retrieved April 7, 2023 .

^ "US bishops endorse sainthood cause of Catholic Worker's Dorothy Day" .

Catholic News Service . November 13, 2012. Archived from the original on December 7, 2012 . Retrieved December 1, 2012 .

^ Cornell, Deirdre (December 10, 2021).

" 'Here among Us:' Dorothy Day's Cause Moves Forward" .

Maryknoll Magazine . Retrieved April 7, 2023 .

^ Dulle, Colleen (December 16, 2021).

"An inside look at Dorothy Day's contested canonization process" .

America Magazine . Retrieved January 23, 2024 .

^ Stack, Liam (January 21, 2022).

"Was Dorothy Day Too Left-Wing to Be a Catholic Saint?" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

^ Schmalz, Valerie (December 5, 2012).

"Some followers question Day sainthood" .

Catholic San Francisco . Archived from the original on February 20, 2014 . Retrieved January 27, 2014 .

^ "Martha Hennessy, granddaughter of candidate for Catholic sainthood, to speak at Benedictine University" .

Daily Herald . September 26, 2022 . Retrieved April 7, 2023 .

Works cited [ edit ] Coles, Robert (1987), Dorothy Day: A Radical Devotion , Radcliffe Biography Center, Perseus Books , conversations with Dorothy Day Forest, Jim (2011).

All is Grace: A Biography of Dorothy Day . Maryknoll, NY: Orbis Books.

Miller, William D. (1982).

Dorothy Day: A Biography . NY: Harper & Row.

Further reading [ edit ] "Dorothy Day speaks in Melbourne 1970" .

Dally Messenger . June 26, 2020 . Retrieved June 26, 2020 .

(mp3 recording – 1 hour 50 mins) Robert Atkins (2013) " Dorothy Day's social Catholicism: the formative French influences " Carol Byrne (2010) The Catholic Worker Movement (1933–1980): A Critical Analysis , Central Milton Keynes, UK: AuthorHouse Virginia Cannon, "Day by Day: A Saint for the Occupy Era?" The New Yorker , November 30, 2012 Elie, Paul (2003).

The Life You Save May Be Your Own . New York, NY: Farrar, Straus, & Grioux.

Kate Hennessy (2017) Dorothy Day: The World Will Be Saved by Beauty: An Intimate Portrait of My Grandmother , NY: Scribner Brigid O'Shea Merriman (1994) Searching for Christ: The Spirituality of Dorothy Day William Miller (1982) Dorothy Day: A Biography , NY: Harper & Row June O'Connor (1991) The Moral Vision of Dorothy Day: A Feminist Perspective Mel Piehl (1982) Breaking Bread: The Origins of Catholic Radicalism in America Jeffrey M. Shaw (2014) Illusions of Freedom: Thomas Merton and Jacques Ellul on Technology and the Human Condition Wipf & Stock.

William J. Thorn, Phillip Runkel, Susan Mountin, eds. (2001) Dorothy Day and the Catholic Worker Movement: Centenary Essays , Marquette University Press, 2001 Terrence C. Wright, Dorothy Day: An Introduction to Her Life and Thought , Ignatius Press, 2018.

D.L. Mayfield, Unruly Saint: Dorothy Day’s Radical Vision and its Challenge for Our Times , Broadleaf Books, 2022.

External links [ edit ] Dorothy Day at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Works by Dorothy Day in eBook form at Standard Ebooks Dorothy Day Collection 721 documents Day wrote for the Catholic Worker the full text of four of her books and other selected articles Dorothy Day, Union Square Speech, 1965 Dorothy Day quotations , PBS Dorothy Day- Catholic Worker Collection , Marquette University February 1965 Interview with Dorothy Day in The Georgia Bulletin Stephen Beale, "The Dorothy Day Few of Us Know" , Crisis Magazine , March 19, 2013 Maurin, Day, the Catholic Worker, and Anarcho-Distributism Archived August 3, 2020, at the Wayback Machine by Nicholas Evans 2018 v t e Pacem in Terris Peace and Freedom Award laureates 1960s 1964: John Howard Griffin / John F. Kennedy 1965: Martin Luther King Jr.

1966: R. Sargent Shriver 1967: A. Philip Randolph 1968: James Groppi 1969: Saul Alinsky 1970s 1971: Dorothy Day 1974: Harold Hughes 1975: Hélder Câmara 1976: Mother Teresa 1979: Thomas Gumbleton 1980s 1980: Crystal Lee Sutton / Ernest Leo Unterkoefler 1982: George F. Kennan 1983: Helen Caldicott 1985: Joseph Bernardin 1986: Maurice John Dingman 1987: Desmond Tutu 1989: Eileen Egan 1990s 1990: Mairead Maguire 1991: María Julia Hernández 1992: César Chávez 1993: Daniel Berrigan 1995: Jim Wallis 1996: Samuel Ruiz 1997: Jim and Shelley Douglass 2000s 2000: George G. Higgins 2001: Lech Wałęsa 2002: Gwen Hennessey / Dorothy Hennessey 2004: Arthur Simon 2005: Donald Mosley 2007: Salim Ghazal 2008: Marvin Mottet 2009: Hildegard Goss-Mayr 2010s 2010: John Dear 2011: Álvaro Leonel Ramazzini Imeri 2012: Kim Bobo 2013: Jean Vanier 2014: Simone Campbell 2015: Thích Nhất Hạnh 2016: Gustavo Gutiérrez 2017: Widad Akreyi 2019: Dalai Lama 2019: Munib Younan 2020s 2022: Norma Pimentel 2023: Atiya Aftab / Sheryl Olitzky 2024: Chad Pregracke 2025: Silvio José Báez Ortega v t e Gandhi Peace Award laureates 1960–1979 1960 Eleanor Roosevelt / Edwin T. Dahlberg 1961 Maurice Eisendrath / John Haynes Holmes 1962 Linus Pauling / James Warburg 1963 E. Stanley Jones 1964 1965 1966 A. J. Muste 1967 Norman Thomas / Jerome Davis / William Sloane Coffin 1968 Benjamin Spock 1969 1970 Wayne Morse / Willard Uphaus 1971 1972 U Thant 1973 1974 1975 Dorothy Day 1976 Daniel Ellsberg 1977 1978 Peter Benenson / Martin Ennals 1979 Roland Bainton 1980–1999 1980 Helen Caldicott 1981 Corliss Lamont 1982 Randall Watson Forsberg 1983 1984 Robert Jay Lifton / Kay Camp 1985 1986 Bernard Lown 1987 John Somerville 1988 1989 César Chávez 1990 Marian Wright Edelman 1991 George McGovern 1992 Ramsey Clark 1993 Lucius Walker 1994 Roy Bourgeois 1995 Edith Ballantyne 1996 New Haven-León Sister City Project Alan Wright Paula Kline 1997 Howard / Alice Frazier 1998 1999 2000–2019 2000 2001 2002 Michael True 2003 Dennis Kucinich 2004 Karen Jacob / David Cortright 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 Ehud Bandel / Arik Ascherman 2012 Amy Goodman 2013 Bill McKibben 2014 Medea Benjamin 2015 Tom B.K. Goldtooth / Kathy Kelly 2016 2017 Ralph Nader / Omar Barghouti 2018 Jackson Browne v t e Inductees to the National Women's Hall of Fame 1970–1979 1973 Jane Addams Marian Anderson Susan B. Anthony Clara Barton Mary McLeod Bethune Elizabeth Blackwell Pearl S. Buck Rachel Carson Mary Cassatt Emily Dickinson Amelia Earhart Alice Hamilton Helen Hayes Helen Keller Eleanor Roosevelt Florence Sabin Margaret Chase Smith Elizabeth Cady Stanton Helen Brooke Taussig Harriet Tubman 1976 Abigail Adams Margaret Mead Mildred "Babe" Didrikson Zaharias 1979 Dorothea Dix Juliette Gordon Low Alice Paul Elizabeth Bayley Seton 1980–1989 1981 Margaret Sanger Sojourner Truth 1982 Carrie Chapman Catt Frances Perkins 1983 Belva Lockwood Lucretia Mott 1984 Mary "Mother" Harris Jones Bessie Smith 1986 Barbara McClintock Lucy Stone Harriet Beecher Stowe 1988 Gwendolyn Brooks Willa Cather Sally Ride Mary Risteau Ida B. Wells-Barnett 1990–1999 1990 Margaret Bourke-White Barbara Jordan Billie Jean King Florence B. Seibert 1991 Gertrude Belle Elion 1993 Ethel Percy Andrus Antoinette Blackwell Emily Blackwell Shirley Chisholm Jacqueline Cochran Ruth Colvin Marian Wright Edelman Alice Evans Betty Friedan Ella Grasso Martha Wright Griffiths Fannie Lou Hamer Dorothy Height Dolores Huerta Mary Putnam Jacobi Mae Jemison Mary Lyon Mary Mahoney Wilma Mankiller Constance Baker Motley Georgia O'Keeffe Annie Oakley Rosa Parks Esther Peterson Jeannette Rankin Ellen Swallow Richards Elaine Roulet Katherine Siva Saubel Gloria Steinem Helen Stephens Lillian Wald Madam C. J. Walker Faye Wattleton Rosalyn S. Yalow Gloria Yerkovich 1994 Bella Abzug Ella Baker Myra Bradwell Annie Jump Cannon Jane Cunningham Croly Catherine East Geraldine Ferraro Charlotte Perkins Gilman Grace Hopper Helen LaKelly Hunt Zora Neale Hurston Anne Hutchinson Frances Wisebart Jacobs Susette La Flesche Louise McManus Maria Mitchell Antonia Novello Linda Richards Wilma Rudolph Betty Bone Schiess Muriel Siebert Nettie Stevens Oprah Winfrey Sarah Winnemucca Fanny Wright 1995 Virginia Apgar Ann Bancroft Amelia Bloomer Mary Breckinridge Eileen Collins Elizabeth Hanford Dole Anne Dallas Dudley Mary Baker Eddy Ella Fitzgerald Margaret Fuller Matilda Joslyn Gage Lillian Moller Gilbreth Nannerl O. Keohane Maggie Kuhn Sandra Day O'Connor Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin Pat Schroeder Hannah Greenebaum Solomon 1996 Louisa May Alcott Charlotte Anne Bunch Frances Xavier Cabrini Mary A. Hallaren Oveta Culp Hobby Wilhelmina Cole Holladay Anne Morrow Lindbergh Maria Goeppert Mayer Ernestine Louise Potowski Rose Maria Tallchief Edith Wharton 1998 Madeleine Albright Maya Angelou Nellie Bly Lydia Moss Bradley Mary Steichen Calderone Mary Ann Shadd Cary Joan Ganz Cooney Gerty Cori Sarah Grimké Julia Ward Howe Shirley Ann Jackson Shannon Lucid Katharine Dexter McCormick Rozanne L. Ridgway Edith Nourse Rogers Felice Schwartz Eunice Kennedy Shriver Beverly Sills Florence Wald Angelina Grimké Weld Chien-Shiung Wu 2000–2009 2000 Faye Glenn Abdellah Emma Smith DeVoe Marjory Stoneman Douglas Mary Dyer Sylvia A. Earle Crystal Eastman Jeanne Holm Leontine T. Kelly Frances Oldham Kelsey Kate Mullany Janet Reno Anna Howard Shaw Sophia Smith Ida Tarbell Wilma L. Vaught Mary Edwards Walker Annie Dodge Wauneka Eudora Welty Frances E. Willard 2001 Dorothy H. Andersen Lucille Ball Rosalynn Carter Lydia Maria Child Bessie Coleman Dorothy Day Marian de Forest Althea Gibson Beatrice A. Hicks Barbara Holdridge Harriet Williams Russell Strong Emily Howell Warner Victoria Woodhull 2002 Paulina Kellogg Wright Davis Ruth Bader Ginsburg Katharine Graham Bertha Holt Mary Engle Pennington Mercy Otis Warren 2003 Linda G. Alvarado Donna de Varona Gertrude Ederle Martha Matilda Harper Patricia Roberts Harris Stephanie L. Kwolek Dorothea Lange Mildred Robbins Leet Patsy Takemoto Mink Sacagawea Anne Sullivan Sheila E. Widnall 2005 Florence E. Allen Ruth Fulton Benedict Betty Bumpers Hillary Clinton Rita Rossi Colwell Mother Marianne Cope Maya Y. Lin Patricia A. Locke Blanche Stuart Scott Mary Burnett Talbert 2007 Eleanor K. Baum Julia Child Martha Coffin Pelham Wright Swanee Hunt Winona LaDuke Elisabeth Kübler-Ross Judith L. Pipher Catherine Filene Shouse Henrietta Szold 2009 Louise Bourgeois Mildred Cohn Karen DeCrow Susan Kelly-Dreiss Allie B. Latimer Emma Lazarus Ruth Patrick Rebecca Talbot Perkins Susan Solomon Kate Stoneman 2010–2019 2011 St. Katharine Drexel Dorothy Harrison Eustis Loretta C. Ford Abby Kelley Foster Helen Murray Free Billie Holiday Coretta Scott King Lilly Ledbetter Barbara A. Mikulski Donna E. Shalala Kathrine Switzer 2013 Betty Ford Ina May Gaskin Julie Krone Kate Millett Nancy Pelosi Mary Joseph Rogers Bernice Sandler Anna Schwartz Emma Willard 2015 Tenley Albright Nancy Brinker Martha Graham Marcia Greenberger Barbara Iglewski Jean Kilbourne Carlotta Walls LaNier Philippa Marrack Mary Harriman Rumsey Eleanor Smeal 2017 Matilda Cuomo Temple Grandin Lorraine Hansberry Victoria Jackson Sherry Lansing Clare Boothe Luce Aimee Mullins Carol Mutter Janet Rowley Alice Waters 2019 Gloria Allred Angela Davis Sarah Deer Jane Fonda Nicole Malachowski Rose O'Neill Louise Slaughter Sonia Sotomayor Laurie Spiegel Flossie Wong-Staal 2020–2029 2020 Aretha Franklin Barbara Hillary Barbara Rose Johns Henrietta Lacks Toni Morrison Mary Church Terrell 2022 Octavia E. Butler Judy Chicago Rebecca S. Halstead Mia Hamm Joy Harjo Emily Howland Katherine Johnson Indra Nooyi Michelle Obama 2024 Patricia Bath Ruby Bridges Elouise P. Cobell Kimberlé Crenshaw Peggy McIntosh Judith Plaskow Loretta Ross Sandy Stone Anna Wessels Williams Serena Williams v t e Silent Sentinels Sentinels Edith Ainge Nina E. Allender Annie Arniel Abby Scott Baker Mary Ritter Beard Alva Belmont Lucy Gwynne Branham Lucy Burns Iris Calderhead Sarah Tarleton Colvin Dorothy Day Julia Emory Matilda Hall Gardner Florence Bayard Hilles Alison Turnbull Hopkins Julia Hurlbut Mary Hall Ingham Paula O. Jakobi Dora Lewis Anne Henrietta Martin Nell Mercer Sophie Gooding Rose Meredith Vida Milholland Katherine Morey Mary A. Nolan Alice Paul Alice Gram Robinson Elizabeth Selden Rogers Caroline Spencer Doris Stevens Betty Gram Swing Mary Church Terrell Phyllis Terrell Mabel Vernon Evelyn Wotherspoon Wainwright Amelia Himes Walker Ruza Wenclawska Sue Shelton White Margaret Fay Whittemore Maud Younger Memorials Turning Point Suffragist Memorial Related National Woman's Party The Suffragist Occoquan Workhouse Prison Special Women's suffrage in the United States Jailed for Freedom (1920 book) Iron Jawed Angels (2004 film) Suffs (2022 musical) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC 2 Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐cv2mw
Cached time: 20250817044258
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.938 seconds
Real time usage: 2.158 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11626/1000000
Revision size: 106072/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 431225/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9940/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 508941/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.214/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 12317934/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1781.512      1 -total
 52.18%  929.659      2 Template:Reflist
 12.38%  220.468     33 Template:Cite_news
 10.24%  182.515     37 Template:Cite_web
  9.95%  177.319     31 Template:Cite_book
  7.36%  131.192      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.30%  130.018     19 Template:Sfn
  6.76%  120.484      1 Template:Anarchism_US
  6.24%  111.247      1 Template:Infobox_saint
  6.23%  110.904      2 Template:IMDb_title Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:264094:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044258 and revision id 1304452415. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dorothy_Day&oldid=1304452415 " Categories : Dorothy Day 1897 births 1980 deaths 20th-century American memoirists 20th-century American newspaper editors 20th-century American newspaper founders 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century American women journalists 20th-century American women writers 20th-century anarchists 20th-century venerated Christians Activists from Brooklyn Activists from Manhattan American anarchist writers American anti-capitalists American anti-fascists American anti-poverty advocates American anti–Vietnam War activists American anti–World War I activists American anti–World War II activists American Christian pacifists American Christian socialists American feminist writers American nonviolence advocates American religious writers American Roman Catholic writers American Servants of God American socialists American tax resisters American venerated Catholics American women founders American women memoirists American women newspaper editors American women non-fiction writers American women religious writers Anarcho-pacifists Benedictine oblates Benedictine Servants of God Catholic anarchists Catholic feminists Catholic pacifists Catholic socialists Catholic Workers Catholicism and far-left politics Catholics from New York (state) Christian ethicists Christian humanists Christian radicals Converts to Roman Catholicism from Anglicanism Converts to Roman Catholicism from atheism or agnosticism Distributism Editors of Christian publications Editors of New York City newspapers Female Christian socialists Industrial Workers of the World members Journalists from New York City Journalists from Staten Island Laetare Medal recipients Liberation theology Memoirists from New York (state) National Woman's Party activists People from Brooklyn Heights People from Greenwich Village People from the Lower East Side People of the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York Roman Catholic activists University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign alumni Venerated Catholics by Pope Francis Writers from Brooklyn Writers from Manhattan Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links IMDb title ID different from Wikidata Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from August 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from August 2022 Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 04:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dorothy Day 40 languages Add topic

