Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Defining airsheds 2 Urban Airshed Model (UAM) Toggle Urban Airshed Model (UAM) subsection 2.1 Uni-directional Impacts 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Airshed Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Air pollution from a factory in Nepal An airshed is a geographical area where local topography and meteorology limit the dispersion of pollutants away from the area. They are formed by air masses moving across a landscape, thus influencing the atmospheric composition of that area. Their boundaries are loosely defined, but can be quantified. Airborne chemicals disperse throughout an airshed and enter bodies of water in the area.

[ 1 ] Defining airsheds [ edit ] Airsheds are difficult to define precisely because they are spatially variable and can change over time. Their boundaries may change due to weather conditions and the sources of pollutants. Airsheds can be quantified for specific events, by season, or over a long period of time. Scientists model the movement of air masses over time to construct the dimensions of the upwind and downwind airsheds for a region.

[ 2 ] Urban Airshed Model (UAM) [ edit ] The Urban Airshed Model (UAM) is a three-dimensional grid model that is used to simulate chemical and physical atmospheric processes. The United States Environmental Protection Agency uses this model to develop air quality plans for ozone in urban areas.

[ 2 ] Uni-directional Impacts [ edit ] The upwind airshed of a city represents the area where emissions and pollutants affecting that city originate. This includes compounds that form secondary pollutants such as fine particulate matter and ground level ozone . Downwind effects in airsheds are responsible for the spread of those pollutants outside of the city. The downwind airshed tends to affect a wider area than the upwind because they are a combination of the upwind airshed and pollutants produced within the city.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ Sparling, D. W. (2016).

Ecotoxicology essentials : environmental contaminants and their biological effects on Animals and plants . London, UK.

ISBN 978-0-12-801961-0 .

OCLC 947118281 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b Scheffe, Richard D.; Morris, Ralph E. (1993-03-01).

"A review of the development and application of the Urban Airshed model" .

Atmospheric Environment. Part B. Urban Atmosphere .

27 (1): 23– 39.

Bibcode : 1993AtmEB..27...23S .

doi : 10.1016/0957-1272(93)90043-6 .

ISSN 0957-1272 .

^ Jones, Laurence; Reis, Stefan; Hutchins, Mike; Miller, James; He, Baihuiqian; Seifert-Dähnn, Isabel; Xu, Chong-Yu; Hagen-Zanker, Alex; Yu, Jingyan; Lin, Tao; Jia, Haifeng; Loiselle, Steven; Russel, Duncan; Sabel, Clive E.; Fletcher, David (2022-12-01).

"Airsheds, watersheds and more – The flows that drive intra-extra-urban connections, and their implications for nature-based solutions (NBS)" .

Nature-Based Solutions .

2 100040.

doi : 10.1016/j.nbsj.2022.100040 .

hdl : 10871/131978 .

ISSN 2772-4115 .

S2CID 253170834 .

External links [ edit ] Georgia Basin-Puget Sound International Airshed Strategy v t e Natural resources Air Pollution / quality Ambient standards (US) Index Indoor Law Clean Air Act (US) Ozone depletion Emissions Airshed Trading Deforestation (REDD) Energy Bio Law Resources Fossil fuels ( gas , peak coal , peak gas , peak oil ) Geothermal Hydro Nuclear Solar sunlight shade Wind Land Agricultural arable peak farmland Degradation Field Landscape cityscape seascape soundscape viewshed Law property Management habitat conservation Minerals gemstone industrial ore metal mining law sand peak copper phosphorus rights Soil conservation fertility health resilience Use planning reserve Life Biodiversity Bioprospecting biopiracy Biosphere Bushfood Bushmeat Fisheries climate change law management Forests genetic resources law management non-timber products Game law Marine conservation Meadow Pasture Plants FAO Plant Treaty food genetic resources gene banks herbal medicines UPOV Convention wood Rangeland Seed bank Wildlife conservation management Water Types / location Aquifer storage and recovery Drinking Fresh Groundwater pollution recharge remediation Hydrosphere Ice bergs glacial polar Irrigation huerta Marine Rain harvesting Stormwater Surface water Sewage reclaimed water Watershed Aspects Desalination Floods Law Leaching Sanitation improved Scarcity Security Supply Efficiency Conflict Conservation Peak water Pollution Privatization Quality Right Resources improved policy Related Commons enclosure global land tragedy of Economics ecological land Ecosystem services Exploitation overexploitation Earth Overshoot Day Management adaptive Natural capital accounting good Natural heritage Nature reserve remnant natural area Systems ecology Urban ecology Wilderness Resource Common-pool Conflict (perpetuation) Curse Depletion Extraction Nationalism Renewable / Non-renewable Politics Oil war Petroleum politics Petrostate Petro-Islam Resource war Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Airshed&oldid=1300856846 " Category : Meteorological phenomena Hidden category: CS1 maint: location missing publisher This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 19:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Airshed Add languages Add topic

