Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contributions to philosophy 2 Selected works 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Paul B. Thompson (philosopher) 4 languages العربية Français 한국어 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher Paul B. Thompson is Professor Emeritus at Michigan State University , where he held the W.K. Kellogg Chair in Agricultural Food and Community Ethics before retiring in 2022. Thompson was born in 1951 in Springfield, Missouri. He earned his B.A. at Emory University before going on to earn a Ph.D. in philosophy at the State University of New York at Stony Brook .

[ 1 ] He formerly taught at Texas A&M University and Purdue University before joining MSU, where he continues to do research on ethical and philosophical questions dealing with agriculture and food and especially the development of agricultural techno-science.

He is a member of the Editorial Advisory Board for Public Philosophy Journal .

[ 2 ] Paul B. Thompson, W.K. Kellogg Chair in Agricultural Food and Community Ethics at Michigan State University. Thompson was instrumental in developing the field of philosophy of agriculture.

Contributions to philosophy [ edit ] Thompson has served on national and international committees on agricultural biotechnology such as the International Advisory Panel for the PEGASUS Project on Animal Biotechnology, the Advisory Committee on Biotechnology for the Board of Agriculture and Natural Resources (part of the National Research Council based in Washington D.C.), The Scientific Advisory Committee for the Mansholt Graduate School at Wageningen University and Research Institute, and was the Chair of the Council on Agricultural Science and Technology's Working Group on Ethics and Animal Agricultural Biotechnology from 2006 to 2010. Thompson also contributed to the National Research Council report entitled The Environmental Effects of Transgenic Plants.

[ 3 ] He is a past President of the Society for Philosophy and Technology and the Agriculture, Food and Human Values Society.

[ 4 ] Selected works [ edit ] P. B. Thompson, From Field to Fork: Food Ethics for Everyone.

New York: Oxford University Press, 2015.

P. B. Thompson, The Agrarian Vision: Sustainability and Environmental Ethics.

Lexington, KY: The University Press of Kentucky, 2010.

P. B. Thompson, Ed.

The Ethics of Intensification: Agricultural Development and Cultural Change.

Dordrecht, NL: Springer, 2008.

K. David and P. B. Thompson, Eds.

What Can Nanotechnology Learn from Biotechnology? Social and Ethical Lessons for Nanoscience from the Debate over Agrifood Biotechnology and GMOs.

Burlington, MA: Academic Press, 2008.

P. B. Thompson and T. C. Hilde, Eds.

The Agrarian Roots of Pragmatism.

Nashville, TN: Vanderbilt University Press, 2000.

P. B. Thompson, Agricultural Ethics: Research, Teaching and Public Policy, Ames, IA: Iowa State University Press, 1998.

P.B. Thompson, Food Biotechnology in Ethical Perspective, London: Chapman and Hall (Blackie Academic and Professional), 1997.

P.B. Thompson, The Spirit of the Soil: Agriculture and Environmental Ethics, New York and London: Routledge Publishing Co., 1995.

W. Browne, J. Skees, L. Swanson, P.B. Thompson, and L. Unnevehr, Sacred Cows and Hot Potatoes: Agrarian Myths and Policy Realities, Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1992.

See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers Environmental ethics References [ edit ] ^ Michigan State University Philosophy Department Archived 2011-10-18 at the Wayback Machine accessed July 1, (2011) ^ "PPJ Editorial Advisory Board | Public Philosophy Journal" .

publicphilosophyjournal.org . Archived from the original on 2019-05-13.

^ Michigan State University Philosophy Department Archived 2011-10-18 at the Wayback Machine accessed July 1, (2011) ^ Michigan State University Philosophy Department Archived 2011-10-18 at the Wayback Machine accessed July 1, (2011) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Israel Academics PhilPeople Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paul_B._Thompson_(philosopher)&oldid=1175844814 " Categories : Living people Michigan State University alumni Michigan State University faculty American ethicists Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 17 September 2023, at 20:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paul B. Thompson (philosopher) 4 languages Add topic

