Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Knowledge workers 2 See also 3 Further reading 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Information economy 15 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Deutsch فارسی Français हिन्दी IsiZulu Монгол Română Русский Slovenščina Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Economy where information is valued as a capital good Not to be confused with Information economics .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Information economy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Economic systems Major types Capitalism Socialism By ideology Associative Capitalist Corporate Democratic Laissez-faire Mercantilist Neo- Neoliberal Social market State Welfare Democratic Developmentalism Distributist Fascist Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgist Green Nationalist Protectionist Religious Buddhist economics Christian Sabbath economics Islamic Socialist Communist Market socialist Mutualist Participatory Socialist market Socialist-oriented market State Syndicalist Social credit Traditionalist Corporatist Feudalism By coordination Closed (autarky) Decentralized Digital Dirigist Dual Gift Informal Market Mixed Natural Open Planned Robinson Crusoe Sharing Subsistence Underground Vertical archipelago Virtual By regional model Asian East Asian Chinese Singaporean Keralan European Anglo-Saxon German Nordic Dutch Rhenish Soviet Latin America Socialism of the 21st century Sectors Common ownership Private Public Voluntary Property types Collective ownership Commons ( Common ownership ) Private property State ownership Social ownership Transition Collectivization Communization Corporatization Demutualization Deregulation Expropriation Financialization Liberalization Marketization Municipalization Mutualization Nationalization Privatization Socialization Marxist Coordination Barter Market Free Open Regulated Planning In kind Cybernetics Indicative Material balancing Price Self-managed Peer-to-peer Sharing Open access Other types Attention Commons-based peer production Expeditionary Hunter-gatherer Inclusive Democracy Information Manorialism Newly industrialized Palace Plantation Plutonomy Post-capitalist Post-industrial Post-scarcity Resource-based Token Traditional Transition World Business portal Economics portal v t e The media industry is an example of the information economy.

Information economy is an economy with an increased emphasis on informational activities and information industry , where information is valued as a capital good.

[ 1 ] The term was coined by Marc Porat , a graduate student at Stanford University , who would later co-found General Magic .

[ 2 ] Manuel Castells states that information economy is not mutually exclusive with manufacturing economy.

[ 3 ] He finds that some countries such as Germany and Japan exhibit the informatization of manufacturing processes. In a typical conceptualization, however, information economy is considered a "stage" or "phase" of an economy, coming after stages of hunting, agriculture, and manufacturing. This conceptualization can be widely observed regarding information society , a closely related but wider concept.

There are numerous characterizations of the transformations some economies have undergone.

Service economy , high-tech economy, late-capitalism , post-Fordism , and global economy are among the most frequently used terms, having some overlaps and contradictions among themselves. Closer terms to information economy would include knowledge economy .

Knowledge workers [ edit ] In The Effective Executive by Peter Drucker , Drucker describes the manual worker (page 2) who works with his hands and produces "stuff". The knowledge worker (page 3) works with his head and produces ideas , knowledge, and information.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Capitalism – Economic system based on private ownership Creative industry – Economic sector Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Digital economy – Economy based on digital computing technologies Electronic business – Business that takes place over the internet Electronic commerce – Type of business industry usually conducted over the internet Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Information superhighway – Term used in the 1990s to refer to the Internet Information market Information revolution – Industrial shift to information technology Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Information society – Society driven by the processing and communication of information Intellectual property – Ownership of creative expressions and processes Knowledge economy – Approach to generating value Knowledge market – Mechanism for distributing knowledge resources Knowledge policy – Institutional foundations for creating, managing, and using organizational knowledge Network economics – Increasing value with increasing participation Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Online advertising – Form of advertising that uses the Internet Platform capitalism – Business model of technological platforms Surveillance capitalism – Concept in political economics Virtual economy – Emergent economy existing in a virtual world Further reading [ edit ] Boyett, Joseph H. And Jimmie T. Boyett. 2001. The Guru Guide to the Knowledge Economy. John Wiley& Sons. John Wiley & Sons Coyle, Diane. 1997. The Weightless World. MIT Press.

Evans, Philip B. and Thomas S. Wurster. 2000. Blown to Bits. Harvard Business School Press.

Mcgee, James and Lawrence Prusak. 1993. Managing Information Strategically. Random House Negroponte, Nicholas. 1996. Being Digital.

Rayport, Jeffrey F. and John J. Sviokla. 1995. Exploiting the Virtual Value Chain. in: Harvard Business Review (no. 1995) Rifkin, Jeremy (2000).

The Age of Access . Penguin Putnam.

ISBN 1585420824 .

Schwartz, Evan I.

(1999).

Digital Darwinism . Broadway Books.

ISBN 0767903331 .

Shapiro, Carl and Hal R. Varian. 1999. Information Rules: A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy. Harvard Business School Press.

Tapscott, Donald. 1996. The Digital Economy. McGraw-Hill.

References [ edit ] ^ Coiera, E. (2000-05-01).

"Information Economics and the Internet" .

Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association .

7 (3): 215– 221.

doi : 10.1136/jamia.2000.0070215 .

ISSN 1067-5027 .

PMC 61423 .

PMID 10833157 .

^ Fisher, Adam (2018-08-01).

"The Company That Invented the iPhone in 1990" .

Intelligencer . Retrieved 2021-08-31 .

^ Castells, Manuel (1997).

The information age: Economy, society and culture (3 volumes) . Blackwell. p. 1998.

^ Drucker, Peter (1966).

The Effective Executive . Harper & Row.

ISBN 9780060318253 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Information economy at Wikimedia Commons Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Information_economy&oldid=1297840062 " Categories : Information economy Information society Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2021 All articles needing additional references Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 June 2025, at 21:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Information economy 15 languages Add topic

