Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Members 2 History 3 Press 4 Affiliations 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Boston Ironsides RFC Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

Find sources: "Boston Ironsides RFC" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Rugby team Boston Ironsides Full name Boston Ironsides Rugby Football Club Union NERFU Nickname(s) The Ironsides Founded 2002 ; 23 years ago ( 2002 ) Location Boston , Massachusetts Ground(s) Joe Moakley Park League(s) NERFU 04 Team kit Official website www .bostonironsides .org Boston Ironsides Rugby Football Club is a rugby union football club based in Boston , Massachusetts .  The Ironsides play in the New England Rugby Football Union as a Division 4 Men's Team; retaining around 40-60 members (players and supporters) each season.

The Boston Ironsides are affiliated with World Rugby , based in Dublin, Ireland. They are sanctioned by USA Rugby, the governing body for the sport of rugby in the United States. Their geographical union is NERFU, the New England Rugby Football Union . The Ironsides represent Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut and New Hampshire as New England's only competitive and fully accredited member of the International Gay Rugby Association and Board, or IGRAB, headquartered in London, England. IGRAB is an organization that promotes rugby as an inclusive, non--discriminatory sport which everyone can play, regardless of sexual orientation, gender, race, religion, nationality, ethnic origin, political beliefs, athletic ability, age, physical challenge, mental challenge, or health status. IGRAB organizes the biennial Mark Kendall Bingham Memorial Tournament, popularly known as the Bingham Cup, the Rugby World Cup for gay and gay-friendly teams.

The Bingham Cup is named for Mark Bingham , an openly gay rugger and one of the heroes who gave their lives to thwart the terrorist hijackers of United Flight 93 on September 11, 2001.  Since then, the exponential rise of IGRAB in the United States has made rugby the nation's fastest-growing sport in recent years. As one of the original members of IGRAB the Ironsides are proud to be a part of this legacy.

Members [ edit ] The members of the Boston Ironsides come from diverse backgrounds. Straight, gay, lifelong athletes, newcomers to the sport; accountants, engineers, bartenders, designers, educators, students, physicians and more. Many are native New Englanders, while some come from different parts of the country, and still others hail from all over the world—Canada, Europe, South America, Australia.

History [ edit ] Players of the team in 2006 At the height of American patriotism following the attacks on 9/11, members of New York's Gotham Knights arrived in Boston to begin laying the initial groundwork and recruiting players for a Boston-based gay-friendly rugby club. On July 28, 2002 the Boston Ironsides RFC (Rugby Football Club) was formed. The Ironsides grew rapidly and became competitive in their division. This momentum culminated in May 2006, when the Ironsides won the inaugural Bingham Bowl at the Mark Kendall Bingham Memorial Championship.

Following a period of inactivity after this achievement, the team began a renewed recruitment effort in early 2010. A dynamic coaching staff and the dedication of key team leaders have revitalized the Ironsides with an energy that can be seen on the pitch. In June 2012 the Ironsides shut out opponents on the first day of competition at the VI Bingham Cup in Manchester, United Kingdom and quickly became known as a force to be reckoned with in amateur rugby union.

The Ironsides sent several players to the 2014 Bingham cup, and were the first team to register.

In 2016, the Ironsides went to Nashville to compete in their Bingham Cup.

2018 took the Ironsides to Amsterdam for their Bingham Cup.

In fall of 2019, the Ironsides grew to over 60 members and were able to field two separate teams on the same day. With one team competing in D4 NERFU Competition against Rutland Rugby Club, and the other competing in a friendly against the South Shore Anchors Old Boys.

In 2020, the Ironsides were scheduled to compete at the Ottawa Bingham Cup, but due to COVID-19, the tournament, and the season as a whole was cancelled. No rugby competitions were played this year.

In 2021, the Ironsides continued onward with the Spring season cancelled due to COVID-19 once again. The team continues its efforts off the field in social engagement and philanthropy while they wait to resume play.

In 2022, the Ironsides headed to Ottawa to compete in the rescheduled Bingham Cup.

In 2023, the Ironsides, as well as a mixed team with the Village Lions, took 2nd in the Inaugural NORAM Cup.

Press [ edit ] The Boston Ironsides have been featured in several newspapers over the years.

Bay Windows Article on the 2006 Bingham Bowl win InNewsweekly Article on the 2006 Bingham Bowl win Boston.com article on the Boston Ironsides Improper Bostonian article Affiliations [ edit ] World Rugby USA Rugby NERFU IGRAB External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Inclusive Rugby Clubs International Gay Rugby Association and Board - Bingham Cup - Union Cup Argentina Pampas Rugby Mendoza Huarpes Australia Adelaide Sharks Brisbane Hustlers Daylesford Dragons Melbourne Chargers Perth Rams Sydney Convicts Belgium Brussels Straffe Ketten Canada Armada Montréal Muddy York Ottawa Wolves Vancouver Rogues Chile Titanes Rugby England Berkshire Unicorns Birmingham Bulls Brighton & Hove Sea Serpents Bristol Bisons Chester Centurians Hull Roundheads Kings Cross Steelers Leeds Hunters Liverpool Tritons Manchester Village Spartans Newcastle Ravens Northampton Outlaws Reading Renegades Sheffield Vulcans South London Stags Typhoons RUFC Wessex Wyverns Westcountry Wasps RFC France La Mêlée Alpine Les Coqs Festifs Les Gaillards Parisiens Los Valents de Montpellier Rebelyons Tou'Win Germany Berlin Bruisers Cologne Crushers Ireland Emerald Warriors Israel Tel Aviv Ibex Italy Libera Rugby Roma Roosters Rugby 7 Japan Dym-Rugby Netherlands Amsterdam Lowlanders New Zealand New Zealand Falcons Northern Ireland Belfast Azlans Portugal Lisbon Dark Horses Scotland Aberdeen Taexali Caledonian Thebans Dundee Jutes Dunfermline Knights Glasgow Alphas South Africa Blight Jozi Cats Wham Rugby Spain Els Dragons De La Mola Madrid Titanes Sweden Stockholm Berserkers Switzerland Zürich Rascals United States Atlanta Bucks Baltimore Flamingos Boston Ironsides Charleston Blockade Charlotte Royals Chicago Dragons Colorado RUSH Columbus Coyotes Columbus Kodiaks Dallas Diablos Dallas Lost Souls Gotham Knights Madison Minotaurs Minneapolis Mayhem Nashville Grizzlies New England Valkyries Philadelphia Gryphons Phoenix Storm Portland Lumberjacks St. Louis Crusaders San Diego Armada San Francisco Fog Seattle Quake Los Angeles Rebellion Washington Renegades Washington Scandals Wales BAF Praetorians Cardiff Lions Swansea Vikings International World Barbarians v t e Sports teams based in Massachusetts Australian football USAFL Boston Demons Baseball MLB Boston Red Sox IL Worcester Red Sox FL Brockton Rox CCBL Bourne Braves Brewster Whitecaps Chatham Anglers Cotuit Kettleers Falmouth Commodores Harwich Mariners Hyannis Harbor Hawks Orleans Firebirds Wareham Gatemen Yarmouth–Dennis Red Sox FCBL Pittsfield Suns Westfield Starfires Worcester Bravehearts NECBL Martha's Vineyard Sharks North Adams SteepleCats North Shore Navigators Valley Blue Sox Basketball NBA Boston Celtics BIG3 Boston Ball Hogs Esports CDL Boston Breach OWL Boston Uprising Football NFL New England Patriots IFL Massachusetts Pirates WFA Boston Renegades Hockey NHL Boston Bruins PWHL Boston Fleet AHL Springfield Thunderbirds ECHL Worcester Railers NAHL Northeast Generals Lacrosse WPLL New England Command UWLX Boston Storm PLL Boston Cannons WLL Boston Guard Roller derby WFTDA Bay State Brawlers Roller Derby Boston Roller Derby MRDA Pioneer Valley Roller Derby Rugby league NARL Boston Bears Rugby union MLR New England Free Jacks NERFU Boston RFC Boston Ironsides RFC Boston Irish Wolfhounds Boston Maccabi Rugby Charles River Rats Mystic River Old Gold Rugby South Shore Anchors Worcester RFC WER Boston Banshees Soccer MLS New England Revolution NWSL Boston Legacy FC (2026) MLSNP New England Revolution II USL2 Black Rock FC Boston Bolts Boston City FC Western Mass Pioneers NPSL Valeo FC UWS New England Mutiny Ultimate AUDL Boston Glory College athletics NCAA Division I Bentley Falcons Boston College Eagles Boston University Terriers Harvard Crimson Holy Cross Crusaders Merrimack Warriors Northeastern Huskies Stonehill Skyhawks UMass Minutemen and Minutewomen UMass Lowell River Hawks NCAA Division II American International Yellow Jackets Assumption Greyhounds Bentley Falcons NCAA Division III Amherst Mammoths Anna Maria Amcats Babson Beavers Brandeis Judges Bridgewater State Bears Clark Cougars Curry Colonels Dean Bulldogs Eastern Nazarene Lions Elms Blazers Emerson Lions Emmanuel Saints Endicott Gulls Fitchburg State Falcons Framingham State Rams Gordon Fighting Scots Lasell Lasers Lesley Lynx Mount Holyoke Lyons MCLA Trailblazers Massachusetts Maritime Buccaneers MIT Engineers Nichols Bison Regis Pride Salem State Vikings Simmons Sharks Smith Pioneers Springfield Pride Suffolk Rams Tufts Jumbos UMass Boston Beacons UMass Dartmouth Corsairs Wellesley Blue Wentworth Leopards Western New England Golden Bears Westfield State Owls Wheaton Lyons Williams Ephs WPI Engineers Worcester State Lancers NAIA Fisher Falcons USCAA Bay Path Wildcats Hampshire Black Sheep NJCAA Division II Massasoit Warriors NJCAA Division III Benjamin Franklin Shockers Bristol Bayhawks Bunker Hill Bulldogs Holyoke Cougars Massachusetts Bay Buccaneers Northern Essex Knights Quinsigamond Chiefs Roxbury Tigers Springfield Technical Rams Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Boston_Ironsides_RFC&oldid=1267460115 " Categories : International Gay Rugby member clubs Rugby union teams in Boston Rugby clubs established in 2001 2001 establishments in Massachusetts LGBTQ culture in Boston South Boston Hidden categories: Use American English from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from September 2020 Articles lacking sources from November 2016 All articles lacking sources Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 January 2025, at 05:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Boston Ironsides RFC Add languages Add topic

