Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Inspiration for A Choice Not an Echo 2 Historical context 3 1964 Republican primaries 4 Content 5 Effects of A Choice Not an Echo 6 References Toggle the table of contents A Choice Not an Echo Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1964 book by Phyllis Schlafly A Choice Not an Echo Author Phyllis Schlafly Publication date 1964 This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e A Choice Not an Echo is a non-fiction book self-published in 1964 by movement conservative activist Phyllis Schlafly . It was the first of Schlafly's 19 books and sold three million copies, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] bringing her to national attention as a conservative activist. Schlafly published this book to support Arizona Senator Barry Goldwater in his presidential candidacy, hoping to help him triumph in the California primary, cementing his chances for obtaining the Republican party nomination. Schlafly's secondary motivation behind the publishing of A Choice Not an Echo was to break control of the "Eastern Establishment" over the Republican Party. In other words, her book served as an exposure of the covert influence that, in her word, "kingmakers" had on Republican primary nominations.

Inspiration for A Choice Not an Echo [ edit ] Phyllis Schlafly speaking at CPAC in 2011 Prior to 1963, Phyllis Schlafly had prepared a whole series of Republican speeches that she hoped to deliver. However, after the assassination of John F. Kennedy , she deemed it inappropriate to give anti-Democratic speeches.

[ citation needed ] Accordingly, Schlafly instead wrote a speech entitled "How Political Conventions Are Stolen" (which reflected on the liberal Rockefeller administration in New York and how it had outmaneuvered the party's Conservative wing) in December 1963 and delivered it throughout January and February the following year.

[ 3 ] Schlafly hoped to have a permanent effect so she converted this speech into a book, which became A Choice Not an Echo . By establishing her own publisher, the Pere Marquette Press , Schlafly was able to quickly self-publish her book, which she distributed in mass quantities.

[ 3 ] By the weekend after publication, Schlafly's book had statewide distribution in California and eventually had sold over half a million copies by May of that year, helping to support Goldwater's campaign.

[ 3 ] Historical context [ edit ] Throughout the 1940s, 50s, and 60s, Democrats maintained control of the executive office, with the exception of the 1953–1961 Eisenhower presidency. The Republican party had often been split between a conservative wing supported in the Midwest and West, and liberal wing from the Northeast. The conservative wing, which Schlafly was a part of, opposed New Deal reforms and supported isolationist policies. This wing was represented by candidates such as Robert A. Taft in 1948. On the other side, the liberal wing of the Republican party demanded more efficient use of New Deal policies [ 4 ] and were led by Thomas E. Dewey , who Schlafly claims was subject to the will of the kingmakers.

[ 5 ] The liberal wing maintained control of the Republican Presidential nomination until 1964.

In 1964, the conservative wing made a comeback against the liberal wing by nominating Barry Goldwater. Goldwater defeated Nelson Rockefeller and Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

, who were on the left side of the GOP. However, Goldwater was defeated by Johnson in the 1964 election.

1964 Republican primaries [ edit ] Senator Barry Goldwater in 1962 Phyllis Schlafly's A Choice Not an Echo was a key factor in Barry Goldwater's securing of the 1964 Republican nomination. In preceding months, Goldwater was close to winning the nomination, but needed to win a major primary in order to do so. The California primary, therefore, was key if Goldwater were to win the Republican nomination. The liberal New York governor Nelson Rockefeller opposed Goldwater in the California primary, which was a very close race.

[ citation needed ] Conservative lobbyists and volunteers traveled to various precincts and handed out copies of A Choice Not an Echo . Schlafly's book was evidently very influential: later studies showed that Goldwater had secured narrow victories in many of these precincts.

[ 6 ] Goldwater won the California primary, and got the Republican presidential nomination.

Content [ edit ] The first appearance of the "kingmakers" is in Chapter 5. "The Advertising Agent's Holiday" describes how Wendell Willkie , who was a registered Democrat, was marketed into becoming the 1940 Republican presidential candidate by the kingmakers, who were very prominent business and economic figures during the time. Willkie began appearing on the covers of magazines and newspapers, and was placed on panels where the questions were tailored specifically to his knowledge. This type of marketing ensured that he appeared to outsmart other intellectuals on the panels. Despite this marketing, when the Republican National Convention was seven weeks away, Willkie was only favored by 3% of Republicans.

[ 5 ] When the Republican National Convention arrived, the kingmakers launched "Operation Telegram".

[ 5 ] In this operation, prominent and financially powerful people were called and asked if they would like to send a telegram to the delegates at the Republican National Convention on their behalf. As a result of this, almost a million telegrams flooded the delegates at the convention in favor of Willkie. In addition, cab drivers picking up delegates and taking them to the convention were paid to hint that the nomination was leaning towards Willkie.

[ 5 ] The combination of these strategies worked, and Willkie won the presidential nomination, with Taft and Dewey trailing behind.

Flyer used to challenge Goldwater's campaign Chapter 12 of A Choice Not an Echo is titled "Anybody but Goldwater". In this chapter of her book, Schlafly focuses in on the work of the kingmakers' attempts to prevent Goldwater from securing the Republican popular vote. For example, Schlafly references "The chief propaganda organ of the secret kingmakers, The New York Times ", [ 5 ] demonstrating the tension between Goldwater and the Eastern establishment in the following sentence (extracted from a New York Times article written by Tom Wicker on August 11, 1963) : "The most bitter resistance to Senator Goldwater centers in the 'eastern, internationalist power structure that for two decades has dictated Republican nominations. The members of that elite will not lightly relinquish their party to Barry Goldwater .'" [ 5 ] Schlafly also references other magazines that have published "anti-Goldwater" texts such as The New Yorker and The Saturday Evening Post . More specifically, Schlafly references an article published in The Saturday Evening Post on January 25, 1964 called "How the Republicans Can Win" by Arthur Larson , that advises the GOP to select a candidate who appeals to the "Authentic American Center" [ 5 ] (specifically referencing John F. Kennedy at the time).

Aside from "anti-Goldwater propaganda", Schlafly reveals other strategies used by the kingmakers to keep Goldwater out of the race. For example, the kingmakers posed candidates such as Nelson Rockefeller and George Romney whose main motivation to run for president would be to "do everything within my power to prevent him (Goldwater) from becoming the party's presidential choice." [ 5 ] Another candidate who posed a threat to Goldwater's campaign was William W. Scranton , who was Governor of Pennsylvania from 1963–1967.

[ 5 ] The kingmakers invested a lot of attention in Governor Scranton, "showing off Scranton to leading banking, industrial and communications figures in a series of private luncheons." [ 5 ] These exclusive meetings included extremely influential individuals who would help bolster Scranton's campaign.

[ 5 ] Effects of A Choice Not an Echo [ edit ] Phyllis Schlafly wearing a "STOP ERA " badge at an anti-ERA rally on February 4, 1977 The book helped create space within the Republican Party for the modern conservative movement that eventually stopped the passage of the Equal Rights Amendment in the 1970s. The book helped secure the nomination of Senator Barry Goldwater for President of the United States , and detailed how the liberal "Rockefeller Republican" wing of the Republican Party had manipulated the Republican Party's choice of nominees in prior national conventions to nominate people like Wendell Willkie and Dwight D. Eisenhower .

[ 7 ] It called on conservatives to rally against the liberal wing and offer a true conservative for the nomination. Millions of copies of this book were bought and distributed by supporters of Goldwater, making it one of the all-time best selling conservative political books in the United States. The book helped launch the career of Phyllis Schlafly as a movement conservative .

The 50th anniversary edition, A Choice Not an Echo: Updated and Expanded 50th Anniversary Edition , was published in 2014 by Regnery Publishing, ISBN 978-1621573159 .

[ 5 ] The 1964 book was published by the Pere Marquette Press, and has the ISBN ISBN 0-686-11486-8 .

References [ edit ] ^ "Phyllis Schlafly Bio - founder of Eagle Forum" .

Eagle Forum . Retrieved 2019-09-13 .

^ "Phyllis Schlafly" .

Contemporary Authors Online . 2016 . Retrieved October 26, 2019 – via Gale In Context: Biography.

^ a b c Phyllis Schlafly: A Choice Not An Echo , retrieved 2019-10-26 ^ Nash references David W. Reinhard, The Republican Right since 1945 , (University Press of Kentucky, 1983).

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l "A Choice Not an Echo: Updated and Expanded 50th Anniversary Edition." Google Books .  10 November 2014.  14 December 2018.

^ Hemmer, Nicole (2014-05-20).

"The Three Books That Shook Conservative Media in 1964" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 2020-05-29 .

^ Hemmer, Nicole .

"The Three Books That Shook Conservative Media in 1964." The Atlantic .  20 May 2014.  14 December 2018.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=A_Choice_Not_an_Echo&oldid=1304589765 " Categories : 1964 non-fiction books Barry Goldwater Self-published books American political books New Right (United States) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 00:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents A Choice Not an Echo Add languages Add topic

