Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Specialities 2 Planting 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Shade tree 9 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی Français Nederlands 日本語 Tagalog Tiếng Việt Ghanaian Pidgin Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Tree grown specifically for its shade This article is about the plant. For the similarly named album, see Chris Lane .

Not to be confused with List of tree species by shade tolerance .

Not to be confused with Shadetree Mechanic .

A group of Laysan albatrosses resting beneath the canopy of a fig , a common shade tree in many parts of the world.

A shade tree is a large tree whose primary role is to provide shade in the surrounding environment due to its spreading canopy and crown , where it may give shelter from sunlight in the heat of the summer for people who seek recreational needs in urban parks and house yards , and thus, also protecting them from the sun's harmful UV rays.

Native across Europe and into Western Asia, the Norway maple shade tree, where it has since become naturalised.

Some of the most popular shade trees in temperate countries are oaks , plane trees , willows , birches , beeches , maples , ashes , lindens , and elms . In subtropical countries like Australia and India, figs are popular choices as shade trees.

[ 1 ] In tropical countries , trees such as some Erythrina and African tulip tree species are often planted as shade trees.

[ 2 ] Specialities [ edit ] These trees are commonly grown, and/or used, as shade trees due to their protuberant size: [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Paperbark trees have a large canopy, supplying adequate shade.

Oaks are popular shade trees.

A shade-providing elm tree The twisting habit of angophoras provide good shade.

American elm American sycamore Austrian oak Brush box Banyan tree Black walnut Blue Jacaranda Camphor laurel Cape Chestnut Carob tree Chinese elm Coastal Coral Tree European beech Honey locust Golden Ash Golden rain tree Holm oak Hopea odorata Hill's weeping fig Indian horse-chestnut Japanese elm London plane Moreton bay fig Norway maple Oriental plane Palestine oak Pepper tree Port Jackson Fig Red maple Royal poinciana Rough-barked apple Scarlet oak Scholar tree Silver linden Shumard oak Small-leaved fig Southern live oak Swamp Spanish oak Sweet gum Sycamore fig Sycamore maple Sydney red gum Tulipwood White feather honeymyrtle Yellow box Planting [ edit ] There are a few factors to consider when choosing a shade tree: deciduousness , coverage, longevity, and the ability of the roots to damage foundations. Shade trees can enhance the privacy of a garden , patio , or back yard , by obstructing the view of outsiders.  A disadvantage is that in cool climates, an abundance of shade trees may lead to a dank environment in any nearby buildings or gardens. Shade trees must not be planted near chimneys as flying fire sparks can ignite tree branches which could cause rapidly expanding fires.

[ 4 ] Planting shade trees around a home can also reduce the energy that homeowners use in the summer months. Planting shade trees in locations near a home air conditioner can keep the air conditioner cooler which helps it run more efficiently, so less energy is used.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Trees portal Landscaping Avenue (landscape) References [ edit ] ^ Shade Tree ^ AgroForestryTree Database - Species information Archived 2013-01-13 at archive.today ^ Winterhill Tree Farm - Shade Trees ^ a b ABC - Gardening Australia - Shade Trees ^ Selecting Landscape Plants: Shade Trees by Diane Relf, Extension Specialist, Horticulture, Bonnie Appleton, Extension Specialist, Horticulture, Virginia Tech ^ "How to Plant Trees to Conserve Energy for Summer Shade - Climate Change at arborday.org" .

www.arborday.org . Retrieved 2017-05-03 .

Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Shade_tree&oldid=1302517625 " Categories : Trees Ornamental trees Landscape Landscape ecology Community ecology Plant ecology Habitat Hidden categories: Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 22:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Shade tree 9 languages Add topic

