Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Epistemic closure and skeptical arguments 2 Justificatory closure 3 In other uses Toggle In other uses subsection 3.1 Epistemic closure in U.S. political discussion 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Epistemic closure 3 languages فارسی Français Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Principle in epistemology Not to be confused with Cognitive closure (philosophy) .

Epistemic closure [ 1 ] is a property of some belief systems . It is the principle that if a subject S {\displaystyle S} knows p {\displaystyle p} , and S {\displaystyle S} knows that p {\displaystyle p} entails q {\displaystyle q} , then S {\displaystyle S} can thereby come to know q {\displaystyle q} . Most epistemological theories involve a closure principle and many skeptical arguments assume a closure principle.

On the other hand, some epistemologists, including Robert Nozick , have denied closure principles on the basis of reliabilist accounts of knowledge. Nozick, in Philosophical Explanations , advocated that, when considering the Gettier problem , the least counter-intuitive assumption we give up should be epistemic closure. Nozick suggested a "truth tracking" theory of knowledge, in which the x was said to know P if x's belief in P tracked the truth of P through the relevant modal scenarios .

[ 2 ] A subject may not actually believe q , for example, regardless of whether he or she is justified or warranted. Thus, one might instead say that knowledge is closed under known deduction: if, while knowing p , S believes q because S knows that p entails q , then S knows q .

[ 1 ] An even stronger formulation would be as such: If, while knowing various propositions, S believes p because S knows that these propositions entail p , then S knows p .

[ 1 ] While the principle of epistemic closure is generally regarded as intuitive, [ 3 ] philosophers such as Robert Nozick and Fred Dretske have argued against it.

[ 4 ] Epistemic closure and skeptical arguments [ edit ] The epistemic closure principle typically takes the form of a modus ponens argument: S knows p.

S knows that p entails q.

Therefore, S knows q.

This epistemic closure principle is central to many versions of skeptical arguments.  A skeptical argument of this type will involve knowledge of some piece of widely accepted information to be knowledge, which will then be pointed out to entail knowledge of some skeptical scenario, such as the brain in a vat scenario or the Cartesian evil demon scenario.  A skeptic might say, for example, that if you know that you have hands, then you know that you are not a handless brain in a vat (because knowledge that you have hands implies that you know you are not handless, and if you know that you are not handless, then you know that you are not a handless brain in a vat).

[ 5 ] The skeptic will then utilize this conditional to form a modus tollens argument.  For example, the skeptic might make an argument like the following: You do not know that you are not a handless brain in a vat ( ¬ ¬ K ¬ ¬ h {\displaystyle \neg K\neg h} ) If you know that you have hands, then you know that you are not a handless brain in a vat ( K o → → K ¬ ¬ h {\displaystyle Ko\to K\neg h} ) Conclusion: Therefore, you do not know that you have hands ( ¬ ¬ K o {\displaystyle \neg Ko} ) Much of the epistemological discussion surrounding this type of skeptical argument involves whether to accept or deny the conclusion, and how to do each.

Ernest Sosa says that there are three possibilities in responding to the skeptic: Agree with the skeptic by granting him both premises and the conclusion (1, 2, c) Disagree with the skeptic by denying premise 2 and the conclusion, but maintaining premise 1 (1, ~2, ~c) as Nozick and Dretske do.  This amounts to denying the epistemic closure principle.

Disagree with the skeptic by denying premise 1 and the conclusion, but maintaining premise 2 (~1, 2, ~c) as Moore does.  This amounts to maintaining the epistemic closure principle, and holding that knowledge is closed under known implication .

Justificatory closure [ edit ] In the seminal 1963 paper, “ Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?

”, Edmund Gettier gave an assumption (later called the “principle of deducibility for justification” by Irving Thalberg, Jr.

) [ 6 ] that would serve as a basis for the rest of his piece: “for any proposition P, if S is justified in believing P and P entails Q, and S deduces Q from P and accepts Q as a result of this deduction, then S is justified in believing Q.” [ 7 ] This was seized upon by Thalberg, who rejected the principle in order to demonstrate that one of Gettier's examples fails to support Gettier's main thesis that justified true belief is not knowledge (in the following quotation, (1) refers to “Jones will get the job”, (2) refers to “Jones has ten coins”, and (3) is the logical conjunction of (1) and (2)): Why doesn't Gettier's principle (PDJ) hold in the evidential situation he has described? You multiply your risks of being wrong when you believe a conjunction. [… T]he most elementary theory of probability indicates that Smith's prospects of being right on both (1) and (2), namely, of being right on (3), are bound to be less favorable than his prospects of being right on either (1) or (2). In fact, Smith's chances of being right on (3) might not come up to the minimum standard of justification which (1) and (2) barely satisfy, and Smith would be unjustified in accepting (3). ( Thalberg 1969 , p. 798) In other uses [ edit ] Epistemic closure in U.S. political discussion [ edit ] The term "epistemic closure" has been used in an unrelated sense in American political debate to refer to the claim that political belief systems can be closed systems of deduction, unaffected by empirical evidence .

[ 8 ] This use of the term was popularized by libertarian blogger and commentator Julian Sanchez in 2010 as an extreme form of confirmation bias .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Epistemic logic Doxastic logic Here is one hand#Objections and replies – Epistemological argument by George Edward Moore References [ edit ] ^ a b c Luper, Steven (31 December 2001).

"Epistemic Closure" .

The Epistemic Closure Principle .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

^ Philosophical explanations ,  By Robert Nozick (Harvard 1981), page 204 ^ Brady, Michael; Pritchard, Duncan (2005). "Epistemological Contextualism: Problems and Prospects".

The Philosophical Quarterly .

55 (219): 161– 171.

doi : 10.1111/j.0031-8094.2005.00393.x .

^ "Epistemic Closure" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Sosa, Ernest (1999-10-01). "How to Defeat Opposition to Moore".

Noûs .

33 : 141– 153.

doi : 10.1111/0029-4624.33.s13.7 .

ISSN 1468-0068 .

^ Thalberg Jr., Irving (November 1969). "In Defense of Justified True Belief".

Journal of Philosophy .

66 (22): 794– 803.

doi : 10.2307/2024370 .

JSTOR 2024370 .

^ Gettier, Edmund (June 1963).

"Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?" (PDF) .

Analysis .

23 (6): 121– 3.

doi : 10.1093/analys/23.6.121 .

JSTOR 3326922 .

^ a b Patricia Cohen (27 April 2010).

" 'Epistemic Closure'? Those are Fighting Words" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 28 November 2012 .

^ Sanchez, Julian (26 March 2010).

"Frum, Cocktail Parties, and the Threat of Doubt" .

External links [ edit ] Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"The Epistemic Closure Principle" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Epistemic closure at the Indiana Philosophy Ontology Project "Epistemic closure" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Epistemic closure at PhilPapers v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism v t e Epistemology Epistemologists William Alston Aquinas Robert Audi Augustine A. J. Ayer George Berkeley Laurence BonJour Gilles Deleuze Keith DeRose René Descartes John Dewey Fred Dretske Edmund Gettier Alvin Goldman Nelson Goodman Paul Grice Anil Gupta Susan Haack David Hume Immanuel Kant Søren Kierkegaard Peter Klein Saul Kripke Hilary Kornblith David Lewis John Locke G. E. Moore John McDowell Robert Nozick Alvin Plantinga Plato Duncan Pritchard James Pryor Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine Thomas Reid Bertrand Russell Gilbert Ryle Wilfrid Sellars Susanna Siegel Ernest Sosa P. F. Strawson Baruch Spinoza Timothy Williamson Ludwig Wittgenstein Nicholas Wolterstorff Vienna Circle more...

Theories Coherentism Constructivism Contextualism Empiricism Evolutionary epistemology Fallibilism Feminist epistemology Fideism Foundationalism Holism Infinitism Innatism Naïve realism Naturalized epistemology Phenomenalism Positivism Rationalism Reductionism Reliabilism Representational realism Skepticism Transcendental idealism Concepts A priori knowledge A posteriori knowledge Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction Belief Certainty Common sense Descriptive knowledge Exploratory thought Epistemic injustice Epistemic virtue Gettier problem Induction Internalism and externalism Justification Knowledge Meta Objectivity Privileged access Problem of induction Problem of other minds Perception Procedural knowledge Proposition Regress argument Simplicity Truth Uncertainty Related articles Faith and rationality Formal epistemology Metaepistemology Philosophy of perception Philosophy of science Social epistemology Virtue epistemology Category Outline Portal WikiProject Stubs Discussion Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Epistemic_closure&oldid=1299976988 " Categories : Concepts in epistemology Belief Epistemic logic Philosophy of Robert Nozick Concepts in logic Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 14:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Epistemic closure 3 languages Add topic

