Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Goals 2 Origins 3 Relationship to other conservation methods Toggle Relationship to other conservation methods subsection 3.1 Sustainable development 3.2 Smart growth 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Preservation development 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Model of real-estate development Preservation development is a model of real-estate development that addresses farmland preservation . It shares many attributes with conservation development , with the addition of strategies for maintaining and operating productive agriculture and silviculture , often in perpetuity . A preservation development is a planned community that allows limited, carefully designed development (typically housing) on a working farm, while placing the majority of productive land under a system of easements and community governance to ensure a continuity of farming and environmental stewardship .

Goals [ edit ] Preservation development is not a formal planning approach, but an example of goal-oriented environmental planning . Particular characteristics of the land, local market and local agricultural norms influence the tools to be deployed in each case. The successful project should, however, aim to meet several goals: [ 1 ] 80% or more of the target parcel's agricultural productivity should be retained.

Development should take a form that does not interfere with productive land uses.

Legal constructions should make land protections permanent, but flexible.

Community Governance and management structures should be created to ensure stewardship of the community.

The community should advance public education on the value of rural lands.

Origins [ edit ] Preservation development was developed in the 1980s in response to rapid farmland loss due to urban sprawl around Boston. Robert Baldwin, Sr. devised the system of interlocking "farmbelt" and "greenbelt" easements.

[ 2 ] The system, and associated design and community governance tools, was refined through the 1990s on projects around New England. In 2005, this model was expanded into the Southeast, beginning with the 2,300 acre (931 ha) Bundoran Farm, in Charlottesville, Virginia .

Relationship to other conservation methods [ edit ] In the United States, most land is conserved by a combination of charitable giving and tax incentives. Parcels with ecological, historic or scenic value may be voluntarily placed under conservation easement , which prohibits or significantly limits future development of the land. The landowner may be directly compensated for the easement (Purchase of Development Rights), or the future-development rights may be considered a donation, subject to tax credits offsetting income taxes due. In some US states, the tax credits may be sold to generate income from the transaction. In a few localities, future-development rights may be sold or traded ( Transferable development rights ), and redeployed in urbanizing areas.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Preservation development is a market-based approach, and does not rely on taxpayer funding or charitable donation. The landowner sells the land. Development and land protections are enacted simultaneously, and the resulting subdivided parcels are sold to individuals.

[ 5 ] The value of each parcel is increased by adjacency and access to the conserved land, which allows development density significantly below that allowed by zoning .

[ 6 ] Sustainable development [ edit ] Preservation development is a type of sustainable development wherein the natural carrying capacity of land is considered not only in terms of development but also in agricultural capacity and ecological service. Rather than maximizing development, developers seek a Triple Bottom Line (TBL) balance between social, environmental and economic factors.

[ 7 ] Smart growth [ edit ] New Urbanism and smart growth promote density, interconnectivity and access to transit as desirable goals of urban planning. Both approaches privilege development in infill locations and brownfields. Preservation Development's focus on greenfield sites with active agriculture and forestry places has placed it outside the mainstream of either movement.

Since 2001, however, New Urbanist planners Duany / Plater-Zyberk have promoted a "transect" zoning approach, recognizing the need to extend Smart Growth approaches to highly urbanized and rural locations. These new codes address development pressure in exurban locations, as does Preservation Development. In this context, Preservation Development is an appropriate settlement pattern for the two or three lowest-density landscape types on the transect, and insufficiently dense for the other categories.

Some communities with zoning influenced by tenets of Smart Growth have embraced preservation development as an additional tool for managing exurban growth.

References [ edit ] ^ Ned Carter, "Build It (Farm It!) and They Will Come", The Piedmont Virginian , Winter 2010, pp. 12-13.

^ Richard Peiser, "Saving the Family Farm", Urban Land December 1996.

^ Nelson, Arthur C.; Pruetz, Rick; Woodruff, Doug (2011).

The TDR Handbook: Designing and Implementing Transfer of Development Rights Programs . Washington, D.C.: Island Press.

ISBN 9781610911597 .

^ "Transfer of Development Rights; Fact Sheet" (PDF) . Washington, D.C.: American Farmland Trust. April 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2011-01-16.

^ For Sale: Condo with Chicken Coop , Sara Schaeffer Munoz, in The Wall Street Journal, May 17, 2007.

^ Organic Farms as Subdivision Amenities , Alec Appelbaum in The New York Times , July 1, 2009.

^ Nell Porter Brown, "Keeping it Green", Harvard Magazine Nov/Dec 2008, v. 111-2, p. 24.

External links [ edit ] Bundoran Farm Congress for New Urbanism v t e Urban planning History Theories Index Outline General Urban area City Metropolitan area Suburb Land use Planning Planning and zoning commission Growth management World Urbanism Day Labor market area Major branches General Land-use planning Comprehensive planning (US) History of urban planning Spatial planning (Eur) Redevelopment Urban design Urban green space Urbanism Rural Conservation development Preservation development Rural housing Village design statement (UK) Regional planning Regional Planning Association of America Environmental planning Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Recreation resource planning Sustainable development Transportation planning Transportation forecasting Trip distribution Rational planning model Transit-oriented development Professional transportation planner Urban freight distribution Economic development Community economic development Concepts/ theories Movements Athens Charter Car-free movement City Beautiful movement Dark-sky movement Garden city movement Indigenous planning NIMBY New Urbanism Settlement movement Smart growth Structuralism Transition towns YIMBY Theories Collaborative planning Context theory Ekistics Intelligent urbanism Livable streets Market urbanism Radical planning Urban renewal Cities by type Company town / Monotown Commuter town Ghost town Global city Mining community Pit village Man camp Logging camp Model village Planned community (New town) Intentional community Arcology Urban village Boomtown Concepts Affordable housing Cityscape Cluster development Complete Communities Conservation community Creative city Eminent domain (US) Filtering (housing) Gentrification / Brusselization Infill Healthy cities / Healthy community design LEED-ND Leapfrog development Mixed-use development Permeability Placemaking Planning gain Planning Permission Rural flight Temporary use Third place Tract housing Transferable development rights Urban decay Urban growth boundary Urban sprawl / Peri-urbanisation Urban vitality Urbanization Verticalization / High-rise urbanism Zoning People Theorists/ practitioners Edward Bassett Andrés Duany Clarence Perry Clarence Stein Colin Buchanan Daniel Burnham Donald Appleyard Ebenezer Howard Edmund Bacon Guy Benveniste Ian McHarg James Rouse Konstantinos Doxiadis Kevin A. Lynch Le Corbusier Loretta Lees Peter Calthorpe Patrick Geddes Raymond Unwin Thomas Adams List of urban theorists List of urban planners Critics Elizabeth Farrelly Jane Jacobs James Howard Kunstler Lewis Mumford Randal O'Toole Training Planning education Planning Accreditation Board Real estate education Professional organizations Places Countries Australia China Czech Republic Russia Serbia Singapore United Kingdom Taiwan Cities Barcelona Shanghai Sydney Other Africa Communist countries Nazi Germany Ancient Egypt Related fields Architecture Civil engineering Development economics Environmental social science Geography Land development Landscape architecture Marine spatial planning Public health Public policy Real estate development Social sciences Urban ecology Urban economics Cities portal Category List of planned cities List of planning journals Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Preservation_development&oldid=1111032298 " Category : Sustainable agriculture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 September 2022, at 23:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Preservation development 1 language Add topic

