Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and clerical career Toggle Life and clerical career subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Priesthood 1.3 Auxiliary Bishop of Los Angeles 1.4 Bishop of Winona–Rochester 1.5 White House Religious Liberty Commission 2 Media career Toggle Media career subsection 2.1 Internet 2.2 Videos 2.3 Television 2.4 Radio/podcast 3 Works Toggle Works subsection 3.1 Books 3.2 DVDs 4 Distinctions Toggle Distinctions subsection 4.1 Orders 4.2 Honorary academic awards 4.3 Awards 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Robert Barron 19 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español Français Gaeilge Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Slovenčina Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Prelate of the Catholic Church, author, scholar and Catholic evangelist For other people named Robert Barron, see Robert Barron (disambiguation) .

The Most Reverend Robert Barron Bishop of Winona–Rochester Barron in 2023 Church Catholic Church Diocese Winona–Rochester Appointed June 2, 2022 Installed July 29, 2022 Predecessor John M. Quinn Previous post(s) Auxiliary Bishop of Los Angeles and Titular Bishop of Macriana in Mauretania (2015–2022) [ 1 ] President–Rector of University of St. Mary of the Lake/Mundelein Seminary (2012–15) Orders Ordination May 24, 1986 by Joseph Bernardin Consecration September 8, 2015 by José Horacio Gómez , Blase J. Cupich , and Joseph Martin Sartoris Personal details Born Robert Emmet Barron ( 1959-11-19 ) November 19, 1959 (age 65) Chicago, Illinois, U.S.

Alma mater Catholic University of America ( BA , MA ) University of St. Mary of the Lake ( STL ) Institut Catholique de Paris ( STD ) Motto Non nisi te Domine [ 2 ] (English: Nothing but you, Lord) Coat of arms Awards List of awards Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Thomism Nouvelle theologie Virtue ethics [ 3 ] Main interests Systematic theology Ethics Styles of Robert Emmet Barron Reference style His Excellency The Most Reverend Spoken style Your Excellency Religious style Bishop Ordination history of Robert Barron History Priestly ordination Ordained by Joseph Bernardin Date May 24, 1986 Place Holy Name Cathedral , Chicago Episcopal consecration Principal consecrator José Horacio Gómez Co-consecrators Blase J. Cupich , Joseph M. Sartoris Date September 8, 2015 Place Cathedral of Our Lady of the Angels , Los Angeles Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Robert Emmet Barron (born November 19, 1959) is an American prelate of the Catholic Church who has served as bishop of the Diocese of Winona–Rochester since 2022.

[ 11 ] He is the founder of the Catholic ministerial organization Word on Fire , and was the host of Catholicism , a documentary TV series about Catholicism that aired on PBS . He served as rector at Mundelein Seminary from 2012 to 2015 and as auxiliary bishop for the Archdiocese of Los Angeles from 2015 to 2022.

Barron has published books, essays, and articles on theology and spirituality . He is a religion correspondent for NBC and has also appeared on Fox News , CNN , and EWTN . He has been informally called the "bishop of social media" and the "bishop of the Internet".

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] As of November 2022 [update] , Barron's regular YouTube videos have been viewed over 151 million times; he has over 3 million followers on Facebook, 399,000 on Instagram , and 254,000 on Twitter .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In addition, he has been invited to speak about religion at the headquarters of Amazon , Facebook , and Google . He has keynoted several conferences and events over the world, including the 2016 World Youth Day and the 2015 World Meeting of Families .

Barron's 2016 film series, Catholicism: The Pivotal Players , [ 16 ] was syndicated for national television in the United States.

Life and clerical career [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Robert Barron was born on November 19, 1959, in Chicago. He is of Irish descent . He spent his childhood first in Detroit, then in the Chicago suburb of Western Springs . His mother was a homemaker, and his father, who died in 1987, was a national sales manager for John Sexton & Company , a national food distributor.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] He has a sister, Pat Callahan, a teacher at Lyons Township High School in the Chicago western suburbs, and a brother, John Barron, who was the Sun-Times Media Group 's publisher.

[ 19 ] Barron started reading the works of Thomas Aquinas when he was a freshman at Fenwick High School , a private Dominican high school.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] He transferred to Benet Academy , a private Benedictine high school, where he graduated in 1977.

[ 22 ] Barron attended the University of Notre Dame in South Bend, Indiana, for a year before transferring to Mundelein Seminary in Mundelein, Illinois. One year later, he was accepted as a Basselin Scholar at the School of Theology of the Catholic University of America in Washington, D.C., where he earned a Bachelor of Philosophy degree in 1981 and a Master of Philosophy degree in 1982; his master's thesis was on the political philosophy of Karl Marx . Barron earned a Licentiate of Sacred Theology from Mundelein Seminary in 1986.

[ 23 ] Priesthood [ edit ] Barron was ordained to the priesthood for the Archdiocese of Chicago on May 24, 1986, by Cardinal Joseph Bernardin .

[ 24 ] After serving as an associate pastor of St. Paul of the Cross Catholic Parish in Park Ridge, Illinois , from 1986 to 1989, he was sent to France and earned a Doctor of Sacred Theology at the Institut Catholique de Paris in 1992. His dissertation was titled "Creation as Discipleship: A Study of the De potentia of Thomas Aquinas in Light of the Dogmatik of Paul Tillich".

[ 25 ] In addition to his native English, Barron is fluent in French, Spanish, German, and Latin .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] He is a proponent of Hans Urs von Balthasar 's " dare we hope " theology, declaring there is "objective ground" for a "hope that all men may be saved".

[ 28 ] From 1992 until 2015, Barron was a professor of systematic theology at University of St. Mary of the Lake, where he was also named the inaugural Francis Cardinal George Professor of Faith and Culture in 2008.

[ 29 ] He also served as president-rector from 2012 to 2015.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Barron lectured extensively in the United States and internationally, including the Pontifical North American College and the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas in Rome. In 2000, Barron launched Word on Fire Catholic Ministries, a non-profit organization, that supports his evangelistic endeavors.

Word on Fire programs, featuring Barron, have been broadcast regularly on WGN America , EWTN , Telecare , Relevant Radio and the Word on Fire YouTube channel. Barron's Word on Fire website offers daily blogs, articles, commentaries and over ten years of weekly sermon podcasts.

[ citation needed ] In 2002, Barron was a visiting professor at the University of Notre Dame [ 32 ] and at the Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas in 2007. He was also twice scholar-in-residence at the Pontifical North American College, in 2007 and 2010.

[ 33 ] Auxiliary Bishop of Los Angeles [ edit ] Coat of arms as Auxiliary Bishop of Los Angeles On July 21, 2015, Pope Francis appointed Barron an auxiliary bishop in the Archdiocese of Los Angeles and titular bishop of Macriana in Mauritania.

[ 1 ] Archbishop José Horacio Gómez noted that Barron's media talent and rapport with young people, as well as his outreach to other faiths would be good for the archdiocese.

[ 34 ] Archbishop Cupich , of Chicago, said Barron would be of great benefit to the LA archdiocese.

[ 35 ] On September 8, 2015, Barron received his episcopal consecration at the Cathedral of Our Lady of the Angels from Archbishop José H. Gomez.

[ 36 ] That same month, Barron started a weekly podcast called The Word on Fire Show .

[ citation needed ] Bishop of Winona–Rochester [ edit ] Bishop Barron in Minnesota in 2023 On June 2, 2022, Pope Francis appointed Barron as the ninth bishop of the Diocese of Winona-Rochester , in southern Minnesota .

[ 37 ] His installation there took place on July 29, 2022, at the Co-Cathedral of St. John the Evangelist in Rochester, Minnesota .

[ 38 ] White House Religious Liberty Commission [ edit ] On May 1, 2025, it was announced the Barron would serve on the Trump Administration's newly created Religious Liberty Commission. The commission is tasked with delivering a report on the state of religious liberty in the US. The same day, other members of the panel were announced, including clerics like Cardinal Timothy Dolan .

[ 39 ] Media career [ edit ] Barron lectures extensively in the United States and internationally and he has published numerous books, essays, and DVD programs. He is a frequent commentator for The Chicago Tribune , NBC Nightly News , Fox News Channel , Our Sunday Visitor , the Catholic Herald (London, UK) and The Catholic New World .

[ citation needed ] Internet [ edit ] Barron's website hosts daily blog posts, weekly articles and video commentaries, and an audio archive of over 500 homilies. Barron has the following social media statistics: 3.1 million Facebook followers [ 40 ] 1.86 million YouTube subscribers [ 41 ] 530,000+ Instagram followers [ 42 ] 324,000+ X (formerly Twitter) followers [ 43 ] Videos [ edit ] Barron has produced over 1,000 online video commentaries, which have attracted over 84 million views. His weekly productions include Sunday homilies and brief theological reviews of contemporary culture, including movies, books, music, and current events.

[ citation needed ] Television [ edit ] Barron's videos are aired on CatholicTV , EWTN , Telecare , NET TV, and Salt + Light Television . He created a 10-part documentary, Catholicism , filmed in 16 countries, which aired on public television in the United States beginning in 2011. A sequel was released in September 2013, titled Catholicism: The New Evangelization .

In October 2010, Barron premiered a half-hour television show, Word on Fire with Father Barron , on WGN America on Sundays.

[ 44 ] Barron is the first priest since Archbishop Fulton Sheen in the 1950s to have a regular national program on a commercial television network.

Radio/podcast [ edit ] Barron produces a weekly podcast on faith and culture titled The Word on Fire Show , which has been downloaded over 10 million times. His weekly homilies and podcasts air on radio stations around the United States.

Barron has appeared on other podcasts, including those of Jordan Peterson , [ 45 ] Lex Fridman , [ 46 ] Ben Shapiro , [ 47 ] and Tucker Carlson.

[ 48 ] Works [ edit ] Books [ edit ] A Study of the De potentia of Thomas Aquinas in Light of the Dogmatik of Paul Tillich (1993) Thomas Aquinas: Spiritual Master (1996) And Now I See: A Theology of Transformation (1998) Heaven in Stone and Glass (2000) The Strangest Way: Walking the Christian Path (2002) Bridging the Great Divide: Musings of a Post-Liberal, Post-Conservative, Evangelical Catholic (2004) The Priority of Christ: Toward a Post-Liberal Catholicism (2007) Word on Fire: Proclaiming the Power of Christ (2008) Eucharist (2008) Catholicism: A Journey to the Heart of the Faith (2011) New King for a New Kingdom (2012) The New Evangelization and the New Media (2014) Seeds of the Word: Finding God in the Culture (2015) 2 Samuel . Brazos Theological Commentary on the Bible (2015) Exploring Catholic Theology: Essays on God, Liturgy, and Evangelization (2015) El Misterio de Dios - Guia de Studio (The Mystery of God Study Guide) (by Robert Barron and Trent Horn ) (2015) Vibrant Paradoxes: The Both/And of Catholicism (2016) To Light a Fire on the Earth: Proclaiming the Gospel in a Secular Age (2017) [ 49 ] Arguing Religion: A Bishop Speaks at Facebook and Google (2018) [ 50 ] Letter to a Suffering Church: A Bishop Speaks on the Sexual Abuse Crisis (2019) [ 51 ] Centered: The Spirituality of Word on Fire (2020) The Pivotal Players: 12 Heroes Who Shaped the Church and Changed the World (2020) Renewing Our Hope: Essays for the New Evangelization (2020) The Rosary with Bishop Robert Barron (2021) Light from Light: A Theological Reflection on the Nicene Creed (2021) Proclaiming the Power of Christ: Classic Sermons (2021) Redeeming the Time: Gospel Perspectives on the Challenges of the Hour (2022) The Great Story of Israel: Election, Freedom, Holiness (2022) This is My Body: A Call to Eucharistic Revival (2023) Come Lord Jesus: Timeless Homilies for Advent and Christmas (2023) 2023 Advent Gospel Reflections (2023) 2024 Lenten Gospel Reflections (2024) An Introduction to Prayer (2024) 2025 Lenten Gospel Reflections (2025) DVDs [ edit ] Untold Blessings The Three Paths of Holiness (2005) Conversion (2006) Faith Clips (2007) Seven Deadly Sins, Seven Lively Virtues (2007) Eucharist (2009) Catholicism (2011) Catholicism: The New Evangelization (2013) Priest, Prophet, King (2014) The Mystery of God (2015) Catholicism: The Pivotal Players Volume I (2016) David the King (2017) The Mass (2018) Catholicism: The Pivotal Players St. Augustine & St. Benedict (2018) Catholicism: The Pivotal Players Fulton Sheen & Flannery O'Connor (2019) The Sacraments (2020) The Creed (2021) Distinctions [ edit ] Orders [ edit ] Holy See : Order of the Holy Sepulchre [ 52 ] Honorary academic awards [ edit ] 2025: Doctor of Public Service, Honoris Causa Catholic University of America 2023: Doctor of Public Service, Honoris Causa Hillsdale College 2022: Doctor of Humane Letters, Honoris Causa Benedictine College 2019: Doctor of Theology, Honoris Causa Pontifical University of St. Thomas Aquinas 2018: Doctor of Humane Letters, Honoris Causa Assumption College 2017: Doctor of Divinity, Honoris Causa Saint Anselm College 2016: Doctor of Sacred Theology, Honoris Causa Dominican House of Studies 2013: Doctor of Religious Education, Honoris Causa Providence College 2012: Doctor of Humanities, Honoris Causa Lewis University Awards [ edit ] 2025: Josef-Pieper-Preis (Germany) [ 53 ] 2015: Fisher's Net Award for Best Overall and for Best Social Media Presence [ 54 ] 2012: Relevant Radio Christ Brings Hope Award 2003: Catholic Press Association Book Award: The Strangest Way: Walking the Christian Path 1998: Catholic Press Association Journalism Award: Best Article - Clergy, Religious, "The Uncanny God" 1997: Catholic Press Association Book Award: Thomas Aquinas: Spiritual Master 1995: Catholic Press Association Journalism Award: Best Article - Professional and Special Interest, "Priest as Bearer of the Mystery" See also [ edit ] Catholic Church hierarchy Catholic Church in the United States Historical list of the Catholic bishops of the United States List of Catholic bishops of the United States Lists of patriarchs, archbishops, and bishops References [ edit ] ^ a b "Catholic Hierarchy - Macriana in Mauretania" .

^ This was, according to a legend, the answer of Saint Thomas Aquinas when asked by the Lord what reward he wished for his commendable theological teaching, cf.

Bene scripsisti de me .

^ a b Barron, Robert (June 21, 2018).

"Bishop Barron on Pope Francis and Virtue Ethics" .

YouTube . Retrieved December 27, 2019 .

^ Barron, Robert (October 16, 2019).

"Bishop Barron at the Grave of C.S. Lewis" .

YouTube . Retrieved December 27, 2019 .

^ Barron, Robert (September 24, 2016).

"Word on Fire 035: Understanding Dante's "Divine Comedy" " .

Spotify . Retrieved December 27, 2019 .

^ Barron, Robert (October 16, 2019).

"Bishop Barron at the Grave of J.R.R. Tolkien" .

YouTube . Retrieved December 27, 2019 .

^ Barron, Robert (June 11, 2019).

"Bishop Barron on Pope Francis, Tradition, and John Henry Newman" .

YouTube . Retrieved December 27, 2019 .

^ Barron, Robert (March 9, 2020).

"Gnosticism, the Enduring Heresy" .

YouTube . Retrieved June 20, 2022 .

^ Barron, Robert (January 21, 2016).

"Bishop Barron on René Girard" .

YouTube . Retrieved February 3, 2020 .

^ Barron, Robert (October 3, 2019).

"Bishop Barron on His Theological Path" .

YouTube . Retrieved December 27, 2019 .

^ "Bishop Barron to lead Diocese of Winona-Rochester" .

La Crosse Tribune . June 2, 2022.

^ Mastrangelo, Dominick (January 22, 2019).

" 'Bishop of the Internet': Backlash against Covington Catholic students 'literally, Satanic' " .

Washington Examiner . Retrieved December 27, 2019 .

^ Hennessey, Matthew (November 29, 2018).

"Opinion | The Bishop of Catholic Social Media" .

Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 0099-9660 . Retrieved August 25, 2022 .

^ "Bishop Robert Barron (@bishopbarron) • Instagram photos and videos" .

^ " @bishopbarron "  on Twitter ^ Catholicism: The Pivotal Players ^ Bertagnoli, Lisa (September 27, 2010).

"Priest's pulpit: blogs, YouTube" .

Crain's Chicago Business . Retrieved December 27, 2019 .

^ "Obituary: John C. Barron" .

Chicago Tribune . May 7, 1987 . Retrieved December 27, 2019 .

^ "John Barron named Sun-Times Media Group Publisher" .

The Huffington Post . November 20, 2009. Archived from the original on November 21, 2009 . Retrieved December 27, 2019 .

^ Mixa, Robert (July 21, 2015).

"Fr. Robert Barron named Auxiliary Bishop of Los Angeles" .

University of Saint Mary of the Lake . Archived from the original on June 25, 2022 . Retrieved December 27, 2019 .

^ Osuna, Traci (June 7, 2010).

"Age Old Values Spread Through Modern Technology: An Interview with Father Robert Barron" .

Zenit News Agency . Retrieved December 27, 2019 .

^ "Father Robert Barron '77 Appointed Auxiliary Bishop of Los Angeles" .

Benet Academy . Archived from the original on November 20, 2023 . Retrieved December 27, 2019 .

^ "Mundelein centennial: The rectors" .

Chicago Catholic . November 17, 2021 . Retrieved June 9, 2025 .

^ "Bishop Robert Emmet Barron [Catholic-Hierarchy]" .

www.catholic-hierarchy.org . Retrieved June 10, 2024 .

^ Barron, Robert (1993).

A study of the de potentia of Thomas Aquinas in light of the Dogmatik of Paul Tillich: creation as discipleship . Lewiston, NY: Mellen.

ISBN 978-0-7734-2238-4 .

^ "Father Barron, Catholic Evangelist, named auxiliary bishop of Los Angeles" . July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on June 10, 2024 . Retrieved June 10, 2024 .

^ "LA says farewell as Bishop Barron takes up his new post in Minnesota" . August 1, 2022 . Retrieved June 10, 2024 .

^ " "Dare We Hope?" FAQ page" .

Word on Fire .

^ Murphy, Francesca Aran (September 24, 2015).

The Oxford Handbook of Christology . OUP Oxford. p. 11.

ISBN 978-0-19-106167-7 .

^ "Father Robert Barron Named Rector of Mundelein Seminary" .

NCR . May 15, 2012 . Retrieved May 2, 2025 .

^ "Bishop-elect Barron says goodbye to community" .

Chicago Catholic . Retrieved May 2, 2025 .

^ "Father Robert Barron - Curriculum Vitae" .

St.Paul Center for Biblical Theology . October 4, 2008. Archived from the original on January 31, 2016.

^ "Bishop Robert E. Barron to Deliver Commencement Address and Receive Award at Thomas Aquinas College" .

Thomas Aquinas College . Retrieved May 2, 2025 .

^ Long-García, J. D. (July 22, 2015).

"The story behind the new LA bishops' pectoral crosses" .

Catholic News Agency . Retrieved December 27, 2019 .

^ "Archbishop Cupich Congratulates Bishop-elect Robert Barron on his Appointment to the Archdiocese of Los Angeles" (Press release).

Archdiocese of Chicago . July 21, 2015. Archived from the original on July 24, 2015.

^ Long-García, J. D. (September 9, 2015).

"Three new auxiliary bishops ordained for the Archdiocese of Los Angeles" .

Angelus News . Archived from the original on September 24, 2015 . Retrieved September 9, 2015 .

^ "Pope Francis appoints Bishop Barron to lead Minnesota diocese" .

National Catholic Register . June 2, 2022 . Retrieved June 2, 2022 .

^ Heipel, Edie (July 29, 2022).

"Word on Fire's Robert Barron installed as bishop of Rochester, Minnesota" .

Catholic News Agency . Retrieved May 3, 2025 .

^ Arnold, Tyler.

"Cardinal Dolan, Bishop Barron to serve on Trump's religious liberty commission" .

Catholic News Agency . Retrieved May 2, 2025 .

^ "Bishop Robert Barron" .

Facebook . Retrieved August 1, 2022 .

^ Barron, Robert.

"Bishop Robert Barron" .

YouTube . Retrieved July 31, 2024 .

^ "Bishop Robert Barron (@bishopbarron) • Instagram photos and videos" .

www.instagram.com . Retrieved August 1, 2022 .

^ "Bishop Robert Barron (@BishopBarron)" .

Twitter . Retrieved August 1, 2022 .

^ "Catholic Priest Father Robert Barron set to Launch Nationwide Television Program in October" .

PRWeb . September 13, 2010. Archived from the original on September 20, 2010 . Retrieved December 27, 2019 .

^ "Christianity and the Modern World | Bishop Barron - Jordan B Peterson Podcast S4 (2022): E15" .

YouTube . April 19, 2021.

^ "Bishop Robert Barron: Christianity and the Catholic Church | Lex Fridman Podcast #304" .

YouTube . July 20, 2022.

^ "Bishop Robert Barron | the Ben Shapiro Show Sunday Special Ep. 31" .

YouTube . December 16, 2018.

^ "Bishop Barron on the New Pope, the Foolishness of Atheism, and Why Young Men Are Turning to Christ" .

tuckercarlson.com . Retrieved June 2, 2025 .

^ Barron, Robert.

" "To Light a Fire on the Earth" by Bishop Robert Barron with John Allen, Jr" .

bishopbarronbooks.com . Retrieved December 27, 2019 .

^ Barron, Robert.

"New Book! "Arguing Religion: A Bishop Speaks at Facebook and Google" " .

bishopbarronbooks.com . Retrieved May 13, 2019 .

^ Barron, Robert.

"Letter to a Suffering Church: A Bishop Speaks on the Sexual Abuse Crisis" .

order.sufferingchurchbook.com . Retrieved May 13, 2019 .

^ "The Installation of Bishop Robert Barron" . Retrieved November 19, 2022 .

^ "Josef-Pieper-Preis in Münster für umstrittenen US-Bischof" .

deutschlandfunkkultur.de , 28 July 2025 (in German). Retrieved 28 July 2025.

^ "Award Winners" .

Fisher's Net Awards . December 8, 2015 . Retrieved September 12, 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Roman Catholic Diocese of Winona–Rochester official website Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Los Angeles official website Barron's YouTube channel Quotations related to Robert Barron at Wikiquote Bishop Barron on Twitter On Bishop Barron on German ad-fontes.org Catholic Church titles Preceded by John M. Quinn Bishop of Winona-Rochester July 29, 2022–present Incumbent Preceded by Laurent Marie Bernard Dognin — TITULAR — Bishop of Macriana in Mauretania September 8, 2015–July 29, 2022 Academic offices Preceded by Dennis J. Lyle President-Rector of University of Saint Mary of the Lake Mundelein Seminary 2012–2015 Succeeded by John Kartje Portals : Biography Catholicism Minnesota v t e Roman Catholic Diocese of Winona-Rochester Bishops Ordinaries Joseph Bernard Cotter Patrick Richard Heffron Francis Martin Kelly Edward Aloysius Fitzgerald Loras Joseph Watters John George Vlazny Bernard Joseph Harrington John M. Quinn Robert Barron Auxiliaries Leo Binz George Henry Speltz Churches Cathedrals Cathedral of the Sacred Heart, Winona St. John the Evangelist, Rochester Parishes Basilica of Saint Stanislaus Kostka, Winona Church of St. Augustine, Austin Church of St. Adrian, Adrian Church of the Sacred Heart, Heron Lake Church of the Holy Trinity, Rollingstone Church of St. Kilian, Wilmont Township Education Higher education Immaculate Heart of Mary Seminary Saint Mary's University of Minnesota High schools Cotter High School, Winona Lourdes High School, Rochester Loyola Catholic School, Mankato Pacelli High School, Austin Other Austin Area Catholic Schools Priests Paul Breza Robert Brom Jan Romuald Byzewski Jozef Cieminski Frederick William Freking Michael Joseph Hoeppner Antoni Klawiter Jakub W.J. Pacholski John Hubert Peschges Catholicism portal v t e Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Los Angeles v t e Bishops of the Archdiocese of Los Angeles Bishop of Two Californias Francisco García Diego y Moreno Bishop of Monterey Joseph Sadoc Alemany Bishops of Monterey–Los Angeles Thaddeus Amat y Brusi Francisco Mora y Borrell George Thomas Montgomery Thomas James Conaty John Joseph Cantwell Bishop of Los Angeles–San Diego John Joseph Cantwell Archbishops of Los Angeles John Joseph Cantwell James Francis Cardinal McIntyre Timothy Cardinal Manning Roger Cardinal Mahony José Horacio Gómez Auxiliary bishops, current Alejandro Dumbrigue Aclan Marc Vincent Trudeau Albert Bahhuth Matthew Elshoff Brian Nunes Slawomir Szkredka Auxiliary bishops, former Juan Alfredo Arzube Alden John Bell Stephen Blaire Robert Barron Joseph Brennan Thomas John Curry Edward W. Clark Joseph Patrick Dougherty Carl Anthony Fisher William Robert Johnson William Levada Joseph Thomas McGucken Donald William Montrose Manuel Duran Moreno David O'Connell Armando Xavier Ochoa Sylvester Donovan Ryan Alexander Salazar Joseph Martin Sartoris Thaddeus Anthony Shubsda Oscar Azarcon Solis John J. Ward Gerald Eugene Wilkerson Gabino Zavala George Patrick Ziemann Priests who became bishops Michael Patrick Driscoll Justin Rigali Catholicism portal v t e Churches in the Archdiocese of Los Angeles Archdiocese Cathedral Cathedral of Our Lady of the Angels Cathedral, former Cathedral of Saint Vibiana Our Lady of the Angels Pastoral Region Deanery 13 (Westside) Corpus Christi Catholic Church, Pacific Palisades St. Monica Catholic Church, Santa Monica St. Augustine Catholic Church, Culver City St. Martin of Tours Catholic Church, Brentwood St Paul the Apostle Church, Westwood St. Timothy Catholic Church, Los Angeles Church of the Good Shepherd, Beverly Hills St. Ambrose Church, West Hollywood Saint Victor Catholic Church, West Hollywood Deanery 14 (Central LA/Hollywood) Blessed Sacrament Catholic Church, Hollywood Cathedral Chapel, Los Angeles Christ the King Catholic Church, Los Angeles St. Basil Catholic Church, Wilshire St. Brendan Catholic Church, Los Angeles Deanery 15 (Downtown/South) Cathedral of Our Lady of the Angels La Iglesia de Nuestra Señora la Reina de los Ángeles Precious Blood Catholic Church St. Cecilia Catholic Church St. Patrick Catholic Church St. Thomas the Apostle Catholic Church St. Vincent de Paul Church Deanery 16 (South LA/Inglewood) St. John Chrysostom Church, Inglewood St. Odilia Church, Los Angeles Ascension Catholic Church, Los Angeles Spanish mission La Iglesia de Nuestra Señora la Reina de los Ángeles (Note: This is not a Spanish mission, but rather, a parish church.) San Fernando Pastoral Region Deanery 5 (West San Fernando Valley) Cathedral of St. Mary Byzantine Catholic Church, Sherman Oaks Our Lady of Grace, Encino Our Lady of Lourdes Church, Northridge Our Lady of the Valley, Canoga Park St. Bernardine of Siena Church, Woodland Hills St. Bridget of Sweden Catholic Church, Van Nuys St. Catherine of Siena Church, Reseda St. Cyril of Jerusalem Church and School, Encino St. Euphrasia, Granada Hills St. Francis De Sales Catholic Church, Sherman Oaks St. John Eudes Church, Chatsworth St. John the Baptist de la Salle Church, Granada Hills St. Joseph the Worker Church, Winnetka St. Mel, Woodland Hills Deanery 6 (Crescenta Valley, Glendale and Eagle Rock) Holy Family Catholic Church, Glendale Incarnation Catholic Church and School, Glendale Deanery 7 (Central San Fernando Valley and Burbank) Guardian Angel Church, Pacoima Jesus Sacred Heart Syriac Catholic Church, North Hollywood Mary Immaculate Catholic Church, Pacoima Mission San Fernando Rey de España, Mission Hills Our Lady of Peace Church, North Hills Our Lady of the Holy Rosary, Sun Valley St. Alphonsa Syro-Malabar Church, San Fernando St. Anne Melkite Catholic Cathedral, North Hollywood St. Charles Borromeo Church, North Hollywood St. Didacus Catholic Church, Sylmar St. Elizabeth Church and School, Van Nuys St. Ferdinand Catholic Church, San Fernando St. Finbar Catholic Church and School, Burbank St. Francis Xavier Church, Burbank St. Genevieve Catholic Church, Panorama City St. Jane de Chantal Catholic Church, North Hollywood St. Patrick Catholic Church, North Hollywood St Paul Assyrian Chaldean Catholic Church, North Hollywood St. Robert Bellarmine Catholic Church, Burbank Santa Rosa Catholic Church, San Fernando Deanery 8 (Santa Clarita Valley and Lancaster/Palmdale) Blessed Junipero Serra Catholic Church, Lancaster San Gabriel Pastoral Region Deanery 9 (East LA, Boyle Heights, City Terrace) All Saints Catholic Church, Los Angeles Assumption Catholic Church, Los Angeles Deanery 10 (Pasadena, Altadena, San Gabriel, Monterey Park, Montebello, Alhambra) All Souls Catholic Church, Alhambra Assumption of the Blessed Virgin Mary Catholic Church, Pasadena St. Andrew's Catholic Church, Pasadena Mission San Gabriel Parish, San Gabriel Deanery 11 (Arcadia, Covina, Glendora, Monrovia, La Puente) Annunciation Catholic Church, Arcadia Deanery 12 (San Dimas, Claremont, Pomona, Diamond Bar, La Puente, Valinda, Walnut) San Pedro Pastoral Region Deanery 17 (Downey, Compton, Huntington Park, Lynwood) Deanery 18 (Whittier, La Mirada, Pico Rivera, Norwalk) Beatitudes of Our Lord Catholic Church, La Mirada Holy Family Catholic Church, Artesia Deanery 19 (South Bay and San Pedro) American Martyrs Catholic Church, Manhattan Beach SS. Peter and Paul's Church, Wilmington Deanery 20 (Long Beach) Santa Barbara Pastoral Region Deanery 1 (Lompoc, Solvang, Santa Maria) La Purisima Mission, Lompoc Mission Santa Inés, Solvang Deanery 2 (Santa Barbara) Santa Barbara Mission, Santa Barbara Our Lady of Sorrows Church, Santa Barbara Deanery 3 (Oxnard, Ventura, Ojai, Fillmore, Santa Paula) Mission San Buenaventura, Ventura Deanery 4 (Simi Valley, Westlake Village, Thousand Oaks, Moorpark, Camarillo) Blessed Junipero Serra Catholic Church, Camarillo v t e Education in the Archdiocese of Los Angeles Archdiocese Seminaries St. John's Seminary Our Lady of the Angels Pastoral Region Universities and colleges Loyola Marymount University Mount St. Mary's University High schools Bishop Conaty-Our Lady of Loretto HS, Harvard Heights Cathedral HS (Boys) Immaculate Heart HS, Los Feliz (Girls) Loyola HS, Harvard Heights (Boys) Marymount HS, Bel Air (Girls) Notre Dame Acad. (Girls) St. Bernard HS, Playa del Rey St. Mary's Acad., Inglewood (Girls) St. Monica Preparatory, Santa Monica Verbum Dei Jesuit HS, Watts (Boys) High schools, closed Daniel Murphy HS, Los Angeles Mount Carmel HS, Los Angeles San Fernando Pastoral Region High schools Bishop Alemany HS, Mission Hills Chaminade HS, West Hills Crespi Carmelite HS, Encino Flintridge Sacred Heart Acad., La Cañada Flintridge Louisville HS, Woodland Hills Notre Dame HS, Sherman Oaks Paraclete HS, Lancaster Providence HS, Burbank St. Francis HS, La Cañada Flintridge St. Genevieve HS, Panorama City High schools, closed Bellarmine-Jefferson HS, Burbank Our Lady of Corvallis HS, Studio City Holy Family HS, Glendale St. John Paul II STEM Acad., Burbank Villa Cabrini Acad., Burbank San Gabriel Pastoral Region High schools Ramona Convent Sec., Alhambra St. Lucy's Priory HS, Glendora Bishop Amat Memorial HS, La Puente Damien HS, La Verne Salesian HS, Los Angeles Cantwell-Sacred Heart of Mary HS, Montebello La Salle College Prep., Pasadena Mayfield Senior, Pasadena St. Monica Acad., Montrose Pomona Catholic HS, Pomona San Gabriel Mission HS, San Gabriel Alverno Heights Acad., Sierra Madre (formerly Alverno HS) San Pedro Pastoral Region High schools St. John Bosco HS, Bellflower St. Pius X-St. Matthias Acad., Downey Junipero Serra HS, Gardena St. Joseph High School, Lakewood St. Anthony HS, Long Beach Don Bosco HS, Rosemead Mary Star of the Sea HS, San Pedro St. Paul HS, Santa Fe Springs Bishop Montgomery HS, Torrance Universities and colleges, closed Marymount College, Palos Verdes High schools, closed Queen of Angels Acad., Compton Santa Barbara Pastoral Region Universities and colleges St. John's Seminary, Camarillo Thomas Aquinas College, Santa Paula High schools Bishop García Diego HS, Santa Barbara La Reina HS, Thousand Oaks St. Bonaventure HS, Ventura St. Joseph HS, Santa Maria Santa Clara HS, Oxnard Villanova Prep., Ojai v t e Hospitals and cemeteries in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Los Angeles Our Lady of the Angels Pastoral Region Hospitals Saint John's Health Center, Santa Monica Cemeteries Crypt Mausoleum of the Cathedral of Our Lady of the Angels Holy Cross Cemetery, Culver City San Fernando Pastoral Region Cemeteries San Fernando Mission Cemetery San Gabriel Pastoral Region Cemeteries Calvary Cemetery, East Los Angeles San Pedro Pastoral Region Santa Barbara Pastoral Region Catholic Church portal Catholic Church portal v t e Archdiocese of Chicago v t e Ordinaries of the Archdiocese of Chicago Bishops William Quarter James Oliver Van de Velde Anthony O'Regan James Duggan Coadjutor bishop Thomas Patrick Roger Foley Archbishops Patrick Feehan James Edward Quigley George Mundelein Samuel Stritch Albert Gregory Meyer John Cody Joseph Bernardin Francis George Blase Cupich Catholicism portal v t e Churches in the Archdiocese of Chicago Cathedral Holy Name Cathedral Basilicas Basilica of Saint Hyacinth Our Lady of Sorrows Basilica Queen of All Saints Basilica Churches List List of churches in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Chicago Chicago Holy Cross Church Holy Family Church Holy Innocents Church Holy Trinity Church Church of the Immaculate Conception Immaculate Heart of Mary Church Nativity of Our Lord Church Notre Dame de Chicago Old St. Patrick's Church Sacred Heart Church St. Barbara Church St. Clement Church St. Edward's Church St. Hedwig's Church St. Ita's Church St. John Cantius Church St. Josaphat Church St. Joseph Church St. Jerome Croatian Church St. Ladislaus Church St. Mary of Perpetual Help Church St. Mary of the Angels Church St. Mary of the Woods Catholic Church St. Michael's Church, Old Town St. Michael the Archangel Church, South Shore St. Stanislaus Kostka Church St. Thomas the Apostle Church St. Vincent de Paul Church Church of St. Vitus St. Wenceslaus Church Cook County Holy Family Church, North Chicago St. Anne Church, Barrington St. Mary of Częstochowa Church, Cicero Our Lady of Perpetual Help Church, Glenview SS. Cyril and Methodius Church, Lemont St. James Church, Lemont St. Martha Church, Morton Grove St. John Brebeuf Church, Niles St. Joseph Church, Wilmette Chapels Madonna Della Strada Chapel v t e Education in the Archdiocese of Chicago Higher education DePaul University Dominican University Loyola University Chicago Saint Xavier University Stritch School of Medicine Seminaries Catholic Theological Union Saint Joseph College Seminary University of Saint Mary of the Lake Casa Jesus High schools Chicago Brother Rice High School Christ the King Jesuit College Prep High School Cristo Rey Jesuit High School De La Salle Institute DePaul College Prep Hales Franciscan High School Holy Trinity High School Josephinum Academy Leo Catholic High School Marist High School Mother McAuley Liberal Arts High School Mount Carmel High School Notre Dame High School for Girls Our Lady of Tepeyac High School Resurrection High School St. Benedict High School St. Francis de Sales High School St. Ignatius College Preparatory School St. Patrick High School St. Rita of Cascia High School Cook County St. Viator High School, Arlington Heights St. Laurence High School, Burbank Marian Catholic High School, Chicago Heights Nazareth Academy, La Grange Park Mount Assisi Academy, Lemont Notre Dame College Prep, Niles Fenwick High School, Oak Park Trinity High School, River Forest Guerin College Preparatory High School, River Grove Seton Academy, South Holland St. Joseph High School, Westchester Loyola Academy, Wilmette Regina Dominican High School, Wilmette Lake County Woodlands Academy of the Sacred Heart, Lake Forest Carmel High School, Mundelein Cristo Rey St. Martin College Prep, Waukegan Former Higher education Barat College Lexington College St. Viator College High schools Academy of Our Lady, Chicago Archbishop Quigley Preparatory Seminary, Chicago Immaculata High School, Chicago Maria High School, Chicago Queen of Peace High School, Burbank St. Gregory the Great High School, Chicago St. Scholastica Academy, Chicago Saint Louise de Marillac High School, Northfield Grade school Our Lady of the Angels School, Chicago v t e Clergy of the Archdiocese of Chicago Auxiliary bishops Alfred Leo Abramowicz Mark Andrew Bartosic Kevin M. Birmingham Robert Gerald Casey Edwin Michael Conway William Edward Cousins Michael Dempsey Gustavo García-Siller John R. Gorman Raymond E. Goedert Thomas Joseph Grady Wilton Daniel Gregory Jeffrey S. Grob Nevin William Hayes Ronald Aldon Hicks Raymond Peter Hillinger Edward Francis Hoban Thad J. Jakubowski Francis J. Kane Gerald Frederick Kicanas Jerome E. Listecki Robert J. Lombardo Timothy Joseph Lyne John R. Manz Alexander Joseph McGavick William Edward McManus William David O'Brien John L. May George V. Murry Cletus F. O'Donnell Thomas Paprocki Joseph N. Perry George J. Rassas Plácido Rodriguez Alberto Rojas Bernard James Sheil John George Vlazny Andrew Peter Wypych Robert Fedek José Maria Garcia Maldonado Timothy J. O'Malley John S. Siemianowski Lawrence J. Sullivan Priests who became bishop elsewhere Peter Joseph Baltes Robert Emmet Barron Romeo Roy Blanchette Stanislaus Vincent Bona Edward Braxton Maurice Francis Burke Edmund Michael Dunne Edward Joseph Dunne Edward Egan James Aloysius Griffin William Richard Griffin John Richard Keating James Patrick Keleher Moses E. Kiley Francis Joseph Magner Paul Marcinkus John McMullen Martin Dewey McNamara Peter Muldoon William Aloysius O'Connor Thomas Joseph Murphy Ernest John Primeau Paul Peter Rhode Patrick William Riordan Edward James Slattery Louis Tylka Raymond James Vonesh Aloysius John Wycisło Priests John George Alleman Thaddeus J. Butler Donald Martin Carroll George Clements Daniel Coughlin John Joseph Egan Andrew Greeley George G. Higgins Reynold Henry Hillenbrand Michael Pfleger Jeremiah J. Rodell Other 28th International Eucharistic Congress Catholic Church portal Chicago portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Italy Australia Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Korea Poland Israel Artists MusicBrainz People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Robert_Barron&oldid=1305805489 " Categories : 1959 births Living people 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century American Roman Catholic priests 20th-century American Roman Catholic theologians 21st-century American male writers 21st-century American non-fiction writers 21st-century American Roman Catholic theologians 21st-century American Roman Catholic titular bishops Academic staff of the Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas American evangelists American male non-fiction writers American religious writers American Roman Catholic clergy of Irish descent American Roman Catholic writers Benet Academy alumni Bishops appointed by Pope Francis Catholic University of America alumni Catholic University of Paris alumni Members of the Order of the Holy Sepulchre Roman Catholic bishops of Winona-Rochester Systematic theologians Thomists University of Notre Dame faculty University of Saint Mary of the Lake alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from September 2015 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Articles using infobox templates with no data rows Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing potentially dated statements from November 2022 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 05:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Robert Barron 19 languages Add topic

