Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Flutes 2 Reed instruments 3 Modern orchestra and concert band woodwinds 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Woodwind instrument 56 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русский Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt West-Vlams 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Woodwind instruments at the Museu de la Música de Barcelona.

Family of musical wind instruments Part of a series on Musical instruments Woodwinds Bagpipes Bassoon Contrabassoon Cor anglais Clarinet Flute Oboe Piccolo Saxophone Brass instruments Baritone horn Cornet Euphonium Flugelhorn French horn Mellophone Tenor horn Trombone Trumpet Tuba String instruments Bowed Cello Double bass Huqin Hurdy-gurdy Viola Violin Plucked Banjo Guitar Bass guitar Guzheng Koto Lyre Mandolin Harp Shamisen Sitar Tambura Ukulele Zither Percussion Bass drum Bell Carillon Celesta Cymbals Glockenspiel Gong Handbell Lithophone Marimba Mridangam Snare drum Steelpan Timpani Triangle Tubaphone Tubular bells Vibraphone Xylophone Keyboards Clavichord Electronic keyboard Harmonium Harpsichord Organ Piano Spinet Virginals v t e Tenor and soprano saxophones Woodwind instruments are a family of musical instruments within the greater category of wind instruments .

Common examples include flute , clarinet , oboe , bassoon , and saxophone . There are two main types of woodwind instruments: flutes and reed instruments (otherwise called reed pipes). The main distinction between these instruments and other wind instruments is the way in which they produce sound.

[ 1 ] All woodwinds produce sound by splitting the air blown into them on a sharp edge, such as a reed or a fipple . Despite the name, a woodwind may be made of any material, not just wood. Common examples of other materials include brass, silver, cane, and other metals such as gold and platinum. The saxophone, for example, though made of brass, is considered a woodwind because it requires a reed to produce sound. Occasionally, woodwinds are made of earthen materials, especially ocarinas .

Alto and tenor saxophone reeds Flutes [ edit ] Main article: Flute Flutes produce sound by directing a focused stream of air across the edge of a hole in a cylindrical tube.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] The flute family can be divided into two subfamilies: open flutes and closed flutes.

[ 4 ] To produce a sound with an open flute, the player is required to blow a stream of air across a sharp edge that then splits the airstream. This split air stream then acts upon the air column contained within the flute's hollow, causing it to vibrate and produce sound.  Examples of open flutes are the transverse flute , panpipes , and shakuhachi .

[ 5 ] Ancient flutes of this variety, including bamboo flutes , were often made from tubular sections of plants such as grasses, reeds, bamboo and hollowed-out tree branches. Later, flutes were made of metals such as tin , copper , or bronze . Modern concert flutes are usually made of high-grade metal alloys , usually containing nickel , silver , copper , or gold .

[ 6 ] To produce a sound with a closed flute, the player is required to blow air into a duct.  This duct acts as a channel, bringing the air to a sharp edge.  As with the open flutes, the air is then split; this causes the column of air within the closed flute to vibrate and produce sound.  Examples of this type of flute include the recorder , ocarina , and organ pipes .

[ 7 ] Reed instruments [ edit ] Reed instruments produce sound by focusing air into a mouthpiece which then causes a reed , or reeds, to vibrate. Similarly to flutes, reed pipes are also further divided into two types: single reed and double reed.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Single-reed woodwinds produce sound by fixing a reed onto the opening of a mouthpiece (using a ligature ).  When air is forced between the reed and the mouthpiece, the reed causes the air column in the instrument to vibrate and produce its unique sound. Single reed instruments include the clarinet and saxophone .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Double reed instruments use two precisely cut, small pieces of cane bound together at the base.  This form of sound production has been estimated to have originated in the middle to late Neolithic period ; its discovery has been attributed to the observation of wind blowing through a split rush.   The finished, bound reed is inserted into the instrument and vibrates as air is forced between the two pieces (again, causing the air within the instrument to vibrate as well).

[ 11 ] This family of reed pipes is subdivided further into another two subfamilies: exposed double reed, and capped double reed instruments.

Exposed double-reed instruments are played by having the double reed directly between the player's lips.  This family includes instruments such as the oboe , cor anglais (also called English horn), and bassoon , and many types of shawms throughout the world.

Capped double-reed instruments, on the other hand, have the double reed covered by a cap; the player blows through a hole in this cap that then directs the air through the reeds. This family includes the crumhorn .

A piper playing the bagpipes in Newport, Rhode Island Bagpipes are unique reed pipe instruments, since they use two or more double or single reeds.  However, bagpipes are functionally the same as a capped double reed instruments, since the reeds are never in direct contact with the player's lips.

[ 12 ] [ non-tertiary source needed ] Free reed aerophone instruments are likewise unique since sound is produced by 'free reeds' –  small metal tongues arranged in rows within a metal or wooden frame. The airflow necessary for the instrument's sound is generated either by a player's breath (e.g.

harmonica ), or by bellows (e.g.

accordion ).

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ non-tertiary source needed ] Modern orchestra and concert band woodwinds [ edit ] Main article: Woodwind section The modern orchestra 's woodwind section typically includes flutes , oboes , clarinets , and bassoons . Supplementary instruments include piccolo , cor anglais , bass clarinet , E-flat clarinet , and contrabassoon .

Saxophones are also used on occasion.

The concert band 's woodwind section is typically much larger and more diverse than the orchestra's. It typically includes piccolos , flutes , oboes , B ♭ clarinets , alto clarinets , bass clarinets , bassoons , alto saxophones , tenor saxophones , and baritone saxophones .

Alto flute , cor anglais , E ♭ clarinet , contra-alto clarinet , contrabass clarinet , contrabassoon , soprano saxophone , and bass saxophone are also sometimes used.

See also [ edit ] Brass instrument Wind instrument References [ edit ] ^ "Woodwind" Encyclopedia Britannica Online.

^ "Flute acoustics: an introduction" .

newt.phys.unsw.edu.au . Retrieved 2024-02-01 .

^ "Instruments of the Orchestra Strings Woodwinds Brass Percussion conductor Devin Patrick Hughes" .

Arapahoe Philharmonic . Retrieved 2024-02-01 .

^ Carroll, Paul "Baroque Woodwind instruments" p. 45. Aldershot, Hants, England: Ashgate, 1999 ^ Carroll, Paul "Baroque Woodwind instruments" p. 45. Aldershot, Hants, England: Ashgate, 1999.

^ "San Francisco Symphony - Instrument of the Month: Flute" .

San Francisco Symphony . Retrieved 2024-02-01 .

^ Carroll, Paul "Baroque Woodwind instruments" p. 45. Aldershot, Hants, England: Ashgate, 1999 ^ "Woodwind" Encyclopædia Britannica Online.

^ a b "Woodwinds" .

www.uv.es . Retrieved 2024-02-01 .

^ Levine, Mike (2023-05-05).

"The Woodwind Family, Explained" .

Yamaha Music - Blog . Retrieved 2024-02-01 .

^ Carroll, Paul "Baroque Woodwind instruments" pp.88. Aldershot, Hants, England: Ashgate, 1999.

^ "Bagpipes" Encyclopædia Britannica Online.

^ "Harmonica" Encyclopædia Britannica Online ^ "Accordion" Encyclopædia Britannica Online External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Woodwind instruments .

How do Woodwind Instruments work Woodwind Fingering Chart Woodwind Reference – ClassicalMusicHomepage.com Archived 2014-11-16 at the Wayback Machine v t e Music History of music Prehistoric Ancient Dance Martial Religious Biblical Secular Art music Afghan classical music—Klasik Andalusi classical music Arabic music Azerbaijani Mugham Burmese classical music—Mahāgīta Cambodian ceremonial music—Pinpeat Chinese traditional music Indian classical music Byzantine music Indonesian art music—Gamelan Japanese court music—Gagaku Korean court music Lao classical music Mandé art music Ottoman music Persian classical music Philippine art songs—Kundiman Scottish Ceòl Mór Kandyan dance of Sri Lanka Thai classical music—Piphat Vietnam imperial court music—Nhã nhạc Western classical music Vernacular music Circus music Folk music Blues Country music Electronic music Hip hop music Jazz Pop music Progressive music Psychedelic music Soul music Musical instruments Arched Harp Angular harp History of the harpsichord History of lute-family instruments Nafir Evolution of timpani in the 18th and 19th centuries History of the trumpet History of the violin Musician Ensembles Band (rock and pop) Backup band All-female band Rhythm section Big band Concert band Disc jockey Military band Lead vocalist Backing vocalist Theory Composition Form Genre Notation Improvisation Lyrics Singing Song Technique Education and study Bachelor of Music Master of Music Doctor of Musical Arts PhD Method Music archaeology Music history Music psychology Music school Composition Musicology Biomusicology Cognitive musicology Computational musicology Ecomusicology Ethnomusicology New musicology Organology Sociomusicology Zoomusicology Production Single A-side and B-side Extended play Compilation Live Remix Audio engineer Record label Record producer Sampling Music technology (electric) Music technology (electronic and digital) Sound recording and reproduction Cover Remix Cultural and regional genres African Central East North Southern West Asian Central East Middle Eastern South Southeast European Balkan Nordic Latin American Central American South American North American Caribbean Oceanian Melanesian Micronesian Polynesian By sovereign state Afghanistan Albania Algeria Andorra Angola Antigua and Barbuda Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bahamas Bahrain Bangladesh Barbados Belarus Belgium Belize Benin Bhutan Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Botswana Brazil Brunei Bulgaria Burkina Faso Burundi Cambodia Cameroon Canada Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Chile China Colombia Comoros Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Democratic Republic of the Congo Denmark Djibouti Dominica Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Estonia Eswatini Ethiopia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Finland France Gabon Gambia Georgia Germany Ghana Greece Grenada Guatemala Guinea Guinea-Bissau Guyana Haiti Honduras Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Iraq Ireland Israel Italy Ivory Coast Jamaica Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Kenya Kiribati Kosovo Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Latvia Lebanon Lesotho Liberia Libya Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Madagascar Malawi Malaysia Maldives Mali Malta Marshall Islands Mauritania Mauritius Mexico Moldova Monaco Mongolia Montenegro Morocco Mozambique Myanmar Namibia Nauru Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Niger Nigeria North Korea North Macedonia Norway Oman Pakistan Palau Palestine Panama Papua New Guinea Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Qatar Republic of the Congo Romania Russia Rwanda Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Samoa San Marino Saudi Arabia Senegal Serbia Seychelles Sierra Leone Singapore Slovakia Slovenia Solomon Islands Somalia South Africa South Korea South Sudan Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Suriname Sweden Switzerland Syria São Tomé and Príncipe Taiwan Tajikistan Tanzania Thailand Timor-Leste Togo Tonga Trinidad and Tobago Tunisia Turkey Turkmenistan Tuvalu Uganda Ukraine United Arab Emirates United Kingdom United States Uruguay Uzbekistan Vanuatu Vatican City Venezuela Vietnam Western Sahara Yemen Zambia Zimbabwe Lists Index Outline Timeline Albums Classical and art music traditions Classical music genres Cultural and regional genres Instruments Jazz and popular music glossary Music genres and styles Songs Terminology related articles Aesthetics of music Album era Fictional music Music and emotion Music and exercise Music and fashion Music industry Music and politics Censorship Environmentalism Warfare Music and sleep Music community Music festival Music technology Music therapy Musical escapism Musical instrument Classification Folk Women in music Music portal Record production portal Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other MusicBrainz instrument Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐r99fl
Cached time: 20250812000112
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.479 seconds
Real time usage: 0.684 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1956/1000000
Revision size: 8670/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 112495/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3500/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 204/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 51199/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.315/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7407133/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  572.017      1 -total
 34.01%  194.541      1 Template:Music_topics
 33.96%  194.239      2 Template:Navbox
 24.19%  138.348      1 Template:World_topic
 16.18%   92.556      1 Template:Reflist
 14.05%   80.359      5 Template:Cite_web
 12.49%   71.463      1 Template:Musical_instruments_sidebar
 12.18%   69.656      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 12.17%   69.631      1 Template:Short_description
  7.14%   40.850      1 Template:Commons_category Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:33882:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000112 and revision id 1274161556. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Woodwind_instrument&oldid=1274161556 " Categories : Woodwind instruments Musical instruments Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from October 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 5 February 2025, at 19:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Woodwind instrument 56 languages Add topic

