Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Precursors 2 Non-philosophy according to Laruelle Toggle Non-philosophy according to Laruelle subsection 2.1 Role of the subject 2.2 Radical immanence 2.3 Sans-philosophie 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Non-philosophy 4 languages Afrikaans Español 日本語 Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept by François Laruelle This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Non-philosophy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Non-philosophy ( French : non-philosophie ) is a concept popularized by French philosopher François Laruelle .

Precursors [ edit ] German philosopher Adam Karl August von Eschenmayer developed an early approach to philosophy called non-philosophy ( German : Nichtphilosophie ). He defined it as a kind of mystical illumination by which was obtained a belief in God that could not be reached by mere intellectual effort.

[ 1 ] He carried this tendency to mysticism into his physical researches, and was led by it to take a deep interest in the phenomena of animal magnetism . He ultimately became a devout believer in demoniacal and spiritual possession; and his later writings are all strongly impregnated with supernaturalism . Laruelle sees Eschenmayer's doctrine as a "break with philosophy and its systematic aspect in the name of passion, faith, and feeling".

[ 2 ] Japanese Kyoto school philosopher Hajime Tanabe advanced another early notion on non-philosophy in his 1945 tome Philosophy as Metanoetics .

[ 3 ] Drawing on his earlier studies of Western philosophy, Hajime took inspiration from Shin Buddhism to conceive of "a philosophy that is not a philosophy" in which the limitations of speculative reason would be recognized and transcended, avoiding both idealism and materialism .

[ 4 ] Hajime emphasized this non-philosophy (" metanoetics ") as defined not by the "self-power" of the philosopher but by a mediating " Other-power " (or "absolute nothingness") through which philosophizing could be newly possible.

[ 5 ] Non-philosophy according to Laruelle [ edit ] Laruelle argues that all forms of philosophy (from ancient philosophy to analytic philosophy to deconstruction and so on) are structured around a prior decision, and remain constitutively blind to this decision. The 'decision' that Laruelle is concerned with here is the dialectical splitting of the world in order to grasp the world philosophically. Examples from the history of philosophy include Immanuel Kant 's distinction between the synthesis of manifold impressions and the faculties of the understanding; Martin Heidegger 's split between the ontic and the ontological; and Jacques Derrida 's notion of différance/presence. The reason Laruelle finds this decision interesting and problematic is because the decision itself cannot be grasped (philosophically grasped, that is) without introducing some further scission.

Laruelle further argues that the decisional structure of philosophy can only be grasped non-philosophically. In this sense, non-philosophy is a science of philosophy. Non-philosophy is not metaphilosophy because, as Laruelle scholar Ray Brassier notes, "philosophy is already metaphilosophical through its constitutive reflexivity".

[ 6 ] Brassier also defines non-philosophy as the "theoretical practice of philosophy proceeding by way of transcendental axioms and producing theorems which are philosophically uninterpretable".

[ 6 ] The reason why the axioms and theorems of non-philosophy are philosophically uninterpretable is because, as explained, philosophy cannot grasp its decisional structure in the way that non-philosophy can.

Laruelle's non-philosophy, he claims, should be considered to philosophy what non-Euclidean geometry is to the work of Euclid. It stands in particular opposition to philosophical heirs of Jacques Lacan such as Alain Badiou .

Laruelle scholar Ekin Erkan, elucidating on Laruelle's system, notes that "'non-philosophy' [...] withdraws from the metaphysical precept of separating the world into binarisms, perhaps epitomized by the formative division between 'universals” and “particulars' in Kant’s Transcendental Deduction. Laruelle’s method also rejects the 'evental' nature of Being described by Heiddegger [...] Laruelle's  'One' is understood as generic identity - an identity/commonality that reverses the classical metaphysics found in philosophy’s bastion thinkers (a lineage that runs from Plato to Badiou), where the transcendental is upheld as a necessary precondition for grounding reality."" [ 7 ] Role of the subject [ edit ] The decisional structure of philosophy is grasped by the subject of non-philosophy. Laruelle's concept of "the subject" here is not the same as the subject-matter, nor does it have anything to do with the traditional philosophical notion of subjectivity. It is, instead, a function along the same lines as a mathematical function .

The concept of performativity (taken from speech act theory) is central to the idea of the subject of non-philosophy. Laruelle believes that both philosophy and non-philosophy are performative. However, philosophy merely performatively legitimates the decisional structure which, as already noted, it is unable to fully grasp, in contrast to non-philosophy which collapses the distinction (present in philosophy) between theory and action. In this sense, non-philosophy is radically performative because the theorems deployed in accordance with its method constitute fully-fledged scientific actions. Non-philosophy, then, is conceived as a rigorous and scholarly discipline.

[ citation needed ] The role of the subject is a critical facet of Laruelle's non-ethics and Laruelle's political system. "By problematizing what he terms 'The Statist Ideal,' or the 'Unitary Illusion' - be it negative (Hegel) or positive (Nietzsche) - Laruelle interrogates the 'scission' of the minority subject, which he contends is a “symptom” of the Western dialectic practice. In opposition to the Kantian first principles upon which both Continental and Analytic philosophy rest, Laruelle attempts to sketch a 'real Critique of Reason' that is determined in itself and through itself; insofar as this involves Laruellean 'non-ethics,' this involves breaking from the long-situated practice of studying the State from the paralogism of the State view, itself." [ 7 ] Radical immanence [ edit ] The radically performative character of the subject of non-philosophy would be meaningless without the concept of radical immanence . The philosophical doctrine of immanence is generally defined as any philosophical belief or argument which resists transcendent separation between the world and some other principle or force (such as a creator deity ). According to Laruelle, the decisional character of philosophy makes immanence impossible for it, as some ungraspable splitting is always taking place within. By contrast, non-philosophy axiomatically deploys immanence as being endlessly conceptualizable by the subject of non-philosophy. This is what Laruelle means by "radical immanence". The actual work of the subject of non-philosophy is to apply its methods to the decisional resistance to radical immanence which is found in philosophy.

Sans-philosophie [ edit ] In "A New Presentation of Non-Philosophy" (2004), François Laruelle states: I see non-philosophers in several different ways. I see them, inevitably, as subjects of the university, as is required by worldly life, but above all as related to three fundamental human types. They are related to the analyst and the political militant, obviously, since non-philosophy is close to psychoanalysis and Marxism — it transforms the subject by transforming instances of philosophy. But they are also related to what I would call the ‘spiritual′ type — which it is imperative not to confuse with ‘spiritualist′. The spiritual are not spiritualists. They are the great destroyers of the forces of philosophy and the state, which band together in the name of order and conformity. The spiritual haunt the margins of philosophy, Gnosticism , mysticism , and even of institutional religion and politics. The spiritual are not just abstract, quietist mystics; they are for the world. This is why a quiet discipline is not sufficient, because man is implicated in the world as the presupposed that determines it. Thus, non-philosophy is also related to Gnosticism and science-fiction ; it answers their fundamental question — which is not at all philosophy's primary concern — ‘Should humanity be saved? And how?’ And it is also close to spiritual revolutionaries such as Müntzer and certain mystics who skirted heresy . When all is said and done, is non-philosophy anything other than the chance for an effective utopia?" [ 8 ] Numbered amongst the early members or sympathizers of sans-philosophie ("without philosophy") are those included in a collection published in 2005 by L’Harmattan: [ 9 ] François Laruelle , Jason Barker , Ray Brassier , Laurent Carraz, Hugues Choplin, Jacques Colette, Nathalie Depraz, Oliver Feltham , Gilles Grelet , Jean-Pierre Faye , Gilbert Hottois , Jean-Luc Rannou, [ 10 ] Pierre A. Riffard , Sandrine Roux and Jordanco Sekulovski. Since then, a slew of translations and new introductions have appeared from John Ó Maoilearca (Mullarkey), Anthony Paul Smith, Rocco Gangle, Katerina Kolozova , and Alexander Galloway.

See also [ edit ] Antiphilosophy Henology Nondualism Félix Ravaisson-Mollien —Laruelle wrote a book on him in 1971 References [ edit ] ^ Höffding, H., Hist. of Mod. Phil.

, Eng. trans. vol. 2, 1900, p. 170.

^ François Laruelle, "The Generic as Predicate and Constant (Non-Philosophy and Materialism)." in: Bryant, Levi , Graham Harman , and Nick Srnicek (eds.). 2011.

The Speculative Turn: Continental Materialism and Realism . Melbourne: Re-Press. p. 237. Archived from [OA_Version_Speculative_Turn_9780980668346.pdf the original].

^ Dilworth, David A. (Winter 1988).

"Reviewed Work: Philosophy as Metanoetics. by Tanabe Hajime, Takeuchi Yoshinori, Valdo H. Viglielmo, James W. Heisig" .

Monumenta Nipponica .

43 (4).

JSTOR 2384810 . Retrieved 27 August 2023 .

^ Mochizuki, Taro (2013). "A Philosopher's Defeat in World War II: Tanabe Hajime's Conversion to Shin Buddhism in Philosophy as Metanoetics".

Academia.edu .

^ Mochizuki, Taro (2013). "A Philosopher's Defeat in World War II: Tanabe Hajime's Conversion to Shin Buddhism in Philosophy as Metanoetics".

Academia.edu .

^ a b Ray Brassier, ' Axiomatic Heresy: The Non-Philosophy of Francois Laruelle Archived 2006-03-29 at the Wayback Machine ', Radical Philosophy Archived 2008-01-05 at the Wayback Machine 121, Sep/Oct 2003. p. 25 ^ a b Erkan, Ekin (Spring 2019).

"François Laruelle. A Biography of Ordinary Man: On Authorities and Minorities" (PDF) .

Cincinnati Romance Review .

46 : 119– 123. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 May 2022 . Retrieved 14 July 2019 .

^ " "A New Presentation of Non-Philosophy" " . Archived from the original on 2009-07-16 . Retrieved 2008-07-19 .

^ Gilles Grelet (ed.), Théorie-rébellion. Un ultimatum , Paris: L’Harmattan, coll. « Nous, les sans-philosophie », 2005, p. 159.

^ Jean-Luc Rannou, La non-philosophie, simplement. Une introduction synthétique , 2005, p. 238 Further reading [ edit ] Brassier, Ray, 'Axiomatic Heresy: The Non-Philosophy of Francois Laruelle', Radical Philosophy 121, Sep/Oct 2003.

Brassier, Ray, Nihil Unbound. Enlightenment and Extinction . Edinburgh University Press, 2007.

Galloway, Alexander, Laruelle: Against the Digital . University of Minnesota Press, 2014.

Gangle, Rocco.

François Laruelle’s Philosophies of Difference: A Critical Introduction and Guide . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2013.

James, Ian.

The New French Philosophy . Cambridge: Polity, 2012.

Kolozova, Katerina.

Cut of the Real: Subjectivity in Poststructuralist Philosophy .  Columbia University Press, 2014.

Kolozova, Katerina.

The Lived Revolution: Solidarity with the Body in Pain as the New Political Universal . Evro-Balkan Press, 2010.

Laruelle, François, 'A Summary of Non-Philosophy' in Pli: The Warwick Journal of Philosophy . Vol. 8. Philosophies of Nature, 1999.

Laruelle, François, 'Identity and Event' in Pli: The Warwick Journal of Philosophy . Vol. 9. Parallel Processes, 2000.

Mullarkey, John.

Post-Continental Philosophy: An Outline . Continuum Press, 2006.

Mullarkey, John, and Anthony Paul Smith, eds.

Laruelle and Non-Philosophy . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2012.

Ó Maoilearca, John, All Thoughts are Equal: Laruelle and Nonhuman Philosophy, University of Minnesota Press, 2015.

Smith, Anthony Paul.

Francois Laruelle's Principles of Non Philosophy: A Critical Introduction and Guide . Edinburgh University Press, 2015.

Smith, Anthony Paul.

Laruelle: A Stranger Thought.

Polity Press, 2016.

External links [ edit ] Controversy over the Possibility of a Science of Philosophy (pdf) a debate between Laruelle and Derrida (from La Décision Philosophique , No. 5, April 1988, pp. 62–76) translated by Robin Mackay Frequently Asked Questions at Organisation Non-Philosophique Internationale (ONPhI) ( Organisation Non-Philosophique Internationale A New Presentation of Non-Philosophy by François Laruelle at Organisation Non-Philosophique Internationale (ONPhI) v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Non-philosophy&oldid=1280053823 " Category : Concepts in metaphilosophy Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2017 This page was last edited on 12 March 2025, at 05:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Non-philosophy 4 languages Add topic

