Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Survey results 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey 11 languages العربية বাংলা Cymraeg Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano مصرى 日本語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Anglo-Australian Telescope survey, 1997–2002 "2DF" redirects here. For the German broadcaster, see ZDF .

2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey Alternative names 2dF Website www .2dfgrs .net Related media on Commons [ edit on Wikidata ] Part of a series on Physical cosmology Big Bang · Universe Age of the universe Chronology of the universe Early universe Inflation · Nucleosynthesis Backgrounds Gravitational wave (GWB) Microwave (CMB) · Neutrino (CNB) Expansion · Future Hubble's law · Redshift Expansion of the universe FLRW metric · Friedmann equations Lambda-CDM model Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Components · Structure Components Dark energy · Dark matter Photons · Baryons Structure Shape of the universe Galaxy filament · Galaxy formation Large quasar group Large-scale structure Reionization · Structure formation Experiments Black Hole Initiative (BHI) BOOMERanG Cosmic Background Explorer (COBE) Dark Energy Survey Planck space observatory Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey ("2dF") Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe (WMAP) Scientists Aaronson Alfvén Alpher Copernicus de Sitter Dicke Ehlers Einstein Ellis Friedmann Galileo Gamow Guth Hawking Hubble Huygens Kepler Lemaître Mather Newton Penrose Penzias Rubin Schmidt Smoot Suntzeff Sunyaev Tolman Wilson Zeldovich List of cosmologists Subject history Discovery of cosmic microwave background radiation History of the Big Bang theory Timeline of cosmological theories Category Astronomy portal v t e Rendering of the 2dFGRS data In astronomy , the 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey (Two-degree-Field Galaxy Redshift Survey), 2dF or 2dFGRS is a redshift survey conducted by the Australian Astronomical Observatory (AAO) with the 3.9m Anglo-Australian Telescope between 1997 and 11 April 2002.

[ 1 ] The data from this survey were made public on 30 June 2003.  The survey determined the large-scale structure in two large slices of the Universe to a depth of around 2.5 billion light years ( redshift ~ 0.2).  It was the world's largest redshift survey between 1998 (overtaking Las Campanas Redshift Survey ) and 2003 (overtaken by the Sloan Digital Sky Survey ).  Matthew Colless, Richard Ellis , Steve Maddox and John Peacock were in charge of the project. Team members Shaun Cole and John Peacock were awarded a share of the 2014 Shaw Prize in astronomy for results from the 2dFGRS.

Description [ edit ] The 2dF survey covered an area of about 1500 square degrees , surveying regions in both the north and the south galactic poles .

[ 2 ] The name derives from the fact that the survey instrument has a 2 degree diameter field of view.

The areas selected for observation were previously surveyed by the massive APM Galaxy Survey (on which Steve Maddox also worked).

[ 2 ] The regions surveyed cover roughly 75 degrees of right ascension for both bands, and the declination of the North Polar band was about 7.5 degrees while the declination of the South Polar band was about 15 degrees. Hundreds of isolated two degree fields near the South Polar band were also surveyed (see this illustration , where black circles represent survey fields, and the red grid represents the earlier APM survey).

In total, the photometry of 382,323 objects were measured, which includes spectra for 245,591 objects, of which 232,155 were galaxies (221,414 with good quality spectra), 12,311 are stars , and 125 are quasi-stellar objects (quasars).

[ 3 ] The survey necessitated 272 required nights of observation, spread over 5 years.

The survey was carried out with the 4 metre Anglo-Australian Telescope , with the 2dF instrument installed at the primary focus permitting the observation of a field of 2 degrees per pointing.  The instrument possesses a spectrograph equipped with two banks each of 200 optical fibres, permitting the simultaneous measurement of 400 spectra.

The limiting apparent magnitude of the survey is 19.5, covering objects with a redshift mostly within less than z=0.3 and a median redshift of 0.11.  The volume of the Universe covered by the survey is approximately 10 8 h −1 Mpc 3 , where h corresponds to the value of the Hubble constant , H 0 , divided by 100.

H 0 is approximately 70 km/s/Mpc.  The largest redshift observed by the survey corresponds to a distance of 600 h −1 Mpc.

Survey results [ edit ] The principal results obtained for the field of cosmology by the 2dF survey are: The measurement of the density parameter of non-relativistic matter ( baryonic matter plus dark matter plus massive neutrinos ) The detection of Baryon acoustic oscillations , and as a consequence the relationship between the density of baryonic matter and dark matter Limits on the contribution of massive neutrinos to dark matter, putting a limit on the sum of the masses of the three families of neutrinos at 1.8 eV.

All these results are in agreement with the measurements of other experiments, notably those of WMAP .  They confirm the standard cosmological model .

DTFE reconstruction of the inner parts of the 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey.

The 2dF survey also yields a unique view on our local cosmic environment. In the figure a 3-D reconstruction of the inner parts of the survey is shown, revealing a view on the cosmic structures in the nearby universe. Several superclusters stand out, such as the Sloan Great Wall , one of the largest structures [ 4 ] in the universe known to date (see also Huge-LQG ).

See also [ edit ] Lambda-CDM model Dark matter References [ edit ] ^ Final Status of Survey Observations Archived March 4, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b 2dFGRS − An Introduction Archived 2007-03-04 at the Wayback Machine ^ 2dFGRS Summary Statistics Archived 2007-03-04 at the Wayback Machine ^ Wall, Mike (2013-01-11).

"Largest structure in universe discovered" .

Fox News .

External links [ edit ] Official site of the 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey The 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey: spectra and redshifts − 2001 Royal Astronomical Society paper describing the survey Official site Archived 2014-04-20 at the Wayback Machine of the Two Degree Field instrument system v t e Astronomical surveys Photographic Digitized Sky Survey (DSS) The INT Photometric H-Alpha Survey (IPHAS) NGS-POSS Palomar Distant Solar System Survey (PDSSS) SLUGGS Infra-red 2MASS Akari (Astro-F) Infrared Astronomical Satellite (IRAS) UKIRT Infrared Deep Sky Survey (UKIDSS) SCUBA-2 All Sky Survey VISTA Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer (WISE) Radio C-BASS GALEX Arecibo SDSS Survey (GASS) HIPASS NVSS Ohio Sky Survey PALFA Survey Spectroscopic 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey (2dFGRS) 6dF Galaxy Survey (6dFGS) Calar Alto Legacy Integral Field Area Survey (CALIFA) CfA Redshift Survey Dark Energy Survey (DES) DEEP2 Redshift Survey (DEEP2) Galaxy And Mass Assembly survey (GAMA) LAMOST Las Campanas Redshift Survey Sloan Digital Sky Survey (SDSS) VIMOS-VLT Deep Survey (VVDS) WiggleZ Category Commons Portals : Astronomy Stars Outer space Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=2dF_Galaxy_Redshift_Survey&oldid=1296777608 " Categories : Observational astronomy Astronomical surveys 1997 in science Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with infoboxes completely from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 22 June 2025, at 06:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents 2dF Galaxy Redshift Survey 11 languages Add topic

