Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Decidability of short mates 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Infinite chess 5 languages Español Français 日本語 Tiếng Việt 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Variation of chess A simple infinite chess scheme (starting position). More complex schemes have the addition of various fairy chess pieces as well as the infinitely large board.

Infinite chess is any variation of the game of chess played on an unbounded chessboard . Versions of infinite chess have been introduced independently by multiple players, chess theorists, and mathematicians, both as a playable game and as a model for theoretical study. It has been found that even though the board is unbounded, there are ways in which a player can win the game in a finite number of moves.

Background [ edit ] Taikyoku shōgi (36×36 squares), most likely starting position. The complete rules of this historical game are not conclusively known.

Classical ( FIDE ) chess is played on an 8×8 board (64 squares).  However, the history of chess includes variants of the game played on boards of various sizes.  A predecessor game called courier chess was played on a slightly larger 12×8 board (96 squares) in the 12th century, and continued to be played for at least six hundred years.  Japanese chess ( shogi ) has been played historically on boards of various sizes; the largest is taikyoku shōgi ("ultimate chess"). This chess-like game, which dates to the mid 16th century, was played on a 36×36 board (1296 squares). Each player starts with 402 pieces of 209 different types, and a well-played game would require several days of play, possibly requiring each player to make over a thousand moves.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Chess player Jianying Ji was one of many to propose infinite chess, suggesting a setup with the chess pieces in the same relative positions as in classical chess, with knights replaced by nightriders and a rule preventing pieces from travelling too far from opposing pieces.

[ 5 ] Numerous other chess players, chess theorists, and mathematicians who study game theory have conceived of variations of infinite chess, often with different objectives in mind. Chess players sometimes use the scheme simply to alter the strategy; since chess pieces, and in particular the king, cannot be trapped in corners on an infinite board, new patterns are required to form a checkmate . Theorists conceive of infinite chess variations to expand the theory of chess in general, or as a model to study other mathematical, economic, or game-playing strategies.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Decidability of short mates [ edit ] For infinite chess, it has been found that the mate-in- n problem is decidable; that is, given a natural number n and a player to move and the positions (such as on Z × × Z {\displaystyle \mathbb {Z} \times \mathbb {Z} } ) of a finite number of chess pieces that are uniformly mobile and with constant and linear freedom, there is an algorithm that will answer if there is a forced checkmate in at most n moves.

[ 11 ] One such algorithm consists of expressing the instance as a sentence in Presburger arithmetic and using the decision procedure for Presburger arithmetic.

The winning-position problem is not known to be decidable.

[ 11 ] Not only is there a lack of an upper bound on the smallest such n when there is a mate-in- n , there are also positions for which there is a forced mate but no integer n such that there is a mate-in- n .  For example, there is a position such that after one rook move by black, the number of moves until black is checkmated will be one more than the distance by which black moved.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] List of chess variants Fairy chess pieces References [ edit ] ^ Taikyoku Shogi .

^ Chess Variants: Taikyoku Shogi .

^ Abstract Strategy Games .

^ Free History of Chess .

^ Infinite Chess at The Chess Variant Pages . An infinite chess scheme represented using ASCII characters.

^ "Infinite Chess, PBS Infinite Series" PBS Infinite Series.

^ a b Evans, C. D. A.; Hamkins, Joel David (2013). "Transfinite game values in infinite chess".

arXiv : 1302.4377 [ math.LO ].

^ Evans, C. D. A.; Hamkins, Joel David; Perlmutter, Norman Lewis (2015). "A position in infinite chess with game value ω 4 ".

arXiv : 1510.08155 [ math.LO ].

^ Aviezri Fraenkel; D. Lichtenstein (1981), "Computing a perfect strategy for n×n chess requires time exponential in n", J. Combin. Theory Ser. A , 31 (2): 199– 214, doi : 10.1016/0097-3165(81)90016-9 ^ "A position in infinite chess with game value w^4" Transfinite game values in infinite chess, January 2017; A position in infinite chess with game value w^4, October 2015; An introduction to the theory of infinite games, with examples from infinite chess, November 2014; The theory of infinite games: how to play infinite chess and win, August 2014; and other academic papers by Joel Hamkins.

^ a b Brumleve, Dan; Hamkins, Joel David; Schlicht, Philipp (2012). "The Mate-in-n Problem of Infinite Chess is Decidable".

How the World Computes . Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Vol. 7318. Springer. pp.

78– 88.

arXiv : 1201.5597 .

doi : 10.1007/978-3-642-30870-3_9 .

ISBN 978-3-642-30869-7 .

S2CID 8998263 .

External links [ edit ] Infinitechess.org : Online implementation that supports play against an opponent in the same room or against an opponent on the internet.

Infinite Chess at The Chess Variant Pages Infinite Chess • Infinite Series on YouTube Mate-in-Omega, The Great Phenomenon of Infinite Chess on YouTube v t e Chess variants ( list ) Orthodox rules Different starting position Fischer random chess Displacement chess Transcendental chess Different number of pieces Dunsany's chess Handicap Unorthodox board Balbo's game Circular chess Cylinder chess Double chess Grid chess Hexagonal chess ( Cross chess , Masonic chess ) Infinite chess Millennium 3D chess Minichess ( Los Alamos chess ) Rhombic chess Spherical chess Three-dimensional chess Triangular chess Unorthodox rules with traditional pieces Standard 8×8 board Andernach chess Atomic chess Beirut chess Checkless chess Chessplus Circe chess Crazyhouse Cubic chess Dynamo chess Extinction chess Hostage chess Knight relay chess Legan chess Losing chess Madrasi chess Monochromatic chess Patrol chess PlunderChess Portal chess Progressive chess Three-check chess Way of the Knight Multimove variants Avalanche chess Kung-Fu Chess Marseillais chess Monster chess Progressive chess Elements of chance Dark chess Dice chess Knightmare Chess Kriegspiel Penultima Unorthodox rules on an unorthodox board 5D Chess with Multiverse Time Travel Alice chess Apocalypse Chad Chessence Congo Diplomat chess Dragonfly Jeson Mor Parallel worlds chess Rollerball Unorthodox rules using non-traditional pieces Standard 8×8 board Baroque Berolina Chakra Chess with different armies Duell Falcon–hunter chess Grasshopper chess Musketeer chess Pocket mutation chess Cheskers Compound pieces Almost chess Capablanca chess Capablanca random chess Chancellor chess Embassy chess Grand Chess Janus Chess Maharajah and the Sepoys Modern chess Seirawan chess Tutti-frutti chess Unorthodox boards and pieces 2000 A.D.

Chesquerque Chess on a really big board Courier-Spiel Dragonchess Gess Omega Chess Stratomic Dekle's triangular chess Wildebeest chess Wolf chess Multiplayer Bosworth Bughouse chess Business chess Djambi Duchess Enochian chess Forchess Fortress chess Four Fronts Four-player chess Gala Hand and brain Quatrochess Three-man chess Three-player chess Tri-chess Inspired games Arimaa Jetan Martian chess Navia Dratp The Duke Chess-related games Historical Chadarangam Chaturaji Chaturanga Courier chess Grant Acedrex Semedo Shatranj Short assize Tamerlane chess Regional Janggi variants Makruk Senterej Shatar Shogi Chu shogi Dai shogi Other variants Sittuyin Xiangqi Jungle Banqi Manchu chess Game of the Three Kingdoms Game of the Three Friends Game of the Seven Kingdoms Other variants Software ChessV Fairy-Max XBoard Zillions of Games Related Correspondence chess Fairy chess Fairy chess piece Fairy Chess Review The Chess Variant Pages Checkers Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Infinite_chess&oldid=1305446869 " Categories : Chess variants Combinatorial game theory Abstract strategy games Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 03:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Infinite chess 5 languages Add topic

