Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Award description 2 Criteria 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Newton International Fellowship Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Postdoctoral research fellowship in the UK for a non-UK scientist Sir Isaac Newton FRS (1642–1727) was President of the Royal Society from 1723 until his death.

The Newton International Fellowship , named after Sir Isaac Newton , is an international postdoctoral award for selected foreign academics to carry out research at institutions in the United Kingdom.

Award description [ edit ] Established by the Royal Society , British Academy , and Royal Academy of Engineering ,
the Fellowships are awarded annually to approximately 25 of the most outstanding early career academics from across the world, in all disciplines of the sciences and humanities . Key objectives of the Newton Fellowship are to bring the best early career academics to the UK and to enhance ties between these academics' home countries and the UK.

[ 1 ] Newton Fellows are fully funded for a period of three years and awarded coverage of research expenses up to £8,000 per year, with a maximum award value since 2023 of £420,000.

[ 2 ] This award is intended to facilitate the development of a continuous research program and to support continued engagement with UK-based researchers.

[ 3 ] Criteria [ edit ] Applicants to the Fellowship must not hold UK citizenship and must be working outside the UK at the time of the application. It is required that applicants hold a PhD by the time the funding starts. Applicants should have no more than 7 years of active full-time postdoctoral experience at the time of application (discounting career breaks, but including teaching experience and/or time spent in industry ).

[ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ Royal Society Newton International Fellowship (2015) Royal Society Newton International Fellowship , www.royalsociety.org. Retrieved 20 April 2015.

^ "Newton International Fellowships | Royal Society" . 23 January 2024.

^ British Academy Newton International Fellowships Scheme (2015) Newton International Fellowships Scheme , www.britac.ac.uk. Retrieved 17 April 2015.

^ Royal Society Newton International Fellowship (2015) Royal Society Newton International Fellowship , www.royalsociety.org. Retrieved 20 April 2015.

External links [ edit ] Official site The Royal Society website v t e Sir Isaac Newton Publications Fluxions (1671) De Motu (1684) Principia (1687) Opticks (1704) Queries (1704) Arithmetica (1707) De Analysi (1711) Other writings Quaestiones (1661–1665) " standing on the shoulders of giants " (1675) Notes on the Jewish Temple (c. 1680) " General Scholium " (1713; " hypotheses non fingo " ) Ancient Kingdoms Amended (1728) Corruptions of Scripture (1754) Contributions Calculus fluxion Impact depth Inertia Newton disc Newton polygon Newton–Okounkov body Newton's reflector Newtonian telescope Newton scale Newton's metal Spectrum Structural coloration Newtonianism Bucket argument Newton's inequalities Newton's law of cooling Newton's law of universal gravitation post-Newtonian expansion parameterized gravitational constant Newton–Cartan theory Schrödinger–Newton equation Newton's laws of motion Kepler's laws Newtonian dynamics Newton's method in optimization Apollonius's problem truncated Newton method Gauss–Newton algorithm Newton's rings Newton's theorem about ovals Newton–Pepys problem Newtonian potential Newtonian fluid Classical mechanics Corpuscular theory of light Leibniz–Newton calculus controversy Newton's notation Rotating spheres Newton's cannonball Newton–Cotes formulas Newton's method generalized Gauss–Newton method Newton fractal Newton's identities Newton polynomial Newton's theorem of revolving orbits Newton–Euler equations Newton number kissing number problem Newton's quotient Parallelogram of force Newton–Puiseux theorem Absolute space and time Luminiferous aether Newtonian series table Personal life Woolsthorpe Manor (birthplace) Cranbury Park (home) Early life Later life Apple tree Religious views Occult studies Scientific Revolution Copernican Revolution Relations Catherine Barton (niece) John Conduitt (nephew-in-law) Isaac Barrow (professor) William Clarke (mentor) Benjamin Pulleyn (tutor) Roger Cotes (student) William Whiston (student) John Keill (disciple) William Stukeley (friend) William Jones (friend) Abraham de Moivre (friend) Depictions Newton by Blake (monotype) Newton by Paolozzi (sculpture) Isaac Newton Gargoyle Astronomers Monument Namesake Newton (unit) Newton's cradle Isaac Newton Institute Isaac Newton Medal Isaac Newton Telescope Isaac Newton Group of Telescopes XMM-Newton Sir Isaac Newton Sixth Form Statal Institute of Higher Education Isaac Newton Newton International Fellowship Categories Isaac Newton Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Newton_International_Fellowship&oldid=1275952816 " Categories : Higher education in the United Kingdom Scholarships in the United Kingdom Royal Society Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from February 2025 Use British English from April 2015 This page was last edited on 16 February 2025, at 01:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Newton International Fellowship Add languages Add topic

