Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Training and early work 1.2 Mature work: Milan, 1823–48 1.3 Late work, after 1848 2 Critical assessment 3 Gallery 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Francesco Hayez 45 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Հայերեն Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano עברית Latina Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски मराठी مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian painter (1791–1882) Francesco Hayez Self-Portrait at the age of 78 in 1869 Born ( 1791-02-10 ) 10 February 1791 Venice , Republic of Venice Died 12 February 1882 (1882-02-12) (aged 91) Milan , Kingdom of Italy Nationality Italian Known for Painting Notable work The Kiss Movement Romanticism Francesco Hayez ( Italian: [franˈtʃesko ˈaːjets] ; 10 February 1791 – 12 February 1882) was an Italian painter. He is considered one of the leading artists of Romanticism in mid-19th-century Milan , and is renowned for his grand historical paintings , political allegories, and portraits.

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Training and early work [ edit ] Francesco Hayez was from a relatively poor family from Venice . His father, Giovanni, was a fisherman of French origin while his mother, Chiara Torcella, was from Murano . Francesco was the youngest of five sons. Hayez displayed a predisposition for drawing since childhood. He was placed at a very early age in the Venetian studio of his uncle, the antiquarian Giovanni Binasco, who hoped to train him as a restorer of paintings.

In 1798 he started to study painting under Francesco Maggiotto and gained his first experience of the Neo-classical style. His artistic education was completed, in the years 1800–03, by visits to the Galleria Farsetti, Venice, where he studied the plaster casts of antique sculptures and the reproductions of paintings by Giovanni da Udine from the Vatican. In 1803 he attended life drawing classes at the old Accademia di Pittura e Scultura in the Fonteghetto della Farina, and between 1802 and 1806 he studied the use of colour in classes run by the painter from Bergamo, Lattanzio Querena , a skilful portraitist and a copyist of 16th-century Venetian paintings.

In 1807 Hayez produced a competent Portrait of the Artist’s Family (Treviso, Museo Civico Bailo). In 1808 he was finally able to enter the Accademia di Belle Arti di Venezia , recently modernized in its teaching methods by Leopoldo Cicognara , who was to remain an important adviser and patron for Hayez. He then attended the painting school run by the Neoclassicist Teodoro Matteini .

In 1809 Hayez won a scholarship to study at the Accademia di San Luca in Rome and left Venice in October, travelling south via Rovigo, Bologna, Florence (where he met the painters Pietro Benvenuti , Giuseppe Bezzuoli and Francesco Nenci ) and Siena. At Rome, as well as studying the Antique, he spent a great deal of time studying the works of Raphael in the Vatican Stanze and visiting the workshop of the sculptor Antonio Canova , who was to have an enormous influence on him. Hayez was also able to meet many Italian and foreign artists in Rome, for example Tommaso Minardi , Jean-Auguste-Dominique Ingres and the Lukasbrüder, a group that would always hold a particular fascination for him.

In 1811 he entered a competition set by the Accademia of Naples, to which he travelled in the company of his friend the sculptor Rinaldo Rinaldi . Despite his failure to be accepted for the competition, he remained in Naples in order to study its antiquities and to complete drawings of its Renaissance monuments for Leopoldo Cicognara’s Storia della scultura (3 vols, Venice, 1813–18).

Laokoon , 1812, Milan, Pinacoteca di Brera Returning to Rome in 1812, he sent his painting Laokoon (Milan, Pinacoteca di Brera ) to the competition run by the Brera Academy , where he tied for the first prize with Antonio De Antoni ( fl.

1812). Unwilling to keep to his undertaking to enter a second time, Hayez worked, instead, on an exceptional picture, Rinaldo and Armida (Venice, Ca’ Pesaro), which he sent to Venice: it was the greatest work of his Neoclassical period. Because of this erratic behaviour, however, Canova sent Hayez away from Rome. He returned in 1815 , after spending time as at the court of Joachim Murat in Naples, where he began his large historical picture Odysseus at the Court of Alcinous (1814–16; Naples, Museo di Capodimonte ).

After his return, he won first prize in the competition established by Canova at the Accademia di San Luca, with his Triumphant Athlete (Rome, Accademia Nazionale di San Luca), beating the entries of such other artists as Ingres. Having provided excellent proof of his skills as a fresco artist while assisting Pelagio Palagi in the decoration of the Palazzo Torlonia in Rome in 1813, he was commissioned by Canova in 1816 to paint a number of fresco lunettes in the Chiaramonti corridor in the new wing of the Vatican Museums . Hayez disappointed Canova, however, because of his constant changes of mind and slowness in completing only three lunettes celebrating the artistic policies of Pope Pius VII : Sculpture Restored to Honour , the Return to Rome of her Stolen Works of Art and the Founding of the School of Drawing ; and Hayez was accordingly relieved of his commission.

In 1817 Hayez was able to devote himself to works better suited to his abilities, such as the portrait of the Cicognara Family (Venice, priv. col.), which brought him back to Venice. Here, and in Padua, until 1821, he was involved in providing decoration for various palazzi: these included in Venice the Doge's Palace and the Palazzo Gritti , and in Padua the Palazzo Zabarella .

Pietro Rossi , 1818-20, Milan, priv. col.

Between 1818 and 1819, while engaged on a commission to restore the paintings by Tintoretto in the Doge's Palace, he was encouraged by Canova and Cicognara to study 15th-century Venetian masters such as Giovanni Bellini and Vittore Carpaccio . This new interest was soon reflected in Hayez’s own work in the painting Pietro Rossi (Milan, priv. col.), produced between 1818 and 1820. Having failed to find a buyer in Venice, Hayez sent the picture in 1820 to the Brera exhibition in Milan, where it was received with great acclaim and acquired by Giorgio Pallavicino Trivulzio . Because of its new style and its subject, taken from medieval history , the work soon came to be seen as a manifesto for the new Romantic painting, and Hayez thus won immediate fame in Milanese artistic and literary circles. Here he met the writer Alessandro Manzoni and from the latter’s historical tragedy, Il conte di Carmagnola , he derived inspiration for a picture of this name. When shown at the Brera in 1821, it was admired by Stendhal , who declared Hayez to be the greatest Italian painter of the day.

Mature work: Milan, 1823–48 [ edit ] The Last Kiss of Romeo and Juliet , 1823, Tremezzo, Villa Carlotta After being appointed as a temporary replacement for Luigi Sabatelli as Professor of Painting at the Brera Academy, Hayez moved to Milan in 1823 and embarked on a highly successful career as a history painter and portraitist, showing his works almost every year at the annual exhibitions at the Brera. His work was invariably highly praised by the Romantics and disparaged by the Classcists. This was especially the case with such masterpieces of his early years in Milan as the splendid The Last Kiss of Romeo and Juliet (1823; Tremezzo, Villa Carlotta ) and the Penitent Magdalene (1825; Cernobbio, priv. col.). He also painted some extremely fine portraits during this period, for example those of Carlo Della Bianca (1822; Milan, Pinacoteca di Brera) and Carolina Zucchi (1825; Turin Civic Gallery of Modern and Contemporary Art ), and a Self-portrait in a Group of Friends (1824–7; Milan, priv. col.).

Among his most faithful patrons were men at the forefront of the fight for Italian independence, such as Francesco Teodoro Arese Lucini , who had himself painted in chains by Hayez in one of the most outstanding portraits of the 19th century (Milan, priv. col.). Exhibitions of Hayez’s history paintings, in which he often portrayed contemporary Milanese personalities in the guise of figures from the past, caused a great sensation, because of the novelty of their subject-matter and because of their style.

One of the most significant aspects of his art, however, was his interest in events from Italian history, which he portrayed in paintings containing clear political allusions, such as the Lampugnani's Conspiracy (1826–9; Milan, Pinacoteca di Brera). The two paintings with perhaps the strongest political content were Peter the Hermit Preaching the First Crusade (Milan, priv. col.) and The Refugees of Parga (Brescia, Pinacoteca Civica Tosio-Martinengo), shown at the Brera Academy in 1829 and 1831 respectively. Because of the effectiveness of their patriotic message, the themes of the Crusades and the Greek War of Independence were repeated in other works. During this period Hayez also painted a number of individualistic and highly evocative portraits, such as the ones depicting the ballerina Carlotta Chabert as Venus Playing with Two Doves (Trent, Cassa di Risparmio) and the singer Giovanni David in Theatrical Costume (Milan, Pinacoteca di Brera), both of which caused a great stir at the Brera Exhibition of 1830. The following year he exhibited his beautiful portrait of Cristina Trivulzio Belgiojoso (Florence, priv. col.), the princess who had been exiled by the Austrians. This sumptuous likeness was painted on panel, a technique used by Hayez for his most demanding portraits and for works in which he wanted to achieve particular effects of transparency and chromatic nuance.

Throughout this period Hayez alternated painting with printmaking, achieving brilliant results with lithography , a new means of reproduction only recently introduced to Milan. Of particular importance are the two sets of prints Lombards in the First Crusade , illustrating the historical poem (1827–8) by Tommaso Grossi , and a series (Milan, Biblioteca di Brera ) illustrating Walter Scott ’s novel Ivanhoe ( 1828–31). By the mid-1830s Hayez began to attend the Maffei Salon in Milan , hosted by Clara Maffei . Maffei's husband would later commission Hayez a portrait of his wife.

In 1833, when his fame was at its peak, he began work on a gigantic canvas intended to be his greatest work: Thirst Suffered by the First Crusaders beneath the Walls of Jerusalem , inspired by a variety of historical and literary sources. In 1838, having started work on the painting, he found a patron in the person of King Charles Albert of Sardinia , who was, however, never to see its completion when it was hung (1850) in the Hall of the Bodyguards in the Royal Palace of Turin . The painting, which still impresses today, partly through its echoes of Giuseppe Verdi ’s melodramatic opera I Lombardi alla prima crociata , marked a change of direction for Hayez: from that point on he appeared more influenced by memories of the Venetian Settecento (especially the work of Piazzetta and Giovanni Battista Tiepolo ) and also by aspects of contemporary German painting. A decisive factor in this change had been a trip to Munich to see recent German painting and to meet artists such as Peter Cornelius, Julius Schnorr von Carolsfeld , Heinrich Maria von Hess and Wilhelm von Kaulbach .

Two Foscari , 1838, Milan, priv. col.

In 1838 Ferdinand I of Austria , in Milan for his coronation, unveiled the fresco by Hayez in the Royal Palace , representing the Allegory of the Political Order of Ferdinand I of Austria (destr. 1943; cartoon, Milan, Pinacoteca di Brera), and admired two new paintings by Hayez at the Brera exhibition. Hayez received a commission from the Emperor, who also acquired the beautiful Two Foscari (Milan, priv. col.), a work that was to mark the start of a series of paintings of Venetian subjects that were to bring Hayez vast popularity. Recognition of the political commitment of his work, on the other hand, came from the politician Giuseppe Mazzini , who, in an article published in 1841, hailed Hayez as a great patriotic painter. In the meantime, Hayez’s painting became increasingly sophisticated and refined, both in composition and in technique. This applied not only to more intimate works such as his Self-portrait (1848; Milan, Pinacoteca di Brera) but also to his great historical pictures, such as his new version of The Sicilian Vespers (Rome, Galleria Nazionale d'Arte Moderna ), which was commissioned by the Neapolitan Prince Ruffo di Sant’Antimo, and which was begun in Sicily in 1844 (completed 1846). One of the significant features of these works is the way in which they relate to the contemporary melodramas of Verdi, a friend of the artist, whom Hayez often advised in the staging of his operas.

Late work, after 1848 [ edit ] The Kiss , 1859, Milan, Pinacoteca di Brera After the Five Days of Milan , in which Hayez took an active part, his painting underwent a radical change. He almost entirely abandoned great historical subjects and devoted himself to painting allegories with strong political connotations, such as two versions of La Meditazione (1850; Brescia, priv. col.). He found great popularity with the Revenge Triptych , comprising Secret Accusation (1848; Pavia, Pinacoteca Malaspina ), Vengeance is Sworn (1851; Milan, priv. col.) and Revenge of a Rival (1853; Milan, priv. col.). This was also a period of exceptional portraits, revealing great psychological insight and extraordinary skills in formal arrangement, as in the Portrait of Matilde Juva Branca (1851; Milan, Galleria di Arte Moderna). Hayez had little success with works sent to the Exposition Universelle in Paris in 1855 , but he was well received on his second trip to Munich in 1858. He greeted the unification of Italy with a small painting, The Kiss (Milan, Brera, exh. 1859), symbolic of the new historical climate and now his best-known work. The anonymous, unaffected gesture of the couple does not require knowledge of myth or literature to interpret, and appeals to a modern gaze.

[ 2 ] Despite his advancing years, he continued painting until the end of his life, devoting himself mainly to portraits, for example those of the author and statesman Massimo d’Azeglio (1864), of Camillo Benso, Count of Cavour (1864) and of the composer Gioacchino Rossini ( 1870; all Milan, Pinacoteca di Brera).

His two most exacting late works were his large historical paintings, completed in 1867 and presented to the Accademie of Milan and Venice: Marin Faliero Led to his Death (Milan, Brera) and Destruction of the Temple in Jerusalem (Venice, Ca’ Pesaro). The bleakly pessimistic message of these two canvases contrasts with the mood of his last work, shown at the Mostra Nazionale in Milan in 1881, a Vase of Flowers at the Window of the Harem ( 1881; Milan, Brera), a simple and joyful homage to the art of painting. In 1869 Hayez had begun dictating his memoirs, which provide the main source of information on his life. Hayez died in Milan, age 91. His studio at the Brera Academy is marked with a plaque. Among his pupils from the Brera Academy were Carlo Belgioioso, Amanzio Cattaneo, Alessandro Focosi , Giovanni Battista Lamperti , Livo Pecora, Angelo Pietrasanta , Antonio Silo, Ismaele Teglio Milla and Francesco Valaperta .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] After the great success it had enjoyed during his lifetime, his historical work was not appreciated by later critics, who much preferred his portraits, until the positive reassessment of his oeuvre as a whole during the 1970s.

Critical assessment [ edit ] Over the course of a long career, Hayez proved to be particularly prolific. His output included historic paintings designed to appeal to the patriotic sensibility of his patrons as well as works reflecting the desire to accompany a Neoclassic style to grand themes, either from biblical or classical literature. He also painted scenes from theatrical presentations. Conspicuously absent from his oeuvre, however, are altarpieces - possibly due to the Napoleonic invasions that deconsecrated many churches and convents in Northern Italy. Art historian Corrado Ricci described Hayez as a classicist who then evolved into a style of emotional tumult .

[ 5 ] His portraits have the intensity of Ingres and the Nazarene movement . Often sitting, Hayez's subjects are often dressed in austere, black and white clothing, with little to no accoutrements. While Hayez made portraits for the nobility, he also explored other subjects like fellow artists and musicians. Late in his career, he is known to have worked using photographs.

One of Hayez's favorite themes was semi-clothed Odalisque evocative of oriental themes – a favorite topic of Romantic painters.

[ 6 ] The depictions of harems and their women allowed artists the ability to paint scenes otherwise not acceptable within society. Even Hayez's Mary Magdalene has more sensuality than religious fervor.

A scientific assessment of Hayez's career has been made complicated by his proclivity for not signing or dating his works. Often dates in his paintings indicate when the work was acquired or sold, not the time of its creation. Moreover, he often painted the same compositions several times with minimal variations if any at all.

Gallery [ edit ] See also Category:Paintings by Francesco Hayez .

Self-Portrait , Galleria degli Uffizi, Florence Reclining Odalisque (1839) Portrait of Gian Giacomo Poldi Pezzoli Destruction of Temple of Jerusalem (1867) Crusaders Thirsting near Jerusalem (1836–1850) Aristotle , 1811 Scene from Byron's drama The Two Foscari ( Antonio Bernocchi family collection, today in the Museum of Fondazione Cariplo) Sicilian Vespers scene 1 (1821–22) Sicilian Vespers scene 3 (1821–22) Meeting of Esau and Jacob Interior of a Harem Rinaldo and Armida (1813) The Last Kiss of Romeo and Juliet (1823) Bathsheba (1827) Mary Stuart Ascends the Scaffold (1827) Carlotta Chabert as Venus (1830) Rebecca at the Well (1831) The Refugees of Parga (1831) Mary Stuart Proclaiming Her Innocence (1832) Portrait of Cristina Trivulzio Belgiojoso (1833) Lot and His Daughters (1833) Bathsheba at Her Bath (1834) Samson and the Lion (1842) Tamar (1847) Susanna at her Bath (1850) La Meditazione (1851) Ruth (1853) Nude Bather Odalisque with Book (1866) Odalisque (1867) Ciociara [ 7 ] Portrait, Matilde Juva-Branca (1851) Portrait, Princess di Sant' Antimo (1840–1844) Portrait, Antonietta Tarsis Basilico (1851) Portrait, Felicina Caglio Perego di Cremnago (1842) Portrait, Antonietta Vitali Sola (1823) Portrait, Gioacchino Rossini (1870) Portrait, Camillo Benso, Conte of Cavour (1864) Portrait, Massimo d'Azeglio (1860) Portrait, Alessandro Manzoni (1841) Portrait, Conte Ninni (1823) Levite Ephraim (1842–1844) The Victorious Athlete (1813) Vengeance is Sworn (1851) Secret Accusation (1847–1848) Revenge of a Rival (The Venetian Woman) (1853) Odalisque in her Sleep , 1857 Self-Portrait in a Group of Friends (1824 or 1827). From right to left Tommaso Grossi , Giuseppe Molteni , Giovanni Migliara and Pelagio Palagi See also [ edit ] Christian art List of Orientalist artists Orientalism Neo-romanticism References [ edit ] ^ "Francesco Hayez" .

Pittori e scultori italiani (in Italian). Archived from the original on January 26, 2009.

^ Alfredo Melani (1905). " Tranquillo Cremona - Painter ", Studio International , Vol. 33, pp. 43-45.

^ Delle arti del designo e degli artisti nelle provincie di Lombardia dal 1777-1862 by Antonio Caini (1862). Presso Luigi di Giacomo Pirola, Milan. Page 61.

^ Angelo Pietrasanta: un protagonista della pittura lombarda , by Laura Putti, Sergio Rebora, editor Silvana, 2009.

^ Corrado Ricci (1911) Art in Northern Italy . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. p. 95.

^ See Ingres' Grande Odalisque ^ A derogatory term used in Rome in the nineteenth century to ridicule the poor shepherds of the mountain regions; the term was then used by the painters of the time for their portraits.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Francesco Hayez .

Di Monte, Michele (2003).

"HAYEZ, Francesco" .

Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani , Volume 61: Guglielmo Gonzaga–Jacobini (in Italian). Rome: Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana .

ISBN 978-88-12-00032-6 .

v t e Francesco Hayez Paintings The Victorious Athlete (1813) Odysseus at the Court of Alcinous (1814–1816) Pietro Rossi (1818–1820) The Sicilian Vespers (1822, 1826–1827, 1846) The Last Kiss of Romeo and Juliet (1823) Self-Portrait in a Group of Friends (1824–1827) Lampugnani's Conspiracy (1826) Bathsheba (1827) Carlotta Chabert as Venus (1830) Rebecca at the Well (1831) The Refugees of Parga (1831) Mary Stuart Proclaiming Her Innocence (1832) Lot and His Daughters (1833) Bathsheba at Her Bath (1834) Melancholy (1840–1841) Portrait of Alessandro Manzoni (1841) Tamar (1847) Portrait of Teresa Manzoni Stampa Borri (1849) Susanna at her Bath (1850) Portrait of Matilde Juva Branca (1851) La Meditazione (1851) Revenge Triptych (1848–1853) Ruth (1853) Portrait of Countess Antonietta Negroni Prati Morosini as a Child (1858) The Kiss (1859) Self-Portrait Aged 71 (1862) Related Francesco Maggiotto (master) Teodoro Matteini (master) Romanticism v t e Romanticism Countries Denmark England (literature) France (literature) Germany Japan Norway Poland Russia (literature) Scotland Spain (literature) Sweden (literature) Movements Ancients Bohemianism Coppet group Counter-Enlightenment Dark Düsseldorf School German historical school Gothic revival Hudson River School Indianism Jena Lake Poets Nationalist Nazarene movement Neo Pre Sturm und Drang Post Purismo Transcendentalism Ukrainian school Ultra Wallenrodism Themes Blue flower British Marine Gesamtkunstwerk Gothic fiction Hero Byronic Romantic Historical fiction Mal du siècle Medievalism Noble savage Nostalgia Ossian Pantheism Rhine Romantic genius Wanderlust Weltschmerz White Mountain art Writers Brazil Abreu Alencar Manuel Antônio de Almeida Alves Assis Azevedo Barreto Dias Guimarães Macedo Magalhães Reis Taunay Varela France Baudelaire Bertrand Chateaubriand Dumas Gautier Hugo Lamartine Mérimée Musset Nerval Nodier Staël Vigny Germany A. v. Arnim B. v. Arnim Beer Brentano Eichendorff Fouqué Goethe Brothers Grimm Günderrode Gutzkow Hauff Heine Hoffmann Hölderlin Jean Paul Kleist Mörike Novalis Schwab Tieck Uhland Great Britain Barbauld Blake Anne Brontë C. Brontë E. Brontë Burns Byron Carlyle Clare Coleridge de Quincey Maria Edgeworth Keats Maturin Polidori Radcliffe Mary Robinson Scott Seward M. Shelley P. B. Shelley Southey Wordsworth Poland Fredro Krasiński Józef Ignacy Kraszewski Malczewski Mickiewicz Norwid Potocki Wincenty Pol Słowacki Portugal Castelo Branco Castilho João de Deus Dinis Garrett Herculano Soares dos Passos Romania Mihail Kogălniceanu Constantin Negruzzi Vasile Alecsandri Dimitrie Bolintineanu Mihai Eminescu George Coșbuc Octavian Goga Alexandru Macedonski Barbu Ștefănescu Delavrancea Russia Baratynsky Batyushkov Gogol Karamzin Küchelbecker Lermontov Pushkin Tyutchev Vyazemsky Zhukovsky Serbia Jakšić Kostić Njegoš Radičević Stojadinović-Srpkinja Zmaj Spain Bécquer Rosalía de Castro Espronceda Gutiérrez Saavedra Zorrilla U.S.

Bryant Cooper Emerson Hawthorne Josiah Gilbert Holland Irving Longfellow Lowell Poe Other Abovian Alfieri Andersen Baratashvili Botev Chavchavadze Foscolo Frashëri Geijer Grundtvig Heliade Isaacs Lenau Leopardi Mácha Manzoni Maturin Oehlenschläger Orbeliani Prešeren Raffi Runeberg Shevchenko Topelius Vörösmarty Wergeland Musicians Austria Bruckner Czerny Hummel Mahler Schubert Thalberg Wolf Czechia Dvořák Moscheles Reicha Smetana Voříšek France Adam Alkan Auber Berlioz Fauré Halévy Méhul Onslow Saint-Saëns Germany Beethoven Brahms Bruch Kalkbrenner Loewe Marschner Fanny Mendelssohn Felix Mendelssohn Meyerbeer Moszkowski C. Schumann R. Schumann Spohr Strauss Wagner Weber Great Britain Elgar Holst Vaughan Williams Hungary Erkel Goldmark Heller Hubay Joachim Liszt Italy Bellini Busoni Cherubini Donizetti Paganini Respighi Rossini Spontini Verdi Poland Bortkiewicz Chopin Lipiński Moniuszko Paderewski Stolpe Tausig Wieniawski Russia Arensky Balakirev Borodin Cui Glinka Lyapunov Medtner Mussorgsky Rachmaninoff Rimsky-Korsakov Rubinstein Scriabin Tchaikovsky Serbia Hristić Konjović Mokranjac Stanković U.S.

Chadwick Beach Foote Foster Joplin MacDowell Sousa Other Bennett Berwald Field Franck Grieg Sibelius Sor Philosophers Belinsky Berchet Burke Carlyle Chaadayev Coleridge Constant Emerson Fichte Goethe Hazlitt Hegel Khomyakov Lamennais Larra Maistre Mazzini Michelet Müller Novalis Quinet Rousseau Schelling Schiller A. Schlegel F. Schlegel Schleiermacher Senancour Snellman Staël Thoreau Tieck Wackenroder Visual artists Aivazovsky Bierstadt Blake Bonington Bryullov Chassériau Church Constable Cole Corot Dahl David d'Angers Delacroix Edelfelt Friedrich Fuseli Gallen-Kallela Géricault Girodet Głowacki Goya Gude Hayez Janmot Jones Kiprensky Koch Lampi Leutze Martin Michałowski Palmer Porto-Alegre Préault Révoil Richard Rude Runge Saleh Scheffer Stattler Stroy Tidemand Tropinin Turner Veit Ward Wiertz Scholars Abraham Abrams Barzun Beiser Berlin Blanning Bloom Blume Dahlhaus Ferber Frye Janion Lacoue-Labarthe Lovejoy de Man Nancy Porthan Ricks Rosen Wellek Related topics Coleridge's theory of life German idealism List of romantics List of Romantic poets Middle Ages in history Opium and Romanticism Romantic ballet Romantic epistemology Romantic medicine Romantic poetry Romantic psychology Romanticism and economics Romanticism and the French Revolution Romanticism in science Bacon Evolution theory Wanderer above the Sea of Fog ← Age of Enlightenment Modernism → Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Netherlands Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN RKD Artists People Italian People EUTA Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Francesco_Hayez&oldid=1303853501 " Categories : 1791 births 1882 deaths Italian male painters 19th-century Italian painters 19th-century Italian male artists 19th-century painters of historical subjects Accademia di Belle Arti di Venezia alumni Academic staff of Brera Academy Burials at the Cimitero Monumentale di Milano Italian romantic painters Italian portrait painters Italian people of French descent Italian Orientalist painters Painters from Venice Painters from the Austrian Empire Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages with Italian IPA Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 12:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Francesco Hayez 45 languages Add topic

