Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Kalaw Lagaw Ya 2 Meriam Mir 3 Torres Strait Creole 4 Sign language 5 Examples 6 References Toggle the table of contents Torres Strait Island languages 2 languages Deutsch Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Three languages of the Torres Strait Islands "Torres language" redirects here. For the language spoken on the Torres Islands of Vanuatu, see Lo-Toga language .

Languages used at home by Torres Strait Islanders in localities with significant share of Torres Strait islander population.

[ 1 ] There are three languages spoken in the Torres Strait Islands : two indigenous languages and an English-based creole. The indigenous language spoken mainly in the western and central islands is Kalaw Lagaw Ya , belonging to the Pama–Nyungan languages of the Australian mainland. The other indigenous language spoken mainly in the eastern islands is Meriam Mir : a member of the Trans-Fly languages spoken on the nearby south coast of New Guinea and the only Papuan language spoken on Australian territory. Both languages are agglutinative ; however Kalaw Lagaw Ya appears to be undergoing a transition into a declensional language while Meriam Mìr is more clearly agglutinative.

Yumplatok , or Torres Strait Creole, the third language, is a non-typical Pacific English Creole and is the main language of communication on the islands.

Kalaw Lagaw Ya [ edit ] Main article: Kalaw Lagaw Ya The language of the western and central islands of Torres Strait is related to languages of the Australian mainland and is a member of the Pama–Nyungan family of languages, which covers most of Australia. This language is known by its dialect names: Kalau Lagau Ya, Kalau Kawau Ya, Kulkalgau Ya and Kaiwaligau Ya (this latter also called Kowrareg, which is from the mid-19th century Kowrareg dialect form kauraraiga/kaurarega 'islander'.

Kalau Lagau Ya is often called Kala Lagaw Ya in the literature. From here on it is known as Kalau Lagau Ya as per the High Court Decision on 7 August 2013.

Sydney Ray's "Linguistics" [ 2 ] and Rod Mitchell's "Ngalmun Lagaw Yangukudu" [ 3 ] are the main descriptions of the language. Ray contains a vocabulary list of both Mabuiag (as called by the Cambridge Expedition) and Meriam Mìr . In 2001 and 2003, Ron Edwards published the Torres Strait Languages vocabularies of Sydney H. Ray. This is the only dictionary available for use by Torres Strait Islanders and people who want to teach, learn and speak the Torres Strait languages. Unfortunately, neither the Ray work nor his vocabularies are very good, and contain many mistakes. The dictionaries can only be used in conjunction with knowledgeable native speakers to point out errors and corrections.

The four dialects of the Kalau Lagau Ya are very close to each other, somewhat like Standard American and Standard Australian English are to each other. Its vocabulary is potentially 80% non-Australian; much of the non-Australian content is Papuan (Trans-Fly) and Austronesian (South-East Papuan [ 4 ] [ 3 ] ). It is an interesting language in having feminine and masculine gender, though no neuter gender [this is typical among Australian languages that have gender as well as many of the neighbouring Papuan languages] – and the difference is semantically significant in that many words can be masculine or feminine according to inherent reference or culturally significant reference. For example, za as masculine means 'an important topic/subject', and as feminine is 'thing, object'.

Gœiga when masculine means 'sun', and when feminine means 'day'.

Meriam Mir [ edit ] The language of eastern Torres Strait is Meriam Mìr . This is a Papuan language and is related to the languages of the nearby coast of Papua New Guinea . Meriam Mir is the only Papuan language indigenous to Australia, and used to have two dialects, Erubim Mìr and Meriam Mir.

Both languages are strictly speaking mixed languages, Meriam Mìr having some Australian/Kalaw Lagaw Ya influence as well as Austronesian. It is probably the case that Meriam Mìr settlers 'overlaid' Kalaw lagaw ya speakers on the Eastern islands (these non-Meriam people who have always been resident on the Eastern Islands are called Nog Le 'Common People', Lawrie).

[ citation needed ] Torres Strait Creole [ edit ] The third language of the Torres Straits is a creole that developed from Torres Strait Pidgin English, the earliest records of which date to the mid 1800s, though creolisation started in the 1880s at the earliest. This Torres Strait Creole is also known as Blaikman Tok , Broken/Brokan and Yumplatok . It has five dialects – Papuan, Western-Central, Eastern, TI and Cape York.

Sign language [ edit ] Main articles: Western Torres Strait Islander Sign Language and Eastern Torres Strait Islander Sign Language Both languages have signed forms , though they are not reported to be particularly well-developed compared to other Australian Aboriginal sign languages .

[ 5 ] Examples [ edit ] The table below shows how some example phrases differ in the Torres Strait languages. Kalau Kawau Ya, Kala Lagau Ya, Kulkalgau Ya and Kaiwaligau Ya, 'old' Kaiwaligau Ya are the dialects of Kalau Lagau Ya.

Comparison of phrases in Torres Strait Islander Languages and Dialects English I am an Islander I go home/to the house Kalau Kauau Ya Ngai kauau mœbaig Ngai kaualaig Ngai lagapa [uzariz] Kaiwaligau Ya Ngai kaiwau mabaig Ngai kaiwalaig Ngai mudhapa [uzari] Kalau Lagau Ya Ngai lagalaig, ngai kaiwalaig Ngai lagau mabaig, ngai kaiwau mabaig Ngai mudhaka [uzari] Kulkalgau Ya Kauraraigau Ya (mid-1800s) Ngayi kaurau mabaiga Ngayi kauraraiga Ngayi mudhapa/lagapa [uzarizi] Meriam Mìr Kaka kaur le nali, kaka ged le nali Ka metaìm bakeamuda Torres Strait Creole (Yumplatok) Ai ailan man Ai go aus References [ edit ] ^ " "2021 Census - Cultural Diversity, 2021, TableBuilder" " . Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS).

^ Ray, Sydney H. (1907). "Linguistics".

Reports of the Cambridge Anthropological Expedition to Torres Straits . Vol. 3.

^ a b Mitchell, Rod (April 2015). "Ngalmun Lagaw Yangukudu: The Language of our Homeland in Goemulgaw Lagal: Cultural and Natural Histories of the Island of Mabuyag, Torres Strait".

Memoirs of the Queensland Museum – Culture .

8 (1): 323– 446.

ISSN 1440-4788 .

^ David, Bruno; McNiven, Ian; Mitchell, Rod; Orr, Meredith; Haberle, Simon; Brady, Liam; Crouch, Joe (1 July 2004). "Badu 15 and the Papuan–Austronesian Settlement of Torres Strait".

Archaeology in Oceania .

^ Kendon, Adam (1988).

Sign Languages of Aboriginal Australia: Cultural, Semiotic and Communicative Perspectives . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

v t e List of Torres Strait topics Torres Strait Islands , islets , and cays Bellevue group Aipus Cap Kamutnab Keatinge Mabuiag Pulu Subur Warakuikul Talab Widul Bourke group Aukane Aureed Kabbikane Layoak Mimi Roberts Yam Duncan group Kanig Maitak Meth Inner group Port Lihou Yeta Adolphus Channel group Albany Bush Eborac Ida Middle Brother Talbot group Aubussi Boigu Moimi The Three Sisters group Bet Poll Sue Yorke group Keats Marsden Rennel Smith Ungrouped Allison Anchor Arden Badu Barn Barney Bond Booby Bramble Browne Campbell Canoe Castle Coconut Crab Dalrymple Darnley Dauan Dayman Deliverance Dove Dugong Dumaralug East East Strait Entrance Farewell Flat Friday Gabba Getullai Goods Great Woody Green Halfway Hammond Hawkesbury High Horn Kaumag Kerr Lacey Little Adolphus Little Woody Lowry Mai Meddler Moa Morilug Mouinndo Mount Adolphus Mount Ernest Murangi Murray Nepean Nicklin North North Possession North West Obelisk Packe Passage Pearce Phipps Portlock Prince of Wales Quoin Red Red Wallis Roko Saddle Saibai Salter Sassie Spencer Stephens Suarji Thursday Tobin Travers Tree Trochus Tudu Tukupai Turnagain Turtle Head Turtle Turu Twin Underdown Wednesday West Whale Woody Wallis York Yorke Zagai People, culture, communities and languages Notable Torres Strait Islanders Christine Anu Seaman Dan Aaron Fa'aoso Josh Hoffman Nathan Jawai Ellen Jose Robert Lui Eddie Mabo Rachael Maza Patty Mills Rita Mills Mills Sisters Danny Morseu Tanu Nona Albert Proud Wendell Sailor Sam Thaiday Brent Webb Jesse Williams Culture Indigenous music of Australia Mabo (film) Taba Naba Communities Bamaga Kaurareg Mabuiag Meriam (people) Seisia Languages Bine Eastern Trans-Fly Gizrra Kalaw Lagaw Ya Meriam Torres Strait Creole Torres Strait English Wipi Governance and legal matters Governance Shire of Torres Torres Strait Islander Flag Torres Strait Island Region Torres Strait Regional Authority Legal cases and principles Akiba v Commonwealth Mabo v Queensland No 1 No 2 Terra nullius Buildings and structures Boigu Island Airport Booby Island Light Coconut Island Airport Darnley Island Airport Eborac Island Light Goods Island Light Kubin Airport Murray Island Airport Saibai Island Airport Warraber Island Airport Wyborn Reef Light Yam Island Airport Yorke Island Airport Other Adolphus Channel Australian Institute of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Studies Birds of Boigu, Saibai and Dauan Islands Endeavour Strait Alfred Cort Haddon Margaret Lawrie Sea Swift Warul Kawa Indigenous Protected Area Category Commons See also: List of Torres Strait Islands NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐jh48h
Cached time: 20250812005908
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.324 seconds
Real time usage: 0.441 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1166/1000000
Revision size: 7728/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 58381/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1868/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 27488/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.209/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6109976/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  376.713      1 -total
 31.49%  118.619      1 Template:Reflist
 29.85%  112.459      4 Template:Navbox
 27.66%  104.193      1 Template:Torres_Strait
 20.26%   76.305      1 Template:Cite_web
 17.21%   64.820      1 Template:Short_description
 10.24%   38.583      2 Template:Pagetype
  9.10%   34.290      1 Template:Citation_needed
  8.42%   31.724      1 Template:Fix
  6.29%   23.714      1 Template:Redirect Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6713707:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812005908 and revision id 1301162898. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Torres_Strait_Island_languages&oldid=1301162898 " Categories : Agglutinative languages Languages of Australia Culture of the Torres Strait Islands Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Australian English from July 2016 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Use dmy dates from July 2016 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2007 This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 11:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Torres Strait Island languages 2 languages Add topic

