Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Historical context 3 Notable action painters 4 Exhibitions 5 See also 6 References and notes 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Action painting 33 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Style of painting For the compilation album of the same name, see Action Painting (album) .

Action painting , sometimes called " gestural abstraction ", is a style of painting in which paint is spontaneously dribbled, splashed or smeared onto the canvas , rather than being carefully applied. The resulting work often emphasizes the physical act of painting itself as an essential aspect of the finished work or concern of its artist.

Background [ edit ] The style was widespread from the 1940s until the early 1960s, and is closely associated with abstract expressionism (some critics have used the terms "action painting" and " abstract expressionism " interchangeably).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] A comparison is often drawn between the American action painting and the French tachisme .

[ 2 ] The New York School of American Abstract Expressionism (1940s-50s) is also seen as closely linked to the movement.

[ 3 ] The term was coined by the American critic Harold Rosenberg in 1952, [ 4 ] in his essay "The American Action Painters", [ 5 ] and signaled a major shift in the aesthetic perspective of New York School painters and critics. According to Rosenberg the canvas was "an arena in which to act".

[ 6 ] The actions and means for creating the painting were seen, in action painting, of a higher importance than the result.

[ 3 ] While Rosenberg created the term "action painting" in 1952, he began creating his action theory in the 1930s as a critic.

[ 7 ] While abstract expressionists such as Jackson Pollock , Franz Kline and Willem de Kooning had long been outspoken in their view of a painting as an arena within which to come to terms with the act of creation, earlier critics sympathetic to their cause, like Clement Greenberg , focused on their works' "objectness." Clement Greenberg was also an influential critic in action painting, intrigued by the creative struggle, which he claimed was evidenced by the surface of the painting.

[ 3 ] To Greenberg, it was the physicality of the paintings' clotted and oil-caked surfaces that was the key to understanding them. "Some of the labels that became attached to Abstract Expressionism, like "informel" and "Action Painting," definitely implied this; one was given to understand that what was involved was an utterly new kind of art that was no longer art in any accepted sense. This was, of course, absurd." – Clement Greenberg, "Post Painterly Abstraction".

Rosenberg's critique shifted the emphasis from the object to the struggle itself, with the finished painting being only the physical manifestation, a kind of residue, of the actual work of art, which was in the act or process of the painting's creation. The newer research tends to put the exile-surrealist Wolfgang Paalen in the position of the artist and theoretician who used the term "action" at first in this sense and fostered the theory of the subjective struggle with it. In his theory of the viewer-dependent possibility space, in which the artist "acts" like in an ecstatic ritual, Paalen considers ideas of quantum mechanics , as well as idiosyncratic interpretations of the totemic vision and the spatial structure of native-Indian painting from British Columbia. His long essay Totem Art (1943) had considerable influence on such artists as Martha Graham , Barnett Newman , Isamu Noguchi , Jackson Pollock and Mark Rothko ; Paalen describes a highly artistic vision of totemic art as part of a ritual "action" with psychic links to genetic memory and matrilinear ancestor-worship.

[ 8 ] Over the next two decades, Rosenberg's redefinition of art as an act rather than an object, as a process rather than a product, was influential, and laid the foundation for a number of major art movements, from Happenings and Fluxus to Conceptual , Performance art , Installation art and Earth Art .

Historical context [ edit ] It is essential for the understanding of action painting to place it in historical context. The action painting movement took place in the time after World War II ended. With this came a disordered economy and culture in Europe, and in America the government took advantage of their new state of importance.

[ 9 ] A product of the post-World War II artistic resurgence of expressionism in America and more specifically New York City , action painting developed in an era where quantum mechanics and psychoanalysis were beginning to flourish and were changing people's perception of the physical and psychological world; and civilization's understanding of the world through heightened self-consciousness and awareness.

[ 10 ] American action painters pondered the nature of art as well as the reasons for the existence of art often when questioning what the value of action painting is.

[ 9 ] The preceding art of Kandinsky and Mondrian had freed itself from the portrayal of objects and instead tried to evoke, address and delineate, through the aesthetic sense, emotions and feelings within the viewer.

Action painting took this a step further, using both Jung and Freud 's ideas of the subconscious as its underlying foundations. Many of the painters were interested in Carl Jung's studies of archetypal images and types, and used their own internal visions to create their paintings.

[ 9 ] Along with Jung, Sigmund Freud and Surrealism were also influential to the beginning of action painting.

[ 6 ] The paintings of the Action painters were not meant to portray objects per se or even specific emotions. Instead they were meant to touch the observer deep in the subconscious mind, evoking a sense of the primeval and tapping the collective sense of an archetypal visual language.

[ 11 ] This was done by the artist painting "unconsciously," and spontaneously, creating a powerful arena of raw emotion and action, in the moment. Action painting was clearly influenced by the surrealist emphasis on automatism which (also) influenced by psychoanalysis claimed a more direct access to the subconscious mind . Important exponents of this concept of art making were the painters Joan Miró and André Masson .

[ citation needed ] Notable action painters [ edit ] Ana Hatherly [ 12 ] Frank Avray Wilson [ 13 ] Norman Bluhm [ 14 ] James Brooks [ 15 ] Nicolas Carone [ 16 ] Elaine de Kooning [ 17 ] Willem de Kooning [ 18 ] John Ferren [ 19 ] Perle Fine [ 20 ] Sam Francis [ 21 ] Michael Goldberg William Green [ 22 ] Ismail Gulgee [ 23 ] Philip Guston [ 24 ] Grace Hartigan [ 25 ] Franz Kline [ 26 ] Albert Kotin [ 24 ] Lee Krasner [ 27 ] Alfred Leslie [ 24 ] Conrad Marca-Relli [ 24 ] Georges Mathieu [ 28 ] Joan Mitchell [ 24 ] Jackson Pollock [ 24 ] Milton Resnick [ 29 ] Joe Stefanelli [ 30 ] Jack Tworkov [ 31 ] Exhibitions [ edit ] Action Painting Organized by Ulf Küster. Fondation Beyekerm Basekm Switzerland, January 27–May 12, 2008 [ 32 ] Action/Abstraction: Pollock, de Kooning, and American Art, 1940–1976 Organized by Norman L. Kleeblatt. Jewish Museum, New York, May 4–September 21, 2008 [ 32 ] See also [ edit ] Tachisme Michel Tapié Gutai group Abstract Imagists New York School Abstract Expressionism Lyrical abstraction 9th Street Art Exhibition Tenth Street galleries References and notes [ edit ] ^ "Art History Definition: Action Painting" .

ThoughtCo . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ a b Boddy-Evans, Marion.

" Art Glossary: Action Painting " . About.com. Archived from the original on 12 March 2007 . Retrieved 20 August 2006 .

^ a b c "Action Painting Technique: Definition, Characteristics" .

www.visual-arts-cork.com . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ Rosenberg, Harold.

" The American Action Painters " . poetrymagazines.org.uk. Archived from the original on 2016-04-10 . Retrieved 20 August 2006 .

^ Stokstad, Marilyn, 2008, Art History , 3:d edition, London, Pearson Education, p. 1133.

^ a b "Action Painting | Artsy" .

www.artsy.net . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ Slifkin, Robert (June 2011). "The Tragic Image: Action Painting Refigured".

Oxford Art Journal .

34 (2): 227– 246.

doi : 10.1093/oxartj/kcr019 .

^ Andreas Neufert, Auf Liebe und Tod, Das Leben des Surrealisten Wolfgang Paalen , Berlin (Parthas) 2015, S. 494ff.

^ a b c Kaufman, Jason Edwards (Spring 2008).

"What the Mind's Eye Sees: Action painters were postwar exemplars of American individualism" .

American Scholar .

77 : 113– 117 – via EBSCO.

^ "Peggy Liebenow: Abstrakte Kunst" (in German) . Retrieved 2021-10-06 .

^ Hunt, T.; Schooler, J. W. (2019).

"The Easy Part of the Hard Problem: A Resonance Theory of Consciousness" .

Frontiers in Human Neuroscience .

13 : 378.

doi : 10.3389/fnhum.2019.00378 .

PMC 6834646 .

PMID 31736728 .

^ "Ana Hatherly and the Baroque. In a Garden Made of Ink" .

Calouste Gulbenkian Museum - Modern Collection . Retrieved 2021-11-09 .

^ "Frank Avray Wilson biography" .

Whitford Fine Art . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ "Why Haven't You Heard of Norman Bluhm?- artnet News" .

artnet News . 2016-06-08 . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ Exhibit-E.

"James Brooks (1906-1992) - Artists - Michael Rosenfeld Art" .

www.michaelrosenfeldart.com . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ "Nicolas Carone | Loretta Howard Gallery" .

lorettahoward.com . Archived from the original on 2018-05-04 . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ "Elaine de Kooning, Portraiture, and the Politics of Sexuality" .

Genders 1998-2013 . 2003-09-01 . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ exhibit-E.com.

"Biography - The Artist - Willem de Kooning Foundation" .

www.dekooning.org . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ "John Ferren | Smithsonian American Art Museum" .

^ Tennessee, AE Artworks - Nashville.

"Biography - Perle Fine - Abstract Expressionist Art - PerleFine.Com" .

www.perlefine.com . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ "The Late Abstract Expressionism in the Works of Sam Francis - IdeelArt" .

IdeelArt . Archived from the original on 2018-05-04 . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ "Action Art" .

www.artmovements.co.uk . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ "ArtAsiaPacific: Ismail Gulgee19262007" .

artasiapacific.com . Archived from the original on 2018-05-04 . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ a b c d e f "New York School Action Painting 1950s" .

Post War American Expressionsim . 2012-02-22 . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ "Grace Hartigan: New York School painter who later rejected Abstract" .

The Independent . 2008-12-08.

Archived from the original on 2008-12-09 . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ "Franz Kline Biography, Art, and Analysis of Works" .

The Art Story . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ "Lee Krasner and Her Impressive Oeuvre - IdeelArt" .

IdeelArt . Archived from the original on 2018-05-04 . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ "Georges Mathieu Biography – Georges Mathieu on artnet" .

www.artnet.com . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ "Milton Resnick: A Question of Seeing" .

The Brooklyn Rail . 7 June 2008 . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ "Joe (Joseph) Stefanelli American Abstract Expressionist - Artlyst" .

Artlyst . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ "Jack Tworkov Biography – Jack Tworkov on artnet" .

www.artnet.com . Retrieved 2018-05-04 .

^ a b "Action Painting: Perspectives from Two Sides of the Atlantic" .

Art Journal .

67 : 119– 121. Winter 2008 – via EBSCO.

Rosenberg, Harold The Tradition of the New (1959) - Ayer Co Pub - ISBN 0-8369-2127-5 Wills, Garry Action Painting in Venice (1994) Marika Herskovic, American Abstract Expressionism of the 1950s An Illustrated Survey, Archived 2007-09-29 at the Wayback Machine (New York School Press, 2003.) ISBN 0-9677994-1-4 Marika Herskovic, New York School Abstract Expressionists Artists Choice by Artists, Archived 2007-09-29 at the Wayback Machine (New York School Press, 2000.) ISBN 0-9677994-0-6 Hrebeniak, Michael.

Action Writing: Jack Kerouac's Wild Form , Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois UP, 2006.

External links [ edit ] Auction record including a color image of a 1960 action painting by Elaine Hamilton .

9th Street Art Exhibition-abstract expressionist artists reminisce —YouTube video v t e Abstract art Geometric abstraction Abstract photography Concrete art Constructivism De Stijl Fractal art Hard-edge painting Minimalism Op art Suprematism Lyrical abstraction Abstract expressionism Action painting All-over painting Color Field Drip painting Nuagisme Organic abstraction Tachisme Predecessors Cubism Fauvism Futurism Expressionism Category v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Action_painting&oldid=1305328278 " Categories : Modern art Contemporary art movements Abstract expressionism Art Informel and Tachisme Painting techniques Western art Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2021 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 12:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Action painting 33 languages Add topic

