Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Prevalence 2 Americas Toggle Americas subsection 2.1 Bolivia 2.2 Canada 2.3 Chile 2.4 Cuba 2.5 Mexico 3 Africa Toggle Africa subsection 3.1 Algeria 3.2 Angola 3.3 Burkina Faso 3.4 Burundi 3.5 Cameroon 3.6 Central African Republic 3.7 Chad 3.8 Democratic Republic of the Congo 3.9 Egypt 3.10 Eritrea 3.11 Ethiopia 3.12 Kenya 3.13 Libya 3.14 South Africa 3.15 Somalia 3.16 Sudan 4 Asia Toggle Asia subsection 4.1 Afghanistan 4.2 China 4.3 India 4.4 Indonesia 4.5 Malaysia 4.6 North Korea 4.7 Pakistan 4.8 Sri Lanka 5 Middle East Toggle Middle East subsection 5.1 Iraq and Syria 5.2 Israel and Palestine 5.2.1 Green Line Israel 5.2.2 Israeli public diplomacy 5.2.3 Jerusalem 5.2.4 West Bank 5.2.4.1 Taybeh 5.2.5 West Bank Checkpoints 5.2.6 West Bank during the Gaza war 5.2.7 Gaza Strip, Palestine 5.2.8 Media in Palestine 5.3 Lebanon 5.3.1 Lebanese public diplomacy 5.4 Saudi Arabia 5.5 Turkey 5.6 Yemen 6 Europe Toggle Europe subsection 6.1 Norway 6.2 Russia 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Persecution of Christians in the post–Cold War era 3 languages العربية Ελληνικά Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about the persecution of Christians since 1989. For the persecution of Christians in previous centuries, see Persecution of Christians .

Freedom of religion Concepts Laicism Religious discrimination Religious censorship Religious liberty Religious police Religious pluralism Secularism Separation of church and state Anti-clericalism School prayer Catholic priests in public office Confessionalism Theocracy State religion Secular state Confessional state Atheist state Status by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros DR Congo Egypt Mauritania Morocco South Africa Sudan Tanzania North and South America Brazil Canada Colombia Ecuador Guyana Panama Paraguay United States Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Northern Cyprus Georgia India Indonesia Japan Kazakhstan Laos Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal North Korea Pakistan Philippines Russia Singapore South Korea Sri Lanka Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Turkmenistan Uzbekistan Vietnam Europe Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Northern Cyprus France Georgia Germany Hungary Italy Kosovo Montenegro North Macedonia Norway Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Bahrain Egypt Iran Iraq Israel Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Oman Palestinian territories Qatar Saudi Arabia Syria UAE Yemen Oceania Australia Topical Apostasy in Islam by country Blasphemy laws by country Female genital mutilation laws by country Legal aspects of ritual slaughter Religious male circumcision Religious persecution Traditional African religions Serers Atheism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Christophobia post–Cold War era Catholicism Catholic Church Mormonism Jehovah's Witness Eastern Orthodox Christianity Oriental Orthodox Christianity Protestantism Falun Gong Hinduism ( Anti-Hindu sentiment ) Islam Sunni Shi'a Ahmadiyya Alevism Sufis Islamophobia Persecution of non-believers Judaism Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Religious antisemitism New religious movements Christian countercult movement Neopaganism Rastafari Zoroastrianism Religion portal v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Part of a series on Persecutions of the Catholic Church Overview Historical persecution of Christians Catholic Church persecutions 1939–1958 Eradication of the Church under Stalinism Eastern Catholic persecutions Persecution of Christians in the modern era Roman Empire Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire Diocletianic Persecution Neo-Persian Empire Sasanian conquest of Jerusalem Byzantine Empire Massacre of the Latins Japan Martyrs of Japan India Violence against Christians in India 2008 attacks on Christians in southern Karnataka China Martyr Saints of China Vietnam Vietnamese Martyrs Canada Canadian Martyrs United States Know Nothing Oregon Compulsory Education Act Pierce v. Society of Sisters Philadelphia nativist riots Ursuline Convent riots Norway Anti-Catholicism in Norway Great Britain and Ireland Anti-Catholicism in the United Kingdom List of Catholic martyrs of the English Reformation Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Irish Catholic Martyrs Dissolution of the Monasteries Penal Laws Cromwellian conquest of Ireland France Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution War in the Vendée Martyrs of Compiègne Massacre in the Rue Haxo Expulsion of congregations Spain Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War Red Terror Dilectissima Nobis Martyrs of Turon Martyrs of Daimiel Bartolomé Blanco Innocencio of Mary Immaculate José María of Manila 233 Spanish Martyrs 498 Spanish Martyrs 522 Spanish Martyrs Burning of convents in Spain (1931) Germany Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church in Germany Mit brennender Sorge Kulturkampf Poland Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church in Poland Polish anti-religious campaign 1945–1990 108 Blessed Polish Martyrs Russia Martyrs of Pratulin Conversion of Chelm Eparchy Anti-Catholicism in the Soviet Union Eastern Catholic victims of Soviet persecutions Mexico Cristero War Saints Anti-clericalism in Mexico El Salvador Four U.S. missionaries 1989 murders of Jesuits Catholicism portal v t e The persecution of Christians from 1989 to the present is part of a global pattern of religious persecution . In this era, the persecution of Christians takes place in Africa, the Americas, Europe, Asia and the Middle East .

The number of anti-Christian persecutions has increased on a global scale, leading the United Kingdom's Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs to release a report which highlights this trend in 2019 stated that the number of countries where Christians face persecution for their faith rose to 144 in 2016.

[ citation needed ] Data collected by the PEW organization between 2007 and 2017 showed that Christians experienced harassment in 144 countries, either by government forces or social groups. The United States compiles an annual report on religious freedom, detailing instances of persecution gathered from U.S. embassies worldwide, in collaboration with various governmental and non-governmental organizations.

[ citation needed ] Instances of persecution occur across Africa , with countries like Algeria, Angola, Burkina Faso, and others experiencing varying degrees of religious intolerance and violence against Christians. The Americas, Asia, and the Middle East reported significant instances of persecution, from the destruction of Christian churches in Canada to severe restrictions and violence against Christians in countries like China, North Korea, and Pakistan. The situation in the Middle East is difficult, with former Lebanese President Amine Gemayel stating in 2011 that Christians had become the target of genocide following deadly attacks in Egypt and Iraq. Overall, there has been a global increase in anti-Christian persecutions, with governments and extremist groups imposing restrictions and committing acts of violence against Christians, often under the guise of law enforcement or religious purity.

Prevalence [ edit ] A July 2019 report, in support of persecuted Christians, released by the UK's Secretary of State for Foreign and Commonwealth Affairs , states that the number of countries where Christians suffer because of their faith, rose from 125 in 2015 to 144 in 2016.

[ 1 ] The review prepared by the Bishop of Truro , states that in some regions the level and nature of persecution , is arguably coming close to meeting the International definition of genocide , according to the Genocide Convention , adopted by the United Nations .

[ 2 ] Between 2007 and 2017, the PEW organization [ 3 ] found that "Christians experienced harassment by governments or social groups in 144 countries".

[ 3 ] The United States submits an annual report on religious freedom to Congress, also containing data on religious persecution, that it has collected from U.S. embassies around the world in collaboration with the Office of International Religious Freedom and other relevant U.S. government and non-governmental institutions. The data is listed by country and is available online.

[ 4 ] Americas [ edit ] Further information: Religion in North America , Religion in South America , Religion in Central America , and Religion in the Caribbean Bolivia [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Bolivia The Bolivian government has been criticized for not adequately protecting the rights of religious minorities, including Christians, and for failing to prosecute those responsible for attacks. There have been incidents of property damage and theft directed towards Christian organizations and individuals. The country also has a history of religious tolerance and diversity, and many Christians live and worship freely without incident.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Canada [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Canada In 2021, Christian churches in Canada were subject to numerous acts of arson and vandalism that resulted in the damage and destruction of 68 churches across the country.

[ 7 ] [ dead link ] Harsha Walia , the executive director of the British Columbia Civil Liberties Association , responded to reports of fires at indigenous Catholic parishes with a tweet on June 30 that read "burn it all down". The Union of British Columbia Indian Chiefs expressed support for her without mentioning the controversial tweet.

[ 8 ] Chile [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Chile Since 2015, twelve churches have been burned in southern Chile, 10 Catholic ones and two Protestant ones. Attacks were supposedly from the Mapuche indigenous people, who are campaigning to reclaim ancestral lands, according to authorities.

[ 9 ] A note declaring "We are going to burn all churches" was found at the ruins of the Christian Union Evangelical church in Ercilla, Chile, after an arson attack on 31 March 2016.

[ 10 ] Cuba [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Cuba In Cuba, government regulations are aimed at curbing the growth of Christian house churches.

[ 11 ] Mexico [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Mexico Mexico is 83% Catholic, 5% Protestant, with some indigenous persons adhering to indigenous beliefs, 0.5% Jewish and an even smaller number of Muslims and others. In March, authorities in San Miguel Chiptic, Chiapas State, threatened three indigenous families for converting from Catholicism to the Seventh-day Adventist Church and did significant damage to their properties. On 23 May, local police in San Miguel Chiptic arrested two Seventh-day Adventist men for preaching beliefs other than Catholicism. Evangelical Protestant leaders in the states of Chiapas and Oaxaca said local indigenous leaders pressured them to financially support and/or participate in Catholic events, convert or return to Catholicism. In September Christian Solidarity Worldwide reported representatives from Rancheria Yocnajab, located in the Comitan de Dominguez municipality of Chiapas, did not allow the burial of an evangelical Protestant in the community public cemetery because she had not done so. The Catholic Multimedia Center reported that unidentified individuals killed seven priests and kidnapped another. In most cases, attacks on and killings of Catholic priests generally reflect criminal activity rather than religious persecution. In August, the CMC asserted that Mexico was the most violent country for priests in Latin America for the 10th year in a row. In March unidentified individuals detonated two homemade bombs in two Catholic churches in Matamoros, Tamaulipas. Christian Solidarity Worldwide reported unidentified individuals killed four non-Catholic clergy.

[ 12 ] Africa [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Africa There are 54 countries in Africa, with many, but not all, experiencing some type of religious persecution.

[ citation needed ] Algeria [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Algeria In Algeria, the official religion is Sunni Islam , and "those engaged in religious practice other than Sunni Islam, including Ahmadi Muslims , reported that they had experienced threats and intolerance. The police charged five Christians from Bouira Province with 'inciting a Muslim to change his religion' and 'performing religious worship in an unauthorized place.' In March 2018 a court in Tiaret convicted and fined two Christian brothers for carrying more than 50 Bibles in their car. In May another court convicted a church leader and another Christian of proselytizing, sentenced them to three months in prison, and fined them 100,000 dinars. Authorities closed eight churches and a nursery associated with the Protestant Church of Algeria (EPA). Media outlets reported vandalism of two Christian cemeteries".

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Angola [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Angola In Angola, about two-fifths of the population is Roman Catholic, two-fifths is Protestant, and some one-tenth adheres to traditional beliefs or other religions. All religious groups are required to register with the government in order to operate legally. In October 2018, the government required all unregistered religious groups to submit registration documents, 94 submitted their files. On 6 November, the government launched a nationwide law enforcement campaign against which included closing down unlicensed associations. The operation closed more than 900 houses of worship, including eight mosques.

[ 13 ] [ 15 ] Burkina Faso [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Burkina Faso In Burkina Faso society is religiously diverse with a 60.5% Muslim majority. A number of terrorist groups operated in the country throughout the year of 2018. In April they kidnapped a public schoolteacher in the Sahel Region, because "French is the language of infidels and all education should be conducted in Arabic." In September they burned and vandalized several schools and teachers' houses in the East Region, warning against secular teaching. They kidnapped a Catholic catechist and a Christian pastor in the Sahel Region in May and June. In September unidentified individuals vandalized a Catholic church, removing the heads of religious statues in the southwest area of the country.

[ 13 ] [ 16 ] Burundi [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Burundi Burundi 2018 "laws regulating nonprofit organizations and religious denominations require them to register with the Ministry of the Interior. Religious groups that do not seek or receive registration may face scrutiny, and at times harassment or prosecution, by government officials and ruling party members".

[ 13 ] [ 17 ] Cameroon [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Cameroon In Cameroon, Islam, Christianity, and Traditionalist [ clarification needed ] are the three main religions. Religious groups must register with the government but the government has not allowed registrations for eight years. In 2018, religious leaders said security forces killed three clerics, interrupted church services, and prevented people from getting to their places of worship. On 18 January, soldiers reportedly burned down the presbytery of St. Paul's Catholic Church, Kwa-Kwa, Southwest Region. During the year, the government suspended church executives who had been elected by their churches and closed places of worship. Boko Haram attacked civilians, invaded churches, burned churches, killed and kidnapped both Muslims and Christians, and stole and destroyed property including private homes. Unidentified gunmen in the Southwest Region killed a local chief in a church and assassinated a priest. Separatists threatened pastors, kidnapped priests, and sometimes limited Christians' ability to attend services. There were reports that more than 90 students were kidnapped from Presbyterian schools in two incidents in October and November.

[ 13 ] [ 18 ] Central African Republic [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in the Central African Republic In 2018, the Central African Republic is a majority Christian country that is also religiously diverse. In 2018, the government has limited control as the country is mostly controlled by the Christian anti-Balaka and the Muslim ex-Séléka militia forces who occupy territories in the western and northern parts of the country. The police and the gendarmerie (military police) failed to stop or punish killings, physical abuse, religion-based and gender-based violence committed by these militias. Sectarian clashes between the militias and the rest of the population included attacks on churches and mosques and the deaths at those places of worship.

[ 13 ] In April and May, a joint government and UN operation to disarm a militia group in Bangui's predominantly Muslim PK5 neighborhood sparked violence. On 1 May, militia gunmen attacked and killed one priest, 26 worshipers, and injured more than 100 civilians. The following day, anti-Balaka elements burned two mosques in Bangui. On 15 November, a suspected ex-Seleka militia group set fire to the Catholic cathedral and an adjoining internally displaced person (IDP) camp in the city of Alindao, killing Bishop Blaise Mada and Reverend Delestin Ngouambango and more than 40 civilians.

[ 13 ] [ 19 ] Chad [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Chad Chad in 2018 is 51–58% Muslim, 40–45% Christian, with small populations of animists and unaffiliated individuals. During the inauguration of the new government, two Christian ministers refused to swear the required oath of office in the name of Allah; one minister who refused to take any oath in the name of Allah was immediately fired by President Idriss Déby .

[ 13 ] [ 20 ] Democratic Republic of the Congo [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in the Democratic Republic of the Congo The Democratic Republic of the Congo is approximately 45 percent Roman Catholic, 40 percent Protestant (including evangelicals), 5 percent Church of Jesus Christ on Earth through the Prophet Simon Kimbangu ( Kimbanguist ), and 5 percent Muslim. International NGOs, media, and religious organizations have reported that the government subjected religious organizations and leaders, most prominently Catholic, to intimidation, arbitrary arrest , and in some cases violence. Due to the political nature of many of the Catholic Lay Association's activities and practices; however, it is difficult to establish the government's response as being solely based on religious identity.

[ 13 ] [ 21 ] Egypt [ edit ] Main articles: Christianity in Egypt and Persecution of Copts About 90% of Egypt's population is Muslim, predominantly Sunni , while approximately 10% are Christian, predominantly Coptic Orthodox . Although Islam is the state religion, the government officially recognizes Christianity and Judaism, permitting their followers to practice publicly. Nevertheless, religious freedom in Egypt faces significant challenges. The Egyptian government does not legally recognize conversions from Islam to Christianity , and missionary activities by foreigners are limited to social services rather than proselytizing.

[ 22 ] Historically, the community experienced significant tension during the presidency of Anwar Sadat , who internally exiled Coptic Pope Shenouda III in 1981 over accusations of stirring sectarian tensions. Shenouda was restored in 1985 by President Hosni Mubarak . Extremist Islamist groups, notably Al-Jama'a al-Islamiyya , heightened violence against Christians during the 1980s and 1990s, often with accusations of police complicity.

[ 23 ] Following the 2011 Egyptian Revolution , anti-Christian sentiment increased notably amid the unrest. Incidents included church burnings, violence over the appointment of a Christian governor, and inflammatory anti-Christian rhetoric by Islamist groups. The European Parliament criticized Egypt in 2011 for persecuting Christians, and by mid-2012, around 10,000 Christians had emigrated.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Violence escalated again in July 2012, when Dahshur 's entire Christian community fled following sectarian clashes after a minor dispute spiraled into riots, resulting in destruction of property and violence against Christians.

[ 26 ] Kidnappings for ransom of Christians became widespread after the revolution , particularly in Minya , with over 150 cases reported between 2011 and 2013.

[ 27 ] Tensions have persisted over church construction, despite legal permissions being available; attempts to build or renovate churches frequently provoke hostility and sometimes violent attacks from local Muslim communities.

[ 28 ] Egypt's laws on contempt of religion have also been controversial. In 2016, poet Fatima Naoot received a three-year sentence for a Facebook post criticizing animal slaughter during Eid.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] In the same year, four Christian teenagers were convicted under the same laws for reportedly mocking Islam, with three sentenced to five years imprisonment.

[ 31 ] Nonetheless, recent years have shown signs of progress in certain areas. Christians have reported greater freedom to construct and renovate churches, and new initiatives, such as interreligious reconciliation efforts and protective fatwas, have emerged.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Egypt's position on Open Doors ’ World Watch List, which ranks the 50 countries where Christians face the most persecution, fell from 25th in 2013 to 40th by 2025, indicating a measurable decline in reported persecution.

[ 34 ] However, social discrimination and underrepresentation in public institutions continue to affect the community.

[ citation needed ] Eritrea [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Eritrea The population of Eritrea is equally divided between the predominantly Christian high plateau (Asmara), and the Muslim lowlands and coast. The government recognizes four officially registered religious groups: the Eritrean Orthodox Church , Sunni Islam , the Roman Catholic Church , and the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Eritrea . Unregistered groups can be subjected to additional security service scrutiny. The government appoints the heads of the Eritrean Orthodox Church and the Sunni Islamic community. International NGOs and media reported that members of all religious groups were subjected to government abuses and restrictions. Members of unrecognized religious groups reported instances of imprisonment and deaths in custody, and detention without explanation. NGOs reported the government continued to detain 345 church leaders and officials without charge or trial, while estimates of detained laity ranged from 800 to more than 1,000. Authorities detained 53 Jehovah's Witnesses for conscientious objection.

[ 13 ] [ 35 ] Ethiopia [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Ethiopia Ethiopia has 43.5% Ethiopian Orthodox Christians, 33.9% Muslim, 18.6%, Protestants, and 2.6% traditional beliefs population. There is also a small Jewish community and some adherents of the Baháʼí Faith . In January 2018, security forces fired tear-gas on a group of youth singing politically charged messages in Woldia town during Epiphany celebrations. The local Human Rights Council (HRCO) reported that security forces shot and killed eight Orthodox Church members; this was followed by further protests and more killings. On 4 August, in the Somali region, an organized group of Muslim youth reportedly killed six priests and burned down at least eight Ethiopian Orthodox churches during widespread civil unrest in Jijiga. On 25 August, in Bure town, followers of the Ethiopian Orthodox Church stoned a man to death after accusing him of attempting to set a church on fire.

[ 13 ] [ 36 ] Kenya [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Kenya Kenya in 2018 is religiously diverse: 47.4% of the total population are varieties of Protestant, 20.6% are Roman Catholic, 11.1 percent are Islamic, and 16% are Baháʼí, Buddhist, Hindu and traditional religionists. Kenya also has the highest number of Quakers of any country in the world, with around 119,285 members. The Eastern Orthodox Church has over 650,000 members making it the third largest Orthodox Church in Sub-Saharan Africa. The Somalia-based terrorist group Harakat al-Shabaab al-Mujahideen (al-Shabaab) carried out attacks in Mandera, Wajir, Garissa, and Lamu Counties saying they had targeted non-Muslims. In September, al-Shabaab reportedly stopped a bus in Lamu County and killed two Christian travelers. In October a group of residents in Bungale, Magarini Sub County, burned and demolished a Good News International Ministries church. There were reports of religiously motivated threats, such as members of Muslim communities threatening individuals who converted from Islam to Christianity. According to religious leaders, some Muslim youths vandalized properties of local Christians.

[ 13 ] [ 37 ] Libya [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Libya Sunni Islam is the state religion and sharia is the principal source of legislation. Non-Muslim activity remains curtailed by legal prohibitions. Circulation of non-Islamic religious materials, missionary activity, or speech considered "offensive to Muslims" is prohibited. Multiple international human rights organizations said Christians faced a heightened risk of physical assault, including sexual assault and rape than other migrants and refugees at government detention centers. Some detainees reported they were tortured and abused. Domestic human rights activists continued to report a restrictive environment, especially toward women, imposing restrictions on women's dress and movement and punishing men for behavior they deemed un-Islamic. The East operated under a separate, unrecognized governmental administration, with security provided by the Libyan National Army (LNA) and LNA-aligned Salafist armed groups. Militias continued to operate and control territory throughout the country, including in Benghazi, parts of Tripoli, and Derna, where there were numerous reports of armed groups restricting religious practices, enforcing compliance with sharia, and targeting those viewed as violating their standards. According to Open Doors USA , Islamic militant groups and organized crime groups targeted religious minorities, including Christian migrants, converts to Christianity, and foreign residents for physical attacks, sexual assaults, detentions, kidnappings, and killings. Foreign terrorist organizations that included Ansar al-Sharia , al-Qaida in the Maghreb (AQIM), and ISIS continued to operate within the country. In December the Reuters news service reported local authorities said they had exhumed from a mass grave near Sirte the bodies of 34 Ethiopian Christians executed by ISIS in 2015. According to international media, former Muslims faced intense social and economic pressure to renounce their Christian faith and return to Islam.

[ 13 ] [ 38 ] South Africa [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in South Africa and Religion in South Africa In April 2025, American missionary Josh Sullivan was abducted at gunpoint during a church service in Motherwell , a township near Gqeberha in South Africa's Eastern Cape province. Sullivan, who had been working in the region since 2018 as a church-planting missionary to Xhosa-speaking communities, was taken by at least four armed men, prompting a ransom demand. Following a coordinated response by South Africa's elite police unit, the Hawks, he was rescued unharmed on 15 April during a shoot-out in KwaMagxaki that resulted in the deaths of three suspects. The incident highlighted a broader trend of increased kidnappings for ransom in South Africa in the 2010s and 2020s. Sullivan's case drew international attention and sparked widespread calls for prayer and support from faith communities in both South Africa and the United States.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] [ 41 ] Somalia [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Somalia Christians in Somalia face persecution associated with the ongoing civil war in that country.

[ 42 ] In September 2011 militants sworn to eradicate Christianity from Somalia beheaded two Christian converts. A third Christian convert was beheaded in Mogadishu in early 2012.

[ 43 ] Sudan [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Sudan Some interpretations of Muslim law in Sudan refuse to recognize conversions out of Islam , considering apostasy a crime, and refuse to recognize marriages to non-Muslims. Sudan is one of the nations where being a Christian is hardest in the world. Freedom of religion and belief are systematically violated.

[ 44 ] Asia [ edit ] For West Asia, see § Middle East .

Afghanistan [ edit ] See also: Christianity in Afghanistan , Freedom of religion in Afghanistan , Human rights in Afghanistan § Religious freedom , and Religion in Afghanistan § Christianity In Afghanistan in 2006, Abdul Rahman , a 41-year-old citizen, was charged with rejecting Islam because he converted to Catholicism , a crime which is punishable by death under Sharia law. Under intense pressure from Western governments, he was allowed to leave Afghanistan at the end of March 2006 and since then, he has been living in exile in Italy.

[ 45 ] In 2008, the Taliban killed a British charity worker, Gayle Williams , "because she was working for an organization which was preaching Christianity in Afghanistan" even though she was extremely careful and she did not try to convert Afghans to Christianity.

[ 46 ] China [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in China and Freedom of religion in China In the Xi Jinping era, some estimates put the number of Christians in China at 100 million, but it has been claimed in 2019 that 20 million of them faced persecution, including crackdowns, raids and church closures. Claims of persecution of Chinese Christians occurred in both official and unsanctioned churches.

[ 47 ] India [ edit ] Part of a series on Violence against Christians in India Incidents 1997–1999 anti-Christian violence in Gujarat 1998 Ramgiri-Udaygiri violence 1999 Ranalai violence 2007 Christmas violence in Kandhamal 2008 Kandhamal violence 2008 Kandhamal nun gang rape case 2008 attacks on Christians in southern Karnataka 2021 anti-Christian violence in Karnataka Related topics Freedom of religion Persecution of Christians Religious violence in India Religious persecution Violence against Muslims in India v t e Main article: Violence against Christians in India See also: Hindutva and Violence against Muslims in India There have been instances of religious intolerance and persecution of Christians in India, particularly in certain areas of the country. In recent years, there have been reports of violence and discrimination against Christians, as well as forced conversions, mainly by Hindu nationalist groups.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] The Indian government has been criticized by some international human rights organizations and religious groups for not doing enough to protect the rights of religious minorities, including Christians.

[ 50 ] Indonesia [ edit ] Main article: Persecution of Christians § Indonesia Indonesia is the world's largest Muslim-majority country, and while the constitution guarantees freedom of religion, [ 51 ] there have been instances of religious intolerance and persecution of religious minorities, including Christians. In some areas of the country, particularly in more conservative regions, local laws and regulations have been used to restrict the religious freedom of minority groups. Additionally, there have been incidents of violence and intimidation directed at religious minorities, including Christians, by extremist groups.

[ 52 ] However, the overall situation varies widely across the country, with some areas being relatively peaceful while others experience significant religious tension.

[ citation needed ] Malaysia [ edit ] See also: Christianity in Malaysia and Freedom of religion in Malaysia In Malaysia, although Islam is the official religion, Christianity is tolerated under Article 3 and Article 11 of the Malaysian constitution . But at some point, the spread of Christianity is a particular sore point for the Muslim majority, the Malaysian government has also persecuted Christian groups who were perceived to be attempting to proselytize Muslim audiences.

[ 53 ] Those showing interest in the Christian faith or other faith practices not considered orthodox by state religious authorities are usually sent either by the police or their family members to state funded Faith Rehabilitation Centres ( Malay : Pusat Pemulihan Akidah ) where they are counseled to remain faithful to Islam and some states have provisions for penalties under their respective Shariah legislations for apostasy from Islam.

[ 54 ] It has been the practice of the church in Malaysia to not actively proselytize to the Muslim community. Christian literature is required by law to carry a caption "for non-Muslims only". Article 11(4) of the Federal Constitution of Malaysia allows the states to prohibit the propagation of other religions to Muslims, and most (with the exception of Penang, Sabah, Sarawak and the Federal Territories) have done so. There is no well-researched agreement on the actual number of Malaysian Muslim converts to Christianity in Malaysia.

[ 55 ] According to the latest population census released by the Malaysian Statistics Department, there are none, according to Ustaz Ridhuan Tee, they are 135 and according to Tan Sri Dr Harussani Zakaria , they are 260,000.

[ 55 ] See also Status of religious freedom in Malaysia .

[ citation needed ] There are, however, cases in which a Muslim will adopt the Christian faith without declaring apostasy openly. In effect, they are practicing Christians, but legally Muslims .

[ 56 ] North Korea [ edit ] Main article: Human rights in North Korea The government of North Korea is officially atheist , and any religious practices are strictly controlled and heavily monitored by the state.

[ 57 ] Those who are found to be practicing Christianity or any other religion can face severe punishment, including imprisonment, torture, and execution.

[ 58 ] The government also actively seeks to root out and punish individuals who are suspected of being involved in underground Christian activities. The country is considered as one of the worst places in the world for religious freedom by several human rights and Christian organizations.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] Pakistan [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Pakistan Christians in Pakistan are a minority, making up 1.6% of the population, and religious minorities are frequently discriminated against.

[ 61 ] The Pakistan blasphemy law mandates that blasphemy of the Qur'an is to be punished. Critics of the laws say that Christians like Asia Bibi are sentenced to death with only hearsay for evidence of alleged blasphemy.

[ 62 ] At least a dozen Christians have been given death sentences, [ 63 ] and half a dozen of them have been murdered after being accused of violating blasphemy laws. In 2005, 80 Christians were behind bars due to these laws.

[ 64 ] Christians in Pakistan have been murdered in outbreaks of communal violence , such as the 2009 Gojra riots , and they have been targeted by militant groups, with the Peshawar church attack killing 75 Christians in Peshawar in 2013, [ 65 ] and the Lahore church bombings killing 15 Christians in 2015.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] The campaign of violence by the Tehrik-i-Taliban Pakistan has been described as a genocide .

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] [ 70 ] Sri Lanka [ edit ] See also: Freedom of religion in Sri Lanka and Sinhalese Buddhist nationalism Christians in Sri Lanka are a minority, making up around 7.4% of the population as of the 2011 census.

[ 71 ] The Christian population faces sporadic outbreaks of violence and hostility [ 72 ] [ 73 ] by extremists. Churches have been vandalized by mobs organized by supporters of religious nationalist groups, such as Hindu supporters of Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh , [ citation needed ] Buddhist supporters of Bodu Bala Sena and Islamist supporters of National Thowheeth Jama'ath .

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] Middle East [ edit ] See also: Christianity in the Middle East Iraq and Syria [ edit ] See also: Christianity in Iraq , Christianity in Syria , Persecution of Christians by the Islamic State , and Sectarianism and minorities in the Syrian Civil War § Christians The consolidation of power in the hands of Shia Islamists in Iraq since the overthrow of Saddam Hussein 's regime has been detrimental to Iraq's Assyrian and Armenian Christian communities. Friction between rival sects in Iraq has frequently resulted in acts of violence against Christians in the country. Consequently, Christians have fled from some areas of Iraq and emigrated to Europe and the United States. Since 2003, hundreds of thousands of Christians have fled from Iraq, and as a result, the Christian population, which may have numbered as high as 1.4 million prior to the Iraq War , has dropped to 500,000, and the number of Christians who are currently living in Iraq is continuing to decline. Between 2003 and 2012, more than 70 churches were bombed. In 2007, Al Qaeda militants killed a young priest in Mosul, and in 2010, gunmen massacred 53 Assyrian Christians in a Baghdad church.

[ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] During the Syrian Civil War and its spillover into Iraq, the persecution of Christians by ISIL and other militant groups has been ongoing. The Fall of Mosul and the fall of the Assyrian town of Qaraqosh during the 2014 ISIL advance in Iraq caused the displacement of an estimated 100,000 Assyrian Christian civilians. After the fall of Mosul, ISIL decreed that if the Assyrian Christians who lived in the city did not convert to Islam or pay tribute , they would be executed.

[ 80 ] ISIL begun marking homes of Christian residents with the letter nūn for Nassarah ('Christian').

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] Thousands of Christians, Yazidis (the latter were only given the choice of conversion or death) and other, mostly Shi'a Muslims (who ISIL considers apostates ) have abandoned their homes and land. One of the cultural heritage sites which was destroyed by ISIL was Mosque of the Prophet Jonah , a site which is considered holy by adherents of all Abrahamic faiths .

[ citation needed ] Israel and Palestine [ edit ] Main articles: Palestinian Christians and Christianity in Israel Green Line Israel [ edit ] Further information: Green Line (Israel) In Tel Aviv in 2008, three teenagers burned hundreds of Christian Bibles. In a 2008 Tel Aviv incident, hundreds of copies of the New Testament, which had been handed out in the city (allegedly by Messianic Jews in order to convert Ethiopian Jews ), were burned by three teenaged Orthodox students of Judaism. Uzi Aharon, the town's deputy mayor, told CNN he had collected the New Testaments but that he did not plan for them to be burned. The youths had done so while he was not present. Once he found out that the fire was going, he put it out.

[ 83 ] In Jerusalem, there have been instances of Christian churches and monasteries being vandalized with spray-painted offensive remarks against Christianity, including death threats. These are believed to be price tag attacks by extremist settlers.

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] A number of Ultra-Orthodox/ Haredi youth have reportedly spat at Christian clergymen. Archbishop Aris Shirvanian, of Jerusalem's Armenian Patriarchate, says he personally has been spat at about 50 times in the past 12 years.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] The Anti-Defamation League has called on the chief Rabbis to speak out against the interfaith assaults.

[ 88 ] Father Goosan, Chief Dragoman of the Armenian Patriarchate of Jerusalem , stated that, "I know there are fanatical Haredi groups that don't represent the general public but it's still enraging. It all begins with education. It's the responsibility of these men's yeshiva heads to teach them not to behave this way".

[ 89 ] In July 2012, a former member of the Knesset , Michael Ben-Ari , who supports Kahanism , videotaped himself tearing up a copy of the New Testament and throwing it in the trash. Ben-Ari referred to it as a "despicable book" that should be "in the dustbin of history".

[ 90 ] In response, the American Jewish Committee urged the Knesset to censure Ben-Ari, while a spokesman for Benjamin Netanyahu also condemned Ben-Ari's actions.

[ 91 ] Israeli public diplomacy [ edit ] Main articles: Israeli public diplomacy and Israeli public diplomacy in the Gaza war According to Israeli ambassador to the United States Michael Oren , in the hundred years leading up to 2010 the Middle East's Christian population dwindled from 20% to less than 5%. Oren argues that with the exception of Israel, Christians in the Middle East have endured severe political and cultural hardships: in Egypt, Muslim extremists have subjected Coptic Christians with massacres from terrorist attacks, resulting in the exodus of Copts from their homes; in Iraq, 1,000 Christians were killed in Baghdad between the years 2003 and 2012 and 70 churches in the country were burned; in Iran, converts to Christianity face the death penalty and in 2012 Pastor Yousef Nadarkhani was sentenced to death; in Saudi Arabia, private Christian prayer is against the law; in the Gaza Strip, half of the Palestinian Christian population has fled since Hamas seized power in 2007 and Gazan law forbids public displays of crucifixes; in the West Bank, the Christian population has been reduced from 15% to less than 2%.

[ 92 ] Jerusalem [ edit ] Further information: East Jerusalem and Jerusalem  § Political status In 2023, Member of the Knesset Moshe Gafni submitted a bill that would have banned Proselytizing of Christianity in Israel .

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] In January 2010, Christian leaders, Israeli Foreign ministry staff, representatives of the Jerusalem municipality and the Haredi community met to discuss inter-faith tolerance. The Haredi Community Tribunal of Justice published a statement condemning harassment of Christians, stating that it was a "desecration of God's name". Several events were planned in 2010 by the Orthodox Yedidya congregation to show solidarity with Christians and improve relations between the Haredi and Christian communities of Jerusalem.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] West Bank [ edit ] A vandalized Christian graveyard in Bethlehem . The text says " Death to Arabs " in Hebrew.

Further information: Israeli occupation of the West Bank In May 2023, a few months before the Gaza genocide , a report titled "Palestinian Christians - The Forcible Displacement and Dispossession Continues" was released by Kairos Palestine , a Palestinian Christian advocacy group, based in the West Bank.

[ 99 ] In 2002, a mob of Palestinian Muslims burned Christian property in Ramallah.

[ 100 ] A dossier submitted in 2005 to Church leaders in Jerusalem listed 93 incidents of abuse alleged to have been committed against Palestinian Christians by Muslim extremists and 140 cases of gangs allegedly stealing Christian land in the West Bank.

[ 101 ] Taybeh [ edit ] In September 2005, hundreds of Muslim men from Deir Jarir torched homes in Taybeh in response to an affair between a 30-year-old Muslim woman from Deir Jarir said to have been romantically involved with a Christian man from Taybeh.

[ 102 ] Taybeh residents called the authorities to intervene, the Israelis arrived first but they watched and did not intervene. Palestinian policemen arriving from Ramallah were held at an Israeli checkpoint for three hours, and were only allowed to pass after constant calls from the U.S. consulate in Jerusalem.

[ 103 ] Despite the incident, the neighboring towns continue to have healthy relations; residents say "the people of Taybeh and the people of Deir Jarir are one family".

[ 102 ] In May 2012 www.worldnewstribune.com reported that a group of 100 Muslims attacked Taybeh , a Christian village in the West Bank.

[ 104 ] On 19 April 2013, Israeli settlers attempted to take over Taybeh 's monastery and its adjacent chapel.

[ 105 ] West Bank Checkpoints [ edit ] In 2012, Isaac became the director of Christ at the Checkpoint (CATC), a conference which seeks to encourage and organize opposition to the Israeli occupation of Palestine among Christians from other countries.

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] In addition to attending lectures, conference participants  witness some of the features of the Israeli occupation, including the West Bank Barrier and the military checkpoints.

[ 107 ] The conference is hosted by Bethlehem Bible College , where Isaac became the academic dean in 2015.

[ 108 ] [ 107 ] According to Isaac, CATC has contributed to more awareness of Palestinian viewpoints among Evangelical Christians .

[ 107 ] [ 109 ] West Bank during the Gaza war [ edit ] Further information: Israeli incursions in the West Bank during the Gaza war  § Tubas, Bethlehem, and Qalqilya ; and Munther Isaac In 2023 and 2024 Palestinian Christians in Bethlehem held protests against the war in Gaza.

[ 110 ] On Christmas Day in 2023, Israel raided Bethlehem , where many Palestinian Christians live.

[ 111 ] Gaza Strip, Palestine [ edit ] Further information: Islamization of the Gaza Strip , The Teacher's Bookshop , Extremists in Gaza who believe Hamas are too secular , and Gaza Strip blockade In 2007, the Gaza Strip had a tiny Christian minority of 2,500–3,000, mostly in Gaza City. Despite this small number, there was a reserved Christian seat in Gaza City for the 2006 election. The seat one by Hosam al-Taweel , a Greek Orthodox Palestinian Christian running as an independent on the Hamas-led Change and Reform electoral list . He was from an intensely Patriotic family.

[ 112 ] [ 113 ] The Hamas overthrow of the Palestinian Authority in Gaza during that year was accompanied by violent attacks against Christians and Christian holy sites by Islamic militants. A Catholic convent and Rosary Sisters school were ransacked, with some Christians blaming Hamas for the attack. In September 2007 Christian anxiety grew after an 80-year-old Christian woman was attacked in her Gaza home by a masked man who robbed her and called her an kafir .

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] That attack was followed less than a month later by a deadly assault on the owner of the only Christian bookstore in Gaza City. Muslim extremists were implicated as being behind the incident.

[ 116 ] The library of YMCA was bombed in 2008 by gunmen who, according to guards at the site, asked why the guards worked for "infidels".

[ 117 ] In 2011, the Christian population of the Gaza Strip was less than 1,400. A member of the Catholic faith told The Guardian he was stopped by a Hamas official and told to remove a wooden crucifix he was wearing.

[ 118 ] The Guardian claimed that "Hamas cancelled Christmas".

[ 118 ] However, Christmas celebrations were still held annually by the small community, including scaled down festivities during the 2020 COVID lockdown.

Media in Palestine [ edit ] Further information: MEMRI , Palestinian propaganda , and Palestinian Media Watch Palestinian Media Watch (PMW) reported that state-controlled Palestinian media frequently demonize religions like Judaism and Christianity. PMW translated into English a children's television program aired twice in 2012 it said featured a young girl saying Jews and Christians are "cowardly and despised".

[ 119 ] Lebanon [ edit ] Lebanese public diplomacy [ edit ] Former Lebanese president Amine Gemayel stated in 2011 that Christians had become the target of genocide after dozens of Christians were killed in deadly attacks in Egypt and Iraq.

[ when?

] [ 120 ] Saudi Arabia [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Saudi Arabia The human rights advocacy group International Christian Concern (ICC) informed the Christian Post that in December 2011, 35 Christian Ethiopians – both men and women – were violently arrested in Jeddah while they were holding a prayer meeting in their home. The prisoners stated that they were persecuted on account of their faith and they also stated that they were also pressured to convert to Islam, and the women stated that they were forced to undergo a humiliating strip search. According to ICC, one prisoner said, "The Muslim preacher [that was sent by officials to speak to the prisoners] vilified Christianity, denigrated the Bible and told us that Islam is the only true religion." [ 121 ] Turkey [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Turkey ; Bible publishing firm murders in Malatya, Turkey ; Varlık Vergisi ; and Istanbul pogroms See also: Freedom of religion in Turkey , Minorities in Turkey , Human rights in Turkey , and Discrimination in Turkey The Ecumenical Patriarchate of Constantinople is still in a difficult position. Turkish law requires the Ecumenical Patriarch to be an ethnic Greek who holds Turkish citizenship since birth, although most members of Turkey's Greek minority have been expelled. The state's expropriation of church property is an additional difficulty faced by the Church of Constantinople. In November 2007, a 17th-century chapel of Our Lord's Transfiguration at the Halki seminary was almost totally demolished by the Turkish forestry authority.

[ 122 ] There was no advance warning given for the demolition work and it was only stopped after appeals were filed by the Ecumenical Patriarch .

[ 123 ] The difficulties currently experienced by the Assyrians and Armenian Orthodox minorities in Turkey are the result of an anti-Armenian and anti-Christian attitude which is espoused by ultra-nationalist groups such as the Grey Wolves . According to the Minority Rights Group , the Turkish government recognizes Armenians and Assyrians as minorities but in Turkey, this term is used to denote second-class status.

[ 124 ] In February 2006, Father Andrea Santoro was murdered in Trabzon .

[ 125 ] On 18 April 2007 in the Zirve Publishing House, Malatya , Turkey.

[ 126 ] [ 127 ] Three employees of the Bible publishing house were attacked, tortured and murdered by five Sunni Muslim assailants.

[ 128 ] Yemen [ edit ] See also: Christianity in Yemen The Christian presence in Yemen dates back to the fourth century AD when a number of Himyarites embrace Christianity due to the efforts of Theophilos the Indian . Currently, there are no official statistics on their numbers, but they are estimated to be between 3,000 and 25,000 people, [ 129 ] and most of them are either refugees or temporary residents.

Freedom of worship , conversion from Islam and establishing facilities dedicated for worship are not recognized as rights in the country's Constitution and laws.

[ 129 ] At the same time, Wahabbi activities linked to Al-Islah was being facilitated, financed and encouraged from multiple fronts including the Ministry of Endowments and Guidance, [ 130 ] which says that its tasks "to contribute to the development of Islamic awareness and circulation of the publication Education and Islamic morals and consolidation in the life of public and private citizens." [ 131 ] The Missionaries of Charity founded by Mother Teresa has worked in Aden since 1992, and it has three other centers in Sana'a , Taiz and Hodeidah . Three Catholic nuns were killed in Hodeidah in 1998, two of them from India and the third from the Philippines. The nuns died at the hands of a member of Al-Islah named Abdullah al-Nashiri, who argued that they were calling Muslims to convert to Christianity. In 2002, three Americans were killed in Baptists Hospital at the hands of another Al-Islah member named Abed Abdul Razak Kamel.

[ 132 ] Survivors say that the suspect (Al-Islah) was "a political football" who had been raised by Islamists, who talked about it often in mosques and who described hospital workers as "spies". But they emphasized that these views are only held by a minority of Yemenis.

[ 133 ] In December 2015, an old Catholic church in Aden was destroyed.

[ 134 ] Since the escalation of the Yemeni crisis in March 2015, six priests from John Bosco remained, and twenty workers for charitable missions in the country, described by Pope Francis by the courage to fortitude amid war and conflict. He called the Apostolic Vicar of Southern Arabia to pray for all the oppressed and tortured, expelled from their homes, and killed unjustly.

[ 135 ] In all cases, regardless of the values and ethics of the warring forces in Yemen on religious freedom, it is proved that the Missionaries of Charity were not active in the field of evangelization according to the testimonies of beneficiaries of its services.

[ 133 ] [ 136 ] On 4 March 2016, Missionaries of Charity operation in Aden was attacked , resulting in 16 deaths.

[ 137 ] [ 138 ] Europe [ edit ] Norway [ edit ] Further information: Christianity in Norway Anti-Christian graffiti in Tampere , Finland In June 1992, the Fantoft Stave Church was burnt down. It was a wooden church originally built in 1150 in Fortun and moved to Bergen in 1883.

[ 139 ] At first the fire was attributed to lightning and electrical failure. In January 1993 Varg Vikernes , also known as "Count Grishnackh", was interviewed by a local journalist in his apartment decorated with 'Nazi paraphernalia, weapons and Satanic symbols'. Vikernes, at the time a proponent of White nationalism , social conservatism , survivalism and his völkisch -inspired ideology, declared that he wanted to blow up Blitz House and Nidaros Cathedral . He has publicly supported black metal fans burning down eight churches in Norway. He used a photo of the charred remnants of one church taken soon after the fire on his band Burzum 's EP entitled Aske ( Norwegian for 'ashes'). Following his statement, the Norwegian authorities began to clamp down on black metal musicians.

[ 140 ] In 1994, Vikernes was found guilty of murder, arson and possession of illegal weapons, including explosives, and given the maximum sentence under Norwegian law of 21 years in prison.

[ 140 ] He was released in 2009.

[ 141 ] The following is a partial list of Norwegian Christian church arsons in 1992 by anti-Christian groups [ citation needed ] reported by English-language media sources: 23 May 1992: Storetveit Church in Bergen .

[ 142 ] [ failed verification ] 1 August: Revheim Church in Stavanger .

[ 143 ] 21 August: Holmenkollen Chapel in Oslo .

[ 144 ] 1 September: Ormøya Church in Oslo.

[ 144 ] 13 September: Skjold Church in Vindafjord .

[ 144 ] Varg Vikernes and Samoth were convicted.

October: Hauketo Church in Oslo.

[ 144 ] 24 December: Åsane Church in Bergen .

[ 145 ] Varg Vikernes and musician Jørn Inge Tunsberg were convicted.

[ 146 ] 25 December: a Methodist church in Sarpsborg .

[ 145 ] A firefighter was killed while fighting the fire.

[ 145 ] Russia [ edit ] Many attacks, arsons and acts of vandalism against churches in Russia are reported each year.

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] The acts of vandalism are often accompanied by Satanic symbolism and graffiti.

[ 149 ] In many instances, icons and crosses are burned and vandalized, and swastikas and Satanic symbols are painted on the walls of churches (while other attacks on churches in Russia are simply robberies).

[ 148 ] Some of the attacks on the churches, such as the cutting down of crosses, appear to be conducted by groups organized online and by local youth.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Christianity portal International Day of Prayer for the Persecuted Church Anti-Catholicism Anti-Christian sentiment Anti-clericalism Anti-Mormonism Anti-Protestantism Christianity in the 21st century Christmas controversy Decline of Christianity in the Western world Religion and politics Religious violence Sectarian violence Related topics Anti-Judaism Antisemitism Anti-Zionism Christianity and other religions Christianity and politics Christianity and violence History of Christianity History of Christian thought on persecution and tolerance Role of Christianity in civilization Hindu terrorism Hindutva Hindu nationalism Islamophobia Islamophobic trope Islamophobia in the media Persecution of Christians Persecution of Eastern Orthodox Christians Persecution of Hazara people Persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses Persecution of Jews Persecution of Muslims Sectarian violence among Christians References [ edit ] ^ "Persecution of Christians review: Foreign Secretary's speech following the final report" . UK: Foreign & Commonwealth Office. 8 July 2019 . Retrieved 25 July 2020 .

^ "Independent Review by the Bishop of Truro" (PDF) .

wecanstopthegenocide.com .

^ a b "A Closer Look at How Religious Restrictions Have Risen Around the World" . Pew Research Center. 15 July 2019 . Retrieved 1 June 2020 .

^ "2018 Report on International Religious Freedom" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ "Bolivian Religious Freedom Law gives evangelicals the same rights as Catholics" .

Evangelical Focus . Retrieved 1 February 2023 .

^ "Bolivia's president reverses evangelism ban after Christian outcry - Premier Christian News | Headlines, Breaking News, Comment & Analysis" .

premierchristian.news . Retrieved 1 February 2023 .

^ Dzsurdzsa, Cosmin (23 August 2021).

"Update: A map of the 68 churches that have been vandalized or burned since the residential schools announcement" .

True North . Retrieved 14 December 2022 .

^ Little, Simon (4 July 2021).

"Head of B.C. civil liberties group under fire over 'burn it all down' tweet" .

Global News . Retrieved 14 December 2022 .

^ "Indigenous militants burn another church in southern Chile" .

Fox News . 12 April 2016. Archived from the original on 5 October 2016 . Retrieved 28 November 2016 .

^ "Chile's burning discontent - The Irish Catholic" . Archived from the original on 4 October 2016 . Retrieved 28 November 2016 .

^ "Christian House Churches in Cuba Facing New Restriction Laws" .

www.christiantoday.com . 20 September 2005.

Archived 21 January 2019 at the Wayback Machine retrieved 21 January 2019 ^ "Protestant Christian families forced to participate in religious majority festival for fourth consecutive year" .

CSW . 29 April 2022 . Retrieved 27 September 2023 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m US Congress, House committee on foreign affairs (1994).

Religious Persecution: Hearings Before the Subcommittee on International security, International organizations and Human Rights . U.S. Government printing office.

ISBN 0-16-044525-6 .

^ "Algeria" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ "Angola" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ "Burkina Faso" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ "Burundi" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ "Cameroon" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ "Central African Republic" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ "Chad" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ "Democratic Republic of the Congo" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ Fowler, Lilly (18 June 2012).

"Coptic Christian ex-patriots keep a wary eye on Egyptian elections" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 19 June 2012 . Retrieved 23 June 2012 .

^ "Funerals for victims of Egypt clashes" .

BBC News . 4 January 2000.

Archived from the original on 30 August 2006 . Retrieved 29 June 2011 .

^ Fathi, Yasmine (4 December 2011).

"Egypt Copts react to Islamist electoral win" .

Ahram Online .

Archived from the original on 8 July 2012 . Retrieved 19 June 2012 .

^ Mostafa, Abdallah (28 October 2011).

"EU parliament accuses Egypt of persecuting Christian minority" .

Egypt Independent .

Archived from the original on 31 July 2013 . Retrieved 19 June 2012 .

^ El Deeb, Sarah (4 August 2012).

"Riot leaves an Egyptian village without Christians" . ABC News. Associated Press.

Archived from the original on 7 August 2012 . Retrieved 5 August 2012 .

^ Hendawi, Hamza (7 April 2013).

"Christians being targeted by kidnappers in Egypt" .

Florida Today . Melbourne, Florida. pp. 11A.

^ Arraf, Jane (14 June 2017).

"For Christians in Egypt, Building A New Church Can Set Off Violence" . NPR.

Archived from the original on 3 July 2018 . Retrieved 3 July 2018 .

^ Mourad, Mahmoud (28 January 2015).

"Egyptian poet goes on trial accused of contempt of Islam" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 18 January 2018 . Retrieved 2 April 2016 .

^ "Egyptian writer Fatima Naoot sentenced to 3 years in jail for 'contempt of religion' - Politics - Egypt - Ahram Online" . English.ahram.org.eg.

Archived from the original on 23 November 2017 . Retrieved 2 April 2016 .

^ "Egypt sentences Christian teens to jail for contempt of Islam" . Yahoo! News. 25 February 2016.

Archived from the original on 16 November 2018 . Retrieved 2 April 2016 .

^ Cite error: The named reference catholicnewsagency was invoked but never defined (see the help page ).

^ "2023 Report on International Religious Freedom: Egypt" .

U.S. Embassy in Egypt . U.S. Mission Egypt. 15 July 2024 . Retrieved 23 July 2024 .

^ "World Watch List – Persecution of Christians" . Open Doors . Retrieved 25 March 2025 .

^ "Eritrea" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ "Ethiopia" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ "Kenya" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ "Libya" .

United States Department of State . Retrieved 3 January 2024 .

^ "Josh Sullivan: Kidnapped US pastor rescued after South Africa shoot-out" .

www.bbc.com . 16 April 2025 . Retrieved 23 April 2025 .

^ Blair, Leonardo; Reporter, Senior (21 April 2025).

"Rescued Tennessee missionary Josh Sullivan breaks silence with gratitude" .

www.christianpost.com . Retrieved 23 April 2025 .

^ "American missionary reportedly kidnapped at gunpoint in South Africa during church service" .

ABC News . Retrieved 23 April 2025 .

^ "Almost expunged: Somalia's Embattled Christians" . 22 October 2009. Archived from the original on 23 July 2011.

^ "Islamic Extremists Behead Another Convert in Somalia" .

The Christian Post .

Compass Direct News . 9 February 2012.

^ Abdelaziz, Salma; Shoichet, Catherine E.; Burke, Daniel; Payne, Ed (15 May 2014).

"Christian woman in Sudan sentenced to death for her faith" . CNN.

^ "Afghan on trial for Christianity" .

BBC News .

BBC . 20 March 2006.

"Afghan Convert's Trial Put in Doubt" .

Al Jazeera . 22 March 2006. Archived from the original on 27 June 2006.

^ Starkey, Jerome; Sengupta, Kim (21 October 2008).

"Killed for being Christian" .

The Independent . Archived from the original on 9 December 2008.

^ "Asia is 'new hotbed of Christian persecution' with situation in China worst since Cultural Revolution, report claims" .

South China Morning Post . 16 January 2019.

Archived from the original on 16 January 2019 . Retrieved 17 January 2019 .

^ "India's Christians living in fear as claims of 'forced conversions' swirl" .

the Guardian . 4 October 2021 . Retrieved 25 January 2023 .

^ "Arrests, Beatings and Secret Prayers: Inside the Persecution of India's Christians" .

The New York Times . 22 December 2021.

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 25 January 2023 .

^ "India: Government should promptly adopt and act on the recommendations made at UN Rights Review" .

Amnesty International . 21 November 2022 . Retrieved 25 January 2023 .

^ Africa, R. M. (20 January 2023).

"Indonesian President Reaffirms Religious Freedom" .

International Christian Concern . Retrieved 25 January 2023 .

^ "Brutal Attack on Indonesian Christians Stirs Renewed Fears of Persecution | Hudson" .

www.hudson.org . Retrieved 25 January 2023 .

^ "unhchr.ch – unhchr Resources and Information" .

ww1.unhchr.ch .

[ dead link ] ^ "Akidah: Ajaran Sesat" .

Nota Tingkatan 5 (in Malay). Chief Minister's Department, Sabah State Government . Retrieved 26 July 2008 .

^ a b AHMAD FAROUK MUSA; MOHD RADZIQ JALALUDDIN; AHMAD FUAD RAHMAT; Edry Faizal Eddy Yusuf (22 October 2011).

"What is Himpun about?" .

The Star . Archived from the original on 24 October 2011.

^ "Malay converts to Christianity 'cannot renounce Islam' " .

AsiaNews . AsiaNews C.F. 11 September 2005 . Retrieved 16 December 2011 .

^ "Freedom from Fear: Not in North Korea" .

George W. Bush Presidential Center . Retrieved 1 February 2023 .

^ "2021 Report on International Religious Freedom: Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK)" .

U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 25 January 2023 .

^ ILČIĆ, Raffaele FITTO, Adam BIELAN, Anna FOTYGA, Zbigniew KUŹMIUK, Valdemar TOMAŠEVSKI, Ryszard Antoni LEGUTKO, Angel DZHAMBAZKI, Jadwiga WIŚNIEWSKA, Karol KARSKI, Assita KANKO, Patryk JAKI, Elżbieta KRUK, Alexandr VONDRA, Elżbieta RAFALSKA, Bogdan RZOŃCA, Witold Jan WASZCZYKOWSKI, Eugen JURZYCA, Bert-Jan RUISSEN, Ladislav.

"MOTION FOR A RESOLUTION On human rights situation in North Korea, including the persecution of religious minorities | B9-0196/2022 | European Parliament" .

www.europarl.europa.eu . Retrieved 1 February 2023 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "North Korea" (PDF) .

Aid to the Church in Need ACN International .

^ "Country Profile: Pakistan" (PDF) .

Library of Congress Country Studies on Pakistan .

Library of Congress . February 2005.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 17 July 2005 . Retrieved 19 February 2013 .

Religion: Approximately 1.6 percent of the population is Hindu, 1.6 percent is Christian, and 0.3 percent belongs to other religions, such as Bahaism and Sikhism.

^ Debra Killalea (4 November 2014).

"Last ditch appeal to save Asia Bibi, sentenced to death under Pakistan's tough blasphemy laws" .

News.com.au .

^ "Q&A: Pakistan's controversial blasphemy laws" . BBC.

Archived from the original on 20 November 2012 . Retrieved 15 November 2012 .

^ "Christians often victims under Pakistan's blasphemy law" .

Archived from the original on 13 March 2013 . Retrieved 15 November 2012 .

^ New York Times: "Suicide Attack at Christian Church in Pakistan Kills Dozens" by ISMAIL KHAN and SALMAN MASOOD Archived 2 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine 22 September 2013 ^ "Two blasts at Lahore churches claim 15 lives - PAKISTAN - geo.tv" .

geo.tv . 15 March 2015.

Archived from the original on 25 July 2015 . Retrieved 10 August 2015 .

^ Agencies - Imran Gabol - Nadeem Haider - Waseem Riaz - Abbas Haider - Akbar Ali (15 March 2015).

"15 killed in Taliban attack on Lahore churches" .

Dawn . Pakistan.

Archived from the original on 30 July 2015 . Retrieved 10 August 2015 .

^ "After the Malala Yousafzai shooting, can shock therapy free Pakistan?" . Ibnlive.in.com. Archived from the original on 27 November 2012 . Retrieved 18 February 2013 .

^ "The Problem of Pakistan" .

International Business Times . 4 October 2012.

Archived from the original on 26 April 2013 . Retrieved 18 February 2013 .

^ "Pakistan should be on the genocide watch list: US think tank" .

India Today . 26 September 2012.

Archived from the original on 21 November 2012 . Retrieved 18 February 2013 .

^ Religious Beliefs In Sri Lanka , worldatlas.com ^ "Violence against Christians in Sri Lanka continue" .

jdslanka.org .

^ "SRI LANKA: Violence, discrimination against Christians escalate in Sri Lanka | Human Rights Without Frontiers" .

^ "A Calculated Attack on Christianity" . Yahoo! News. 23 April 2019.

^ Schmalz, Mathew (22 April 2019).

"Why are Sri Lankan Christians the latest target of hate crimes?" .

Quartz India .

^ Tevrov, Daniel (16 June 2012).

"Syrian Christian Support For Assad Regime May Turn Out To Be A Losing Strategy" .

International Business Times .

Archived from the original on 18 June 2012 . Retrieved 18 June 2012 .

^ "Pope marks Easter with call for end to violence in Syria" .

Fox News Channel .

Associated Press . 8 April 2012.

Archived from the original on 26 June 2012 . Retrieved 7 June 2012 .

^ "Christians fleeing Iraq" .

Watertown Daily Times . 14 March 2012. Archived from the original on 15 June 2013 . Retrieved 7 June 2012 .

^ Arraf, Jane (8 April 2012).

"A northern Iraqi Easter" .

The Christian Science Monitor .

Archived from the original on 19 April 2012 . Retrieved 7 June 2012 .

^ "Iraqi Christians flee after Isis issue Mosul ultimatum" .

BBC News . 18 July 2014.

Archived from the original on 24 July 2014 . Retrieved 13 February 2015 .

^ "Iraqi Christians flee after Isis issue Mosul ultimatum" .

BBC News . 7 August 2014. Archived from the original on 24 July 2014 . Retrieved 7 August 2014 .

^ Loveluck, Louisa (7 August 2014).

"Christians flee Iraq's Mosul after Islamists tell them: convert, pay or die" .

The Daily Telegraph . Archived from the original on 30 July 2014 . Retrieved 7 August 2014 .

^ Bixler, Mark (28 March 2008).

"Hundreds of New Testaments torched in Israel" . CNN. Archived from the original on 21 January 2012 . Retrieved 23 June 2012 .

^ Zaimov, Stoyan (21 February 2012).

"Christianity in Jerusalem Under Attack? Extremists Hit Another Church" .

The Christian Post .

Archived from the original on 2 June 2013 . Retrieved 10 June 2012 .

^ Elgot, Jessica.

"Rabbis condemn attacks on Israel's Christian sites" .

The Jewish Chronicle .

Archived from the original on 19 April 2012 . Retrieved 10 June 2012 .

^ Barkat, Amiram (27 June 2009).

"Christians in Jerusalem want Jews to stop spitting on them" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 16 March 2010 . Retrieved 18 October 2010 .

^ Rosenberg, Oz (4 November 2011).

"Ultra-Orthodox spitting attacks on Old City clergymen becoming daily" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 14 August 2012 . Retrieved 10 June 2012 .

^ "ADL Calls on Chief Rabbis to Speak Out Against Interfaith Assaults in Old City" . 17 October 2004. Archived from the original on 29 November 2008.

^ Oz Rosenberg (15 November 2011).

"Ultra-Orthodox spitting attacks on Old City clergymen becoming daily" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 19 November 2011 . Retrieved 15 November 2011 .

^ "MP tears up copy of New Testament" .

The Australian . 18 July 2012.

^ "AJC Urges Knesset to Censure MK Ben-Ari for New Testament Desecration" . Archived from the original on 23 July 2012.

^ Oren, Michael (9 March 2012).

"Israel and the Plight of Mideast Christians" .

The Wall Street Journal .

Archived from the original on 21 December 2014 . Retrieved 7 June 2012 .

^ Rosenberg, Joel (19 March 2023).

"EXCLUSIVE: Two Knesset members propose legislation to outlaw sharing the Gospel in Israel and send violators to prison – could it become law?" .

All Israel News .

^ "Two Knesset members propose law banning spread of Christianity in Israel - Jordan News" .

Jordan News . 22 March 2023.

^ "Christians will face jail in Israel for proselytising under proposed bill" .

Middle East Monitor . 22 March 2023.

^ "Israeli leader halts bill against Christian proselytizing" .

AP News . 22 March 2023.

^ Ahren, Rachel (5 March 2010).

"Capital Anglos mobilize against practice of spitting at Christians" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 14 April 2010 . Retrieved 18 October 2010 .

^ Ahren, Raphael.

"Capital Anglos mobilize against practice of spitting at Christians" .

Haaretz .

Archived from the original on 5 May 2012 . Retrieved 23 June 2012 .

^ Layan Choufani; Rev. Dr.

Munther Isaac ; Saif Kassis (May 2023).

"Palestinian Christians - The Forcible Displacement and Dispossession Continues" (PDF) .

kairospalestine.ps . Kairos Palestine.

^ Radin, Charles A. (6 February 2002).

"Defendants killed in court; mob fears grow in West Bank" .

The Boston Globe . Archived from the original on 1 June 2013 . Retrieved 23 June 2012 .

^ de Quetteville, Harry (9 September 2005).

" 'Islamic mafia' accused of persecuting Holy Land Christians" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on 4 May 2012 . Retrieved 23 June 2012 .

^ a b A frightening family feud , bbc.co.uk. Accessed 1 November 2022.

^ "What Happened in Taybeh?" .

saltfilms.net . 21 September 2005 . Retrieved 2 June 2016 .

^ "Muslim attacks against Christians on the rise in West Bank" .

World Tribune . 28 May 2012. Archived from the original on 12 February 2016 . Retrieved 23 June 2012 .

^ Settlers raise Israeli flag over West Bank church Archived 13 November 2014 at the Wayback Machine , Maan News Agency . 19 April 2013.

^ Woodman, Sonja (15 May 2024).

"Munther Isaac, a watchman in the Palestinian night" .

La Vie . Retrieved 23 December 2024 – via Oxford Centre for Mission Studies.

^ a b c d Zeveloff, Naomi (21 March 2022).

"Munther Isaac: What Would Jesus Do at an Israeli Military Checkpoint?" .

University of Southern California Center for Religion and Civic Culture . Retrieved 23 December 2024 .

^ Farhoud, Amira (27 October 2015).

"Munther Isaac our New Academic Dean" .

Bethlehem Bible College . Retrieved 23 December 2024 .

^ Bethlehem, Jayson Casper in (25 May 2018).

"Christ at the Checkpoint in the Age of Trump" .

Christianity Today .

Archived from the original on 10 September 2024 . Retrieved 23 December 2024 .

^ "Bethlehem marks melancholic Christmas for second year in shadow of Gaza war" .

Al Jazeera .

^ Salhut, Hamdah.

"Israeli raids across West Bank, including Bethlehem" .

Al Jazeera . Retrieved 25 December 2023 .

^ "Christian candidate on Hamas ticket" .

Al Jazeera .

^ Also spelled "Hamas boosts image by backing Christian candidate" .

The Jerusalem Post . 24 January 2006.

^ Hadid, Diaa (27 June 2007).

"For Gaza's Christians, new reality unsettling" .

The Houston Chronicle .

Associated Press .

Archived from the original on 13 March 2013 . Retrieved 7 June 2012 .

^ Abu Toameh, Khaled (25 April 2007).

"Christian-Muslim tensions heat up" .

The Jerusalem Post . Retrieved 7 June 2012 .

^ Silver, Eric (8 October 2007).

"Gaza's Christian bookseller killed" .

The Independent . London.

Archived from the original on 30 January 2012 . Retrieved 7 June 2012 .

^ "Militants bomb Gaza YMCA library" .

BBC News . 15 February 2008.

Archived from the original on 21 May 2012 . Retrieved 17 June 2012 .

^ a b Greenwood, Phoebe (23 December 2011).

"Gaza Christians long for days before Hamas cancelled Christmas" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 1 October 2013 . Retrieved 17 June 2012 .

^ Zaimov, Stoyan (20 June 2012).

"Palestinian TV Criticized for Using Young Girl to 'Promote Hate' Toward Christians, Jews" .

The Christian Post . Archived from the original on 2 June 2013 . Retrieved 23 June 2012 .

^ "Ex-Lebanon Leader: Christians Target of Genocide" .

CBS News . 3 January 2011.

Archived from the original on 9 December 2011 . Retrieved 7 June 2012 .

^ Oleszczuk, Luiza (9 February 2012).

"Christians Imprisoned in Saudi Arabia Pressured to Convert to Islam" .

The Christian Post .

Archived from the original on 13 July 2012 . Retrieved 23 June 2012 .

^ "Halki's Chapel of the Transfiguration left in ruins" .

AsiaNews . 17 November 2007.

^ "Monastery on Halki wrecked" .

Kathimerini . 16 November 2007. Archived from the original on 18 November 2007.

^ "Armenians" .

World Directory of Minorities and Indigenous Peoples . Minority Rights Group International. 2005. Archived from the original on 8 May 2015.

^ Pope Benedict XVI (29 November 2006).

"Mass Before the Shrine of Meryem Ana Evì" .

Libreria Editrice Vaticana . Apostolic Journey of Pope Benedict to Turkey. Archived from the original on 20 January 2007.

^ "Attack on Christians in Turkey: Three Killed at Bible Publishing Firm" .

Der Spiegel . 18 April 2007 . Retrieved 2023-01-02 .

^ Christians Killed in Turkey Archived 23 August 2007 at the Wayback Machine , BBC World Service, 19 April 2007 ^ " "Emre Günaydın azmettirici" iddiası" .

CNN TÜRK (in Turkish). 23 April 2007 . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ a b "Yemen" .

International Religious Freedom Report 2008 . U.S. Department of State . Retrieved 11 April 2016 .

^ Shelagh Weir (2009).

A Tribal Order: Politics and Law in the Mountains of Yemen . University of Texas Press. p. 296.

ISBN 9780292773974 .

These activities were encouraged and financed, as elsewhere in Yemen, by the then Wahhabi-controlled Ministry of Religious Guidance (irsha ̄d), by Saudi and Yemeni business figures and by the Yemeni Reform Grouping islah ^ وزارة الأوقاف والإرشاد .

National Information Center . 2014 . Retrieved 11 April 2016 .

^ Evan Kohlmann (17 January 2003).

"Terrorism in Yemen" .

National Review . Archived from the original on 7 March 2016.

^ a b Ian Fisher (16 January 2003).

"Nine Bullets That Ended Baptists' Work in Yemen" .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 13 November 2010.

^ Saleh al-Batati & Asa Fitch (6 March 2016).

"Gunmen Kill 16 at Yemeni Home for the Elderly" .

The Wall Street Journal .

^ "Catholics in Yemen" .

America: The Jesuit Review . April 2015 . Retrieved 11 April 2016 .

^ "Three American Missionaries Killed in Yemen Hospital" . Fox News. 25 March 2015 . Retrieved 11 April 2016 .

^ "Gunmen Kill 16 at Nursing Home in Yemen Started by Mother Teresa" .

The New York Times . 5 March 2016.

^ Faith Karimi (6 March 2016).

"Al Qaeda denies link to attack that killed nuns in Yemen" . CNN.

^ Dregni, Eric (22 September 2008).

In Cod We Trust. p.185 . U of Minnesota Press.

ISBN 9780816656233 . Retrieved 12 February 2013 .

^ a b Chris Campion (21 February 2005).

"In the face of death" .

The Guardian . London.

Archived from the original on 23 January 2016 . Retrieved 12 February 2013 .

^ "Ute av fengsel" .

Dagbladet.no (in Norwegian). 22 May 2009.

Archived from the original on 25 May 2009 . Retrieved 23 May 2009 .

^ "New Page 1" .

thetruemayhem.com . Archived from the original on 9 March 2009.

^ Lords of Chaos (1998): 78 ^ a b c d Lords of Chaos (1998): 79 ^ a b c Satan rides the Media (1998) ^ Satan rides the Media ^ Pope Supports Russian Church’s Position on Vandalism Archived 24 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine MOSCOW, 18 October (RIA Novosti) ^ a b Acts of vandalism against Orthodox churches in Russia, 1998-2008 Archived 14 September 2014 at the Wayback Machine RIA Novosti, 14:46 01.12.2008 ^ "Всемирное телевидение без насилия для Вас! | ТБН" . 22 September 2017. Archived from the original on 25 June 2014.

External links [ edit ] US Commission on International Religious Freedom v t e Persecution of Christians Anti-Christian sentiment By incident Early Christianity New Testament Roman Empire Great Fire of Rome Persecution in Lyon Decian persecution Diocletianic Persecution Middle Ages Homs revolts (854–855) Massacre of the Latins Martyrs of Córdoba Bashmurian revolts Destruction of the Church of the Holy Sepulchre Kisrawan campaigns (1292–1305) Early modern French Revolution Revolt in the Vendée Martyrs of Japan Shimabara Rebellion Kakure Kirishitan Captivity of Mangalorean Catholics at Seringapatam Modern First Serbian Uprising Constantinople massacre of 1821 1843 and 1846 massacres in Hakkari 1850 Aleppo 1876 Bulgaria 1860 Lebanon conflict Tianjin Massacre Kucheng massacre Tự Đức's Catholic persecution Hamidian massacres Diyarbekir Candia massacre Boxer Rebellion Adana massacre Great Famine of Mount Lebanon Armenian genocide Assyrian genocide Greek genocide İzmit massacres Murder of the Romanov family Cristero War Shusha massacre Red Terror (Spain) Persecution of Jehovah's Witnesses in Nazi Germany Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia Bersiap Istanbul pogrom Turkish invasion of Cyprus Black Thursday East Timor genocide Chouf massacres Damour massacre Mountain War (Lebanon) Beer Hall Putsch Eastern Bloc Persecution of Christians in the post–Cold War era Sumgait pogrom 1990 Dushanbe riots Maluku sectarian conflict Nag Hammadi massacre Kosheh massacres Boko Haram insurgency Maspero demonstrations 1998 attacks on Christians in southeastern Gujarat 1998 attacks on Christians in Dangs district 1998 Ramgiri-Udaygiri violence 1999 Ranalai violence 2004 unrest in Kosovo 2007 Christmas violence in Kandhamal 2008 Kandhamal violence 2008 Kandhamal nun gang rape case 2008 attacks on Christians in southern Karnataka 2010 Baghdad church siege 2010 Manila hostage crisis 2016 Lahore bombing 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings 2021 anti-Christian violence in Karnataka Owo church attack 2023 Hamburg shooting Kasindi church bombing Attack on Saint Menas church Mar Elias Church attack By persecutor Early Christianity Agrippa I Roman Empire Nero Domitian Septimius Severus Maximinus Thrax Decius Valerian Late Antiquity Diocletian Maximian Galerius Shapur II Athanaric Middle Ages Al-Mutawakkil Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah Hulagu Khan Timur Mehmed II Early modern Toyotomi Hideyoshi Tokugawa Ieyasu Kangxi Tipu Sultan Minh Mạng Tự Đức Queen Jeongsun Modern Ranavalona I Mwanga II of Buganda Plutarco Elías Calles Tomás Garrido Canabal Bai Chongxi Enver Hoxha Three Pashas Vladimir Lenin Joseph Stalin Plutarco Elías Calles Cristero War Adolf Hitler Mao Zedong Ante Pavelić Islamic State Nicolae Ceaușescu Pol Pot Suharto Saddam Hussein Daniel Ortega Mullah Omar Kim Il-sung Abubakar Shekau Xi Jinping Abu Bakr al-Baghdadi Kim Jong Un By country Afghanistan Algeria Azerbaijan Burma Cambodia China Egypt France German Empire Nazi Germany India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Laos Lebanon Madagascar Malaysia Mexico Nigeria North Korea Ottoman Empire Pakistan Palestine Saudi Arabia Somalia Soviet Union Spain Sudan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Yemen By persecuted group Anabaptists Catholics Eastern Orthodox Mormons Violence against Mormons Oriental Orthodox Armenians Copts Protestants Martyrs ( list ) Massacre of the Innocents Saint Stephen Carthusian Martyrs Chinese Martyrs Saint Martyrs of Jasenovac Drina Martyrs Forty Martyrs of England and Wales Korean Martyrs Martyrs of Japan Martyrs of the Spanish Civil War New Martyrs North American Martyrs Saints of the Cristero War Uganda Martyrs Vietnamese Martyrs 233 Spanish Martyrs 498 Spanish Martyrs 522 Spanish Martyrs Martyrs of Turon Martyrs of Daimiel Eastern Catholics in the USSR 21 Martyrs of Libya Category Commons Portal v t e Persecution of Christians in the world Afghanistan Albania Algeria Bangladesh Belarus Bhutan Bulgaria Cambodia China Egypt Eritrea France Hungary India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Kazakhstan Laos Lebanon Libya Madagascar Malaysia Mexico Nigeria North Korea Pakistan Palestine Poland Romania Saudi Arabia Somalia Spain Sri Lanka Sudan Syria Tajikistan Thailand Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen v t e Religious persecution and discrimination By group Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Methods Censorship Blasphemy law Blood libel Communal violence Cultural genocide Deprogramming Desecration Domicide Discrimination Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Extrajudicial killing Extrajudicial punishment Exclusivism Forced conversion Forced displacement Hate crime Iconoclasm Intolerance Pogrom Police Political violence Population cleansing Population transfer Sectarian violence Social cleansing Segregation State atheism State religion Terrorism Violence War Events Golden calf massacre (c.1250 BC) Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire (64–313) Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire (c. 324–c. 491) Decline of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent (c.550–c. 1200) Yellow Turban Rebellion (c.184–c. 205) Battle of Tours (732) Rhineland massacres (1096) Jerusalem massacre (1099) Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent (643–1526) Inquisition (1184–1908) Massacre at Ayyadieh (1191) Northern Crusades (12th–16th cent.) Crusades against Christians (13th–15th cent.) Forced conversions of Muslims in Spain (1500–1526) European wars of religion (1522–1712) Ottoman–Habsburg wars (1526–1791) Goa Inquisition (1561–1812) French Wars of Religion (1562–1598) Expulsion of the Moriscos (1609–1614) Test Acts (1673–1829) Persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction (1683–1922) Christianization of the Sámi people (1700s) French Revolutionary dechristianisation (1789–1801) Utah War (1857–1858) 1860 Mount Lebanon civil war (1860) Circassian genocide (1864) Dungan Revolt (1862–1877) Adana massacre (1909) Massacres of Albanians in the Balkan Wars (1912–1913) Greek genocide (1913–1922) Pontic Greek genocide Assyrian genocide (1914–1924) Armenian genocide (1915–1923) Persecution of Christians in the Eastern Bloc (1917–1990) Soviet persecution (1922–1991) 1917–1921 1921–1928 1928–1941 1958–1964 1970–1987 legislation Šahovići massacre (1924) White Terror (Spain) (1936–1975) Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses (1933) The Holocaust (1939–1945) Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia (1941–1945) Communist Polish persecution (1945–1989) Communist Romanian persecution (1945–1989) Noakhali riots (1946) Direct Action Day (1946) 1946 Bihar riots (1946) Rawalpindi massacres (1947) Persecution of Hindus in Pakistan (1947–ongoing) Violence against Muslims in India (1947–ongoing) Violence against Hindus in independent India (1947–ongoing) 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight (1948) Jewish exodus from the Muslim world (1948–1980) Antireligious campaigns in China (1949–ongoing) Persecution of Tibetans (1950–ongoing) Exodus of Turks from Bulgaria (1950) Religious violence in Nigeria (1953–ongoing) Istanbul pogrom (1955) Persecution of Papuans (1962–ongoing) Buddhist crisis (1963) Huế Phật Đản shootings (1963) Thích Quảng Đức (1963) Xá Lợi Pagoda raids (1963) Cultural Revolution (1966–1976) Four Olds (1966) Famen Temple (1966) Bangladesh genocide (1971) Persecution of Hindus in Bangladesh (1971–ongoing) Lebanese Civil War (1975–1990) Cambodian genocide (1975–1979) East Timor genocide (1975–1999) 1984 anti-Sikh riots (1984) Revival Process (1984–1989) 1989 expulsion of Turks from Bulgaria (1989) Exodus of Kashmiri Hindus (1990) Yugoslav Wars (1991–2001) Ethnic cleansing in the Bosnian War (1992–1996) Bosnian genocide (1995) War crimes in the Kosovo War (1999) Walisongo school massacre (2000) Kosheh massacres (2000) September 11 attacks (2001) 2002 Gujarat riots (2002) South Thailand insurgency (2004–ongoing) Boko Haram insurgency (2009–ongoing) Maspero demonstrations (2011) Attacks by Islamic extremists in Bangladesh (2013–2016) Yazidi genocide (2014–2017) Genocide of Christians by ISIL (2014–ongoing) Iraqi Turkmen genocide (2014–2017) Persecution of Uyghurs in China (2014–ongoing) Rohingya genocide (2016–ongoing) Christchurch mosque shootings (2019) 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings (2019) 2020 Delhi riots (2020) 2024 Istanbul church shooting Crocus City Hall attack (2024) Mar Elias Church attack (2025) Religion v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Persecution_of_Christians_in_the_post–Cold_War_era&oldid=1306349952 " Categories : 20th-century Christianity 21st-century Christianity Aftermath of the Cold War Contemporary history Persecution of Christians Hidden categories: Pages with reference errors Webarchive template wayback links Pages with broken reference names All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2024 CS1 Malay-language sources (ms) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) CS1 uses Arabic-language script (ar) CS1 Norwegian-language sources (no) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2020 Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2024 Articles containing Malay (macrolanguage)-language text Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from April 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2019 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from January 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from December 2020 This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 08:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Persecution of Christians in the post–Cold War era 3 languages Add topic

