Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Statement forms Toggle Statement forms subsection 2.1 Intensional statement form 2.1.1 Examples 2.2 Extensional statement form 2.2.1 Examples 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Intension 13 languages Deutsch Eesti فارسی Français 한국어 日本語 Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Property or quality connoted by a word, phrase, or another symbol This article is about referential context. For the identically pronounced term referring to a future commitment, see Intention . For the state of having intension, see intentionality . For the song, see Intension (song) .

In any of several fields of study that treat the use of signs—for example, in linguistics , logic , mathematics , semantics , semiotics , and philosophy of language —an intension is any property or quality connoted by a word , phrase , or another symbol.

[ 1 ] In the case of a word, the word's definition often implies an intension. For instance, the intensions of the word plant include properties such as "being composed of cellulose (not always true)", "alive", and "organism", among others. A comprehension is the collection of all such intensions.

Overview [ edit ] The meaning of a word can be thought of as the bond between the idea the word means and the physical form of the word . Swiss linguist Ferdinand de Saussure (1857–1913) contrasts three concepts: the signifier – the "sound image" or the string of letters on a page that one recognizes as the form of a sign the signified – the meaning, the concept or idea that a sign expresses or evokes the referent – the actual thing or set of things a sign refers to. See Dyadic signs and Reference (semantics) .

Without intension of some sort, a word has no meaning.

[ 2 ] For instance, the terms rantans or brillig have no intension and hence no meaning. Such terms may be suggestive, but a term can be suggestive without being meaningful. For instance, ran tan is an archaic onomatopoeia for chaotic noise or din and may suggest to English speakers a din or meaningless noise, and brillig though made up by Lewis Carroll may be suggestive of 'brilliant' or 'frigid'. Such terms, it may be argued, are always intensional since they connote the property 'meaningless term', but this is only an apparent paradox and does not constitute a counterexample to the claim that without intension a word has no meaning. Part of its intension is that it has no extension .  Intension is analogous to the signified in the Saussurean system, extension to the referent.

In philosophical arguments about dualism versus monism , it is noted that thoughts have intensionality and physical objects do not (S. E. Palmer, 1999), but rather have extension in space and time.

Statement forms [ edit ] A statement-form is simply a form obtained by putting blanks into a sentence where one or more expressions with extensions occur—for instance, "The quick brown ___ jumped over the lazy ___'s back." An instance of the form is a statement obtained by filling the blanks in.

Intensional statement form [ edit ] An intensional statement-form is a statement-form with at least one instance such that substituting co-extensive expressions into it does not always preserve logical value . An intensional statement is a statement that is an instance of an intensional statement-form. Here co-extensive expressions are expressions with the same extension .

[ 3 ] That is, a statement-form is intensional if it has, as one of its instances, a statement for which there are two co-extensive expressions (in the relevant language) such that one of them occurs in the statement, and if the other one is put in its place (uniformly, so that it replaces the former expression wherever it occurs in the statement), the result is a (different) statement with a different logical value. An intensional statement, then, is an instance of such a form; it has the same form as a statement in which substitution of co-extensive terms fails to preserve logical value.

Examples [ edit ] Everyone who has read Huckleberry Finn knows that Mark Twain wrote it.

Aristotle often remarked that he enjoyed stargazing .

The first example has a different logical value if the term "Mark Twain" is replaced with the co-extensive term "The author of Corn-pone Opinions ", since not everyone who has read Huckleberry Finn knows that the same author also wrote Corn-pone Opinions .

The second example has a different logical value if the term "stargazing" is replaced with the co-extensive term "looking at luminous spheroids of plasma held together by self-gravity ", since Aristotle would not have been aware of this definition of the term "star", and therefore would not have used it in a remark.

The intensional statements above feature expressions like "knows", "possible", and "pleased". Such expressions always, or nearly always, produce intensional statements when added (in some intelligible manner) to an extensional statement, and thus they (or more complex expressions like "It is possible that") are sometimes called intensional operators . A large class of intensional statements, but by no means all, can be spotted from the fact that they contain intensional operators.

Extensional statement form [ edit ] Main articles: Extensional context , Extensionality , and Extension (semantics) An extensional statement is a non-intensional statement. Substitution of co-extensive expressions into it always preserves logical value. A language is intensional if it contains intensional statements, and extensional otherwise. All natural languages are intensional.

[ 4 ] The only extensional languages are artificially constructed languages used in mathematical logic or for other special purposes and small fragments of natural languages.

Examples [ edit ] Mark Twain wrote Huckleberry Finn .

Aristotle enjoyed stargazing.

Note that if " Samuel Clemens " is put into (1) in place of "Mark Twain", the result is as true as the original statement. It should be clear that no matter what is put for "Mark Twain", so long as it is a singular term picking out the same man, the statement remains true. Likewise, we can put in place of the predicate any other predicate belonging to Mark Twain and only to Mark Twain, without changing the logical value.

For (2), the term "stargazing" can now be substituted with "looking at luminous spheroids of plasma held together by self-gravity", since Aristotle personally being aware of the two terms being co-extensive is no longer relevant to the logical value of the sentence.

See also [ edit ] Description logic Connotation Extension (predicate logic) Extensionality Intensional definition Intensional logic Montague grammar Temperature paradox Sense and reference Set-builder notation Notes [ edit ] ^ Antony Flew (1979).

Dictionary of Philosophy . p. 117.

^ Putnam, Hilary (1973). "Meaning and Reference".

The Journal of Philosophy .

70 (19): 699– 711.

doi : 10.2307/2025079 .

JSTOR 2025079 .

^ Simon Blackburn, Oxford Dictionary of Philosophy , 132-33 ^ Carnap, Rudolf (April 1955).

"Meaning and synonymy in natural languages" .

Philosophical Studies .

6 (3): 33– 47.

doi : 10.1007/BF02330951 .

ISSN 0031-8116 .

S2CID 170508331 .

References [ edit ] Ferdinand de Saussure , Course in General Linguistics . Open Court Classics, July 1986.

ISBN 0-8126-9023-0 S. E. Palmer, Vision Science: From Photons to Phenomenology , 1999. MIT Press, ISBN 0-2621-6183-4 External links [ edit ] Chalmers, David , "On Sense and Intension" .

Rapaport, William J.

, "Inten s ionality v. Inten t ionality" .

v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion v t e Formal semantics (natural language) Central concepts Compositionality Denotation Entailment Extension Generalized quantifier Intension Logical form Presupposition Proposition Reference Scope Speech act Syntax–semantics interface Truth conditions Topics Areas Anaphora Ambiguity Binding Conditionals Definiteness Disjunction Evidentiality Focus Indexicality Lexical semantics Modality Negation Propositional attitudes Tense–aspect–mood Quantification Vagueness Phenomena Antecedent-contained deletion Cataphora Coercion Conservativity Counterfactuals Crossover effects Cumulativity De dicto and de re De se Deontic modality Discourse relations Donkey anaphora Epistemic modality Exhaustivity Faultless disagreement Free choice inferences Givenness Homogeneity (linguistics) Hurford disjunction Inalienable possession Intersective modification Logophoricity Mirativity Modal subordination Opaque contexts Performatives Polarity items Privative adjectives Quantificational variability effect Responsive predicate Rising declaratives Scalar implicature Sloppy identity Subsective modification Subtrigging Telicity Temperature paradox Veridicality Formalism Formal systems Alternative semantics Categorial grammar Combinatory categorial grammar Discourse representation theory (DRT) Dynamic semantics Generative grammar Glue semantics Inquisitive semantics Intensional logic Lambda calculus Mereology Montague grammar Segmented discourse representation theory (SDRT) Situation semantics Supervaluationism Type theory TTR Concepts Autonomy of syntax Context set Continuation Conversational scoreboard Downward entailing Existential closure Function application Meaning postulate Monads Plural quantification Possible world Quantifier raising Quantization Question under discussion Semantic parsing Squiggle operator Strawson entailment Strict conditional Type shifter Universal grinder See also Cognitive semantics Computational semantics Distributional semantics Formal grammar Inferentialism Logic translation Linguistics wars Philosophy of language Pragmatics Semantics of logic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐j9sw7
Cached time: 20250811235448
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.312 seconds
Real time usage: 0.412 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1123/1000000
Revision size: 8593/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 55995/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1760/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 33431/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.188/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4922127/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  320.493      1 -total
 32.47%  104.071      4 Template:Navbox
 32.46%  104.021      1 Template:Reflist
 29.93%   95.925      1 Template:Philosophy_of_language
 24.39%   78.171      1 Template:Cite_book
 22.25%   71.305      1 Template:Short_description
 12.24%   39.237      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.36%   23.602     17 Template:Main_other
  6.71%   21.513      1 Template:About
  6.06%   19.406      1 Template:SDcat Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:14570:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235448 and revision id 1291981792. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Intension&oldid=1291981792 " Categories : Concepts in logic Semantics Definition Formal semantics (natural language) Concepts in the philosophy of language Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 14:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Intension 13 languages Add topic

