Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Trend 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Trade globalization 2 languages 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Trade globalization is a type of economic globalization and a measure ( economic indicator ) of economic integration . On a national scale, it loosely represents the proportion of all production that crosses the boundaries of a country, as well as the number of jobs in that country dependent upon external trade. On a global scale, it represents the proportion of all world production that is used for imports and exports between countries.

For an individual country , trade globalization is measured as the proportion of that country's total volume of trade to its Gross Domestic Product (GDP): [ 1 ] I m p o r t s + E x p o r t s G D P {\displaystyle {\frac {Imports+Exports}{GDP}}} For the world as a whole , trade globalization is the share of total world trade in total world production (GDP), where the sums are taken over all countries: [ 2 ] ∑ ∑ E x p o r t s ∑ ∑ G D P {\displaystyle {\frac {\sum Exports}{\sum GDP}}} Definition [ edit ] Preyer and Brös provide a simple operationalization of trade globalization as "the proportion of all world production that crosses international boundaries".

[ 2 ] Chase-Dunn et al. note that trade globalization is one of the types of economic globalization , and define trade globalization as "the extent to which the long-distance and global exchange of commodities has increased (or decreased) relative to the exchange of commodities within national societies", and precisely operationalize it as "the sum of all international exports as a percentage of the global product, which is the sum of all the national gross domestic products (GDPs)." [ 3 ] Erreygers and Vermeire define trade globalization as "the degree of dissimilarity between the actual distribution of bilateral trade flows and their gravity benchmark, determined only by size and distance." [ 4 ] They note that trade globalization would be maximized in a situation where only size and distance affected the intensity of bilateral trade flows - in other words, in a situation where neither trade barriers nor other factors would matter.

[ 4 ] Salvatore Babones notes that trade globalization is the indicator of a country's level of globalization most commonly used in empirical literature.

[ 5 ] Data for most countries in the modern era are available from the World Bank World Development Indicators database.

[ 5 ] Trend [ edit ] Chase-Dunn et al. note that there have been cyclical waves of trade globalization, with declines corresponding to wars and economic depressions, and that there has been a steady trend over the centuries for trade globalization to increase.

[ 3 ] With regards to the modern age, trade globalization increased until 1880, then decreased until 1905, increased again until 1914, decreased during World War I , increased until 1929, decreased until the end of World War II , and has been growing steadily since.

[ 3 ] They note that the main explanatory factors in this trend are the continued decline in transportation and communication costs, and stability provided by the " hegemonic system " supportive of trade in recent world-systems .

[ 3 ] Decreases can be explained by wars, and periods of conflict and tension often leading to them, where international actors cannot reach consensus on trade agreements and usually give in to protectionism .

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Global financial system International marketing International trade Internationalization List of economic communities List of free trade agreements References [ edit ] ^ Brady, David (19 July 2011).

Comparing European Workers: Policies and Institutions . Emerald Group Publishing. pp. 231–.

ISBN 978-0-85724-932-6 . Retrieved 1 February 2013 .

^ a b Preyer, G.; Mathias Bös (31 March 2002).

Borderlines in a Globalized World: New Perspectives in a Sociology of the World-System . Springer. pp. 18–.

ISBN 978-1-4020-0515-2 . Retrieved 1 February 2013 .

^ a b c d e Chase-Dunn, Christopher; Yukio Kawano; Benjamin D. Brewer. 2000. "Trade globalization since 1795: Waves of integration in the world-system," American Sociological Review 65 (1): 77-95.

^ a b Erreygers, Guido; Mieke Vermeire (9 December 2012).

Macroeconomics and Beyond: Essays in Honour of Wim Meeusen . Maklu. pp. 165–.

ISBN 978-90-441-2855-0 . Retrieved 1 February 2013 .

^ a b Babones, Salvatore (15 April 2008).

"Studying Globalization: Methodological Issues" . In George Ritzer (ed.).

The Blackwell Companion to Globalization . John Wiley & Sons. pp.

147– 149.

ISBN 978-0-470-76642-2 . Retrieved 1 February 2013 .

External links [ edit ] Chase-Dunn, Christopher, and Shoon Lio, "Global Class Formation and the New Global Left in World Historical Perspective" Chase-Dunn, Christopher, and Roy Kwon, "Crises and Counter-Movements in World Evolutionary Perspective" . Contains graphs of trade globalization for 1860-2008 Appendix to "Trade Globalization since 1795: waves of integration in the world-system" v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trade_globalization&oldid=1109173432 " Categories : History of international trade Economic globalization Global economic indicators Economic integration This page was last edited on 8 September 2022, at 11:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trade globalization 2 languages Add topic

