Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins of the term 2 Theory 3 Criticisms 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Cultural feminism 21 languages العربية অসমীয়া Български Català Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski עברית Македонски Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Theories that commend innate differences between women and men Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e Cultural feminism is a term used to describe a variety of feminism that attempts to revalue and redefine attributes culturally ascribed to femaleness.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It is also used to describe theories that commend innate differences between women and men.

[ 3 ] Cultural feminists diverged from radical feminists when they rejected the problematization of femininity and returned to an essentialist view of gender differences in which they regard "female nature" as superior.

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Origins of the term [ edit ] Unlike radical feminism or socialist feminism , cultural feminism was not an ideology widely claimed by proponents but was more commonly a pejorative label ascribed by its opponents. In 1975, Brooke Williams was the first to describe the "depoliticization of radical feminism" as "cultural feminism".

[ 6 ] However, the term had surfaced as early as 1971, when Frances Chapman, in a letter printed in Off Our Backs , condemned the literary magazine Aphra as having "served the cause of cultural feminism".

[ 7 ] Socialist feminist Elizabeth Diggs , in 1972, used the label "cultural feminism" to apply to all of radical feminism.

[ 8 ] Redstockings founder Ellen Willis affirmed that "The great majority of women who presently call themselves 'radical feminists' in fact subscribe to a politics more accurately labeled 'cultural feminist'. [...] Though cultural feminism came out of the radical feminist movement, the premises of the two tendencies are antithetical. Yet on the left and elsewhere the distinction is rarely made." [ 9 ] However, there are scholars such as Rosemarie Tong who conceptualize cultural feminism as a perspective within radical feminism.

[ 2 ] Theory [ edit ] Cultural feminism places women in a position overdetermined by patriarchal systems.

[ 1 ] Linda Alcoff makes the point that "the cultural feminist reappraisal construes woman's passivity as her peacefulness, her sentimentality as her proclivity to nurture, her subjectiveness as her advanced self-awareness".

[ 1 ] Similar lines of thought have been traced to earlier periods.

Jane Addams and Charlotte Perkins Gilman argued that in governing the state, cooperation, caring, and nonviolence in the settlement of conflicts society seem to be what was needed from women's virtues.

[ 10 ] Josephine Donovan argues that the nineteenth century journalist , critic , and women's rights activist, Margaret Fuller , initiated cultural feminism in Woman in the Nineteenth Century (1845). She stressed the emotional, intuitive side of knowledge and expressed an organic worldview that is quite different from the mechanistic view of Enlightenment rationalists.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] However, it was Alice Echols ' article, "Cultural Feminism: Feminist Capitalism and the Anti-Pornography Movement", that led to the widespread adoption of the term to describe contemporary feminists, not their historical antecedents. According to Echols, cultural feminism “equates women's liberation with the development and preservation of a female counterculture.” [ 4 ] : 35 Her examples of cultural feminists are Kathleen Barry , Susan Brownmiller , Mary Daly , Andrea Dworkin , Susan Griffin , Robin Morgan , Janice Raymond , Adrienne Rich , and Florence Rush .

[ 1 ] [ 13 ] Mary Daly linked "female energy", or her term Gyn/Ecology, to the female "life-affirming, life-creating biological condition" that is victimized by male aggression as a result of "male barrenness".

[ 1 ] Adrienne Rich asserts that female biology has “radical” potential that has been suppressed by its reduction by men.

[ 14 ] Some cultural feminists desired the separation of women-only, women-run centers and spaces to “challenge negative gendered constructions.” [ 15 ] This form of separatism within cultural feminism was criticized for ignoring structural patriarchy to instead blame men as individuals for women's oppression.

[ 15 ] In addition to physical separation, cultural feminists called for “separation from male values.” [ 4 ] Women are identified as the most important and most marginalized group. Daly asserted that other categories of identity including ethnicity and class are male-defined groups, and women who identify them are being divided from other women.

[ 1 ] Rich declares the “social burden” placed on women is greater and more complex than even the burden of slavery.

[ 14 ] Motherhood and child-bearing is another popular topic in cultural feminist theory. Rich theorized motherhood as an institution, constructed to control women, which is different from authentic, natural motherhood.

[ 14 ] Cultural feminists declare the relationship between mother and daughter, and therefore all women, has been destroyed by patriarchy and must be repaired.

[ 4 ] In her exhaustive study of second-wave feminist theory, Love and Politics: Radical Feminist and Lesbian Theories , [ 16 ] Carol Anne Douglas (long-time critic at Off Our Backs ) included the influence of Susan Griffin's popular book Woman and Nature: The Roaring Inside Her as central to the development of this strain of theory.  Notably, this chapter of Douglas' book is titled Male biology as a problem and the analysis of Griffin's ideas is subtitled Woman the Natural .

[ 16 ] Criticisms [ edit ] In a 2004 article for the Journal of Women in Culture and Society , Kristen Ghodsee notes several forms of criticism coming from women of color and women of developing countries, who believe that "the idea of a global sisterhood erases important differences in power and access to resources among women of varying races, ethnicities, and nationalities".

[ 17 ] : 727 A common concern, particularly among women of color and women of developing countries, is that cultural feminism only includes white, upper-class women, instead of taking into account women of different color and status.

[ 17 ] : 727 This concern is reflected by Audre Lorde in “An Open Letter to Mary Daly” in which Lorde expresses disappointment that Daly excluded the heritage and herstories of Lorde and other non-European women in her cultural feminist book, while selectively using non-European women's words out of context to prove her points and to describe “female victimization”.

[ 18 ] Another concern is the belief that cultural feminists "have not challenged the defining of woman but only the definition given by men" and therefore perpetuate gender essentialism [ 19 ] : 11 When cultural feminists claim issues like patriarchy and rape are inherent products of male biology and behavior, the opportunity to critique and challenge the structures behind these issues disappears.

[ 4 ] Furthermore, essentialist definitions of “woman” reinforce the oppressive requirement for women to live up to “an innate ‘womanhood’ they will be judged by.” [ 4 ] Alice Echols stated that cultural feminists believe in order to combat “male lasciviousness,” women should demand respect by repressing their sexualities and proposing a conservative "female standard of sexuality".

[ 4 ] : 52 She critiques this concept for attempting to control women's sexual expression to hold women responsible for perceived problems with male sexuality.

[ 4 ] : 52 This biological determinism also reflects on cultural feminists' opinions of transgender women. Echols describes cultural feminist attribution of transgender women to male rapaciousness as inappropriate and explains that cultural feminists dislike transgender women for accusations that they “undermine the salience of gender, and erase the boundaries between genders,” appropriate the female body (which cultural feminists regard as a kind of rape), and threaten to bring the “residual heterosexuality” out of lesbians in lesbian-feminist spaces.

[ 4 ] Trans-exclusionary radical feminism is said to have its origins in cultural feminism.

[ 20 ] Cultural feminism has also been criticized for engaging in capitalism , a practice which some feminists consider contradictory to feminist values and counterproductive to the feminist movement. To highlight problems with feminist capitalism, Echols analyzed the implementation, practices, and outcomes of the Feminist Economic Network (FEN), a feminist business that intended to use capitalism to help women overcome patriarchal barriers by lending money from feminist credit unions to feminist owned businesses.

[ 21 ] She found the network exploited employees, rejected democracy, collectivity, and accountability, and justified hierarchies of power within the business by claiming sisterhood ensures individual empowerment leads to collective empowerment for women.

[ 4 ] Echols's findings can be expanded upon by a critique of cultural feminist business practices in Off Our Backs . The authors explain that the “feminist” businesses cultural feminists advocate for depoliticize feminism, are inherently hierarchal, have minimal access to political economic influence, and are implicitly reformist. Additionally, the authors point out the flaws in cultural feminists’ attempts to counter oppression through membership in an oppressive economic system, use of bootstrap theory, and turning feminism into both a commodity and market which ultimately serves “male” capitalism.

[ 13 ] Verta Taylor and Leila J. Rupp have argued that critiques of cultural feminism are often an attack on lesbian feminism .

[ 6 ] Suzanne Staggenbourg's case study of Bloomington, Indiana led her to conclude that engagement in activities labeled as cultural feminist "provides little evidence that cultural feminism led to a decline in political activity in the women's movement." [ 22 ] : 507 See also [ edit ] Appeal to nature Difference feminism Ecofeminism Female chauvinism Feminist metaphysics Feminist sex wars Gender essentialism New feminism Political lesbianism TERFism References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Alcoff, Linda (1988).

"Cultural Feminism versus Post-Structuralism: The Identity Crisis in Feminist Theory" .

Signs .

13 (3): 405– 436.

ISSN 0097-9740 .

^ a b Tong, Rosemarie (2009). "Radical Feminism: Libertarian and Cultural Perspectives".

Feminist thought: a more comprehensive introduction (3rd ed.). Boulder, Colo: Westview.

ISBN 978-0-8133-4375-4 .

^ Kramarae, Cheris; Spender, Dale (2000).

Routledge International Encyclopedia of Women: Global Women's Issues and Knowledge . New York: Routledge. p. 746.

ISBN 978-0415920902 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Echols, Alice (1983). "Cultural Feminism: Feminist Capitalism and the Anti-Pornography Movement".

Social Text (7): 34– 53.

doi : 10.2307/466453 .

ISSN 0164-2472 .

JSTOR 466453 .

^ Evans, Judy (1995). "Cultural Feminism: Feminism's First Difference".

Feminist Theory Today : an Introduction to Second-Wave Feminism . SAGE Publications. p. 73.

ISBN 9781446264935 .

OCLC 874319830 .

^ a b Taylor, Verta; Rupp, Leila J. (1993).

"Women's Culture and Lesbian Feminist Activism: A Reconsideration of Cultural Feminism" .

Signs .

19 (1): 32– 61.

ISSN 0097-9740 .

^ Frances Chapman, "goodbye," Off Our Backs 1, no. 19 (25 March  1971): 14.

^ Elizabeth Diggs, "What Is the Women's Movement?", Women: A Journal of Liberation 2, no. 4 (1972): 11-12, 20.

^ Willis, Ellen (1984).

"Radical Feminism and Feminist Radicalism" .

Social Text (9/10): 91– 118.

doi : 10.2307/466537 .

ISSN 0164-2472 .

^ Ritzer, George. Contemporary Sociological Theory and Its Classical Roots. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007.

ISBN 978-0-07-299759-0 ^ Donovan, Josefine.

Feminist Theory . 3d ed. (New York: Continuum, 1985.

^ Levine, Amy-Jill; Blickenstaff, Marianne (2004).

A Feminist Companion to the Acts of the Apostles . London: T & T Clark. p. 242.

ISBN 978-0-8264-6252-7 .

^ a b "god, mom & apple pie: "feminist" businesses as an extension of the american dream".

Off Our Backs .

5 (11): 18– 20. 1976.

ISSN 0030-0071 .

JSTOR 25772445 .

^ a b c Rich, Adrienne Cécile. (1997).

Of woman born : motherhood as experience and institution . Virago.

ISBN 0860680312 .

OCLC 263689375 .

^ a b Bromley, Victoria L. (2012).

Feminisms Matter: Debates, Theories, Activism . University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 9781442605008 .

^ a b Douglas, Carol Anne (July 1990).

Love and Politics : Radical Feminist and Lesbian Theories . San Francisco, CA, USA: ISM PRESS.

ISBN 9780910383172 .

^ a b Ghodsee, Kristen (Spring 2004). "Feminism by Design: Emerging Capitalisms, Cultural Feminism, and Women's Nongovernmental Organizations in Post Socialist Eastern Europe".

Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

29 (3): 772– 753.

doi : 10.1086/380631 .

S2CID 145465152 .

^ Lorde, Audre (2022-03-15), "An Open Letter to Mary Daly" , This Bridge Called My Back, Fortieth Anniversary Edition , SUNY Press, pp.

90– 93, doi : 10.1515/9781438488295-033 , ISBN 978-1-4384-8829-5 ^ Blumenthal, Dannielle (1997).

Women and Soap Opera: A Cultural Feminist Perspective . Praeger.

ISBN 9780275960391 . Retrieved 12 November 2018 .

^ Bassi, Serena; LaFleur, Greta (2022-08-01).

"Introduction" .

TSQ: Transgender Studies Quarterly .

9 (3): 311– 333.

doi : 10.1215/23289252-9836008 .

ISSN 2328-9252 .

^ Bruneau, Camille (2021-01-14).

"How do patriarchy and capitalism jointly reinforce the oppression of women?" .

CADTM . Retrieved 2021-01-14 .

^ Staggenborg, Suzanne (2001).

"Beyond Culture versus Politics: A Case Study of a Local Women's Movement" .

Gender and Society .

15 (4): 507– 530.

ISSN 0891-2432 .

Further reading [ edit ] Deegan, Mary Jo (1988).

"Jane Addams on Cultural Feminism" .

Jane Addams and the Men of the Chicago School, 1892–1918 . Routledge. pp.

226– 230.

ISBN 978-0887380778 .

Balbert, Peter (1989).

D. H. Lawrence and the Phallic Imagination: Essays on Sexual Identity and Feminist Misreading . London: Macmillan Press.

ISBN 978-0-333-43964-7 .

Roseneil, Sasha (1995).

"The Coming of Age of Feminist Sociology: Some Issues of Practice and Theory for the Next Twenty Years" .

The British Journal of Sociology .

46 (2): 191– 205.

doi : 10.2307/591785 .

ISSN 0007-1315 .

" 'I'm Not a Feminist, But...' " . letter to a friend.

still no pod . October 24, 2005.

Pollitt, Katha (March 2015).

"Why Feminism Should Focus Less on Culture" .

The Progressive .

v t e Culture Outline Sciences Cultural anthropology Cultural astronomy Cultural ecology Cultural geography Cultural neuroscience Cultural studies Culturology Culture theory Subfields Bioculture Cross-cultural studies Cross-cultural communication Cross-cultural leadership Cross-cultural psychiatry Cross-cultural psychology Cultural analytics Cultural economics Cultural entomology Cultural history Cultural mapping Cultural mediation Cultural psychology Cultural values Culturomics Intercultural learning Intercultural relations Philosophy of culture Popular culture studies Postcritique Semiotics of culture Sociology of culture Sound culture Theology of culture Transcultural nursing Types Constructed culture Dominant culture Folk culture High culture Individualistic culture Legal culture Microculture Official culture Political culture Civic Popular culture Low culture Media culture Recombinant culture Remix culture Trash culture Urban Primitive culture Resistance through culture Subculture Alternative culture Counterculture Fandom Far-right subcultures Underground culture Youth subculture list Super culture Vernacular culture Culture by location Aspects Acculturation Cultural appreciation Cultural appropriation Cultural area Cultural artifact Cultural baggage Cultural bias Cultural capital Cross-cultural Cultural communication Cultural conflict Cultural cringe Cultural dissonance Cultural emphasis Cultural framework Cultural heritage Destroyed Cultural icon Cultural identity Cultural industry Cultural invention Cultural landscape Cultural learning Cultural leveling Cultural memory Cultural pluralism Cultural practice Cultural property Cultural reproduction Cultural system Cultural technology Cultural universal Cultureme Enculturation High- and low-context cultures Interculturality Internet culture Manuscript culture Material culture Non-material culture Organizational culture Assessment culture Design culture Journalism culture Print culture Protoculture Relational mobility Safety culture Symbolic culture Technoculture Trans-cultural diffusion Transculturation Visual culture Politics Colonial mentality Consumer capitalism Cross cultural sensitivity Cultural assimilation Cultural attaché Cultural backwardness Cultural Bolshevism Cultural conservatism Cultural contracts Cultural deprivation Cultural diplomacy Cultural environmentalism Cultural exception Cultural feminism Cultural genocide Cultural globalization Cultural hegemony Cultural imperialism Cultural intelligence Cultural liberalism Cultural nationalism Cultural pessimism Cultural policy Cultural racism Cultural radicalism Cultural retention Cultural Revolution Cultural rights Cultural safety Cultural silence Cultural subsidy Cultural Zionism Culture change Culture minister Culture of fear Culture war Deculturalization Dominator culture Interculturalism Monoculturalism Multiculturalism Biculturalism Multiracial democracy Pluriculturalism Polyculturalism Transculturism Religions Buddhism Christianity Catholicism Cultural Christians Protestantism Role of Christianity in civilization Eastern Orthodoxy Mormonism Cultural Hindus Islam Cultural Muslims Judaism Sikhism Related Algorithmic culture Animal culture Archaeological culture Bennett scale Cannabis culture Circuit of culture Civilization Coffee culture Cringe culture Cross-cultural Cultural center Cultural competence Cultural critic Cultural determinism Cultural diversity Cultural evolutionism Cultural homogenization Cultural institution Cultural jet lag Cultural lag Cultural literacy Cultural mosaic Cultural movement Cultural mulatto Cultural probe Cultural relativism Cultural tourism Pop-culture Cultural translation Cultural turn Cultural sensibility Culture and menstruation Culture and positive psychology Culture and social cognition Culture gap Culture hero Culture industry Culture shock Culturgen Children's culture Culturalism Cyberculture Death and culture Disability culture Deaf culture Drinking culture Drug culture Eastern culture Emotions and culture Historical culture Intercultural communication Intercultural competence Languaculture Living things in culture Media culture Oppositional culture Participatory culture Permission culture Rape culture Remix culture Tea culture Transformation of culture Urban culture Welfare culture Western culture Youth culture Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cultural_feminism&oldid=1303238827 " Categories : Counterculture Feminism and society Feminist movements and ideologies Feminist theory Radical feminism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 20:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cultural feminism 21 languages Add topic

