Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contexts Toggle Contexts subsection 1.1 Activism 1.2 Advertising 1.3 Hoaxing 1.4 Propagandizing 1.5 Psychological warfare 1.6 Public relations 2 Techniques Toggle Techniques subsection 2.1 Internet manipulation 2.1.1 Astroturfing 2.1.2 Clickbait 2.1.3 Information laundering 2.1.4 Search engine marketing 2.2 Distraction 2.2.1 Distraction by major events 2.2.2 Distracting the public 2.2.3 Straw man fallacy 2.3 Voice replication 2.4 Photo manipulation 2.5 Video manipulation 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Media manipulation 20 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano 日本語 Polski Português Simple English Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Techniques in which partisans create an image that favours their interests For other uses, see Manipulation .

Examples of televised manipulation can be found in news programs that can  reach mass audiences. Pictured is the Polish newscast program Dziennik , infamous for having attempted to slander capitalism in then-communist Poland using emotive and loaded language .

Media manipulation refers to orchestrated campaigns in which actors exploit the distinctive features of broadcasting mass communications or digital media platforms to mislead, misinform, or create a narrative that advances their interests and agendas.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] In practice, media manipulation tactics may include the use of rhetorical strategies including logical fallacies , deceptive content like disinformation , and propaganda techniques, and often involve the suppression of information or points of view by crowding them out, by inducing other people or groups of people to stop listening to certain arguments, or by simply diverting attention elsewhere. In Propaganda: The Formation of Men's Attitudes , Jacques Ellul writes that public opinion can only express itself through channels which are provided by the mass media of communication – without which there could be no propaganda.

[ 4 ] Contexts [ edit ] Activism [ edit ] Main article: Activism Activism is the practice or doctrine that has an emphasis on direct vigorous action especially supporting or opposing one side of a controversial matter.

[ 5 ] It is quite simply starting a movement to affect or change social views. It is frequently started by influential individuals but is done collectively through social movements with large masses. These social movements can be done through public rallies , strikes , street marches, and social media .

[ 6 ] Advertising [ edit ] " Daisy ", a TV commercial for the re-election of U.S. President Lyndon B. Johnson . It aired only once, in September 1964, and is considered both one of the most controversial and one of the most effective political ads in American history.

Main article: Advertising Advertising is a form of promotion that seeks to persuade a specific audience to purchase a good or service. One of the first types of marketing, it aims to influence its target market to either buy, sell, or carry out a particular action.

[ 7 ] These advertisements are not only done by businesses but can also be done by other groups. Non-commercial advertisers are those who spend money on advertising in the hope of raising awareness for a cause or promoting specific ideas.

[ 8 ] Hoaxing [ edit ] Main article: Hoax A hoax is something intended to deceive or defraud. Misleading public stunts, scientific frauds , false bomb threats and business scams are examples of hoaxes.

[ 9 ] Propagandizing [ edit ] Main article: Propaganda Propagandizing is a form of communication that is aimed at influencing the attitude of a community toward some cause or position by presenting only one side of an argument.

Propaganda is commonly created by governments, but some forms of mass communication created by other influential organizations can be considered propaganda. As opposed to impartially providing information, propaganda, in its most basic sense, presents information primarily to influence an audience. Propaganda is usually repeated and dispersed over a wide variety of media in order to create the desired result in audience attitudes. While the term propaganda has justifiably acquired a strongly negative connotation by association with its most manipulative and jingoistic examples (e.g.

Nazi propaganda used to justify the Holocaust ), propaganda in its original sense was neutral, and could refer to uses that were generally benign or innocuous, such as public health recommendations, signs encouraging citizens to participate in a census or election, or messages encouraging persons to report crimes to the police, among others.

[ 10 ] Propaganda uses societal norms and myths that people hear and believe. Because people respond to, understand and remember more simple ideas this is what is used to influence people's beliefs, attitudes and values.

[ 11 ] Psychological warfare [ edit ] Main article: Psychological warfare Psychological warfare is a term used to denote actions taken by governments with the aim evoking a planned psychological reaction in other people.

[ 12 ] This tactic has been used in multiple wars throughout history. During World War II , the western Allies , expected that the Soviet Union would drop leaflets on the US and England. During the conflict with Iraq , American and English forces dropped leaflets, with many of the leaflets telling the people how to surrender. In the Korean War both sides would use loud speakers from the front lines.

[ 13 ] In 2009 people in Israel in the Gaza war received text messages on their cell phones threatening them with rocket attacks. The Palestinian people were getting phone calls and leaflets warning them that they were going to drop rockets on them. These phone calls and leaflets were not always accurate.

[ 14 ] Public relations [ edit ] Main article: Public relations Public relations (PR) is the management of the flow of information between an individual or an organization and the public .

[ 15 ] Techniques [ edit ] Means of influence include, but are not limited to, the methods outlined in Influence: Science and Practice , which include appealing to authority, and making the person aware of the scarcity of an offer.

[ 16 ] Internet manipulation [ edit ] Main article: Internet manipulation Astroturfing [ edit ] Main article: Astroturfing Astroturfing is when there is an intent and attempt to create the illusion of support for a particular cause, person, or stance. While this is mainly connected to and seen on the internet, it has also happened in newspapers during times of political elections.

[ 17 ] Corporations and political parties try to imitate grassroots movements in order to sway the public to believing something that is not true.

[ 18 ] Examples of typical Clickbait with headlines containing exaggerated or sensationalized information.

Clickbait [ edit ] Main article: Clickbait Clickbait refers to headlines of online news articles that are sensationalized or sometimes wholly fake . It uses people's natural curiosity to get people to click. In some cases clickbait is used to generate income; more clicks mean more money is made with advertisers.

[ 19 ] But these headlines and articles can also be used to influence a group of people on social media . In some cases, they are constructed to appeal to the interest group's pre-existing biases and thus to be shared within filter bubbles .

[ 20 ] Information laundering [ edit ] Main article: Information laundering Information laundering is a method of using a less trusted or less popular platform to publish a story of dubious origin or veracity for the purposes of reporting on that report rather than the story itself. This technique serves to insulate the secondary, more established media from having to issue a retraction if the report is false. Generally, secondary reports will report that the original report is reporting without verifying or making the report themselves.

[ 21 ] Search engine marketing [ edit ] Main article: Search engine marketing In search engine marketing, websites use market research from past searches and other sources to increase their visibility in search engine results pages . This allows them to guide search results along the lines they desire, thereby influencing searchers.

[ 22 ] Businesses have many tactics to entice customers to their websites to generate revenue, such as banner ads , search engine optimization and pay-per-click marketing tools. They all serve a different purposes and use different tools that appeal to multiple types of users. Banner ads appear on sites in an attempt to attract visitors to a linked website. Search engine optimization is a technique in which a website is optimized to received a higher ranking from the search engine, causing it to be returned more often in searches.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] Distraction [ edit ] Distraction by major events [ edit ] Commonly known as "smoke screen", this technique consists of making the public focus its attention on a topic that is more convenient for the propagandist. This particular type of media manipulation has been referenced in popular culture. For example, the movie Wag the Dog (1997) illustrates how the public can be deceitfully distracted from an important topic by presenting another whose only quality is that of being more attractive.

Politicians might distract the public from domestic issues by diverting attention to global issues in order to reduce pressure domestically.

[ 25 ] Distracting the public [ edit ] This is a variation of the traditional arguments known, in logic as ad hominem and ad populum but applied to countries instead of individuals. This technique consists of refuting arguments by appealing to nationalism or by inspiring fear and hate toward a foreign country or all foreigners. It has the potential to be important since it gives the propagandists the power to discredit any information coming from other countries.

[ 26 ] Straw man fallacy [ edit ] Main article: Straw man An informal fallacy . The "straw man" consists of appearing to refute the opponent's argument while  attacking another topic. For it to work correctly the topic that was refuted and the one that should have been refuted need to be similar.

Voice replication [ edit ] Main article: Audio deepfake Voice replication is an artificially generated audio created by artificial intelligence (AI) to create a realistic-replication of someone's voice. AI uses machine learning models and can replicate the specific characteristics of a target voice, such as pitch, tone, and cadence. It is commonly used to deceive and cause disruption.

[ 27 ] Photo manipulation [ edit ] Main article: Photo manipulation Visual media can be transformed through photo manipulation, commonly called " photoshopping ." This can make a product, person, or idea seem more appealing. Specific product features are highlighted to attract and persuade the public, and specific editing tools are used to enhance the photo. Some techniques include cropping, resizing, airbrushing, color-enhancing, and removing or adding subjects from the original image. The motivation for photo manipulation may be for pure artistic creativity or more nefarious reasons to deceive. Photo manipulation is used extensively in the advertising and fashion industry and has been the subject of controversy for its part in false advertising and promoting unrealistic images of beauty.

[ 28 ] Video manipulation [ edit ] Main article: video manipulation Video manipulation is a variant of media manipulation that targets digital video using a combination of traditional video processing and video editing techniques and auxiliary methods from artificial intelligence like face recognition . In typical video manipulation, the facial structure, body movements, and voice of the subject are replicated in order to create a fabricated recording of the subject. The applications of these methods range from educational videos to videos aimed at ( mass ) manipulation and propaganda , a straightforward extension of the long-standing possibilities of photo manipulation . This form of computer-generated misinformation has contributed to fake news , and there have been instances when this technology was used during political campaigns in an attempt to influence the outcome.

[ 29 ] See also [ edit ] Media portal Audio deepfake Black propaganda Concentration of media ownership Crowd manipulation Deepfake Disinformation Sensationalism Spin (public relations) References [ edit ] ^ Diaz Ruiz, Carlos (2023-10-30).

"Disinformation on digital media platforms: A market-shaping approach" .

New Media & Society .

doi : 10.1177/14614448231207644 .

ISSN 1461-4448 .

^ Marwick, A. E., & Lewis, R. (2017). Media manipulation and disinformation online. Data & Society Research Institute ^ Coxall, Malcolm (2 Mar 2013). Caswell, Guy (ed.).

Human Manipulation - A Handbook . Cornelio Books.

ISBN 978-8-4940-8532-1 .

^ Ellul, Jacques (1973).

Propaganda: The Formation of Men's Attitudes , Ch. 2.Trans. Konrad Kellen & Jean Lerner. Vintage Books, New York.

ISBN 978-0-394-71874-3 .

^ "Definition of Activism" .

Merriam-Webster . 2015.

^ Greijdanus, Hedy; A de Matos Fernandes, Carlos; Turner-Zwinkels, Felicity; Honari, Ali; Roos, Carla A.; Rosenbusch, Hannes; Postmes, Tom (2020).

"The psychology of online activism and social movements: relations between online and offline collective action" .

Current Opinion in Psychology .

35 : 49– 54.

doi : 10.1016/j.copsyc.2020.03.003 .

PMID 32330859 .

^ Young, Megan.

"Marketing vs. Advertising" .

American Marketing Association . Retrieved 2022-10-05 .

^ "Non-commercial Advertising" .

Business Dictionary . 2015. Archived from the original on 2018-06-12 . Retrieved 2016-04-01 .

^ Broersma, Marcel (2013).

A refractured paradigm: Journalism, hoaxes and the challenge of trust . Routledge. pp.

28– 44.

ISBN 9780203102688 .

^ Woolley, Samuel.

"Digital Propaganda: The Power of Influencers" .

Journal of Democracy . JOD . Retrieved April 24, 2024 .

^ "Media's Use of Propaganda to Persuade People's Attitude, Beliefs and Behaviors" .

web.stanford.edu . Retrieved 2017-12-03 .

^ Schmid, A. (2005). Terrorism as psychological warfare. Democracy and Security, 1(2), 137-146.

^ "psychological warfare" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2017-12-03 .

^ Jerusalem, Hazem Balousha Toni O'Loughlin in (2009-01-03).

"Text messages and phone calls add psychological aspect to warfare in Gaza" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2017-12-03 .

^ Botan, Carl H., and Maureen Taylor. "Public relations: State of the field." Journal of communication 54.4 (2004): 645-661.

^ Cialdini, Robert B.

(2000).

Influence: Science and Practice . New Jersey: Allyn & Bacon .

ISBN 0-321-18895-0 .

^ Bienkov, Adam (2012-02-08).

"Astroturfing: what is it and why does it matter? | Adam Bienkov" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 2017-12-03 .

^ "10 Fake Grassroots Movements Started By Corporations To Sway Your Opinion" .

Business Insider . Retrieved 2017-12-03 .

^ Frampton, Ben (2015-09-14).

"Is clickbait changing journalism?" .

BBC News . Retrieved 2017-12-03 .

^ Ohlheiser, Abby (2016-11-18).

"Analysis | This is how Facebook's fake-news writers make money" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Archived from the original on 2016-11-19 . Retrieved 2022-02-27 .

^ Meleshevich, Kirill; Schafer, Bret (2018-01-09).

"Online information laundering: The role of social media" (PDF) .

Alliance for Securing Democracy .

^ Ratliff, James; Rubinfeld, Daniel (May 2014). "Is There a Market for Organic Search Engine Results and Can Their Manipulation Give Rise to Antitrust Liability?".

Journal of Competition Law and Economics : 1– 25.

^ Kritzinger, W.; Weideman, M. (2017).

"Parallel search engine optimisation and pay-per-click campaigns: A comparison of cost per acquisition" .

SA Journal of Information Management .

19 : 1.

doi : 10.4102/SAJIM.V19I1.820 .

^ Almukhtar, Firas; Nawzad, Mahmoodd; Kareem, Shahab (2021).

"Search engine optimization: a review" (PDF) .

Applied Computer Science .

17 (1): 70– 80.

doi : 10.35784/acs-2021-07 .

^ Barberá, Pablo; et al. (January 2024). "Distract and divert: How world leaders use social media during contentious politics".

The International Journal of Press/Politics .

29 (1): 47– 73.

doi : 10.1177/19401612221102030 .

^ Yap, A (2013).

"Ad Hominem Fallacies, Bias, and Testimony" .

Argumentation .

27 (2): 97– 109.

doi : 10.1007/s10503-011-9260-5 .

^ Almutairi, Z.; Elgibreen, H. (2022).

"A Review of Modern Audio Deepfake Detection Methods: Challenges and Future Directions" .

Algorithms .

15 (5): 155.

doi : 10.3390/a15050155 .

^ Brown, A (2015). "Picture [Im]Perfect: Photoshop Redefining Beauty in Cosmetic Advertisements, Giving False Advertising a Run for the Money".

Texas Review of Entertainment & Sports Law .

16 (2): 87– 105.

^ Chawki, Mohamed (2024-02-24).

"Navigating legal challenges of deepfakes in the American context: a call to action" .

Cogent Engineering .

11 (1): 6.

doi : 10.1080/23311916.2024.2320971 .

Further reading [ edit ] Overviews Chomsky, Noam ; Herman, Edward S.

, Manufacturing Consent: The Political Economy of the Mass Media , New York: Pantheon Books , 1988.

Cialdini, Robert B., Influence: Science and Practice, 4th Edition New Jersey: Allyn & Bacon , 2000.

Ewen, Stuart , Captains of Consciousness: Advertising and the Social Roots of the Consumer Culture, New York: McGraw-Hill , 1976.

Ewen, Stuart, PR! A Social History of Spin, New York: Basic Books , 1996.

Ewen, Stuart; Ewen, Elizabeth, Channels of Desire: Mass Images and the Shaping of American Consciousness, New York: McGraw-Hill, 1982.

Ellul, Jacques .

Propaganda: The Formation of Men's Attitudes . Trans. Konrad Kellen & Jean Lerner. New York: Knopf, 1965. New York: Random House/ Vintage 1973 Jamieson,  H.  K, Dirty  Politics:  Deception,  Distraction  and  Democracy Oxford University  Press, 1992.

Jowett, Garth S.; O'Donnell, Victoria, Propaganda and Persuasion, Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications , 1999.

ISBN 0-7619-1147-2 .

Parenti,  M., Monopoly  Media  Manipulation , Mediterranean  Quarterly, Spring  2002.

Lutz, William D.

, Doublespeak, New York, NY: HarperPerennial , 1990.

ISBN 0-06-016134-5 .

Rushkoff, Douglas , "They Say" , in Coercion: Why We Listen to What "They" Say, New York: Riverhead Books , 1999.

Case studies Beeston,  R., Bin  Laden  Heads  List  of  Suspects,  Terror  in America Times, 12 September 2001.

Bohannon, J., I  Fooled  Millions  of  People  into  Thinking  Chocolate Helps  Weight  Loss,  Here's  How IO9,  Gizmodo,  Debunkery, 27  May  2015.

Braddock  J., Historian  says  US  backed  "efficious  terror"  in  1965 Indonesian  Massacre, World  Socialist  Website, 7  July  2009.

Cashmore, E.;  McLaughlin, E., Out  of  Order:  Policing  Black  People, Routledge, 1991.

Hodges,  D., West  Africans  Are  Streaming  Across  the  U.S.  Southern  Border  Carrying  the  Ebola  Virus, The  Common  Sense  Show, 3 August 2014.

Howard, Philip N.; Ganesh, Bharath; Liotsiou, Dimitra; Kelly, John; François, Camille, The IRA, Social Media and Political Polarization in the United States, 2012-2018 .

Computational Propaganda Research Project, 17 December 2018.

Kellner,  D., 9/11,  Spectacles  of  terror,  and  media  manipulation, Miscellany, 15 August 2006.

Ostrow, J., Politics  in  Russia:  A  Reader, Sage  Publications, 26  June  2012.

Sniffen, Michael J., Libby case witness details art of media manipulation , Boston Globe, 28 January 2007.

Turner-Sadler, J., African  American  History:  An  Introduction, Peter  Lang Publishing, 2009.

External links [ edit ] "The Persuaders" Frontline "Understanding Jargon: A Short Bibliography" by Philip E. Agre v t e Media manipulation Context Bias Crowd psychology Deception Dumbing down False balance Half-truths Media Obfuscation Persuasion Manipulation (psychology) Activism Advocacy group Alternative media Boycott Call-out culture Cancel culture Civil disobedience Culture jamming Demonstrations Deplatforming Grassroots Guerrilla communication Hacktivism Internet Media Occupations Petitions Protests Youth Advertising Advertorial / Native advertising Billboards False Infomercials Mobiles Modeling Radio Sex Slogans Testimonials TV Criticism of advertising Annoyance factor Censorship and mass media regulation Books Broadcast law Burying of scholars Catch and kill Corporate Cover-ups Euphemism Films Historical negationism Internet Political Religious Self Hoaxing Alternative facts April Fools' Deepfake audio Fake news websites Fakelore Fictitious entries Firehose of falsehood Forgery Gaslighting List Literary Lying press Photograph manipulation Racial Urban legend Virus Video manipulation Marketing Branding Loyalty Product Product placement Publicity Research Word of mouth News media Agenda-setting Broadcasting Circus Cycle Emotive conjugation False balance Infotainment Managing Narcotizing dysfunction Newspeak Pseudo-event Scrum Sensationalism Tabloid journalism Political campaigning Advertising Astroturfing Attack ad Canvassing Character assassination Dog whistle Election promises Lawn signs Party platforms (or manifestos) Name recognition Negative Push polling Smear campaign Wedge issue Propaganda Bandwagon Big lie Crowd manipulation Disinformation Fearmongering Framing Indoctrination Loaded language National mythology Rally 'round the flag effect Techniques Psychological warfare Airborne leaflets False flag Fifth column Information (IT) Lawfare Political Public diplomacy Sedition Subversion Public relations Cult of personality Doublespeak Non-apology apology Reputation management Slogans Sound bites Spin Transfer Understatement Weasel words Corporate propaganda Sales Cold calling Door-to-door Pricing Product demonstrations Promotion Spaving Promotional merchandise Telemarketing Related Influence-for-hire Media bias United States Media concentration Media democracy Media ecology Media ethics Media franchise Media influence Media proprietor v t e Disinformation and misinformation Core content Disinformation Misinformation Malinformation Propaganda Disinformation attack Disinformation research Publications about disinformation Mechanisms Psychological Cognitive bias List Denialism Manipulation Misinformation effect Political polarization Psychology of climate change denial Computational Algorithmic radicalization Content moderation Community notes Internet manipulation Social bot Social networking service List User-generated content Economic Fake news websites Surveillance capitalism Programmatic advertising Media and Politics Audience fragmentation Echo chamber (media) Fake news Media bias Media culture Media manipulation Tactics Astroturfing Big Lie Circular reporting Clickbait Conspiracy theory List Culture war Deception Deepfake Disinformation playbook Dog whistle (politics) Doublespeak Doxxing Fake news Fake news website List of fake news websites List of satirical fake news websites False accusation False attribution False balance Fear, uncertainty, and doubt Firehose of falsehood Forgery as covert operation Gaslighting Greenwashing Historical negationism Information warfare Logic and reasoning Cherry picking False dilemma Gish gallop Half-truth Fallacy Formal fallacy Informal fallacy List of fallacies Quote mining Red herring Whataboutism Memetic warfare Pink-slime journalism Psychological warfare Propaganda Black propaganda Counterpropaganda State-sponsored Internet propaganda Perception management Rumors Spin (propaganda) Smear campaign Scientific fabrication Strategy of tension Yellow journalism Related terms Alternative facts Factoid Hoax Infodemic Malinformation Post-truth politics Potemkin village Pseudoscience Tabloid journalism Truthiness Targets and campaigns International Politics Disinformation in the Russian invasion of Ukraine Misinformation in the Gaza war New World Order conspiracy theory Russian disinformation Genocide denial Politics by country List of disinformation attacks by country List of political disinformation website campaigns Antisemitism Holocaust denial International Jewish conspiracy Environmental science Climate change denial Fossil fuel industry ExxonMobil climate change denial Fossil fuels lobby Leaded gasoline Ethyl Corporation Robert A. Kehoe Clair Cameron Patterson Pesticide industry Rachel Carson Silent Spring Red mercury Medicine and Public health 5G misinformation Anti-vaccine activism Lancet MMR autism fraud Vaccines and autism Vaccine misinformation COVID-19 misinformation COVID-19 misinformation by governments COVID-19 vaccine misinformation and hesitancy Birth control misinformation Ebola misinformation GMO conspiracy theories HIV/AIDS denialism Mental illness denial Misinformation related to abortion Tobacco industry playbook Transgender health care misinformation Opposition to water fluoridation Journalism and journalists Safety of journalists Maria Ressa Daily Maverick Rappler The Quint Countering disinformation Academic research Critical thinking Digital literacy Health literacy Information literacy Media literacy Science communication Scientific consensus Scientific literacy List of climate change video games Scientific skepticism Skepticism Truth sandwich Verificado 2018 Watchdog journalism Fact-checking and research Fact-checking Websites List of fact-checking websites Non-profits and charities Africa Check FactCheck.org Full Fact PolitiFact USAFacts Private companies Logically (company) NewsGuard StopFake Other Bellingcat International Fact-Checking Network Media Bias/Fact Check Snopes Quackwatch Projeto Comprova Research Canada Citizen Lab EU East StratCom Task Force Finland Faktabaari New Zealand The Disinformation Project UK Counter disinformation unit Ukraine Center for Countering Disinformation USA Active Measures Working Group Counter Misinformation Team Disinformation Governance Board Countering Foreign Propaganda and Disinformation Act United States Information Agency WikiProjects WikiCred Climate change COVID-19 Medicine Skepticism Vaccine safety v t e Propaganda techniques Accusation in a mirror Ad hominem Appeal to fear Appeal to emotion Atrocity propaganda Bandwagon effect Big lie Black propaganda Blood libel Buzzword Cartographic propaganda Computational propaganda Censorship Cherry picking Cult of personality Demonizing the enemy Disinformation Dog whistle Doublespeak Emotive conjugation Exaggeration False accusation False balance False dilemma Fake news Fear, uncertainty, and doubt Firehose of falsehood Flag-waving Framing Gish gallop Glittering generality Half-truth Historical negationism Ideograph Indoctrination Lawfare Loaded language Newspeak Managing the news Minimisation Monumental propaganda Moralistic fallacy New generation warfare Obscurantism Overcomplication Oversimplification Plain folks Psychological warfare Propaganda of the deed Public relations Rally 'round the flag effect Scapegoating Senbu Shooting and crying Slogan Spin Weasel word Whataboutism White propaganda v t e Media culture Media 24-hour news cycle Alternative media Digital media Electronic media Independent media Lost media Mass media Mainstream media Media economics Mobile media New media News broadcasting News media Old media Physical media Social media Influencers State media Streaming media Principles Media development Media policy Media independence Freedom of information Freedom of speech Media pluralism Media transparency Marketplace of ideas Ideology Advanced capitalism American Dream Bipartisanship Consumerism Pensée unique Deception Forms Advertising Propaganda Fake news Public relations Spin Tabloid journalism Techniques Cult of personality Dumbing down Framing Media circus Media event Narcotizing dysfunction Recuperation Sensationalism Viral phenomenon Others Catch and kill Crowd manipulation Managing the news Media manipulation Philosophers Theodor W. Adorno Jean Baudrillard Edward Bernays Noam Chomsky Guy Debord Walter Lippmann Marshall McLuhan Jacques Rancière Counterculture Boycott Call-out culture Cancel culture Civil disobedience Culture jamming Demonstration Graffiti Occupation Political satire Protest Punk Review bomb Strike action In academia Influence of mass media Media studies Mediatization Semiotic democracy The Lonely Crowd Issues Agenda-setting theory Anonymity Concentration of media ownership Exploitation of women Freedom of speech Media bias Privacy Social influence Transparency Violence Synonyms Advanced capitalism Culture industry Mass society Media franchise Post-Fordism Society of the Spectacle v t e Media and human factors Cognitive psychology Externality Evolutionary psychology Behavioral modernity Cognition Mismatch Media psychology Media studies Social psychology Media practices Betteridge's law of headlines Gatekeeping Infotainment Human-interest story Junk food news Least objectionable program Soft media Journalistic scandal Media bias Media manipulation Pink-slime journalism Political endorsement Propaganda Public relations Missing white woman syndrome News values Sensationalism Hot take Spiking Tabloid television Yellow journalism Attention Attention economy Attention inequality Attention management Attention span Chumbox Clickbait Cognitive miser Low information voter Digital zombie Phubbing Doomscrolling Human multitasking Media multitasking Mobile phones and driving safety Smartphones and pedestrian safety Texting while driving Influence-for-hire Infodemic Information explosion Information overload Information pollution Information–action ratio Rage farming Screen time Binge-watching Television consumption Sticky content Cognitive bias / Conformity Availability cascade Availability heuristic Bandwagon effect Confirmation bias Crowd psychology Mobbing Moral panic Mean world syndrome Negativity bias Peer pressure Social-desirability bias Social influence bias Spiral of silence Digital divide / Political polarization Algorithmic radicalization Youth Echo chamber Fake news website Post-truth politics United States Filter bubble Knowledge divide Knowledge gap hypothesis Political polarization in the United States Social media use in politics United States 2016 U.S. presidential election 2020 U.S. presidential election Related topics Computer rage Criticism of Facebook 2021 Facebook company files leak Facebook–Cambridge Analytica data scandal Criticism of Netflix Cultural impact of TikTok Digital media use and mental health Effects of violence in mass media Fascination with death Griefer Mass shooting contagion Psychological effects of Internet use Sealioning Social aspects of television Social bot Social impact of YouTube Technophilia Neophile Technophobia Violence and video games NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐mrqc8
Cached time: 20250811235812
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.603 seconds
Real time usage: 0.736 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2447/1000000
Revision size: 23996/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 146855/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 824/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 18/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 145629/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.341/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6067975/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  541.496      1 -total
 47.87%  259.215      1 Template:Reflist
 27.72%  150.088     11 Template:Cite_journal
 16.27%   88.112      5 Template:Navbox
 14.20%   76.897      1 Template:Media_manipulation
 13.78%   74.625      1 Template:Short_description
  8.53%   46.197      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.12%   33.116      6 Template:Cite_news
  5.26%   28.467      5 Template:Cite_web
  5.22%   28.281      1 Template:Disinformation Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:210661:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250811235812 and revision id 1301398649. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Media_manipulation&oldid=1301398649 " Categories : Media manipulation Consumer behaviour Social influence Mass media issues Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 16:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Media manipulation 20 languages Add topic

