Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Operation Toggle Operation subsection 1.1 Non-gravitational regulation 2 History 3 Uses 4 Dynamic systems Toggle Dynamic systems subsection 4.1 Natural selection 5 Culture 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Centrifugal governor 22 languages Afrikaans Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Français 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mechanism for automatically controlling the speed of an engine Drawing of a centrifugal "fly-ball" governor. The balls swing out as speed increases, which closes the valve, until a balance is achieved between demand and the proportional gain of the linkage and valve.

A centrifugal governor is a specific type of governor with a feedback system that controls the speed of an engine by regulating the flow of fuel or working fluid , so as to maintain a near-constant speed. It uses the principle of proportional control .

Centrifugal governors, also known as "centrifugal regulators" and "fly-ball governors", were invented by Christiaan Huygens and used to regulate the distance and pressure between millstones in windmills in the 17th century.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In 1788, James Watt adapted one to control his steam engine where it regulates the admission of steam into the cylinder (s), [ 3 ] a development that proved so important he is sometimes called the inventor. Centrifugal governors' widest use was on steam engines during the Steam Age in the 19th century. They are also found on stationary internal combustion engines and variously fueled turbines , and in some modern striking clocks .

A simple governor does not maintain an exact speed but a speed range, since under increasing load the governor opens the throttle as the speed (RPM) decreases.

Operation [ edit ] Cut-away drawing of steam engine speed governor. The valve starts fully open at zero speed, but as the balls rotate and rise, the central valve stem is forced downward and closes the valve. The drive shaft whose speed is being sensed is top right The devices shown are on steam engines. Power is supplied to the governor from the engine's output shaft by a belt or chain connected to the lower belt wheel. The governor is connected to a throttle valve that regulates the flow of working fluid (steam) supplying the prime mover .  As the speed of the prime mover increases, the central spindle of the governor rotates at a faster rate, and the kinetic energy of the balls increases.  This allows the two masses on lever arms to move outwards and upwards against gravity. If the motion goes far enough, this motion causes the lever arms to pull down on a thrust bearing , which moves a beam linkage, which reduces the aperture of a throttle valve. The rate of working-fluid entering the cylinder is thus reduced and the speed of the prime mover is controlled, preventing over-speeding.

Mechanical stops may be used to limit the range of throttle motion, as seen near the masses in the image at the top of this page.

Non-gravitational regulation [ edit ] A limitation of the two-arm, two-ball governor is its reliance on gravity to retract the balls when the governor slows down, and therefore a requirement that the governor stay upright.

Governors can be built that do not use gravitational force, by using a single straight arm with weights on both ends, a center pivot attached to a spinning axle, and a spring that tries to force the weights towards the center of the spinning axle. The two weights on opposite ends of the pivot arm counterbalance any gravitational effects, but both weights use centrifugal force to work against the spring and attempt to rotate the pivot arm towards a perpendicular axis relative to the spinning axle.

Spring-retracted non-gravitational governors are commonly used in single-phase alternating current (AC) induction motors to turn off the starting field coil when the motor's rotational speed is high enough. They are also commonly used in snowmobile and all-terrain vehicle (ATV) continuously variable transmissions (CVT), both to engage/disengage vehicle motion and to vary the transmission's pulley diameter ratio in relation to the engine revolutions per minute .

History [ edit ] A millstone governor at Sluis in the Netherlands .

Centrifugal governors were invented by Christiaan Huygens and used to regulate the distance and pressure between millstones in windmills in the 17th century.

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] Boulton & Watt engine of 1788 James Watt applied the same technology to steam engines.

[ 5 ] He designed his first governor (or 'centrifugal speed regulator') in 1788, following a suggestion from his business partner Matthew Boulton . It was a conical pendulum governor and one of the final series of innovations Watt had employed for steam engines.

Over subsequent decades a series of improvements and modifications were made by a number of different engineers and manufacturers. Among the inventors who contributed to development of the governor in the 19th century were Charles Porter, Wilson Hartnell, Richard Tangye , Rudolph Proell and Buss.

[ 5 ] A Porter governor on a Corliss steam engine . This design, patented by Charles Porter in 1858, used lighter balls and a sliding weight on the spindle; it suited faster engines.

The Pickering Governor (first patented in 1862) has balls mounted on leaf springs . It was especially suited to smaller high-speed engines and was manufactured in large numbers.

As engine speeds increased, the basic Watt-type governor became less reliable as it would tend to over-compensate, oscillating between opening and closing the steam valve and preventing the engine from running smoothly.

[ 5 ] This led to many modifications and variations over time, including the addition of a dead weight around the spindle, and the application of springs as part of the design. A number of different firms of engineers patented their own variation on the concept, which they would apply to their own engines, and more modern governors were sometimes retrofitted to engines already in service.

Uses [ edit ] The spring-loaded Whitehead governor, patented in 1895, was widely used on mill engines (as here at Ellenroad ).

Centrifugal governors' widest use was on steam engines during the Steam Age in the 19th century. They are also found on stationary internal combustion engines and variously fueled turbines , and in some modern striking clocks .

Centrifugal governors are used in many modern repeating watches to limit the speed of the striking train , so the repeater does not run too quickly.

Another kind of centrifugal governor consists of a pair of masses on a spindle inside a cylinder, the masses or the cylinder being coated with pads, somewhat like a centrifugal clutch or a drum brake . This is used in a spring-loaded record player and a spring-loaded telephone dial to limit the speed.

Dynamic systems [ edit ] The centrifugal governor is often used in the cognitive sciences as an example of a dynamic system , in which the representation of information cannot be clearly separated from the operations being applied to the representation. And, because the governor is a servomechanism , its analysis in a dynamic system is not trivial.  In 1868, James Clerk Maxwell wrote a famous paper " On Governors " [ 6 ] that is widely considered a classic in feedback control theory . Maxwell distinguishes moderators (a centrifugal brake ) and governors which control motive power input. He considers devices by James Watt , Professor James Thomson , Fleeming Jenkin , William Thomson , Léon Foucault and Carl Wilhelm Siemens (a liquid governor).

Natural selection [ edit ] In his famous 1858 paper to the Linnean Society , which led Darwin to publish On the Origin of Species , Alfred Russel Wallace used governors as a metaphor for the evolutionary principle : The action of this principle is exactly like that of the centrifugal governor of the steam engine, which checks and corrects any irregularities almost before they become evident; and in like manner no unbalanced deficiency in the animal kingdom can ever reach any conspicuous magnitude, because it would make itself felt at the very first step, by rendering existence difficult and extinction almost sure soon to follow.

[ 7 ] The cybernetician and anthropologist Gregory Bateson thought highly of Wallace's analogy and discussed the topic in his 1979 book Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity , and other scholars have continued to explore the connection between natural selection and systems theory .

[ 8 ] Culture [ edit ] Governor-inspired Memorial to Boulton and Watt in Smethwick.

A giant statue of Watt's governor stands at Smethwick in the English West Midlands .

A centrifugal governor is part of the city seal of Manchester , New Hampshire in the US and is also used on the city flag. A 2017 effort to change the design was rejected by voters.

[ 9 ] A stylized centrifugal governor is also part of the coat of arms of the Swedish Work Environment Authority .

In Liu Cixin's science fiction novel Death's End (from the "Three-Body" series) , the steam engine centrifugal governor is used as a metaphor for "constant speed" (the speed of light) .

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Cataract (beam engine) Centrifugal switch Hit and miss engine References [ edit ] ^ a b Hills, Richard L (1996), Power From Wind , Cambridge University Press ^ Bellman, Richard E. (8 December 2015).

Adaptive Control Processes: A Guided Tour . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9781400874668 . Retrieved 13 April 2018 – via Google Books.

^ University of Cambridge: Steam engines and control theory ^ Bellman, Richard E. (8 December 2015).

Adaptive Control Processes: A Guided Tour . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9781400874668 . Retrieved 13 April 2018 – via Google Books.

^ a b c Hannavy, John (2021).

The Governor: Controlling the Power of Steam Machines . Barnsley, S. Yorks.: Pen & Sword Transport. pp.

60– 78.

^ Maxwell, James Clerk (1868). "On Governors".

Proceedings of the Royal Society of London .

16 : 270– 283.

doi : 10.1098/rspl.1867.0055 .

JSTOR 112510 .

^ Wallace, Alfred Russel.

"On the Tendency of Varieties to Depart Indefinitely From the Original Type" . Retrieved 18 April 2009 .

^ Smith, Charles H.

"Wallace's Unfinished Business" . Complexity (publisher Wiley Periodicals, Inc.) Volume 10, No 2, 2004 . Retrieved 11 May 2007 .

^ Granite Geek: "Manchester city flag celebrates one of the coolest inventions from the Industrial Revolution – happily, they won’t change it" ^ Liu, Cixin (2016).

Death's end .

ISBN 978-0-7653-7710-4 .

OCLC 936360629 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Centrifugal governors at Wikimedia Commons v t e Steam engines Operating cycle Atmospheric Watt Cornish Compound Uniflow Valves Valves Slide D slide Piston Drop Corliss Poppet Sleeve Bash Valve gear Gab Stephenson link Joy Walschaerts Allan Baker Corliss Lentz Caprotti Gresley conjugated Southern Mechanisms Beam Cataract Centrifugal governor Connecting rod Crank Crankshaft Tusi couple hypocycloidal straight line mechanism Link chain Parallel motion Plate chain Rotative beam Sun and planet gear Watt's linkage Boilers Simple boilers Haystack Wagon Egg-ended Box Flued Cornish Lancashire Fire-tube boilers Locomotive Scotch Launch Water-tube boilers Babcock & Wilcox Field-tube Sentinel Stirling Thimble tube Three-drum Yarrow Boiler feed Feedwater heater Feedwater pump Injector Cylinder Locomotive Oscillating Single- and double-acting Condenser Condensing steam locomotive Jet Kirchweger Watt's separate "Pickle-pot" Surface Other Blowback Crosshead Cutoff Expansion valve Hydrolock Piston Reciprocating engine Return connecting rod engine Six-column beam engine Steeple engine Safety valve Steeple compound engine Stroke Working fluid History Precursors Savery Engine (1698) Newcomen engine Newcomen Memorial Engine (1725) Fairbottom Bobs (1760) Elsecar Engine (1795) Watt engine Beam Kinneil Engine (1768) Old Bess (1777) Chacewater Mine engine (1778) Smethwick Engine (1779) Resolution (1781) Rotative beam Soho Manufactory engine (1782) Bradley Works engine (1783) Whitbread Engine (1785) National Museum of Scotland engine (1786) Lap Engine (1788) High-pressure Richard Trevithick Puffing Devil (1801) London Steam Carriage (1803) "Coalbrookdale Locomotive" (1803) "Pen-y-Darren" locomotive (1804) Compound Woolf's compound engine (1803) Murray Murray's Hypocycloidal Engine (1805) Salamanca (1812) High-speed Porter-Allen (1862) Ljungström (1908) See also Glossary of steam locomotive components History of steam road vehicles Cugnot's fardier à vapeur (1769) Murdoch's model steam carriage (1784) Lean's Engine Reporter List of steam technology patents Modern steam Stationary steam engine Timeline of steam power Water-returning engine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Centrifugal_governor&oldid=1295292830 " Categories : British inventions Control devices Cybernetics Inventions by Christiaan Huygens Mechanical power control Mechanisms (engineering) Rotating machines Scottish inventions Steam engine governors Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2024 This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 21:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Centrifugal governor 22 languages Add topic

