Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Planning and monitoring decompression Toggle Planning and monitoring decompression subsection 1.1 Decompression algorithms 1.1.1 Choice of tables or algorithms 1.2 Decompression tables 1.2.1 Commonly used decompression tables 1.2.2 Other published tables 1.2.3 Recreational Dive Planner 1.3 Decompression software 1.4 Personal decompression computers 1.4.1 Decompression using a personal decompression computer 1.5 Ratio decompression 2 Controlling depth and ascent rate Toggle Controlling depth and ascent rate subsection 2.1 Shot lines 2.1.1 Jonlines 2.1.2 Decompression trapezes 2.2 Downline 2.3 Upline 2.3.1 Positive buoyancy emergency ascent upline 2.4 Surface marker buoy and delayed surface marker buoy 2.5 Decompression station 2.6 Diving stages and wet bells 3 Decompression gas Toggle Decompression gas subsection 3.1 Stage cylinders 3.2 Surface panel gas switching 3.3 Continuously variable mixture in closed circuit rebreathers 4 Surface decompression equipment Toggle Surface decompression equipment subsection 4.1 Deck decompression chambers 4.2 Dry bells and Saturation systems 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Decompression equipment Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Jonline ) Equipment used by divers to facilitate decompression Decompression equipment Surface supplied diver on diving stage Uses Equipment used by divers to facilitate decompression Related items Dive computer , Decompression practice , Diving bell , Diving chamber There are several categories of decompression equipment used to help divers decompress , which is the process required to allow ambient pressure divers to return to the surface safely after spending time underwater at higher ambient pressures.

Decompression obligation for a given dive profile must be calculated and monitored to ensure that the risk of decompression sickness is controlled. Some equipment is specifically for these functions, both during planning before the dive and during the dive. Other equipment is used to mark the underwater position of the diver, as a position reference in low visibility or currents, or to assist the diver's ascent and control the depth.

Decompression may be shortened ("accelerated") by breathing an oxygen-rich "decompression gas" such as a nitrox blend or pure oxygen . The high partial pressure of oxygen in such decompression mixes produces the effect known as the oxygen window .

[ 1 ] This decompression gas is often carried by scuba divers in side-slung cylinders.

Cave divers who can only return by a single route, can leave decompression gas cylinders attached to the guideline ("stage" or "drop cylinders") at the points where they will be used.

[ 2 ] Surface-supplied divers will have the composition of the breathing gas controlled at the gas panel .

[ 3 ] Divers with long decompression obligations may be decompressed inside gas filled hyperbaric chambers in the water or at the surface, and in the extreme case, saturation divers are only decompressed at the end of a project, contract, or tour of duty that may be several weeks long.

Planning and monitoring decompression [ edit ] Equipment for planning and monitoring decompression includes decompression tables, depth gauges , timers, surface computer software, and personal decompression computers . There is a wide range of choice.

Decompression algorithms [ edit ] Inert gas tension in the tissue compartments during a decompression dive with gas switching to accelerate decompression, as predicted by a decompression algorithm Further information: Bühlmann decompression algorithm , Thalmann algorithm , Reduced gradient bubble model , and Varying Permeability Model A decompression algorithm is used to calculate the decompression stops needed for a particular dive profile to reduce the risk of decompression sickness occurring after surfacing at the end of a dive. The algorithm can be used to generate decompression schedules for a particular dive profile, decompression tables for more general use, or be implemented in dive computer software.

[ 4 ] Choice of tables or algorithms [ edit ] During the 1980s the US recreational diving community tended to move away from the US Navy tables to a range of tables published by other organisations, including several of the diver certification agencies (BSAC, NAUI, PADI).

[ 5 ] Depending on the table or computer chosen the range of no-decompression limits at a given depth on air can vary considerably, for example for 100 fsw (30 msw ) the no stop limit varies from 25 to 8 minutes. It is not possible to discriminate between "right" and "wrong" options, but it is considered correct to say that the risk of developing DCS is greater for the longer exposures and less for the shorter exposures.

[ 5 ] The choice of tables for professional diving use is generally made by the organisation employing the divers. For recreational training it is usually prescribed by the certifying agency, but for recreational purposes the diver is generally free to make use of any of the published tables, and for that matter, to modify them to suit himself or herself.

[ 5 ] Decompression tables [ edit ] BSAC nitrox decompression tables The PADI Nitrox tables are laid out in what has become a common format for no-stop recreational tables Dive tables or decompression tables are tabulated data, often in the form of printed cards or booklets, that allow people to determine a decompression schedule for a given dive or other hyperbaric exposure profile and breathing gas .

[ 6 ] Decompression tables represent procedures recommended for decompression from hyperbaric exposures to a continuum of possibilities by schedules tabulated for discrete cases of such exposures chosen for practicality and convenience of the user. They may represent data from theoretical decompression models or empirical data from series of tests on animal and human subjects, or combinations thereof, and may be empirically adjusted to reduce risk or improve efficiency.

[ citation needed ] The availability of dive computers which can apply algorithms in real time to calculate the personal decompression status of a diver have to a large extent supplanted decompression tables for recreational and scientific divers, but tables remain a practical and convenient method for deciding decompression schedules for people exposed to similar but not necessarily identical pressure profiles, particularly when they are to be decompressed as a group, such as saturation divers and compressed air workers.

[ citation needed ] With decompression tables, it is generally assumed that the hyperbaric exposure, or dive profile , is a square profile , meaning that the diver descends to maximum depth immediately and stays at the same depth until resurfacing (approximating a rectangular outline when drawn in a coordinate system where one axis is depth and the other is duration).

[ 7 ] Some dive tables also assume physical condition or acceptance of a specific level of risk from the diver.

[ 8 ] Some recreational tables only provide for no-stop dives at sea level sites, [ 6 ] but the more complete tables can take into account staged decompression dives and dives performed at altitude .

[ 7 ] Commonly used decompression tables [ edit ] US Navy tables [ 9 ] Bühlmann tables [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Royal Navy (RNPL) tables [ 13 ] [ 14 ] BSAC 88 tables [ 15 ] PADI tables: the recreational dive planner (RDP) and "the wheel" [ 16 ] DCIEM tables [ 17 ] [ 18 ] French Navy MN90 tables [ 19 ] NAUI Dive tables [ 20 ] NORSOK standard U-100 Table 12 Saturation decompression schedule [ 21 ] Blackpool decompression table for compressed air work [ 22 ] Other published tables [ edit ] Jeppesen [ 23 ] Huggins [ 20 ] German (Bühlmann/Hahn) [ 20 ] Pandora tables [ 20 ] 1% Risk [ 8 ] Recreational Dive Planner [ edit ] The PADI recreational dive planner, in "Wheel" format.

Main article: Recreational Dive Planner The Recreational Dive Planner (or RDP ) is a set of devices marketed by PADI with which no-stop time underwater can be calculated.

[ 24 ] The RDP was developed by DSAT and was the first dive table developed exclusively for recreational, no stop diving.

[ 16 ] There are four types of RDPs: the original table version first introduced in 1988, The Wheel version, the original electronic version or eRDP introduced in 2005 and the latest electronic multi-level version or eRDPML introduced in 2008.

[ 25 ] The low price and convenience of many modern dive computers mean that many recreational divers only use tables such as the RDP for a short time during training before moving on to use a diving computer.

[ 26 ] Decompression software [ edit ] Decompression software such as Departure, DecoPlanner, Ultimate Planner, Z-Planner, V-Planner and GAP are available, which simulate the decompression requirements of different dive profiles with different gas mixtures using decompression algorithms .

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] Decompression software can be used to generate tables or schedules matched to a diver's planned dive profile and breathing gas mixtures. The usual procedure is to generate schedules for the intended profile and for the most likely contingency profiles, such as slightly greater depth, delayed ascent and early ascent. Sometimes an emergency minimum decompression schedule and a more conservative schedule will be generated to allow the diver further options.

[ 31 ] Decompression software is available based on: US Navy models – both the dissolved phase and mixed phase models Bühlmann algorithm , e.g. Z-planner Reduced Gradient Bubble Model (RGBM), e.g. GAP Varying Permeability Model (VPM), e.g. V-Planner and variations of these.

[ 4 ] V-Planner runs the variable permeability model, developed by D.E. Yount and others in 2000, and allows the choice of VPM-B and VPM-B/E, with six conservatism levels (baseline plus five incrementally more conservative ones).

[ 32 ] GAP allows the user to choose between a multitude of Bühlmann-based algorithms and the full reduced gradient bubble model, developed by Bruce Wienke in 2001, in its five conservatism levels (baseline, two incrementally more liberal and two incrementally more conservative).

[ 32 ] Personal decompression computers [ edit ] HSE Explorer Trimix and rebreather dive computer. Suunto Mosquito with aftermarket strap and iDive DAN recreational dive computers Further information: Dive computer The personal decompression computer, or dive computer, is a small computer designed to be worn by a diver during a dive, with a pressure sensor and an electronic timer mounted in a waterproof and pressure resistant housing and which has been programmed to model the inert gas loading of the diver's tissues in real time during a dive.

[ 33 ] Most are wrist mounted, but a few are mounted in a console with the submersible pressure gauge and possibly other instruments. A display allows the diver to see critical data during the dive, including the maximum and current depth, duration of the dive, and decompression data including the remaining no decompression limit calculated in real time for the diver throughout the dive. Other data such as water temperature and cylinder pressure are also sometimes displayed. The dive computer has the advantages of monitoring the actual dive, as opposed to the planned dive, and does not assume on a "square profile" – it dynamically calculates the real profile of pressure exposure in real time, and keeps track of residual gas loading for each tissue used in the algorithm.

[ 34 ] Dive computers also provide a measure of safety for divers who accidentally dive a different profile to that originally planned. If the diver exceeds a no-decompression limit, decompression additional to the ascent rate will be necessary. Most dive computers will provide the necessary decompression information for acceptably safe ascent in the event that the no-decompression limits are exceeded.

[ 34 ] The use of computers to manage recreational dive decompression is becoming the standard and their use is also common in occupational scientific diving. Their value in surface supplied commercial diving is more restricted, but they can usefully serve as a dive profile recorder.

[ 35 ] Decompression using a personal decompression computer [ edit ] The personal decompression computer provides a real time modelling of the inert gas load on the diver according to the decompression algorithm programmed into the computer by the manufacturer, with possible personal adjustments for conservatism and altitude set by the user. In all cases the computer monitors the depth and elapsed time of the dive, and many allow user input specifying the gas mixture.

[ 34 ] Most computers require the diver to specify the mixture before the dive, but some allow the choice of mixture to be changed during the dive, which allows for the use of gas switching for accelerated decompression. A third category, mostly used by closed circuit rebreather divers, monitors the partial pressure of oxygen in the breathing mix using a remote oxygen sensor, but requires diver intervention to specify the inert gas constituents and ratio of the mix in use.

[ 34 ] The computer retains the diver's pressure exposure history, and continuously updates the calculated tissue loads on the surface, so the current tissue loading should always be correct according to the algorithm, though it is possible to provide the computer with misleading input conditions, which can nullify its reliability.

[ 34 ] This ability to provide real-time tissue loading data allows the computer to indicate the diver's current decompression obligation, and to update it for any permissible profile change, so the diver with a decompression ceiling does not have to decompress at any specific depth provided the ceiling is not violated, though the decompression rate will be affected by the depth. As a result, the diver can make a slower ascent than would be called for by a decompression schedule computed by the identical algorithm, as may suit the circumstances, and will be credited for gas elimination during the slower ascent, and penalised if necessary for additional ingassing for those tissues affected. This provides the diver with an unprecedented flexibility of dive profile while remaining within the safety envelope of the algorithm in use.

[ 34 ] Ratio decompression [ edit ] Main article: Ratio decompression Ratio decompression (usually referred to in abbreviated form as ratio deco) is a technique for calculating decompression schedules for scuba divers engaged in deep diving without using dive tables, decompression software or a dive computer. It is generally taught as part of the "DIR" philosophy of diving promoted by organisations such Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) and Unified Team Diving (UTD) at the advanced technical diving level. It is designed for decompression diving executed deeper than standard recreational diving depth limits using trimix as a "bottom mix" breathing gas.

[ 36 ] It is largely an empirical procedure, and has a reasonable safety record within the scope of its intended application. Advantages are reduced overall decompression time and for some versions, easy estimation of decompression by the use of a simple rule-based procedure which can be done underwater by the diver. It requires the use of specific gas mixtures for given depth ranges. The advantages claimed are flexibility in that if the depth is not known accurately, the schedule can be adjusted during the dive to allow for the actual depth, and that it allows deep dives without the use of an expensive trimix dive computer.

[ 36 ] Limitations include that a consistent set of gases must be used which match the specific ratio model, and the specific ratio will only be relevant to a limited range of depths. As the parameters move away from the base conditions, conservatism will diverge, and the probability of symptomatic bubble formation will become more unpredictable. There is also the requirement for the diver to do mental arithmetic at depth to calculate the parameters of a safety-critical operation. This may be complicated by adverse circumstances or an emergency situation.

[ 36 ] Controlling depth and ascent rate [ edit ] A critical aspect of successful decompression is that the depth and ascent rate of the diver must be monitored and sufficiently accurately controlled. Practical in-water decompression requires a reasonable tolerance for variation in depth and rate of ascent, but unless the decompression is being monitored in real time by a decompression computer, any deviations from the nominal profile will affect the risk. Several items of equipment are used to assist in facilitating accurate adherence to the planned profile, by allowing the diver to more easily control depth and ascent rate, or to transfer this control to specialist personnel at the surface.

[ 37 ] Shot lines [ edit ] Main article: Diving shot Divers ascending and decompressing using a shotline A shot line is a rope between a float at the surface, and a sufficiently heavy weight holding the rope approximately vertical. The shot line float should be sufficiently buoyant to support the weight of all divers that are likely to be using it at the same time. As divers are seldom weighted to be very negatively buoyant, a positive buoyancy of 50 kg is considered adequate by some authorities for general commercial use.

[ 38 ] Recreational divers are free to choose lesser buoyancy at their own risk. The shot weight should be sufficient to prevent a diver from lifting it from the bottom by over-inflation of the buoyancy compensator or dry suit, but not sufficient to sink the float if the slack on the line is all taken up. Various configurations of shot line are used to control the amount of slack.

[ 39 ] The diver ascends along the shotline, and may use it purely as a visual reference, or can hold on to it to positively control depth, or can climb up it hand over hand. A Jonline may be used to fasten a diver to an anchor line or shot line during a decompression stop.

[ 39 ] Shot line configurations: Basic shot line [ 39 ] Self tensioning arrangements Running weight [ 39 ] or top tensioned shotline Running float [ 39 ] or bottom tensioned shotline Lazy shot line [ 40 ] or lazy shot Jonlines [ edit ] Webbing jon-line with bolt snaps, folded and bundled using velcro tabs Webbing jon-line with bolt snaps A jonline (also jon-line or jon line) is a short line used by scuba divers to fasten themselves to something. The original purpose was to fasten a diver to a shot line during decompression stops in current. The line is typically around 1 m (3 feet) long and equipped with a clip at each end. One clip is fastened to the diver's harness, and the other is used to fasten the line to the shot line or anchor line. In current this relieves the diver from holding on to the line during the decompression stop, and the horizontal length of the line will absorb some or all of the vertical movement of the shot line or anchor line due to wave action.

[ 41 ] The jonline is named after Jon Hulbert, who is credited with its invention.

[ 42 ] A jonline can also be used to tether the diver's equipment to the dive boat before or after the dive. This helps the diver to put on or take off the equipment while in the water without drifting away from the boat. It is similar to a buddy line , which is used to tether two divers together during a dive.

[ 41 ] [ 43 ] Decompression trapezes [ edit ] Scuba diver decompressing on decompression trapeze using surface supplied gas Divers decompressing at the trapeze which was lowered into the water when the second DSMB was deployed as a signal A decompression trapeze or decompression bar is a device used in recreational diving and technical diving to make decompression stops more comfortable and more secure and provide the divers' surface cover with a visual reference for the divers' position.

[ 39 ] It consists of a horizontal bar or bars suspended at the depth of intended decompression stops by buoys . The bars are of sufficient weight and the buoys of sufficient buoyancy that the trapeze will not easily change depth in turbulent water or if the divers experience buoyancy control problems.

[ 39 ] [ 44 ] Trapezes are often used with diving shots . When diving in tidal waters at the end of slack water , the trapeze may be released from the diving shot to drift in the current as the divers make their decompression stops. A decompression trapeze may also be deployed in response to a signal from the divers, in which case some care must be taken not to hit a diver while lowering the bar.

[ 39 ] Basic shotline: Weight, and float connected by a line Bottom tensioned shotline: The line passes through a ring at the weight and is tensioned by a small float, often a small lift bag which can later help lift the shot as the air expands.

Top tensioned shotline: The line passes through a ring at the float and is tensioned by a smaller weight hanging from it. This weight may be hooked to the main part of the line by a sliding clip to restrain it from swinging.

A shotline with a lazy shot – a second float with a short weighted line tethered to it at just below the depth of the deepest long decompression stop.

A shotline with a decompression trapeze – a series of crossbars suspended from a float at each end and ballasted as necessary, tethered to the main shotline.

Downline [ edit ] Main article: Downline (diving) A downline is a rope leading from the surface down to the underwater workplace. It allows a commercial diver to travel directly to and from the job site and to control rate of descent and ascent in the same way as using a shotline. Also sometimes called a jackstay.

[ 45 ] A downline used for open ocean diving is much the same as a shotline, but does not reach all the way to the bottom. This may also be referred to as a lazy shot . An open-ocean downline is weighted at the bottom, and attached to a substantial float at the surface, which may be tethered to the boat. It may be marked at intervals by knots or loops, and may be attached to a decompression trapeze system. In some cases a sea anchor may be used to limit wind drift, particularly if attached to a boat with significant windage.

[ 46 ] Upline [ edit ] Also known as a Jersey upline , an upline is a line deployed by the diver, and fixed to the bottom, usually on a wreck, to serve as a position and depth control during offshore ascents in moderate currents, where the diver wants to prevent excessive drift during decompression. The bio-degradable natural fibre line is carried on a spool and deployed connected to an inflatable decompression buoy or lift bag at the end of the dive, and the bottom end tied off to the wreck. After completing decompression and surfacing, the diver cuts the line free at the buoy, and the line sinks and naturally decomposes over a few months.

[ 47 ] Positive buoyancy emergency ascent upline [ edit ] A positive buoyancy emergency ascent can be made using an upline for depth control. This is also known as a tethered ascent , emergency tethered ascent or buoyant tethered ascent . This procedure is used for emergency ascent when the diver is unable to establish neutral to negative buoyancy, or when this is expected to occur at some point during the ascent, and the diver has a decompression obligation, as when ballast weights have been lost, but the diver is still at the bottom and has a ratchet reel with sufficient line. In this case the reel line is tied off to a sufficiently heavy or fixed object on the bottom, and the diver ascends at the appropriate rate paying out line under tension, and making the required decompression stops. It will generally be necessary to cut the line after surfacing, unless another diver is available to go down to release it. This is a required skill for the CMAS Self-Rescue Diver certification.

[ 48 ] Surface marker buoy and delayed surface marker buoy [ edit ] Four stages of scuba ascent with delayed surface marker buoy: Preparation, deployment, ascent, decompression stop Diver deploying a DSMB Main article: Surface marker buoy A surface marker buoy (SMB) with a reel and line is often used by a dive leader to allow the boat to monitor progress of the dive group. This can provide the operator with a positive control of depth, by remaining slightly negative and using the buoyancy of the float to support this slight over-weighting. This allows the line to be kept under slight tension which reduces the risk of entanglement. The reel or spool used to store and roll up the line usually has slightly negative buoyancy, so that if released it will hang down and not float away.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] A delayed or deployable surface marker buoy (DSMB), also known a decompression buoy , is a soft inflatable tube that is attached to a reel or spool line at one end, and is inflated by the diver under water and released to float to the surface, running out the line as it ascends. This provides information to the surface that the diver is about to ascend, and from where. This equipment is commonly used by recreational and technical divers, and requires a certain level of skill to operate safely. Once deployed, it can be used for the same purposes as the standard surface marker and reel, and in the same way, but they are mostly used to signal the boat that the diver has started ascent, as a means of accurately controlling ascent rate and stop depth, or to indicate a problem in technical diving.

[ 50 ] [ 43 ] [ 51 ] [ 52 ] Decompression station [ edit ] A decompression station is a place set up to facilitate the planned decompression for a dive team, and to help a group of divers stay together during long decompression. A simple example would be a decompression trapeze system linked to the shotline or the dive boat. The decompression station may also have backup equipment stored in case of emergency, and provides a visual depth reference, and a physical aid to maintaining a constant depth. More complex systems may include a small underwater habitat.

[ 43 ] In cases where a decompression habitat is used, there may be less exposure to cold water if the divers can partly or completely exit the water into an air-filled space, equivalent to an open diving bell.  A habitat type decompression station can be an advantage when doing long decompressions on high oxygen partial pressure as the risks associated with oxygen toxicity are reduced, and it is easier for safety divers to assist. The term decompression station is associated with technical diving, professional divers would generally use a wet or dry diving bell for the same purpose.

[ 43 ] Diving stages and wet bells [ edit ] Further information: Diving bell Diving stage A diving stage, sometimes known as a diving basket, is a platform on which one or two divers stand which is hoisted into the water, lowered to the workplace or the bottom, and then hoisted up again to return the diver to the surface and out of the water. This equipment is almost exclusively used by surface supplied professional divers, as it requires fairly complex man-rated lifting equipment. A diving stage allows the surface team to conveniently manage a diver's decompression as it can be hoisted at a controlled rate and stopped at the correct depth for decompression stops, and allows the divers to rest during the ascent. It also allows the divers to be relatively safely and conveniently lifted out of the water and returned to the deck or quayside.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] A wet bell, or open bell, is similar to a diving stage in concept, but has an air space, open to the water at the bottom in which the divers, or at least their heads, can shelter during ascent and descent. A wet bell provides more comfort and control than a stage and allows for longer time in the water. Wet bells are used for air and mixed gas diving, and divers can decompress using oxygen from a mask at 12 m.

[ 55 ] The launch and recovery system (LARS) is the equipment used to deploy and recover a stage or diving bell. The sane name is applied to the equipment used to launch and recover small submersibles and ROVs.

[ 53 ] Decompression gas [ edit ] Technical divers preparing for a mixed-gas decompression dive. Note the backplate and wing setup with side mounted stage tanks [ broken anchor ] containing EAN50 (left side) and pure oxygen (right side).

Reducing the partial pressure of the inert gas component of the breathing mixture will accelerate decompression as the concentration gradient will be greater for a given depth. This is achieved by increasing the fraction of oxygen in the breathing gas used, whereas substitution of a different inert gas will not produce the desired effect. Substitution may introduce counter-diffusion complications, owing to differing rates of diffusion of the inert gases, which can lead to a net gain in total dissolved gas tension in a tissue. This can lead to bubble formation and growth, with decompression sickness as a consequence. Partial pressure of oxygen is usually limited to 1.6 bar during in-water decompression for scuba divers, but can be up to 1.9 bar in-water and 2.2 bar in the chamber when using the US Navy tables for surface decompression , [ 9 ] and up to 2.8 bar for therapeutic decompression.

[ 56 ] Stage cylinders [ edit ] Open circuit scuba divers by definition are independent of surface supply, and must take any gas mixture with them that is to be used on the dive. However, if they are confident of returning by a specific route, the decompression gas may be stored at appropriate places on that route. The cylinders used for this purpose are called stage cylinders, and they are usually provided with a standard regulator and a submersible pressure gauge, and are usually left at the stop with the regulator pressurised, but the cylinder valve turned off to minimise the risk of gas loss. Similar cylinders are carried by the divers when the route back is not secure. They are commonly mounted as sling cylinders , clipped to D-rings at the sides of the diver's harness.

[ 57 ] Scuba divers take great care to avoid breathing oxygen enriched "deco gas" at great depths because of the high risk of oxygen toxicity . To prevent this happening, cylinders containing oxygen-rich gases must always be positively identifiable. One way of doing this is by marking them with their maximum operating depth as clearly as possible.

[ 57 ] Other safety precautions may include using different coloured regulator housing, flavoured mouthpieces, or simply placing a rubber band vertically across the mouthpiece as an alert.

[ 58 ] Surface panel gas switching [ edit ] Surface supplied divers may be supplied with a gas mixture suitable for accelerated decompression by connecting a supply to the surface gas panel and connecting it through the valve system to the divers. This allows accelerated decompression, usually on oxygen, which can be used to a maximum depth of 20 ft (6 m) in water for scuba and 30 ft (9 m) on surface supply.

[ 9 ] Surface supplied heliox bounce divers will be provided with mixtures suitable for their current depth, and the mixture may be changed several times during descent and ascent from great depths.

[ 59 ] Continuously variable mixture in closed circuit rebreathers [ edit ] Rebreather diver with bailout and decompression cylinders Further information: Closed circuit rebreather Closed circuit rebreathers are usually controlled to provide a fairly constant partial pressure of oxygen during the dive (set point), and may be reset to a richer mix (higher partial pressure of oxygen) for decompression. The effect is to keep the partial pressure of inert gases as low as safely practicable throughout the dive. This minimises the absorption of inert gas in the first place, and accelerates the elimination of the inert gases during ascent.

[ 60 ] Surface decompression equipment [ edit ] Deck decompression chambers [ edit ] A basic deck decompression chamber Further information: Decompression chamber and Diving chamber A deck decompression chamber (DDC), or double-lock chamber is a two compartment pressure vessel for human occupation which has sufficient space in the main chamber for two or more occupants, and a forechamber which can allow a person to be pressurised or decompressed while the main chamber remains under constant pressure. This allows an attendant to be locked in or out during treatment of the occupant(s) of the main chamber. There is usually also a medical lock, which serves a similar function but is much smaller. This is used to transfer medical material, food and specimens into and out of the main chamber while it is under pressure. Most deck decompression chambers are fitted with built-in breathing systems (BIBS), which supply an alternative breathing gas to the occupants (usually oxygen), and discharge the exhaled gas outside the chamber, so the chamber gas is not excessively enriched by oxygen, which would cause an unacceptable fire hazard, and require frequent flushing with chamber gas (usually air).

[ 61 ] A deck decompression chamber is intended for surface decompression and emergency hyperbaric treatment of divers, but can be used for other hyperbaric treatment under the appropriate supervision of hyperbaric medical personnel.

[ 61 ] Portable or mobile one and two occupant single compartment chambers are not generally intended for routine surface decompression, but may be used in an emergency.

[ 61 ] Dry bells and Saturation systems [ edit ] Personnel transfer capsule, closed bell, or dry bell.

Part of a saturation system: On the left is a part of the living space with a medical lock in the foreground. To the right is the wet-room, on the top of which there is a flange to which the dry bell is bolted for transfer of the divers between the hyperbaric habitat and the bell.

Further information: Diving bell and Saturation diving A "Saturation System" or "Saturation spread" typically includes a living chamber, transfer chamber and submersible decompression chamber , which is commonly referred to in commercial diving and military diving as the diving bell , [ 62 ] PTC (Personnel Transfer Capsule) or SDC (Submersible Decompression Chamber).

[ 63 ] The system can be permanently installed on a ship or ocean platform, but is more commonly capable of being dismantled and moved from one vessel to another by crane. The entire system is managed from a control room, commonly referred to as the "van", where depth, chamber atmosphere and other system parameters are monitored and controlled. The diving bell is the elevator or lift that transfers divers from the system to the work site. Typically, it is mated to the system utilizing a removable clamp and is separated from the system tankage bulkhead by a trunking space, a kind of short tunnel, through which the divers transfer to and from the bell. At the completion of work or a mission, the saturation diving team is decompressed gradually back to atmospheric pressure by the slow venting of system pressure, at rates of about of 15 to 30 msw (50 to 100 fsw) per day, (schedules vary). Thus the process involves only one ascent, thereby mitigating the time-consuming and comparatively risky process of multiple decompressions normally associated with non-saturation ("bounce diving") operations.

[ 64 ] The chamber gas mixture is typically controlled to maintain a nominally constant partial pressure of oxygen of between 0.3 and 0.5 bar during most of the decompression (0.44 to 0.48 bar on US Navy schedule), which is below the upper limit for long term exposure.

[ 65 ] NOAA has used rather different saturation decompression schedules for relatively shallow (less than 100 fsw) air and nitrox saturation dives, which use oxygen breathing when pressure is reduced to less than 55 fsw.

[ 66 ] The divers use surface supplied umbilical diving equipment, using a breathing gas suitable for the depth and pressure, such as helium and oxygen mixtures, stored in large capacity, high pressure cylinders .

[ 64 ] The gas supplies are plumbed to a control panel in the control room, where they are routed to supply the system components. The bell is fed via a large, multi-part umbilical that supplies breathing gas, electrical power, cable communications and hot water, and may return exhaled gas to the surface for recycling. The bell also is fitted with externally-mounted breathing gas storage cylinders for emergency use. The divers are supplied from the bell through personal excursion umbilicals.

[ 63 ] A hyperbaric lifeboat or hyperbaric rescue unit may be provided for emergency evacuation of saturation divers from a saturation system. This would be used if the platform is at immediate risk due to fire or sinking, and allows the divers under saturation to get clear of the immediate danger. A hyperbaric lifeboat may be self-propelled and can be operated by unpressurised crew while the occupants are under pressure. It must be self-sufficient for several days at sea, in case of a delay in rescue due to sea conditions. The crew would normally start decompression as soon as safely possible after launching.

[ 67 ] A dry bell may also be used for bounce dives to great depths, and then used as the decompression chamber during the ascent and later on board the support vessel. In this case it is not always necessary to transfer into a deck chamber, as the bell is quite capable of performing this function, though it would be relatively cramped, as a bell is usually as small as conveniently possible to minimise weight for deployment.

[ 64 ] See also [ edit ] Decompression sickness – Disorder caused by dissolved gases forming bubbles in tissues Decompression (diving) – Pressure reduction and its effects during ascent from depth Decompression practice – Techniques and procedures for safe decompression of divers Decompression theory – Theoretical modelling of decompression physiology Dive computer – Instrument to calculate decompression status in real time Equivalent air depth – Method of comparing decompression requirements for air and a given nitrox mix Equivalent narcotic depth – Method for comparing the narcotic effects of a mixed diving gas with air History of decompression research and development – Chronological list of notable events in the history of diving decompression.

Hyperbaric treatment schedules – Planned hyperbaric exposure using a specified breathing gas as medical treatment Oxygen window – Physiological effect of oxygen metabolism on the total dissolved gas concentration in venous blood Physiology of decompression – Physiological basis for decompression theory and practice Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm – Mathematical model of tissue inert gas uptake and release with pressure change Haldane's decompression model – Decompression model developed by John Scott Haldane Reduced gradient bubble model – Decompression algorithm Thalmann algorithm – Mathematical model for diver decompression Thermodynamic model of decompression – Early model in which decompression is controlled by volume of gas bubbles forming in tissues Varying Permeability Model – Decompression model and algorithm based on bubble physics References [ edit ] ^ Van Liew, Hugh D; Bishop, B; Walder, P; Rahn, H (1965). "Effects of compression on composition and absorption of tissue gas pockets".

Journal of Applied Physiology .

20 (5): 927– 33.

doi : 10.1152/jappl.1965.20.5.927 .

ISSN 0021-8987 .

OCLC 11603017 .

PMID 5837620 .

^ Staff (13 April 2010).

"Using multiple cylinders" .

Sport Diver (online magazine) . PADI. Archived from the original on 6 March 2016 . Retrieved 3 March 2016 .

^ US Navy Diving Manual Revision 6 , Chpt. 8 section 5 ^ a b "Dive Computer Algorithms For Dummies" .

dipndive.com . Retrieved 31 December 2024 .

^ a b c Huggins 1992 , Introduction page 1 ^ a b Huggins 1992 , Chpt. 4 pages 1–18 ^ a b US Navy Diving Manual Revision 6 , chpt. 9 sect. 8 The air decompression table ^ a b Huggins 1992 , Chpt. 4 page 15 ^ a b c US Navy Diving Manual Revision 6 , Chpt. 9 ^ Bühlmann Albert A.

(1984).

Decompression–Decompression Sickness . Berlin, New York: Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 0-387-13308-9 .

^ Bühlmann, Albert A (1995).

Tauchmedizin (in German). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 3-540-55581-1 .

^ Bühlmann, Albert A. (1992).

Tauchmedizin: Barotrauma Gasembolie Dekompression Dekompressionskrankheit (in German). Berlin: Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 3-540-55581-1 .

^ "British RNPL Decompression tables" (PDF) . Royal Naval Physiological Laboratory. 1972 . Retrieved 2 March 2016 .

^ Adkisson, G (1991). "The BS-AC '88 decompression tables".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

21 (1).

^ Powell 2008 , "Other decompression models"; page 203 ^ a b Hamilton, R.W. Jr; Rogers, R.E.; Powell, M.R. (1994). Development and validation of no-stop decompression procedures for recreational diving: the DSAT recreational dive planner (Report). Tarrytown, NY: Diving Science & Technology Corp.

^ Powell 2008 , "Other decompression models"; page 209–13 ^ Nishi, R.Y.; Tikuisis, P. (December 1996).

"Current Trends in Decompression Development: Statistics and Data Analysis" .

Defense Technical Information Center .

^ Trucco, Jean-Noël; Biard, Jef; Redureau, Jean-Yves; Fauvel, Yvon (3 May 1999).

"Table Marine National 90 (MN90): Version du 03/05/1999" (PDF) .

Comité interrégional Bretagne & Pays de la Loire; Commission Technique Régionale.

(in French). F.F.E.S.S.M . Retrieved 23 January 2017 .

^ a b c d Huggins 1992 , Chpt. 4 page 11 ^ NORSOK U-100:2014, Manned underwater operations (PDF) (4th ed.). Oslo, Norway: Standards Norway. June 2014.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 8 June 2023 . Retrieved 8 June 2023 .

^ A guide to the Work in Compressed Air Regulations 1996 (PDF) (Report). Health and Safety Executive.

ISBN 978 0 7176 1120 1 .

^ Huggins 1992 , Chpt. 4 page 10 ^ Duis, D. (1991). "Using the Recreational Diver Planner for multi-level diving".

In: Hans-Jurgen, K; Harper Jr, DE (Eds.) International Pacifica Scientific Diving ... 1991 . Proceedings of the American Academy of Underwater Sciences Eleventh Annual Scientific Diving Symposium held 25–30 September 1991. University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii.

^ Staff (2008).

"Introducing the eRDPML" .

Big Blue Technical Diving News and Events: Archive for August 4, 2008 . Big Blue Technical Diving . Retrieved 7 March 2016 .

^ Huggins, K.E.

"Performance of dive computers exposed to profiles with known human subject results" (PDF) . Catalina Hyperbaric Chamber, Wrigley Marine Science Center University of Southern California . Retrieved 6 March 2016 .

^ "Departure – Dive Planning and Decompression software" . Diverssupport.com . Retrieved 17 July 2012 .

^ "DecoPlanner, decompression simulation software" . Gue.com . Retrieved 17 July 2012 .

^ Ultimate Planner – decompression planning software tool http://www.techdivingmag.com/ultimateplanner.html Archived 23 March 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ "GAP-software, decompression simulation software" . Gap-software.com. 10 February 2008 . Retrieved 17 July 2012 .

^ Beresford, M.; Southwood, P. (2006).

CMAS-ISA Normoxic Trimix Manual (4th ed.). Pretoria, South Africa: CMAS Instructors South Africa.

^ a b Blogg, S.L.; Lang, M.A.; Møllerløkken, A., eds. (2012). "Proceedings of the Validation of Dive Computers Workshop".

European Underwater and Baromedical Society Symposium, August 24, 2011. Gdansk. Trondheim: Norwegian University of Science and Technology .

^ Lang, M.A.; Hamilton, Jr R.W. (1989).

Proceedings of the AAUS Dive Computer Workshop . United States: USC Catalina Marine Science Center. p. 231.

^ a b c d e f Møllerløkken, Andreas (24 August 2011). Blogg, S. Lesley; Lang, Michael A.; Møllerløkken, Andreas (eds.). Proceedings of Validation of Dive Computers Workshop (Report). Gdansk, Poland: European Underwater and Baromedical Society.

^ Azzopardi, E.; Sayer, M.D.J. (2010). "A review of the technical specifications of 47 models of diving decompression computer".

International Journal of the Society for Underwater Technology .

29 (2). Society for Underwater Technology: 63– 70.

doi : 10.3723/ut.29.063 .

^ a b c Powell 2008 , "Other decompression models"; pages 213–217 ^ US Navy Diving Manual Revision 6 , Chpt. 9 section 11 Variations in rate of ascent ^ Department of Labour Diving Council (11 January 2002). "Diving regulations 2001 of the Occupational Health and Safety Act 85 of 1993".

Government Gazette, Republic of South Africa . Vol. 438, no. 2291. Pretoria: Government Printer.

^ a b c d e f g h Boan, Charlotte (2014).

"How to deploy a shotline" .

Dive magazine archive . Syon publishing . Retrieved 3 March 2016 .

^ Edmonds, Carl; Bennett, Michael; Lippmann, John; Mitchell, Simon (2 July 2015).

"Equipment for recreational diving" .

Diving and Subaquatic Medicine, Fifth Edition (5, illustrated, revised ed.). CRC Press. p. 45.

ISBN 978-1-4822-6013-7 . Retrieved 7 March 2016 .

^ a b "Jon Line with Integrated Pouch & Clip (8'): Product description" .

www.divedui.com . Retrieved 31 December 2024 .

^ Gentile, Gary (1998).

The Technical Diving Handbook . Gary Gentile Productions.

ISBN 1-883056-05-5 .

^ a b c d Gurr, Kevin (August 2008). "13: Operational Safety". In Mount, Tom; Dituri, Joseph (eds.).

Exploration and Mixed Gas Diving Encyclopedia (1st ed.). Miami Shores, Florida: International Association of Nitrox Divers. pp.

165– 180.

ISBN 978-0-915539-10-9 .

^ "Technical Issues" . Newry & Mourne Sub Aqua Club . Retrieved 28 August 2009 .

^ Barsky, Steven M.; Christensen, Robert W. (2004).

The Simple Guide to Commercial Diving (Illustrated ed.). Hammerhead Press. p. 92.

ISBN 978-0-9674305-4-6 .

^ Warlaumont, John (October 1991).

"10.6 Open ocean diving" .

NOAA Diving Manual: Diving for Science and Technology (Illustrated ed.). DIANE Publishing. pp. 10–14 to 10–15.

ISBN 978-1-56806-231-0 . Retrieved 17 March 2017 .

^ "Episode 02 - The New NJ Upline" .

www.youtube.com . Narc'd TV . Retrieved 2 September 2024 .

^ Staff (4 March 2014).

"CMAS Self-Rescue Diver" .

Standard Number: 2.B.31 / BOD no 181 ( 04-18-2013 ) . CMAS . Retrieved 13 April 2017 .

^ Staff (2005–2016).

"Surface Marker Buoys (SMBs)" .

Scuba Doctor website . Melbourne: The Scuba Doctor Australia . Retrieved 7 March 2016 .

^ a b Staff.

"Recommendations Concerning the Use of Surface Marker Buoys" (PDF) . British Diving Safety Group. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 December 2016 . Retrieved 7 March 2016 .

^ Staff (2015).

"Delayed surface marker buoy" .

BSAC Safe Diving . British Sub-Aqua Club. p. 18. Archived from the original on 3 April 2012 . Retrieved 7 March 2016 .

^ Nawrocky, Pete (2014).

"We're Over Here!" .

Alert Diver online, Spring 2014 . Divers Alert Network. Archived from the original on 9 October 2019 . Retrieved 7 March 2016 .

^ a b Staff.

"Diving Launch And Recovery Systems" .

Commercial Diving Equipment . Submarine Manufacturing & Products Ltd . Retrieved 7 March 2016 .

^ Staff.

"Pommec 2 diver launch and recovery system with diving basket" (PDF) .

Technical Diving Equipment . Pommec BV . Retrieved 7 March 2016 .

^ Imbert, Jean Pierre (February 2006). Lang; Smith (eds.).

"Commercial Diving: 90m Operational Aspects" (PDF) .

Advanced Scientific Diving Workshop . Smithsonian Institution . Retrieved 30 June 2012 .

^ U.S. Navy Department, 1975. U.S. Navy Diving Manual, Volume 1, Change 1. U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, D.C. NAVSEA 099-LP-001-9010 ^ a b Jablonski, Jarrod (2006). "Details of DIR Equipment Configuration".

Doing it Right: The Fundamentals of Better Diving . High Springs, Florida: Global Underwater Explorers. p. 113.

ISBN 0-9713267-0-3 .

^ Gentile, Gary (July 1988).

Advanced Wreck Diving Guide (3rd ed.). Cornell Maritime Press. p. 60.

ISBN 978-0-87033-380-4 .

^ US Navy Diving Manual Revision 6 , Chpt. 14 page 2 "Gas nixtures" ^ US Navy Diving Manual Revision 6 , Chpt. 17 ^ a b c US Navy Diving Manual Revision 6 , Chpt. 21 Recompression chamber operation ^ Bevan, J. (1999). "Diving bells through the centuries".

South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society Journal .

29 (1).

ISSN 0813-1988 .

OCLC 16986801 .

^ a b US Navy Diving Manual Revision 6 , Chpt. 15 Saturation Diving ^ a b c Beyerstein, G. (2006). Lang, M.A.; Smith, N.E. (eds.).

Commercial Diving: Surface-Mixed Gas, Sur-D-O2, Bell Bounce, Saturation . Proceedings of Advanced Scientific Diving Workshop. Smithsonian Institution, Washington, DC.

^ US Navy Diving Manual Revision 6 , Chpt. 15 sect. 23 pp 33 seq.

^ James W. Miller, ed. (1979). "12.6 Decompression after an air or nitrogen-oxygen saturation dive".

NOAA Diving Manual (2nd ed.). United States Department of Commerce.

^ Staff (May 2013).

"Guidance on Hyperbaric Evacuation Systems" (PDF) .

Guidance on Hyperbaric Evacuation Systems IMCA D 052 May 2013 . International Marine Contractors' Association . Retrieved 6 March 2016 .

Sources [ edit ] Huggins, Karl E. (1992). "Dynamics of decompression workshop".

Course Taught at the University of Michigan .

Powell, Mark (2008).

Deco for Divers . Southend-on-Sea: Aquapress.

ISBN 978-1-905492-07-7 .

US Navy (2006).

US Navy Diving Manual, 6th revision . United States: US Naval Sea Systems Command. Archived from the original on 2 May 2008 . Retrieved 16 March 2016 .

US Navy (2018).

US Navy Diving Manual, 7th revision Ch A . United States: US Naval Sea Systems Command.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Decompression equipment at Wikimedia Commons v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐ggw52
Cached time: 20250818091950
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.203 seconds
Real time usage: 1.456 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8949/1000000
Revision size: 62015/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 594663/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6019/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 19/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 216483/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.644/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27398382/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1039.912      1 -total
 40.24%  418.468      1 Template:Reflist
 18.85%  196.056     17 Template:Annotated_link
 15.15%  157.563      1 Template:Underwater_diving
 14.78%  153.698      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  9.95%  103.459     22 Template:Cite_web
  9.60%   99.854     35 Template:Navbox
  9.50%   98.807      8 Template:Cite_journal
  8.76%   91.047     17 Template:Cite_book
  5.53%   57.518      1 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:49804383:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818091950 and revision id 1305802815. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Decompression_equipment&oldid=1305802815#Jonlines " Categories : Decompression equipment Decompression practice Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 French-language sources (fr) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from March 2021 Use dmy dates from May 2020 Good articles All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 Pages with broken anchors Pages containing broken anchor template with unsupported parameters Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 05:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Decompression equipment Add languages Add topic

