Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early years and personal life 2 Career 3 Awards, honors and commentary 4 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 4.1 Books 4.2 Articles 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Jagdish Bhagwati 22 languages Čeština Deutsch فارسی Français Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Ikinyarwanda Kreyòl ayisyen مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Русский తెలుగు 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian-born American economist (born 1934) Jagdish Bhagwati Bhagwati in 2008 Born ( 1934-07-26 ) July 26, 1934 (age 91) Bombay , Bombay State , British India (present-day Mumbai , Maharashtra , India ) Citizenship United States [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Spouse Padma Desai Academic background Alma mater Sydenham College, Bombay (BA) St John's College, Cambridge (BA) Massachusetts Institute of Technology (PhD) Doctoral advisor Charles P. Kindleberger [ 4 ] Influences Robert Solow Academic work Discipline International economics , globalization , free trade School or tradition Neoclassical economics Institutions Columbia University Indian Statistical Institute Delhi School of Economics MIT Sydenham College Doctoral students Gene Grossman [ 5 ] Caroline Freund Awards Padma Vibhushan Jagdish Natwarlal Bhagwati (born July 26, 1934) is an Indian-born naturalized American economist and one of the most influential trade theorists of his generation.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] He is a University Professor of economics and law at Columbia University and a Senior Fellow in International Economics at the Council on Foreign Relations . He has made significant contributions to international trade theory and economic development.

He is widely regarded as the intellectual father of the Indian economic reforms of 1991 . He is one of the few professors in American academia to have a chair named after him while he was still teaching at the university. He is one of only 10 scholars who hold the title of University Professor at Columbia University .

[ 6 ] Bhagwati is the recipient of several prestigious awards, including the Order of the Rising Sun , Padma Vibhushan , Frank Seidman Distinguished Award in Political Economy and the Freedom Prize of Switzerland .

[ 7 ] In 2014, the Financial Times called him "one of the most outstanding economists of his generation never to have won the Nobel Prize". This view is  shared by his peers including Nobel Prize winning economist Paul Krugman , "The crucial point for me is that people didn't understand at all clearly how distortions in a trading economy relate to policy before Jagdish spelled it out. Once he did, it became so clear that it was hard to believe that someone had to point it out. In my view, that makes his work Nobel-worthy." [ 8 ] Early years and personal life [ edit ] Bhagwati was born in 1934, into a Gujarati family in the Bombay Presidency during the British Raj. He is the son of Indian judge Natwarlal H. Bhagwati and the brother of P. N. Bhagwati , former Chief Justice of India and also of S.N. Bhagwati, an eminent neurosurgeon who served as the president of the Neurological Society of India .

Bhagwati attended St. Xavier's High School and received a BCom from Sydenham College , Mumbai . He then traveled to England to study at St. John's College, Cambridge , receiving a second BA at Cambridge (in economics) in 1956. Between 1957 and 1959 he studied at Nuffield College, Oxford .  He received a PhD in economics from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 1967 for a thesis titled "Essays in International Economics," supervised by Charles P. Kindleberger .      He has also received honorary degrees from the University of Sussex and Erasmus University , as well as others.

Bhagwati is married to Padma Desai , also a Columbia economist and Russia specialist; they have one daughter. Bhagwati and Desai's joint 1970 OECD study India: Planning for Industrialization was a notable contribution at the time.

[ 9 ] Bhagwati with wife Padma Desai , 2012 Career [ edit ] After completing his PhD, Bhagwati returned to India in 1961, first to teach briefly at the Indian Statistical Institute , Kolkata , and then as professor of international trade at Delhi School of Economics at the University of Delhi , from 1962 to 1968. He then returned to American academia and from 1968 until 1980, Bhagwati was the Ford International Professor of Economics at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology .

[ 10 ] From 1980 he taught economics at Columbia University , where he was Arthur Lehman Professor of Economics and Professor of Political Science and later University Professor, Economics and Law. He is one of only 10 scholars who hold the title of University Professor at Columbia University .

Bhagwati is a Senior Fellow of the Council on Foreign Relations in New York and is a Member of the National Academy of Sciences and the American Philosophical Society . He currently serves on the Academic Advisory Board of Human Rights Watch (Asia) and on the board of scholars of the Centre for Civil Society .

He has held several important positions internationally, including special adviser to the United Nations on globalization,  economic policy adviser to Arthur Dunkel -the director-general of General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and external adviser to the World Trade Organization . He has also worked as a member of group appointed by the director-general of the WTO on the future of the WTO .

He was also a member of the advisory committee to UN Secretary General Kofi Annan on the New Partnership for Africa's Development , an economic program accelerating economic co-operation and integration among African countries.

In May, 2004, Bhagwati was one of the experts who took part in the Copenhagen Consensus project.

In 2006, Bhagwati was a part of the Eminent Persons Group along with Brazilian President Fernando Henrique Cardoso on the future of United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD).

In early 2010, Bhagwati joined the advisory board of the Institute for Migrant Rights in Indonesia.

[ 11 ] In 2000, Bhagwati was signatory to an amicus briefing, coordinated by the American Enterprise Institute , with the Supreme Court of the United States to contend that the Environmental Protection Agency should, contrary to a prior ruling, be allowed to take into account the costs of regulations when setting environmental standards.

In January 2004, Bhagwati published In Defense of Globalization, a book in which he argues that globalization , when properly governed, is the most powerful force for social good in the world today. He described how globalization helps the cause of women, reduces child labor and increases literacy. He makes a point that: ... this process [of globalization] has a human face, but we need to make that face more agreeable.

Jagdish Bhagwati was the fictional winner of the Nobel Prize in Economics in The Simpsons episode " Elementary School Musical ".

Awards, honors and commentary [ edit ] Mahalanobis Memorial Medal of the Indian Econometric Society (1974) Fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1982) [ 12 ] Member of the American Philosophical Society (1995) [ 13 ] Seidman Distinguished Award in International Political Economy (1998) Padma Vibhushan Award (2000) Lifetime Achievement Award of the Indian Chamber of Commerce (2004) Order of the Rising Sun , Gold and Silver Star (2006) Member of the National Academy of Sciences (2012) [ 14 ] Nobel laureate Paul Samuelson , on the occasion of Bhagwati's 70th birthday festschrift conference in Gainesville, Florida in January 2005 said: I measure a scholar's prolific-ness not by the mere number of his publishings. Just as the area of a rectangle equals its width times its depth, the quality of a lifetime accomplishment must weight each article by its novelties and wisdoms. ... Jagdish Bhagwati is more like Haydn : a composer of more than a hundred symphonies and no one of them other than top notch. ... In the struggle to improve the lot of mankind, whether located in advanced economies or in societies climbing the ladder out of poverty, Jagdish Bhagwati has been a tireless partisan of that globalization which elevates global total-factor – productivities both of richest America and poorest regions of Asia and Africa.

[ 15 ] Other awards include the Bernhard Harms Prize (Germany), the Kenan Enterprise Award (United States), the Freedom Prize (Switzerland), and the John R. Commons Award (United States). He has also received honorary degrees from the University of Sussex and Erasmus University , as well as others.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] Bibliography [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( December 2009 ) Books [ edit ] Jagdish Bhagwati, Arvind Panagariya (2013).

Why Growth Matters: How Economic Growth in India Reduced Poverty and the Lessons for Other Developing Countries . PublicAffairs.

ISBN 978-1610392716 .

Jagdish Bhagwati, Arvind Panagariya (2013).

India's Tryst with Destiny: Debunking the Myths that Undermine Progress and Addressing New Challenges . HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-9350295854 .

Jagdish Bhagwati (2008).

Termites in the Trading System: How Preferential Agreements Undermine Free Trade . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0195331653 .

Jagdish Bhagwati (2007).

In Defense of Globalization . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0195330939 .

Bhagwati, Jagdish (2003).

Free Trade Today . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0691117300 .

Jagdish Bhagwati (2002).

The Wind of the Hundred Days: How Washington Mismanaged Globalization . MIT Press.

ISBN 0262523272 .

James H. Mathis, Jagdish Bhagwati (Foreword) (2002).

Regional Trade Agreements in the GATT/WTO: Article XXIV and the Internal Trade Requirement . Norwell/TMC Asser Press.

ISBN 9067041394 .

Jagdish N. Bhagwati; Robert E. Hudec, eds. (1996).

Fair Trade and Harmonization, Vol. 1: Economic Analysis . MIT Press.

ISBN 0262024012 .

Jagdish N. Bhagwati (editor) (1977) The New International Economic Order: The North-South Debate Archived 2006-12-11 at the Wayback Machine .

ISBN 0262520427 .

Jagdish N. Bhagwati, ed. (1972).

Economics and World Order from the 1970s to the 1990s . Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0029034705 .

Articles [ edit ] Bhagwati, Jagdish (March 1964). "The Pure Theory of International Trade: A Survey".

The Economic Journal .

74 (293): 1– 84.

doi : 10.2307/2228112 .

JSTOR 2228112 .

Bhagwati, Jagdish (November 1993). "The Case for Free Trade".

Scientific American .

269 (5): 18– 23.

Bibcode : 1993SciAm.269e..42B .

doi : 10.1038/scientificamerican1193-42 .

Bhagwati, Jagdish (Fall 2009). "Feeble Critiques: Capitalism's Petty Detractors".

World Affairs .

doi : 10.3200/WAFS.172.2.36-45 .

[ dead link ] Bhagwati, Jagdish (2008).

"Protectionism" . In David R. Henderson (ed.).

Concise Encyclopedia of Economics (2nd ed.). Indianapolis: Library of Economics and Liberty . pp.

425– 427.

ISBN 978-0865976658 .

OCLC 237794267 .

See also [ edit ] Globalization Indians in the New York City metropolitan area "Spaghetti Bowl" Effect References [ edit ] ^ a b Levy, Philip I.; Barfield, Claude (2011), Swap: How Trade Works , American Enterprise Institute Press, p. 111, ISBN 978-0844772073 , For a thorough assessment of the challenges presented by trade and the environment by an author brought up in India but now a U.S. citizen, see Jagdish Bhagwati, In Defense of Globalization (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004) ^ a b Heilemann, John (August 1, 2004).

"Gearing Ourselves for Globalization Free trade isn't the cause of the world's ills, says Columbia professor Jagdish Bhagwati. It's the best cure we have for them – if only we can stomach it" . Fortune Magazine. Archived from the original on March 20, 2017 . Retrieved 18 March 2017 .

His name may not be immediately familiar, but anyone interested in understanding globalization ought to be acquainted with Jagdish Bhagwati. Born in India, schooled in Britain, and now an American citizen, Bhagwati is an international economist and one of only 10 scholars who hold the title of University Professor at Columbia.

^ a b Drezner, Daniel W. (August 18, 2004).

"Review of 'In Defense of Globalization' by Jagdish Bhagwati, New York: Oxford University Press" .

New York Times .

If anyone can rise to this challenge, it should be Jagdish Bhagwati. An esteemed international economist, Bhagwati is a university professor at Columbia and a senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations. He has advised the World Trade Organization and the United Nations. Born in India, educated in Britain and now an American citizen, he can claim to understand all points of view.

^ Bhagwati, Jagdish N. (11 May 1967).

Essays in international economics (Thesis). Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

hdl : 1721.1/61807 .

^ "PDS login" .

library.mit.edu .

^ Heilemann, John (August 1, 2004).

"Gearing Ourselves for Globalization Free trade isn't the cause of the world's ills, says Columbia professor Jagdish Bhagwati. It's the best cure we have for them – if only we can stomach it" . Fortune Magazine. Archived from the original on March 20, 2017 . Retrieved 18 March 2017 .

His name may not be immediately familiar, but anyone interested in understanding globalization ought to be acquainted with Jagdish Bhagwati. Born in India, schooled in Britain, and now an American citizen, Bhagwati is an international economist and one of only 10 scholars who hold the title of University Professor at Columbia.

^ "Jagdish Bhagwati" .

American Academy . Retrieved 2022-06-22 .

^ "Finance and Development" .

Finance and Development | F&D . Retrieved 2022-06-15 .

^ [1] Archived November 22, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ [2] Archived August 3, 2004, at the Wayback Machine ^ "The Institute for Migrant Rights" . Retrieved 6 November 2014 .

^ "Book of Members, 1780–2010: Chapter B" (PDF) . American Academy of Arts and Sciences . Retrieved June 25, 2011 .

^ "APS Member History" .

search.amphilsoc.org . Retrieved 2021-12-20 .

^ "Jagdish N. Bhagwati" .

www.nasonline.org . Retrieved 2021-12-20 .

^ Paul A. Samuelson.

"Jagdish Bhagwati, the wunderkind who became the tireless theorist of international trade" (PDF) . Columbia.edu. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 June 2010 . Retrieved 6 November 2014 .

^ [3] Archived March 6, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ [4] Archived September 27, 2006, at the Wayback Machine External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jagdish Bhagwati .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Jagdish Bhagwati .

Homepage of Professor Jagdish Bhagwati , Columbia University website, accessed March 2004.

Appearances on C-SPAN Jagdish Bhagwati collected news and commentary at The New York Times v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal v t e Recipients of Padma Vibhushan Arts Ebrahim Alkazi Kishori Amonkar Prabha Atre Amitabh Bachchan Teejan Bai M. Balamuralikrishna T. Balasaraswati S. P. Balasubrahmanyam Asha Bhosle Nandalal Bose Hariprasad Chaurasia Chiranjeevi Girija Devi Kumar Gandharva Adoor Gopalakrishnan Satish Gujral Gangubai Hangal Bhupen Hazarika M. F. Husain Zakir Hussain Ilaiyaraaja Semmangudi Srinivasa Iyer Bhimsen Joshi Ali Akbar Khan Amjad Ali Khan Allauddin Khan Bismillah Khan Ghulam Mustafa Khan Yamini Krishnamurthy Dilip Kumar Kumudini Lakhia R. K. Laxman Birju Maharaj Kishan Maharaj Lata Mangeshkar Sonal Mansingh Mallikarjun Mansur Zubin Mehta Mario Miranda Chhannulal Mishra Kelucharan Mohapatra Raghunath Mohapatra Jasraj Motiram Benode Behari Mukherjee Hrishikesh Mukherjee Rajinikanth Ram Narayan D. K. Pattammal K. Shankar Pillai Balwant Moreshwar Purandare Akkineni Nageswara Rao Kaloji Narayana Rao Satyajit Ray S. H. Raza Zohra Sehgal Uday Shankar Ravi Shankar V. Shantaram Shivkumar Sharma Sharda Sinha Umayalpuram K. Sivaraman M. S. Subbulakshmi L. Subramaniam K. G. Subramanyan Kapila Vatsyayan Homai Vyarawalla K. J. Yesudas Civil service Bimala Prasad Chaliha Naresh Chandra T. N. Chaturvedi Jayanto Nath Chaudhuri Suranjan Das Rajeshwar Dayal Basanti Devi P. N. Dhar Jyotindra Nath Dixit M. S. Gill Hafiz Mohamad Ibrahim H. V. R. Iyengar Bhola Nath Jha Dattatraya Shridhar Joshi Ajudhiya Nath Khosla Rai Krishnadasa V. Krishnamurthy P. Prabhakar Kumaramangalam Pratap Chandra Lal K. B. Lall Sam Manekshaw Om Prakash Mehra Mohan Sinha Mehta M. G. K. Menon Brajesh Mishra Sumati Morarjee A. Ramasamy Mudaliar Sardarilal Mathradas Nanda Chakravarthi V. Narasimhan Braj Kumar Nehru Bhairab Dutt Pande Ghananand Pande Vijaya Lakshmi Pandit T. V. Rajeswar C. R. Krishnaswamy Rao Pattadakal Venkanna R. Rao V. K. R. V. Rao Bipin Rawat Khusro Faramurz Rustamji Harish Chandra Sarin Binay Ranjan Sen Homi Sethna Arjan Singh Harbaksh Singh Kirpal Singh Manmohan Singh Tarlok Singh Lallan Prasad Singh Balaram Sivaraman Chandrika Prasad Srivastava T. Swaminathan Arun Shridhar Vaidya Dharma Vira Narinder Nath Vohra Literature and education V. S. R. Arunachalam Jagdish Bhagwati Satyendra Nath Bose Tara Chand Suniti Kumar Chatterji D. P. Chattopadhyaya Bhabatosh Datta Avinash Dixit Mahasweta Devi John Kenneth Galbraith Sarvepalli Gopal Lakshman Shastri Joshi Kaka Kalelkar Dhondo Keshav Karve Gopinath Kaviraj Radheshyam Khemka Kuvempu O. N. V. Kurup Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Sitakant Mahapatra John Mathai Kotha Satchidananda Murthy Giani Gurmukh Singh Musafir Basanti Dulal Nagchaudhuri M. T. Vasudevan Nair Bal Ram Nanda R. K. Narayan P. Parameswaran Amrita Pritam K. N. Raj C. Rangarajan Raja Rao Ramoji Rao Hormasji Maneckji Seervai Rajaram Shastri Kalu Lal Shrimali Govindbhai Shroff Khushwant Singh Chandeshwar Prasad Narayan Singh Premlila Vithaldas Thackersey Mahadevi Varma Bashir Hussain Zaidi Medicine Jasbir Singh Bajaj B. K. Goyal Purshotam Lal A. Lakshmanaswami Mudaliar S. I. Padmavati Autar Singh Paintal D. Nageshwara Reddy Kantilal Hastimal Sancheti Balu Sankaran V. Shanta Vithal Nagesh Shirodkar Prakash Narain Tandon Brihaspati Dev Triguna M. S. Valiathan Dilip Mahalanabis Other Sunderlal Bahuguna B. K. S. Iyengar Rambhadracharya Ravi Shankar Vishwesha Teertha Jaggi Vasudev B. V. Doshi Public affairs L. K. Advani Montek Singh Ahluwalia Aruna Asaf Ali Fazal Ali Adarsh Sein Anand Madhav Shrihari Aney Parkash Singh Badal Sikander Bakht Milon K. Banerji Mirza Hameedullah Beg P. N. Bhagwati Raja Chelliah Chandra Kisan Daphtary Niren De C. D. Deshmukh Anthony Lancelot Dias Uma Shankar Dikshit Kazi Lhendup Dorjee George Fernandes P. B. Gajendragadkar Benjamin Gilman Ismaïl Omar Guelleh Zakir Husain V. R. Krishna Iyer Jagmohan Lakshmi Chand Jain Arun Jaitley Aditya Nath Jha Murli Manohar Joshi Anerood Jugnauth Mehdi Nawaz Jung Ali Yavar Jung Vijay Kelkar Hans Raj Khanna V. N. Khare Jagdish Singh Khehar Balasaheb Gangadhar Kher Akhlaqur Rahman Kidwai Jivraj Narayan Mehta V. K. Krishna Menon Hirendranath Mukherjee Ajoy Mukherjee Pranab Mukherjee Padmaja Naidu Venkaiah Naidu Gulzarilal Nanda Govind Narain Fali Sam Nariman Hosei Norota Nanabhoy Palkhivala K. Parasaran Hari Vinayak Pataskar Sunder Lal Patwa Sharad Pawar Naryana Raghvan Pillai Sri Prakasa N. G. Ranga Ravi Narayana Reddy Y. Venugopal Reddy Ghulam Mohammed Sadiq Lakshmi Sahgal P. A. Sangma M. C. Setalvad Kalyan Singh Karan Singh Nagendra Singh Swaran Singh Walter Sisulu Soli Sorabjee Kalyan Sundaram Sushma Swaraj Chandulal Madhavlal Trivedi Atal Bihari Vajpayee M. N. Venkatachaliah Kottayan Katankot Venugopal Jigme Dorji Wangchuck S. M. Krishna Mulayam Singh Yadav Science and engineering V. K. Aatre Salim Ali Norman Borlaug Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar Rajagopala Chidambaram Charles Correa Satish Dhawan Anil Kakodkar A. P. J. Abdul Kalam Krishnaswamy Kasturirangan Har Gobind Khorana Daulat Singh Kothari Verghese Kurien Raghunath Anant Mashelkar G. Madhavan Nair Roddam Narasimha Jayant Narlikar Rajendra K. Pachauri Benjamin Peary Pal Yash Pal I. G. Patel Venkatraman Ramakrishnan K. R. Ramanathan Raja Ramanna C. R. Rao C. N. R. Rao Palle Rama Rao Udupi Ramachandra Rao Vikram Sarabhai Man Mohan Sharma Obaid Siddiqi E. Sreedharan M. R. Srinivasan George Sudarshan M. S. Swaminathan Narinder Singh Kapany S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan Social work Baba Amte Pandurang Shastri Athavale Janaki Devi Bajaj Mirabehn Kamaladevi Chattopadhyay Durgabai Deshmukh Nanaji Deshmukh Nirmala Deshpande Mohan Dharia U. N. Dhebar Valerian Gracias Veerendra Heggade Mary Clubwala Jadhav Gaganvihari Lallubhai Mehta Usha Mehta Sister Nirmala Nellie Sengupta Sports Viswanathan Anand Edmund Hillary Mary Kom Sachin Tendulkar Trade and industry Dhirubhai Ambani Ghanshyam Das Birla Ashok Sekhar Ganguly Karim Al Hussaini Aga Khan Lakshmi Mittal Anil Manibhai Naik N. R. Narayana Murthy M. Narasimham Prithvi Raj Singh Oberoi Azim Premji Prathap C. Reddy Osamu Suzuki J. R. D. Tata Ratan Tata Portal Category WikiProject Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jagdish_Bhagwati&oldid=1303738903 " Categories : Living people 1934 births People from Mumbai Indian emigrants to the United States Alumni of St John's College, Cambridge Columbia University faculty Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Fellows of the Econometric Society Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences 20th-century Indian economists International economists MIT School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences alumni Recipients of the Padma Vibhushan in literature & education Trade economists Academic staff of Delhi University University of Mumbai alumni Recipients of the Order of the Rising Sun, 2nd class Writers about globalization American people of Gujarati descent American academics of Indian descent Indian political writers Indian male writers American political writers American male non-fiction writers 20th-century Indian non-fiction writers 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers Alumni of Nuffield College, Oxford Distinguished fellows of the American Economic Association 21st-century Indian economists 21st-century American economists Carnegie Council for Ethics in International Affairs Recipients of Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Members of the American Philosophical Society Gujarati people Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles to be expanded from December 2009 All articles to be expanded All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2023 Commons category link from Wikidata People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 20:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jagdish Bhagwati 22 languages Add topic

