Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In the Renaissance 2 Memory and kairos 3 Memory systems 4 Three elements of the canon of memory Toggle Three elements of the canon of memory subsection 4.1 Memorizing one's speech 4.2 Making one's speech memorable 4.3 Keeping a treasury of rhetorical fodder 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Memoria 5 languages Deutsch 한국어 Interlingua Italiano Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Term for aspects involving memory in Western classical rhetoric For other uses, see Memoria (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Memoria" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Memoria was the term for aspects involving memory in Western classical rhetoric . The word is Latin, and can be translated as "memory".

It was one of five canons in classical rhetoric (the others being inventio , dispositio , elocutio , and pronuntiatio ) concerned with the crafting and delivery of speeches and prose.

The art of rhetoric grew out of oratory , which was the central medium for intellectual and political life in ancient Greece. Legal proceedings, political debates, philosophical inquiry were all conducted through spoken discourse. Many of the great texts from that age were not written texts penned by the authors we associate them with, but were instead orations written down by followers and students. In Roman times, while there was a much greater body of written work, oration was still the medium for critical debate. Unlike public speakers of today, who use notes or who read their speeches, good orators were expected to deliver their speeches without such aids.

Memoria was the discipline of recalling the arguments of a discourse. It generally received less attention from writers than other parts of rhetoric, as there is less to be said about the subject. However, the need to memorize speeches did influence the structure of discourse to some extent. For example, as part of dispositio , some attention was paid to creating structures (such as the divisio , an outline of the major arguments of a discourse) that would also aid memory. Some writers also discussed the use of various mnemonic devices to assist speakers.

But rhetoricians also viewed memoria as requiring more than just rote memorization. Rather, the orator also had to have at his command a wide body of knowledge to permit improvisation, to respond to questions, and to refute opposing arguments. Where today's speech-making tends to be a staged, one-way affair, in former times, much oration occurred as part of debates, dialogues, and other settings, in which orators had to react to others. Moreover, rhetoricians also recognized that the credibility of a speaker depended not just on the strength of his prepared arguments, but on the audience's perceptions of the speaker. In Greece, Rome, and Renaissance Europe, a speaker's familiarity of many areas of learning was seen as a virtue.

In the Renaissance [ edit ] When the Humanists took up the ideas on memory found the writings of Classical authors, memoria played an important role in the pedagogical system. Texts were learned first by rote memorization, then re-read for meaning. Children's ability to memorize was aided by " memory tables ", which were first available in manuscript form, and were, from the 1470s onwards, some of the first products of the printing press. (Source: Paul Gehl, A Moral Art: Grammar, Society, and Culture in Trecento Florence (1993).) Memory and kairos [ edit ] Memory, the fourth canon of rhetoric, and invention, the first canon, are connected. The ad Herennium states that memory is the "treasury of things invented", indirectly referring to the custom of accumulating commonplaces. Hence, for a rhetor, memory is as much related to the need to extemporize as to the necessity to memorize a discourse for delivery; in this way it is linked to kairos and to the ideas of copia and amplification (Burton).

Crowley and Hawhee state about memory and kairos, "... kairos and memory were partnered in several ways. First, both require a kind of 'attunement' in that the rhetor who is gathering items for reserve in the memory must be thinking simultaneously about what's available now that might be useful later. Secondly, memory requires an attunement during the moment of speaking or composing, a recognition of the right time for recalling an illustrative example, an argument, and so on" (317).

Memory systems [ edit ] Ancient peoples used elaborate systems , such as the method of loci , to store large amounts of information in their memories. Today, we use literate and electronic memory systems. Literate memory systems include books, periodicals, and libraries. Electronic systems include computers, databases, computer software, the World Wide Web, and other artificial memory devices (Crowley and Hawhee 325–28).

Three elements of the canon of memory [ edit ] Memorizing one's speech [ edit ] Centuries ago, ancient orators had to memorize and present speeches without the help of note cards or crib sheets. Notetaking, as a way to remember certain things, was looked down upon in ancient cultures. In his Phaedrus , Plato has Socrates explaining that relying on writing or taking notes weakened the mind and memory: "If men learn this, it will implant forgetfulness in their souls: they will cease to exercise memory because they rely on that which is written, calling things to remembrance no longer from within themselves." [ 1 ] Any Greek in ancient times who was caught using the note-taking method would be laughed at and deemed "weak-minded".

[ citation needed ] Nowadays, it is much more common for speakers to use note cards, though speeches are much more impressive without the use of notes.

Using memory during a speech can also affect how the orator influences the audience.

[ 2 ] When the speaker addresses the audiences relying solely on their memory, they build a certain amount of ethos within the relationship.

[ 3 ] Memoria in relation to ethos during a speech situation can be described as a certain amount trustworthiness felt between the audience, as well as a level of similarity, authority, or expertise that the orator has over the audience.

[ 4 ] Unlike ancient Greece, in today's society, it is much more acceptable for politicians and for people of authority to use aids when delivering addresses.

[ 5 ] Although it could be viewed as an aid to use notes or teleprompters, greater importance is placed on actually conveying the information to the audience in a clear and concise manner.

[ 6 ] Making one's speech memorable [ edit ] For ancient orators, the excellence of how a speech was presented was more important than the simple delivery of the speech. An important feature of delivering a speech was finding ways to make one's audience remember one's speech topic. One had to be sure to one's audience learned the information or ideas presented to it.

Keeping a treasury of rhetorical fodder [ edit ] The third element of memory has to do with using quotes, facts, or anecdotes that could be used in future speeches. A professional orator is known to always have a treasury of rhetorical fodder close at all times.

References [ edit ] ^ Plato (1952) [c. 360 B.C.E.].

Phaedrus . Translated by Reginald Hackfort. pp. 274c-275 b.

^ Alvi, Sofia Dildar; Abdul Baseer (2011). "An Analysis Of Barack Obama's Speech 'Keynote Address At The 2004 Democratic National Convention' ".

Language in India .

11 (10): 310– 335.

^ Cazacu, Aurel M. (2011).

"Seneca - The Rhetor" .

Annals of Spiru Haret University, Journalism Studies .

12 (1): 85– 87 . Retrieved 5 March 2014 .

^ Reynolds, Ota Thomas (1968). "American Public Address And The Mass Media".

Western Speech .

32 (1): 44– 49.

doi : 10.1080/10570316809389548 .

^ Reynolds, Ota Thomas (1968). "American Public Address And The Mass Media".

Western Speech .

32 (1): 44– 49.

doi : 10.1080/10570316809389548 .

^ Alvi, Sofia Dildar; Abdul Baseer (2011). "An Analysis Of Barack Obama's Speech 'Keynote Address At The 2004 Democratic National Convention' ".

Language in India .

11 (10): 310– 335.

Further reading [ edit ] Giovanni Ciappelli and Patricia Rubin, Art, Memory, and Family in Renaissance Florence (CUP 2001).

Mary Carruthers, The Book of Memory. A Study of Memory in Medieval Culture (CUP, 1990).

Mary Carruthers, The Craft of Thought. Meditation, Rhetoric, and the Making of Images, 400-1200 (CUP, 1998).

Sharon Crowley and Debra Hawhee, Ancient Rhetorics for Contemporary Students, Third Edition, 316-329 (CUP, 2004).

Yates, Frances A.

(1966).

The Art of Memory . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-95001-8 .

External links [ edit ] Look up memoria in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Burton, Gideon O. "Memory".

The Forest of Rhetoric silva rhetoricae . Brigham Young University.

"MemoryRam".

Types and uses for gaming . PDF pub.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Memoria&oldid=1201012606 " Categories : Mnemonics Rhetoric Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2014 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2016 This page was last edited on 30 January 2024, at 18:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Memoria 5 languages Add topic

