Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Publishers' reprint series 2 Fiction books Toggle Fiction books subsection 2.1 Definitions 2.2 History 2.3 Twentieth century 2.4 Development of the novel sequence 2.5 Other examples 3 Publishers' nonfiction series 4 Academic and scholarly publications 5 Compared with editorial collection 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Book series 22 languages العربية Български Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 עברית Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sequence of books A book series is a sequence of books having certain characteristics in common that are formally identified together as a group. Book series can be organized in different ways, such as written by the same author , or marketed as a group by their publisher .

Publishers' reprint series [ edit ] Collection of the Penguin Books series Little Black Classics Reprint series of public domain fiction (and sometimes nonfiction) books appeared as early as the 18th century, with the series The Poets of Great Britain Complete from Chaucer to Churchill (founded by British publisher John Bell in 1777).

[ 1 ] In 1841 the German Tauchnitz publishing firm launched the Collection of British and American Authors , a reprint series of inexpensive paperbound editions of both public domain and copyrighted fiction and nonfiction works.

[ 2 ] This book series was unique for paying living authors of the works published even though copyright protection did not exist between nations in the 19th century.

Later British reprint series were to include the Routledge's Railway Library ( George Routledge , 1848–99), the Oxford World's Classics ( Oxford University Press , from 1901), the Everyman's Library ( J. M. Dent , from 1906), the Penguin Classics ( Penguin Books , from 1945) and the Penguin English Library (from 1963).

Reprint series were also published in the United States, including the Modern Library ( Boni & Liveright , from 1917), in Germany, including the Universal-Bibliothek ( Reclam , from 1867), [ 3 ] and in most other countries of the world.

Fiction books [ edit ] Main article: Series fiction A novel sequence is a set or series of novels which share common themes, characters, or settings, but where each novel has its own title and free-standing storyline, and can thus be read independently or out of sequence. A novel sequence contains story arcs or themes that cross over several books, rather than simply sharing one or more characters.

Fictional series typically share a common setting , story arc , set of characters or timeline . They are common in genre fiction , particularly crime fiction , adventure fiction , and speculative fiction , as well as in children's literature .

Some works in a series can stand alone—they can be read in any order, as each book makes few, if any, reference to past events, and the characters seldom, if ever, change. Many of these series books may be published in a numbered series. Examples of such series are works like The Hardy Boys , Nancy Drew , and Nick Carter .

Collection of the seven books in the Harry Potter series Some series do have their characters go through changes, and make references to past events. Typically such series are published in the order of their internal chronology, so that the next book published follows the previous book. How much these changes matter will vary from series to series (and reader to reader). For some, it may be minor—characters might get engaged, change jobs, etc., but it does not affect the main storyline. Examples of this type include Tony Hillerman 's Jim Chee and Joe Leaphorn books. In other series, the changes are major and the books must be read in order to be fully enjoyed. Examples of this type include the Harry Potter series.

Some book series are not exactly proper series, but rather single books that are so large that they are published in two or more volumes. Examples of this type include The Lord of the Rings volumes or the Dark Tower series by Stephen King.

Some authors make it difficult to list their books in a numerical order when they do not release each work in its 'proper' order by the story's internal chronology. They might 'jump' back in time to early adventures of the characters, writing works that must be placed before or between previously published works. Thus, the books in a series are sometimes enumerated according to the internal chronology rather than in publication order, depending on the intended purpose for the list. Examples of this series include works from the Chronicles of Narnia , where the fifth book published, The Horse and His Boy , is actually set during the time of the first book, and the sixth book published, The Magician's Nephew is actually set long before the first book. This was done intentionally by C. S. Lewis , a scholar of medieval literature. Medieval literature did not always tell a story chronologically.

Definitions [ edit ] There is no useful, formal demarcation between novel sequences and multi-part novels. Novels that are related may or may not fall into a clear sequence. It is also debatable whether a trilogy is long enough and whether its parts are discrete enough to qualify as a novel sequence.

[ citation needed ] For example, the Barchester novels of Anthony Trollope are only loosely related, although they contain a recurring cast of characters; his political novels about the Pallisers have a tighter connection and dynamic.

[ 4 ] A strict definition might exclude both.

History [ edit ] With precedents such as Madeleine de Scudéry 's magnum opus, Artamène , the novel sequence was a product of the nineteenth century, with James Fenimore Cooper 's works appearing in the 1820s, and Anthony Trollope 's Barchester books in the 1850s. In French literature , Honoré de Balzac 's ambitious La Comédie humaine , a set of nearly 100 novels, novellas and short stories with some recurring characters, started to come together during the 1830s.

Émile Zola 's Rougon-Macquart cycle is a family saga , a format that later became a popular fictional form, going beyond the conventional three-volume novel .

A roman-fleuve (French, literally "river-novel") is an extended sequence of novels of which the whole acts as a commentary for a society or an epoch, and which continually deals with a central character, community or a saga within a family. The river metaphor implies a steady, broad dynamic lending itself to a perspective. Each volume makes up a complete novel by itself, but the entire cycle exhibits unifying characteristics.

[ 5 ] The metaphor of the roman-fleuve was coined by Romain Rolland to describe his 10-volume cycle Jean-Christophe . In the preface to the seventh volume, Dans la maison (1908/1909) he wrote: "When you see a man, do you ask yourself whether he is a novel or a poem? ... Jean-Christophe has always seemed to me to flow like a river; I have said as much from the first pages." The term has subsequently been applied to other French novel sequences, particularly of the years between the world wars, notably: Marcel Proust , À la recherche du temps perdu (1908–22) Georges Duhamel , Vie et aventures de Salavin (1920–32) and Chronique des Pasquier (1933–45) Roger Martin du Gard , The Thibaults (1922–40) Jules Romains , Les Hommes de bonne volonté (1932–47) Louis Aragon , Cycle du monde réel (1933–51) Jacques Chardonne , Les Destinées sentimentales (1934–36) The 19th-century predecessors may be distinguished as being rather "family sagas", as their stories are from the perspective of a single family, rather than society as a whole.

Marcel Proust's À la recherche du temps perdu has come to be regarded as a definitive roman fleuve . Today, however, its seven volumes are generally considered to be a single novel.

[ 6 ] Proust's work was immensely influential, particularly on British novelists of the middle of the twentieth century who did not favour modernism . Some of those follow the example of Anthony Powell , [ 7 ] a Proust disciple, but consciously adapting the technique to depict social change, rather than change in high society. This was a step beyond the realist novels of Arnold Bennett (the Clayhanger books) or John Galsworthy .

Twentieth century [ edit ] The twenty-novel Aubrey-Maturin series by the English author Patrick O'Brian has been called perhaps the best-loved roman fleuve of the twentieth century: "[an] epic of two heroic yet believably realistic men that would in some ways define a generation".

[ 8 ] Development of the novel sequence [ edit ] Although sequences of genre fiction are sometimes not considered to be romans-fleuves , novel sequences are particularly common in science fiction and epic fantasy genres.

[ citation needed ] The introduction of the preconstructed novel sequence is often attributed to E. E. Doc Smith , with his Lensman books.

[ citation needed ] Such sequences, from contemporary authors, tend to be more clearly defined than earlier examples. Authors are now more likely to announce an overall series title, or write in round numbers such as 12 volumes. These characteristics are not those of the classical model forms, and become more like the franchises of the film industry.

[ citation needed ] Other examples [ edit ] Jacques Abeille 's Le Cycle des contrées Louis Aragon 's Cycle du Monde Réel Hirohiko Araki 's JoJo's Bizarre Adventure A. S. Byatt 's "Frederica Potter" quartet Jacques Chardonne 's Les Destinées sentimentales James Fenimore Cooper 's Leatherstocking Tales John Crowley 's Ægypt Cycle Lawrence Durrell 's Alexandria Quartet and other sequences Ford Madox Ford 's Parade's End C. S. Forester 's " Horatio Hornblower " series John Galsworthy 's The Forsyte Saga [ 9 ] Carolyn Keene 's " Nancy Drew Mystery Stories " Doris Lessing 's Children of Violence [ 10 ] Naguib Mahfouz 's The Cairo Trilogy Thomas Mann 's Joseph and His Brothers Roger Martin du Gard 's Les Thibault Yukio Mishima 's The Sea of Fertility Anaïs Nin 's Cities of the Interior Benito Pérez Galdós 's Episodios nacionales Anthony Powell 's A Dance to the Music of Time [ 10 ] Dorothy Richardson 's Pilgrimage Romain Rolland 's Jean-Christophe John Roman Baker 's "The Nick & Greg Books" Philip Roth 's "Zuckerman" novels Paul Scott 's Raj Quartet C. P. Snow 's Strangers and Brothers [ 10 ] Anthony Trollope 's Chronicles of Barsetshire and Palliser novels John Updike 's " Rabbit Angstrom " books Henry Williamson 's Chronicles of Ancient Sunlight A. N. Wilson 's Lampitt Papers Publishers' nonfiction series [ edit ] Notable nonfiction book series for the general public have included: Architecture: Pevsner Architectural Guides Biography: The Republic of Letters ; Great Lives [ 11 ] History: History of the Great War Science: New Naturalist Library Self Instruction: Teach Yourself [ 12 ] Sport: Badminton Library Travel: Murray's Handbooks for Travellers ; Blue Guides Academic and scholarly publications [ edit ] Main article: Monographic series In scholarly and academic publishing , scientific and non-fiction books that are released serially (in successive parts) once a year, or less often, are also called a series . (Publications that are released more often than once a year are known as periodicals .) The connection among books belonging to such a series can be by discipline, focus, approach, type of work, or geographic location. Examples of such series include the "Antwerp Working Papers in Linguistics", "Early English Manuscripts in Facsimile", "Garland Reference Library", "Canterbury Tales Project", " Early English Text Society ", and " Cambridge Companions to Music ".

Compared with editorial collection [ edit ] Main article: Collection (publishing) Book series can be compared with editorial collection, a type of serial publication which is common in the Romance-speaking world , especially in France. Although the two are similar in many ways, book series and editorial collection differ because books in a series generally have a common subject, character, or universe; in other words, a set of volumes that are related to each other by certain thematic elements. While books in a collection do not necessarily have a common subject, or a specific order, but with a certain affinity in the content of books (collections on art, on religion, on science...), as well as in the format , spine and page layout , even grammage , number of pages and style of typeface .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Novels portal List of children's book series Monographic series Partwork Sequel Continuation novel Tetralogy Trilogy Volume References [ edit ] ^ John Feather, A History of British Publishing , London: Croom Helm, 1988, p. 117.

^ Michael S. Suarez and H. R. Woudhuysen, eds., The Oxford Companion to the Book . Oxford University Press, 2010. Vol. 2. p. 1194.

^ Reclams Universal-Bibliothek (Philipp Reclam jun) - Book Series List (Buchreihe) , publishinghistory.com. Retrieved 9 July 2019.

^ Felber, Lynette (1995).

Gender and Genre in Novels Without End: The British Roman-fleuve . University Press of Florida. p. 33.

ISBN 978-0-8130-1402-9 .

^ Encyclopaedia Britannica ^ Douglas-Fairhurst, Robert.

"In Search of Marcel Proust" .

The Observer , 17 November 2002.

^ Powell was an anti-modernist modernist , according to Christopher Hitchens ; see Unacknowledged Legislation (2000) p. 197, Powell's Way , first published in the New York Review of Books 28 May 1998.

^ King, Dean (2000).

Patrick O'Brian: A life revealed . London: Hodder & Stoughton . p. 207.

ISBN 0-340-792558 .

^ Prawer, Siegbert Salomon (2009).

A Cultural Citizen of the World: Sigmund Freud's Knowledge and Use of British and American Writings . MHRA. p. 105.

ISBN 978-1-906540-42-5 .

^ a b c Scanlan, Margaret (14 July 2014).

Traces of Another Time: History and Politics in Postwar British Fiction . Princeton University Press. p. 158.

ISBN 978-1-4008-6093-7 .

^ Great Lives (Gerald Duckworth & Co., Ltd) , seriesofseries.com. Retrieved 9 July 2019.

^ Teach Yourself (E.U.P./Hodder & Stoughton; Teach Yourself Books) - Book Series List , publishinghistory.com. Retrieved 9 July 2019.

^ "Collection, série et numéro" .

commission-fel-clil.org (in French). Archived from the original on October 27, 2020 . Retrieved 13 December 2021 .

^ García Oliva, José (27 May 2008).

"Colecciones y series: diferenciamos" .

diariodejerez.es (in Spanish) . Retrieved 13 December 2021 .

Further reading [ edit ] Peter Harris.

International Companion Encyclopedia of Children's Literature . London: Taylor & Francis, 2014.

Frank Arthur Mumby.

Publishing and Bookselling: A History from the Earliest Times to the Present Day . London: Jonathan Cape, 1930. Revised edition, 1949.

Frank L. Schick.

The Paperbound Book in America: The History of Paperbacks and Their European Background . New York: R. R. Bowker, 1958.

John Spiers, ed.

The Culture of the Publisher's Series . 2 vols. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011.

Jack David Zipes, ed.

The Oxford Encyclopedia of Children's Literature . New York: Oxford University Press, Inc., 2006. 4 volumes.

External links [ edit ] PublishingHistory.com - List of hardback and paperback book series with titles listed in each series A Series of Series - List of hardback publisher’s book series with detailed historical commentary on each FantasticFiction.com FictFact.com FictionDB.com OrderOfBooks.com StopYoureKillingMe.com Vintage Series Books for Girls . . . and a Few for Boys BookSeriesFinder.com v t e Books Production Binding Covers dust jackets Design Editing Illustration Illuminated manuscripts Printing edition history incunabula instant book limited edition Publishing advance copy hardcover paperback Size Typesetting Volume (bibliography) Collection (publishing) Book series Consumption Awards Bestsellers list Bibliography Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) Bibliophilia Bibliotherapy Bookmarks Bookselling blurbs book towns history used Censorship Clubs Collecting Digitizing Bookworm (insect) Furniture bookcases bookends Library Print culture Reading literacy Reviews By country Brazil China France Germany Italy Japan Netherlands Pakistan Spain United Kingdom United States Other Genres non-fiction novel imaginary miniature pop-up textbook Grimoire Formats audiobooks Ebooks Folio Coffee table book Related Banned books Book burning incidents Nazi Book curses Book packaging Book swapping Book tour Conservation and restoration Dog ears History of books scroll codex Intellectual property ISBN Outline Preservation The Philobiblon World Book Day World Book Capital Outline Category Portal v t e Media franchises Media series Animated series anime series Book series Partwork Comic book series manga series Film franchise Film series Media mix Radio program Streaming television Television show Video game franchise Web series Media lists Multimedia franchises print television series films games, toys, and merchandise Animated series anime direct-to-video films Internet television Comic book series manga Film series Television shows most watched Video game franchises Web series Highest-grossing Media franchises Film series Best-selling Comic book series manga series Video game franchises Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic 2 Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐6wvg9
Cached time: 20250816013957
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.416 seconds
Real time usage: 0.528 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2421/1000000
Revision size: 18231/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 56638/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3781/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 50208/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.262/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6514593/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  431.521      1 -total
 28.32%  122.197      1 Template:Reflist
 21.77%   93.929      4 Template:Cite_book
 20.53%   88.588      2 Template:Navbox
 20.08%   86.663      1 Template:Books
 15.27%   65.892      1 Template:Short_description
 12.36%   53.315      4 Template:Citation_needed
 10.70%   46.175      1 Template:Authority_control
 10.26%   44.267      4 Template:Fix
  8.50%   36.696      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:937080:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816013957 and revision id 1286977916. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Book_series&oldid=1286977916 " Categories : Book series Novel series Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2018 This page was last edited on 23 April 2025, at 06:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Book series 22 languages Add topic

