Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Directory and Consulate 2.2 Moldavian assignment and Russian imprisonment 2.3 Return 3 References Toggle the table of contents Charles-Frédéric Reinhard 6 languages Deutsch Esperanto Français مصرى Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Württembergian-born French diplomat, essayist and politician (1761–1837) Charles-Frédéric Reinhard Minister of Foreign Affairs In office 20 July 1799 – 22 November 1799 Preceded by Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord Succeeded by Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord Personal details Born Karl Friedrich Reinhard ( 1761-10-02 ) 2 October 1761 Schorndorf , Duchy of Württemberg , Holy Roman Empire Died 25 December 1837 (1837-12-25) (aged 76) Paris , Kingdom of France Spouse Christine Reimarus Occupation Diplomat essayist Charles-Frédéric , comte Reinhard (born Karl Friedrich Reinhard ; 2 October 1761 – 25 December 1837) was a Württembergian -born French diplomat, essayist, and politician who briefly served as the Consulate 's Minister of Foreign Affairs in 1799. A Girondist during the early stages of the French Revolution , he was dispatched to several countries before and after his ministerial mandate. In 1806–1807, he was appointed Consul and Resident to Moldavia , and subsequently arrested by the Russian Empire for one year. Reinhard was promoted under the Bourbon Restoration governments, which he represented to the German Confederation , and continued his political career under the July Monarchy .

Early life [ edit ] Born in Schorndorf (now in Baden-Württemberg , Germany ), he was the son of a Protestant minister.

[ 1 ] He studied Theology at the University of Tübingen and met with Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (the two corresponded for a period).

[ 1 ] Reinhard moved to Bordeaux in 1787, having been employed as tutor by a Huguenot family, and soon became an acquaintance of future Girondist leaders.

[ 1 ] Career [ edit ] After the Revolution broke out, he asked to be naturalized , [ 2 ] joined the Girondist club and, under the Legislative Assembly , moved to Paris , where he entered the diplomatic service.

[ 1 ] He was first detached as Legation Secretary to the Kingdom of Great Britain , under Ambassador Talleyrand , who became his mentor and political ally.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] With support from the Girondists, the National Convention appointed him First Secretary to the French Embassy in the Kingdom of Sicily .

[ 1 ] Directory and Consulate [ edit ] Despite the Girondists' fall, the Committee of Public Safety promoted him head of division at the Foreign Relations Department (1794).

[ 1 ] The French Directory made him Minister Plenipotentiary to the Hanseatic League in Hamburg (1795–1798), and later to the same position in the Grand Duchy of Tuscany .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] On 12 October 1796, he married Christine Reimarus, the daughter of philosopher Hermann Samuel Reimarus and a native of Hamburg.

[ 3 ] During the March 1799 Campaign , the took charge of Tuscany on orders from his superiors.

[ 1 ] During the period, he was admitted to the Institut de France , in the Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques .

[ 1 ] Reinhard replaced Talleyrand as Minister, under Director Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès , and served in this capacity until after Napoleon Bonaparte 's Coup of 18 Brumaire 1799 (when Talleyrand again came to the office).

[ 1 ] In 1800, he was Minister Plenipotentiary to the Helvetic Republic , and, in 1801, to the Cisalpine Republic ; [ 1 ] in 1802, he was assigned to the same position in the Lower Saxon Circle , where, after 1804, he represented the French Empire .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In 1803, when the Institut underwent reorganizing, he was moved to the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres .

[ 1 ] Moldavian assignment and Russian imprisonment [ edit ] Alexander Mourousis welcoming the British ambassador in Curtea Nouă Reinhard's assignment to Moldavia in late 1805-early 1806 [ 1 ] [ 2 ] was, according to Romanian historian Neagu Djuvara , unprecedented in that Reihard had occupied the high positions before being dispatched to Iaşi .

[ 2 ] Djuvara indicated that the measure was indicative of the Danubian Principalities ' growth in importance at the time when Napoleon maneuvered against the Russian Empire .

[ 2 ] Reportedly, Reinhard unsuccessfully protested the measure, believing it to be equivalent to a demotion, and, as a result of this, his office was added the function of Resident .

[ 2 ] The latter move allegedly caused controversy in the Ottoman Empire , Moldavia's suzerain , since it seemed to imply that France gave additional recognition to Moldavia's ruler, Prince Alexander Mourousis .

[ 2 ] After settling in Iaşi , the consul and his wife traveled extensively throughout Moldavia and into Wallachia and Austrian -ruled Transylvania .

[ 2 ] Letters addressed by Madame Reihard to her mother, later gathered in a volume, provide detail on the two countries' societies: after they visited Prince Constantine Ypsilantis in his Bucharest residence, the newly renovated Curtea Nouă , she recorded that the palace was unappealing and poorly maintained; [ 2 ] amazed that houses in Bucharest lacked writing desks, they were advised to hold writing material on their lap; [ 2 ] also according to Christine Reihard, roads in northern Wallachia presented serious challenges to travelers.

[ 2 ] She left additional detail on the state of Roma slaves , claiming that, before 1806, an unnamed boyar from the Sturdza family had employed a group of Roma at a factory on his estate, but that the project was abandoned when the employees expressed suffering over not being allowed their traditional freedom of movement and trade.

[ 2 ] Reportedly unbeknown to Consul Reihard, [ 2 ] the French Ambassador to the Porte Horace Sébastiani , persuaded Sultan Selim III that Princes Mourousis and Ypsilantis were secretly plotting an alliance with Russia.

[ 2 ] Consequently, Selim sent orders for the rulers to be deposed, provoking the Russo-Turkish War of 1806–1812 .

[ 2 ] This exposed Reihard and his family to risk, and, after the Imperial Russian Army , commanded by Ivan Ivanovich Michelson and Mikhail Andreyevich Miloradovich , stormed into Moldavia, they were arrested.

[ 2 ] The latter action, going against international law, saw the Reinhards transportation to regions of southern Russia, where they spent the following winter before being released with official apologies.

[ 2 ] Return [ edit ] Upon the family's return to Paris , Charles Reinhard, made a baron of the Empire, [ 2 ] was appointed Minister Plenipotentiary to the Kingdom of Westphalia , and, in May 1814, was Head of Chancellery at the French Department of Foreign Affairs (serving until Napoleon's fall and the 1814 Bourbon Restoration ).

[ 1 ] He kept a low profile during the Hundred Days , [ 1 ] and, after King Louis XVIII regained his throne, was made a comte , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] awarded a position in the Conseil d'État , and received the office of Minister Plenipotentiary to the German Confederation in Frankfurt (December 1815 – 1829).

[ 1 ] Following a brief hiatus before the July Revolution , Reinhard represented Louis-Philippe in the Kingdom of Saxony .

[ 1 ] The July Monarchy admitted him a Peer in October 1832.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Also in that year, Charles Reinhard regained the Académie des Sciences Morales et Politiques .

[ 1 ] He died in Paris five years later.

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w "Reinhard, Charles-Frédéric, comte", in Nouvelle biographie générale depuis les temps les plus reculés jusqu'à nos jours , Tome 41, Firmin Didot, Paris, 1863, p.927 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v Neagu Djuvara , Între Orient şi Occident. Ţările române la începutul epocii moderne , Humanitas , Bucharest, 1995, p.49, 53, 83-84, 106, 186, 267, 340-341 ^ Pierre André Bois, Adolph Freiherr Knigge (1752-1796): de la "nouvelle religion" aux Droits de l'Homme , O. Harrassowitz, Wiesbaden, 1990, p.444, 469 Political offices Preceded by Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord Foreign Minister of France 1799 Succeeded by Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord v t e French Directory (2 November 1795 to 10 November 1799) Directors Lazare Carnot Étienne-François Letourneur Jean-François Rewbell Louis Marie de La Révellière-Lépeaux Paul François Jean Nicolas, vicomte de Barras François-Marie, marquis de Barthélemy Philippe-Antoine Merlin de Douai Nicolas François de Neufchâteau Jean Baptiste Treilhard Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès Jean-François-Auguste Moulin Louis-Jérôme Gohier Roger Ducos Ministers Foreign Affairs Charles-François Delacroix Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord Charles-Frédéric Reinhard Justice Philippe-Antoine Merlin de Douai Jean Joseph Victor Génissieu Philippe-Antoine Merlin de Douai Charles Joseph Mathieu Lambrechts Jean-Jacques-Régis de Cambacérès War Jean-Baptiste Annibal Aubert du Bayet Claude Louis Petiet Lazare Hoche Barthélemy Louis Joseph Schérer Louis Marie de Milet de Mureau Jean-Baptiste Bernadotte Edmond Louis Alexis Dubois-Crancé Finance Martin-Michel-Charles Gaudin Guillaume-Charles Faipoult Dominique-Vincent Ramel-Nogaret Jean-Baptiste Robert Lindet Philippe-Antoine Merlin de Douai Police Charles Cochon de Lapparent Jean-Jacques Lenoir-Laroche Jean-Marie Sotin de La Coindière Nicolas Dondeau Marie Jean François Philibert Lecarlier d'Ardon Jean-Pierre Duval Claude Sébastien Bourguignon Joseph Fouché Interior Pierre Bénézech Nicolas François de Neufchâteau François Sébastien Letourneux Nicolas François de Neufchâteau Nicolas Marie Quinette Navy and Colonies Laurent Jean François Truguet Georges René Le Peley de Pléville Étienne Eustache Bruix Marc-Antoine Bourdon de Vatry Preceded by National Convention Followed by French Consulate v t e French Consulate (10 November 1799 – 18 May 1804) Provisional consuls Napoleon Bonaparte Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès Roger Ducos Bonaparte First Consul Consuls Napoleon Bonaparte Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès Charles-François Lebrun, duc de Plaisance Ministers Foreign Affairs Charles-Frédéric Reinhard Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord Justice Jean-Jacques-Régis de Cambacérès André Joseph Abrial Claude Ambroise Régnier War Louis-Alexandre Berthier Lazare Carnot Louis-Alexandre Berthier Finance Martin-Michel-Charles Gaudin Police Joseph Fouché Interior Pierre-Simon Laplace Lucien Bonaparte Jean-Antoine Chaptal Navy and Colonies Marc-Antoine Bourdon de Vatry Pierre-Alexandre-Laurent Forfait Denis Decrès Secretary of State Hugues-Bernard Maret, duc de Bassano Treasury François Barbé-Marbois War Administration Jean François Aimé Dejean Preceded by French Directory Followed by First Cabinet of Napoleon I v t e Foreign ministers of France Ancien Régime Revol Villeroy A. J. Richelieu Sillery R. Phélypeaux Bouthillier Chavigny Brienne Lionne Pomponne Croissy Torcy Huxelles Dubois Morville Chauvelin Chaillou Noailles Argenson Puisieulx Saint-Contest Rouillé Bernis É. Choiseul C. Choiseul É. Choiseul L. Phélypeaux Aiguillon Bertin Vergennes Montmorin Vauguyon Montmorin Lessart Dumouriez Naillac Chambonas Dubouchage Sainte-Croix First Republic Lebrun-Tondu Deforgues Goujon Herman Delacroix Talleyrand Reinhard Talleyrand First Empire Talleyrand Champagny Bassano Caulaincourt First Restoration Laforest Talleyrand Hundred Days Caulaincourt Bignon Second Restoration Talleyrand A. E. Richelieu Dessolles Pasquier M. Montmorency Chateaubriand Damas La Ferronays Montmorency-Laval Portalis Polignac Mortemart July Monarchy Bignon Jourdan Molé Maison Sébastiani V. Broglie Rigny Bresson Rigny V. Broglie Thiers Molé Montebello Soult Thiers Guizot Second Republic Lamartine Bastide Bedeau Bastide Drouyn de Lhuys Tocqueville Rayneval La Hitte Drouyn de Lhuys Brénier Baroche Turgot Drouyn de Lhuys Second Empire Drouyn de Lhuys Walewski Baroche Thouvenel Drouyn de Lhuys La Valette Moustier La Valette La Tour Auvergne Daru Ollivier Gramont La Tour d'Auvergne Third Republic Favre Rémusat A. Broglie Decazes Banneville Waddington Freycinet Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire Gambetta Freycinet Duclerc Fallières Challemel-Lacour Ferry Freycinet Flourens Goblet Spuller Ribot Develle Casimir-Perier Hanotaux Berthelot Bourgeois Hanotaux Delcassé Rouvier Bourgeois Pichon Cruppi Selves Poincaré Jonnart Pichon Doumergue Bourgeois Viviani Doumergue Delcassé Viviani Briand Ribot Barthou Pichon Millerand Leygues Briand Poincaré Lefebvre Herriot Briand Herriot Briand Laval Tardieu Herriot Paul-Boncour Daladier Barthou Laval Flandin Delbos Paul-Boncour Bonnet Daladier Reynaud Daladier Reynaud Baudouin Vichy France Baudouin Laval Flandin Darlan Laval Provisional Government Bidault Blum Fourth Republic Bidault Schuman Bidault Mendès France Faure Pinay Pineau Pleven Couve de Murville Fifth Republic Couve de Murville Debré Schumann Bettencourt Jobert Sauvagnargues Guiringaud François-Poncet Cheysson Dumas Raimond Dumas Juppé Charette Védrine Villepin Barnier Douste-Blazy Kouchner Alliot-Marie Juppé Fabius Ayrault Le Drian Colonna Séjourné Barrot Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Latvia Greece Poland Vatican Israel People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Charles-Frédéric_Reinhard&oldid=1294112951 " Categories : 1761 births 1837 deaths Burials at Montmartre Cemetery People from Schorndorf Comtes Reinhard French Protestants French people of German descent Foreign ministers of France Members of the Chamber of Peers of the July Monarchy First French Empire French diplomats French essayists 18th-century French politicians People of the French Revolution French male essayists Members of the Académie des sciences morales et politiques Members of the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 17:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Charles-Frédéric Reinhard 6 languages Add topic

