Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Political usage 2 Southey's usage 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Oikophobia 15 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español Français Հայերեն Italiano ქართული Македонски Nederlands Polski Suomi Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Aversion to one's home or homeland Oikophobia ( Ancient Greek : οἶκος , romanized : oîkos , lit.

' house , household ' + φόβος , phóbos , 'fear'; related to domatophobia and ecophobia [ 1 ] ) is a tendency to criticise or reject one's own home or home society while praising others.

[ 2 ] It has been used in political contexts to refer critically to political ideologies that are held to repudiate one's own culture. A prominent such usage was by Roger Scruton in his 2004 book England and the Need for Nations .

In 1808 the English Romantic poet and essayist Robert Southey used it to describe a desire (particularly by the English people) to leave home and travel.

[ 3 ] Southey's usage is a synonym for wanderlust .

It is not used in psychiatry , and is not listed in the DSM-5 . If it were, it would be used to narrowly indicate a type of specific phobia or fear of specific items contained in a house, (e.g. appliances, bathtubs and electric switches) but not the fear of a house itself, which is domatophobia .

[ 4 ] In the post-Second World War era in West Germany , some commentators used the term to refer to a supposed "fear and loathing of housework " experienced by women who worked outside of the home and who were attracted to a consumerist lifestyle.

[ 5 ] Political usage [ edit ] The English conservative philosopher Roger Scruton first wrote of oikophobia while at Boston University in 1993.

[ 6 ] In his 2004 book England and the Need for Nations , Scruton expanded usage of the word to mean "the repudiation of inheritance and home".

[ 7 ] He argues that it is "a stage through which the adolescent mind normally passes", [ 8 ] but is also a feature of some, typically leftist , political impulses and ideologies which espouse xenophilia , i.e. preference for foreign cultures.

[ 9 ] Scruton uses it as the antithesis of xenophobia .

[ 10 ] In his book Roger Scruton: Philosopher on Dover Beach the Irish journalist Mark Dooley describes oikophobia as centred within the academic establishment of the Western world as part of "both the common culture of the West , and the old educational curriculum that sought to transmit its humane values." This disposition has grown out of, for example, the writings of Jacques Derrida and of Michel Foucault 's "assault on ' bourgeois ' society result[ing] in an ' anti-culture ' that took direct aim at holy and sacred things, condemning and repudiating them as oppressive and power-ridden." [ 11 ] : 78 He continues: [ 11 ] : 83 Derrida is a classic oikophobe in so far as he repudiates the longing for home that the Western theological , legal , and literary traditions satisfy ... Derrida's deconstruction seeks to block the path to this 'core experience' of membership, preferring instead a rootless existence founded 'upon nothing.' An extreme aversion to the sacred, and the thwarting of the connection of the sacred to the culture of the West is described as the underlying motif of oikophobia; and not the substitution of Christianity by another coherent system of belief. The paradox of the oikophobe seems to be that any opposition directed at the theological and cultural tradition of the West is to be encouraged even if it is "significantly more parochial , exclusivist , patriarchal , or ethnocentric ." [ 11 ] : 78 Scruton describes "a chronic form of oikophobia [which] has spread through the American universities , in the guise of political correctness ." [ 7 ] : 37 Scruton's usage has been taken up by some American political commentators to refer to what they see as a rejection of traditional American culture by the liberal elite . In August 2010 James Taranto wrote a column in the Wall Street Journal entitled "Oikophobia: Why the liberal elite finds Americans revolting", in which he criticises supporters of the proposed Islamic center in New York as oikophobes who were defending Muslims and aimed to "exploit the 9/11 atrocity ." [ 12 ] In the Netherlands oikophobia has been adopted by the politician and writer Thierry Baudet , which he describes in his book Oikophobia: The Fear of Home .

Southey's usage [ edit ] In his Letters from England (1808), Robert Southey describes oikophobia as a product of "a certain state of civilisation or luxury." referring to the habit among wealthy people to visit spa towns and seaside resorts in the summer months. He also mentions the fashion for picturesque travel to wild landscapes, such as the Scottish Highlands .

[ 13 ] Southey's link of oikophobia to wealth and the search for new experiences was taken up by other writers, and cited in dictionaries .

[ 14 ] A writer in 1829 published an essay about his experience witnessing the aftermath of the Battle of Waterloo , saying: [ 15 ] [T]he love of locomotion is so natural to an Englishman , that nothing can chain him home, but the absolute impossibility of living abroad. No such imperious necessity acting upon me, I gave way to my oiko-phobia , and the summer of 1815 found me in Brussels.

In 1959 the Anglo-Egyptian author Bothaina Abd el-Hamid Mohamed used Southey's concept in his book Oikophobia: or, A literary craze for education through travel .

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Allophilia Clientitis Cultural cringe Endophobia Internalized oppression Outgroup favoritism Reverse discrimination Self-hatred Wanderlust Xenocentrism Xenophilia Xenophobia References [ edit ] ^ "Ecophobia" .

Collins Dictionary .

^ "Oikophobia" .

Macmillan Dictionary .

^ Southey, Robert (1808).

Letters from England, Volume 1 . David Longworth. p.

311 .

Oikophobia ^ Doctor, Ronald Manual, Ada P. Kahn, and Christine A. Adamec. 2008.

The Encyclopedia of Phobias, Fears, and Anxieties (3rd ed.).

Infobase Publishing . pp. 281, 286.

^ Moeller, Robert G. 1993.

Protecting motherhood: Women and the family in the politics of postwar West Germany .

University of California Press . p. 140.

^ Scruton, Roger (1993).

"Oikophobia" .

The Journal of Education .

175 (2): 96– 98.

ISSN 0022-0574 . Retrieved 2 June 2025 .

^ a b Scruton, Roger. 2004. " Oikophobia ." pp. 33–38 in England and the Need for Nations . London: Civitas .

^ Scruton, Roger.

"Continuum - Political Philosophy" . Continuum Books. Archived from the original on 2009-10-15 . Retrieved 2010-08-30 .

^ Scruton, Roger. "Oikophobia and Xenophilia." pp. 287–92 in Stereotypes and Nations , edited by T. Walas. Krakow International Cultural Center, Poland.

^ Lacroix, Justine, and Kalypso Nicolaīdis . 2011.

European Stories: Intellectual Debates on Europe in National Contexts .

Oxford University Press . p. 159.

^ a b c Dooley, Mark. 2009.

Roger Scruton: Philosopher on Dover Beach .

Continuum .

^ Taranto, James (27 August 2010).

"Oikophobia: Why the liberal elite finds Americans revolting" . Best of the Web.

The Wall Street Journal .

Dow Jones & Company, Inc.

Retrieved 26 June 2016 .

^ Southey, Robert . 1808.

Letters from England 1. New York: David Longworth. pp.

157 –59.

^ Black, Richard. 1874.

The student's manual complete: an etymological vocabulary of words derived from the Greek and Latin . Oxford. p. 84.

^ [Eyewitness]. 1829. " Waterloo, the Day After the Battle ." pp. 84–92 in The United Service Journal and Naval and Military Magazine 1. London: Henry Colburn . p. 84. Retrieved 3 July 2020.

^ Mohamed, Bothaina Abd el-Hamid. 1959.

Oikophobia;: Or, A literary craze for education through travel . Anglo-Egyptian Books.

v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Oikophobia&oldid=1305829923 " Category : Political science terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 09:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Oikophobia 15 languages Add topic

