Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Discussion 2 Critics 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Umwelt 10 languages Català Deutsch Eesti Français 한국어 Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The world as it appears through a species's perceptual systems Semiotics General concepts Sign relation relational complex Code Confabulation Connotation / Denotation Encoding / Decoding Lexical Modality Representation Salience Semiosis Semiosphere Semiotic theory of Peirce Umwelt Value Fields Biosemiotics Cognitive semiotics Computational semiotics Literary semiotics Semiotics of culture Social semiotics Methods Commutation test Paradigmatic analysis Syntagmatic analysis Semioticians Roland Barthes Marcel Danesi John Deely Umberto Eco Paolo Fabbri Gottlob Frege Algirdas Julien Greimas Félix Guattari Stuart Hall Louis Hjelmslev Vyacheslav Ivanov Roman Jakobson Roberta Kevelson Kalevi Kull Juri Lotman Charles W. Morris Charles S. Peirce Susan Petrilli John Poinsot Augusto Ponzio Ferdinand de Saussure Thomas Sebeok Michael Silverstein Eero Tarasti Vladimir Toporov Jakob von Uexküll Victoria, Lady Welby Related topics Copenhagen–Tartu school Tartu–Moscow Semiotic School Structuralism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Postmodernism v t e "Early Scheme for a circular Feedback Circle" from Theoretische Biologie 1920 Small circular Feedback Pictograms between the Text Schematic view of a cycle as an early biocyberneticist An umwelt (plural: umwelten ; from the German Umwelt , meaning "environment" or "surroundings") is the specific way in which organisms of a particular species perceive and experience the world, shaped by the capabilities of their sensory organs and perceptual systems .

[ 1 ] In the semiotic theories of Jakob von Uexküll and Thomas Sebeok , it is considered to be the "biological foundations that lie at the very center of the study of both communication and signification in the human [and non-human] animal".

[ 2 ] [ failed verification ] Often translated as "self-centered world," [ 3 ] the term highlights how organisms, despite sharing the same physical environment, can inhabit distinct perceptual realities.

Uexküll proposed that each species has its own umwelt , a notion complemented by related concepts like Umgebung (the environment or Umwelt as observed externally) and Innenwelt (the internal mapping of the self to the external world).

[ 4 ] These ideas hold particular significance for fields such as cognitive philosophy, robotics , and cybernetics , offering insights into resolving complex problems like the infinite regress of the Cartesian Theater —the flawed notion of an endless chain of internal observers watching consciousness, which Umwelt reframes as a unified biological process.

[ 5 ] Discussion [ edit ] Each functional component of an umwelt has a meaning that represents the organism's model of the world. These functional components correspond approximately to perceptual features, [ 6 ] as described by Anne Treisman . It is also the semiotic world of the organism, including all the meaningful aspects of the world for any particular organism. It can be water, food, shelter, potential threats or points of reference for navigation. An organism creates and reshapes its own umwelt when it interacts with the world. This is termed a 'functional circle'. The umwelt theory states that the mind and the world are inseparable because it is the mind that interprets the world for the organism. Because of the individuality and uniqueness of the history of every single organism, the umwelten of different organisms differ. When two umwelten interact, this creates a semiosphere .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] As a term, umwelt also unites all the semiotic processes of an organism into a whole. Internally, an organism is the sum of its parts operating in functional circles and, to survive, all the parts must work cooperatively. This is termed the "collective umwelt " which models the organism as a centralised system from the cellular level upward. This requires the semiosis of any one part to be continuously connected to any other semiosis operating within the same organism. If anything disrupts this process, the organism will not operate efficiently.

Uexküll's writings show a specific interest in the various worlds that he believed to exist ('conceptually') from the point of view of the umwelt of different creatures such as ticks , sea urchins , amoebae , jellyfish , and sea worms .

The biosemiotic turn in Jakob von Uexküll's analysis occurs in his discussion of the animal's relationship with its environment. The umwelt is for him an environment-world which is, according to Agamben , "constituted by a more or less broad series of elements [called] 'carriers of significance' or 'marks' which are the only things that interest the animal" . Agamben goes on to paraphrase Uexküll's example of the tick, saying: "...this eyeless animal finds the way to her watchpoint [at the top of a tall blade of grass] with the help of only its skin’s general sensitivity to light. The approach of her prey becomes apparent to this blind and deaf bandit only through her sense of smell. The odor of butyric acid, which emanates from the sebaceous follicles of all mammals, works on the tick as a signal that causes her to abandon her post (on top of the blade of grass/bush) and fall blindly downward toward her prey. If she is fortunate enough to fall on something warm (which she perceives by means of an organ sensible to a precise temperature) then she has attained her prey, the warm-blooded animal, and thereafter needs only the help of her sense of touch to find the least hairy spot possible and embed herself up to her head in the cutaneous tissue of her prey. She can now slowly suck up a stream of warm blood." [ 9 ] Thus, for the tick, the umwelt is reduced to only three (biosemiotic) carriers of significance: (1) the odor of butyric acid , which emanates from the sebaceous follicles of all mammals; (2) the temperature of 37°C (corresponding to the blood of all mammals); and (3) the hairy topography of mammals.

Critics [ edit ] Uexküll's application of the notion of "umwelt" to the human person has been contested. In "Welt und Umwelt" [ 10 ] and "Die Wahrheit der Dinge", the philosopher and sociologist Josef Pieper argued that reason allows the human person to live in "Welt" (world) while plants and animals do indeed live in an Umwelt –a notion he traces back to Plato , Aristotle , and Thomas Aquinas .

See also [ edit ] Cognized environment – Anthropological concept Existential therapy – Form of psychotherapy Phenomenology – Philosophical method and schools of philosophy Qualia – Instances of subjective experience Reality tunnel – Theory of personal perception " What Is It Like to Be a Bat?

" – 1974 philosophy paper by Thomas Nagel Worldview , also known as Weltanschauung – Fundamental cognitive orientation of an individual or society References [ edit ] ^ Ha, James C.; Campion, Tracy L. (2019). "Chapter 2 - Why tails wag: Umwelts, innenwelts, and canine "guilt" ".

Dog Behavior . Academic Press. pp.

33– 61.

doi : 10.1016/b978-0-12-816498-3.00002-x .

ISBN 978-0-12-816498-3 . Retrieved 2024-10-06 .

^ Sebeok, Thomas A. (1976). "Foreword".

Contributions to the Doctrine of Signs . Lisse, Netherlands: Peter de Ridder Press. p. x.

ISBN 0-87750-194-7 .

^ Kull, Kalevi (2010). "Umwelt". In Cobley, Paul (ed.).

The Routledge Companion to Semiotics . London: Routledge. pp.

348– 349.

ISBN 978-0-415-44072-1 .

^ Cobley, Paul (2010).

The Routledge Companion to Semiotics . London and New York: Routledge. p. 348.

^ Hoffmeyer, Jesper (1996).

Signs of Meaning in the Universe . Bloomington: Indiana University Press, pp. 30–45. ISBN 0-253-33227-3.

^ Treisman, Anne M.; Gelade, Garry (1980). "A feature-integration theory of attention".

Cognitive Psychology .

12 (1): 97– 136.

doi : 10.1016/0010-0285(80)90005-5 .

PMID 7351125 .

S2CID 353246 .

^ Uexküll, Thure von (1987). "The sign theory of Jakob von Uexküll". In Krampen; et al. (eds.).

Classics of Semiotics . New York: Plenum. pp.

147– 179.

ISBN 0-306-42321-9 .

^ Uexküll, Jakob von (1957). "A Stroll Through the Worlds of Animals and Men: A Picture Book of Invisible Worlds". In Schiller, Claire H. (ed.).

Instinctive Behavior: The Development of a Modern Concept . New York: International Universities Press. pp.

5 –.

^ Agamben, Giorgio, The Open: Man and Animal (PDF) , p. 46, S2CID 141790408 , archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-10-25 ^ Joseph Piepers, “Welt und Umwelt,” in Schriften zur Philosophischen Anthropologie und Ethik: Grundstrukturen menschlicher Existenz, 180–206.

Further reading [ edit ] Kull, Kalevi (1998).

"On Semiosis, Umwelt, and Semiosphere" .

Semiotica .

120 (3/4): 299– 310.

Naming Nature by Carol Kaesuk Yoon Augustin, Prisca (2009).

"Translating Jakob von Uexküll — Reframing Umweltlehre as biosemiotics" .

Sign Systems Studies .

37 (1/2): 281– 298.

doi : 10.12697/SSS.2009.37.1-2.10 .

View from the Oak by Herbert and Judith Kohl The New Press | https://thenewpress.com/books/view-from-oak Inside of a Dog: What Dogs See, Smell, and Know by Alexandra Horowitz Scribner | https://www.simonandschuster.com/books/Inside-of-a-Dog/Alexandra-Horowitz/9781416583431 An Immense World by Ed Yong Penguin books Vintage | https://www.penguin.co.uk/books/440513/an-immense-world-by-yong-ed/9781847926081 External links [ edit ] Umwelt by John Deely Umwelt and Phenomenology Umwelt and semiosphere by Kalevi Kull Pragmatism and Umwelt-theory by Alexei Sharov TDE-R - A Subjective Biocomputer Archived 2015-05-11 at the Wayback Machine by Charles Dyer v t e Neuroethology Concepts Feedforward Coincidence detector Umwelt Instinct Feature detection Central pattern generator (CPG) NMDA receptor Lateral inhibition Fixed action pattern Krogh's principle Hebbian theory Anti-Hebbian learning Sound localization Ultrasound avoidance in insects People Theodore Holmes Bullock Walter Heiligenberg Niko Tinbergen Konrad Lorenz Donald Griffin Donald Kennedy Karl von Frisch Erich von Holst Jörg-Peter Ewert Franz Huber Bernhard Hassenstein Werner E. Reichardt Eric Knudsen Eric Kandel Nobuo Suga Masakazu Konishi Fernando Nottebohm Methods Patch clamp Slice preparation Systems Animal echolocation Waggle dance Jamming avoidance response Vision in toads Frog hearing and communication Infrared sensing in snakes Caridoid escape reaction Vocal learning Surface wave detection Electroreception and electrogenesis Mechanoreception Lateral line Category Commons v t e Worldview Related terms Basic beliefs / Beliefs Collective consciousness / Collective unconscious Conceptual system Context Conventional wisdom Conventions Cultural movement Epic poetry / National epics / World folk-epics Facts and factoids Framing Ideology Life stance Lifestyle Memes / Memeplex Mental model Metanarrative Mindset Norms Paradigm Philosophical theory Point of view Presuppositions Primal world beliefs Reality tunnel Schemata School of thought Set Social reality Theory of everything Umwelt Value system Aspects Biases Academic Attentional Attitude polarization Belief Cognitive list Collective narcissism Confirmation Congruence Cryptomnesia Cultural Ethnocentrism Filter bubble Homophily In-group favoritism Magical thinking Media Observational error Observer-expectancy Selective exposure Selective perception Self-deception Self-fulfilling prophecy Clever Hans effect placebo effect wishful thinking Status quo Stereotyping ethnic Change and maintenance Activism Argument Argumentum ad populum Attitude change Brainwashing Censorship Charisma Circular reporting Cognitive dissonance Critical thinking Crowd manipulation Cultural dissonance Deprogramming Echo chamber Education religious values Euphemism Excommunication Fearmongering Historical revisionism negationism Ideological repression Indoctrination Manipulation (psychology) Media manipulation Media regulation Missionaries Moral entrepreneurship Persuasion Polite fiction Political engineering Propaganda Propaganda model Proselytism Psychological warfare Religious conversion forced Religious persecution Religious uniformity Revolutions Rhetoric Self-censorship Social change Social control Social engineering Social influence Social progress Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Woozle effect Culture Anthropology cultural social Calendars Ceremonies Coronations Cross-cultural psychology Cultural psychology Doctrine Employment / Serfdom / Slavery Families Funerals / Burial Games Holidays Hygiene ritual Identity (philosophy) cultural Institutions Liminality Liturgy Marriage Myth and ritual Oaths Pilgrimages Play Rites of passage secular Rituals Social class / Social status / Caste Symbols Symbolic boundaries Worship Groupthink Abilene paradox Bandwagon effect Collectives Collective behavior animal Collective effervescence Collective intelligence Conformity Consensus theory Crowd psychology Cults Culture-bound syndromes Deindividuation Doublethink Emergence Emotional contagion Entitativity False consensus effect Folie à deux Group action Group cohesiveness Group dynamics Group emotion Group polarization Groupshift Herd behavior Holism Hysterical contagion Information cascade In-group and out-group Invisible hand Lynching Majoritarianism / Mob rule Mass action Mass psychogenic illness Milieu control Mobbing Moral panic Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Political correctness Pseudoconsensus Scapegoating Self-organization Social action Social behavior Social emotions Social exclusion Social facilitation animal Social group Social proof Social psychology Sociology Spontaneous order Status quo Stigmergy Swarm behaviour System justification Viral phenomena Knowledge Axioms tacit assumptions Conceptual framework Epistemology outline Evidence anecdotal scientific Explanations Faith fideism Gnosis Intuition Meaning-making Memory Meta-knowledge Methodology Observation Observational learning Perception Reasoning fallacious logic Revelation Testimony Tradition folklore Truth consensus theory criteria World disclosure Metaphysics Ætiology Afterlife Anima mundi Causality Concepts Consciousness mind–body problem Cosmogony Cosmology religious Creation myth Deities existence Destiny Eschatology Everything / Nothing Evolution Existence Fiction / Nonfiction Free will Future History Ideas Idios kosmos Illusions Incarnation Information Intelligence Magic Matter Miracles Mythology comparative National mythoi Nature philosophical Ontology Origin myths political Otherworlds axes mundi Physics natural philosophy Problem of evil Reality Souls Spirit Supernature Teleology Theology Time Unobservables Value Aesthetic taste Aesthetic Almsgiving / Charity Altruism Autonomy Beauty Codes of conduct Comedy Common good Conscience Consent Creativity Disgust Duty Economics Ecstasy emotional religious Elegance Emotions Aesthetic Entertainment Eroticism Ethics Étiquette Family values Food and drink prohibitions unclean animals Golden Rule Guilt / Culpability Happiness Harmony Honour Human rights Judgement Justice Law jurisprudence religious Liberty political freedom Love Magnificence Maxims Meaning of life Morality public Obligations Peace Piety Praxeology Principles Punishment Qualities Repentance Reverence Rights Sexuality ethics Sin Social stigma Stewardship Styles Sublime, The Suffering Sympathy Taboo Theodicy Trust Unspoken rules Virtues and Vices Works of art Wrongdoing Examples Attitudes Misanthropy Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Economic and political ideologies Anarchism Authoritarianism Capitalism Christian democracy Collectivism Colonialism Communalism Communism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Distributism Environmentalism Extremism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Globalism Green politics Imperialism Individualism Industrialisation Intellectualism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Masculism Militarism Monarchism Nationalism Pacifism Progressivism Radicalism Reformism Republicanism Sentientism Social democracy Socialism Utilitarianism Veganism Religions African traditional religions Baháʼí Buddhism Caodaism Cheondoism Chinese folk religion Christianity Eastern Orthodox Church Ethnic religions Hinduism Hòa Hảo Islam Jainism Judaism Korean shamanism Modern paganism Rastafari Secularity / Irreligion / Agnosticism / Atheism Shinto Sikhism Spiritism Taoism Tenrikyo Unitarian Universalism Zoroastrianism Schools of philosophy Agriculturalism Aristotelianism Atomism Averroism Cartesianism Cārvāka Collectivism Confucianism / New Confucianism Critical theory Cynicism Cyrenaics Determinism Dualism Eleatics Empiricism Epicureanism Eretrian school Existentialism Fatalism Foundationalism Hedonism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Historicism / New historicism Holism Humanism / Renaissance humanism Idealism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Individualism Ionian Kantianism / Neo-Kantianism Kokugaku Legalism Logicians Materialism Megarian school Modernism / Postmodernism Mohism Monism Natural law Naturalism (Chinese) Naturalism (Western) Nihilism Peripatetic Phenomenology Platonism / Neoplatonism Pluralism Positivism Pragmatism Pre-Socratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism / Neopythagoreanism Rationalism Reductionism Scholasticism / Neo-scholasticism Sentientism Social constructionism Sophism Spinozism Stoicism Structuralism / Post-structuralism Thomism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Yangism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Umwelt&oldid=1302952181 " Categories : Neuroethology concepts Existential therapy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from May 2023 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 08:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Umwelt 10 languages Add topic

