Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Introduction 2 Contemporary Australian liberalism 3 Liberal leaders 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Australia Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of liberalism in Australia This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( October 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Liberalism in Australia People Chipp Cowan Deakin Higinbotham Menzies Smith Syme Turnbull Wentworth West Wise Parties Active Australian Democrats Liberal Party of Australia Libertarian Party Teal independents Defunct Australian Patriotic Association Australian Women's National League Liberal Party (1909) Free Trade Party New Liberal Movement Liberal Federation Liberal Movement Protectionist Party Think tanks Menzies Research Centre Centre for Independent Studies Related topics Conservatism in Australia Liberal Party factions : Centre Right Moderates Neoliberalism Politics of Australia Australia portal Liberalism portal v t e This article is part of a series on the Politics of Australia Constitution Monarchy Monarch Charles III Governor-General Sam Mostyn Executive Prime Minister Anthony Albanese (ALP) Deputy Prime Minister Richard Marles (ALP) Federal Executive Council Ministry Second Albanese ministry Cabinet Legislature Australian Parliament Senate President Sue Lines (ALP) Leader Penny Wong (ALP) House of Representatives Speaker Milton Dick (ALP) Leader Tony Burke (ALP) Opposition Leader Sussan Ley (LP) Shadow Ministry Judiciary High Court of Australia Chief Justice Stephen Gageler Keane Gordon Edelman Steward Gleeson Beech-Jones Federal Court of Australia Chief Justice Debra Mortimer List of Judges Federal Circuit and Family Court of Australia Chief Justice Will Alstergren List of Judges State and territory courts Australian legal system Elections Recent elections 2025 2022 2019 2016 2013 2010 Federal electoral system Electoral divisions By-elections Referendums and plebiscites Voter registration Leadership spill Political parties Political funding States and territories Governors and administrators Premiers and chief ministers Parliaments and assemblies State courts State electoral systems Local government NSW Vic Qld WA SA Tas NT Political parties Foreign relations Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade Foreign Minister Penny Wong Diplomatic missions of / in Australia Nationality law Passports Visa requirements Visa policy Australia and the United Nations G20 APEC New Zealand United Kingdom United States Canada European Union China India Ideologies Anarchism Christian Conservatism Environmentalism Far-right Hansonism Liberalism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Republicanism Secularism Socialism Australia portal New South Wales Victoria Queensland Western Australia South Australia Tasmania Australian Capital Territory Northern Territory v t e Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e In Australia, liberalism has a vast interpretation and a broad definition.

[ 1 ] It dates back to the earliest Australian pioneers and has maintained a strong foothold to the present day. Modern-day Australian liberalism is the successor to colonial liberalism , and has been compared to British liberalism for its similarity. The primary representation (and political entity) of Australian liberalism is the centre-right Liberal Party of Australia . Unlike in the United States , in Australia, the term " liberal ", is often associated with conservatism .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Introduction [ edit ] Some of the earliest pioneers of the federation movement , men such as Alfred Deakin , came under the influence of David Syme of The Age . Other influencers  of federalism included Samuel Griffith who, while initially seen as a supporter of the labour movement , became partisan against the Labour movement with his legal intervention in the 1891 Australian Shearers' strike . While all of these men were generally self-described "liberals", their understanding of liberalism differed substantially. At the time, Deakin was sometimes described as a " radical ", and was disliked by both urban conservatives , and the squatting class of Australia. (However, Deakin was also consistently opposed to Labor, instrumental in the fusion of the centre-right parties, a strong supporter of the White Australia policy , and a prominent proponent of stronger trade and defence ties to the British Empire – a position that gained him admirers amongst tories in the UK.

[ 4 ] ) The degree of progressive sentiments also varied from colony to colony: social liberals such as David Syme were prominent in Victoria while others were prominent in South Australia , for instance. At any rate, Australia's parliamentary institutions, especially at a national level, were brand-new, so it was difficult for anyone to be labelled "conservative" in a traditional sense.

[ citation needed ] The two largest political parties, the Free Trade Party and the Protectionist Party , could both loosely be described as "liberal" in the terms of the time. They were moderates with a strong belief in parliamentary institutions, financially orthodox and attached to the British Empire , with a distaste for radicalism. The third major political force was the trade union movement represented by the Australian Labor Party . The rise in popularity of the Labor Party became the major preoccupation of these two other parties.

[ citation needed ] In the early stages of the parliament, the Labor Party engaged in a partnership with the more radical Protectionists, but Labor's wide-ranging policies for social reform met with only lukewarm support from most Protectionists. Fear of socialism became widespread among the ranks [ who?

] of the establishment, and as the question of tariffs was settled, there was increasing pressure on the non-Labor parliamentary forces to unite in opposition to Labor.

[ dubious – discuss ] The result was the Fusion in 1909, composed of Joseph Cook 's Anti-Socialist Party (formerly Free Trade Party), and conservative Protectionists. The Fusion soon began calling itself the Liberal Party , proclaiming its adherence to classical liberalism .

[ citation needed ] After Deakin's departure, the fervent anti-socialist Joseph Cook became leader of the party and it became the dominant right-wing force in Australian politics.

The pattern of a non-Labor party defining itself as liberal rather than conservative and deriving support from a middle-class base continued to the formation of the present-day Liberal Party , founded in 1945 and led initially by Sir Robert Menzies .

Malcolm Fraser , quoting from Menzies' memoir, Afternoon Light , described the decision to call the party "Liberal" in these terms, We chose the word 'Liberal' because we want to be a progressive party, in no way conservative, in no way reactionary.

[ 5 ] However, previous Liberal Prime Minister, John Howard , is reported to have described himself the most conservative leader the Liberal Party had ever had.

[ 6 ] The " wet " (moderate) [ citation needed ] and " dry " (conservative) [ citation needed ] wings of the Liberal party co-operated fairly harmoniously [ citation needed ] , but in the early 1970s as conservatives started to dominate in South Australia liberals led by Steele Hall broke off to form the Liberal Movement [ citation needed ] .  In 1977, other dissident 'small-l liberal' [ 7 ] [ 8 ] forces led by Don Chipp created the Australian Democrats .

Contemporary Australian liberalism [ edit ] From the early 1990s, social conservatism has characterised the Liberal Party's actions in Government and policy development.

[ 9 ] Former Prime Minister John Howard in a 2005 speech described the modern position: [ 10 ] The Liberal Party is a broad church. You sometimes have to get the builders in to put in the extra pew on both sides of the aisle to make sure that everybody is accommodated. But it is a broad church and we should never as members of the Liberal Party of Australia lose sight of the fact that we are the trustees of two great political traditions. We are, of course, the custodian of the classical liberal tradition within our society, Australian Liberals should revere the contribution of John Stuart Mill to political thought. We are also the custodians of the conservative tradition in our community. And if you look at the history of the Liberal Party it is at its best when it balances and blends those two traditions. Mill and Burke are interwoven into the history and the practice and the experience of our political party.

Federal "small-l liberals", such as Joe Hockey [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ dubious – discuss ] and Malcolm Turnbull [ 13 ] were Cabinet ministers in the Howard government.

Christopher Pyne [ dubious – discuss ] , George Brandis [ dubious – discuss ] and Bruce Billson [ dubious – discuss ] served in the outer ministry. In 2018, members of this grouping made up the substantial majority of senior cabinet and ministry positions in the government of small-l liberal Turnbull. At the state level, "small-l liberals" have substantial influence particularly in New South Wales, Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania.

The Democrats, fractured under the leadership of Cheryl Kernot and Natasha Stott Despoja , moved to the left . Party leader Meg Lees formed the more avowedly centrist Australian Progressive Alliance in 2003.  In 2002, Tasmanian Liberal candidate Greg Barns was disendorsed following comments opposing Government action taken over the Tampa affair . Barns joined the Australian Democrats, with the view of returning a strong liberal platform to the party.

Liberal leaders [ edit ] Protectionist, Fusion: Alfred Deakin Fusion/Liberal Party: Joseph Cook Liberal Party of Australia: Robert Menzies – Harold Holt – John Gorton – William McMahon – Billy Snedden – Malcolm Fraser – Andrew Peacock – John Hewson – Alexander Downer – John Howard – Brendan Nelson – Malcolm Turnbull – Tony Abbott – Malcolm Turnbull – Scott Morrison – Peter Dutton – Sussan Ley Australian Democrats: Don Chipp – Janine Haines – Cheryl Kernot – Meg Lees – Natasha Stott Despoja – Andrew Bartlett – Lyn Allison See also [ edit ] Christian politics in Australia Conservatism in Australia History of Australia List of political parties in Australia Moderates (Liberal Party of Australia) Politics of Australia Reason Party Socialism in Australia TNL (political party) References [ edit ] ^ Melleuish, Gregory.

"A Short History of Australian Liberalism" (PDF) .

cis.org.au .

Centre for Independent Studies (CIS).

^ Hutchens, Gareth (9 April 2023).

"Why are voters abandoning the Liberal Party? What does liberalism stand for today?" .

ABC News .

^ Monsma, Stephen V.; Soper, J. Christopher (2009).

The Challenge of Pluralism: Church and State in Five Democracies . J. Christopher Soper (2nd ed.).

Lanham, Maryland : Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 95.

ISBN 978-0-7425-5416-0 .

OCLC 225846667 .

^ R. Norris, 1981, "Deakin, Alfred (1856–1919)", Australian Dictionary of Biography , (access: 30 August 2021).

^ "Malcolm Fraser" .

Australian Broadcasting Corporation . 2004-05-20. Archived from the original on 2010-07-16 . Retrieved 2009-10-07 .

^ "John Howard And The Conservative Tradition" . www.readings.com.au . Retrieved 2009-10-07 .

^ Andrews, Cameron (2002-07-29).

"Wither the Democrats" .

Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 2009-10-09 .

^ "Only vision will snare Lees the small-l voters" .

Sydney Morning Herald . 2003-05-02 . Retrieved 2009-10-09 .

^ "TRANSCRIPT OF THE PRIME MINISTER THE HON JOHN HOWARD MP ADDRESS TO THE 'AUSTRALIA UNLIMITED ROUNDTABLE' " .

Vicnet . 2007-02-09. Archived from the original on 2008-07-06 . Retrieved 2009-10-07 .

^ "pm.gov.au_News_Speeches_speech2005" . Retrieved 2009-10-07 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Joe Hockey - Speeches - Maiden Speech" . www.joehockey.com. 1997-10-20. Archived from the original on 2009-09-14 . Retrieved 2009-10-08 .

^ Dodson, Louise (2004-10-23).

"Labor bickers as PM opts for slow change" .

Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved 2009-10-08 .

^ Malcolm Turnbull's small 'l' liberalism leaves big legacy , ABC, 6 Apr 2010 External links [ edit ] Libertarian Society of Australia Archived 2008-06-11 at the Wayback Machine ABC Radio National's Hindsight - An attitude of mind and faith: liberalism in Australian political history ABC Radio National's Lingua Franca - George Megalogenis on the words 'liberal' and 'conservative' v t e Liberalism in Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberalism_in_Australia&oldid=1301106504 " Categories : Liberalism in Australia Classical liberalism Political movements in Australia Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from October 2009 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2019 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2019 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from April 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2019 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 03:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberalism in Australia Add languages Add topic

