Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 New Right by country Toggle New Right by country subsection 2.1 Australia 2.2 Brazil 2.3 Chile 2.4 France 2.5 Germany 2.6 Greece 2.7 Iran 2.8 Israel 2.9 Netherlands 2.10 New Zealand 2.11 Poland 2.12 South Korea 2.13 United Kingdom 2.14 United States 2.14.1 First New Right 2.14.2 Second New Right 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents New Right 24 languages العربية Čeština Dansk Deutsch Esperanto Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Кыргызча Magyar 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of right-wing politics that emerged in the 1960s For specific entities called "New Right", see New Right (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Alt-lite .

Part of the Politics Series Party politics Political spectrum Left-wing Far-left Centre-left Centre Centre-left Radical centre Centre-right Right-wing Centre-right Far-right Syncretism Major ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Christian democracy Communism Conservatism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Green politics Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Monarchism Nationalism Populism Progressivism Classical radicalism Republicanism Social democracy Socialism Syncretism Third Way Types Bloc party Elite party Cartel party Competitive Catch-all party Entrepreneurial party Ethnic party Fraternal party Major party / Minor party Mass party Ruling party / Opposition party Rump party Parliamentary opposition Party of power Official party status Single-issue party Transnational / International Leaders and organization Backbencher Caucus Caucus chair Frontbencher Lead candidate Leader of the Opposition Majority leader Minority leader Political faction Parliamentary leader Party chair Party leader Party spokesperson Party secretary Shadow cabinet Whip Internal elections Primary election Leadership election Open list Party convention/conference Leadership convention Party discipline Conscience vote Crossing the floor Party discipline Party line Party-line vote Party switching Whip Party systems One-party Dominant-party Two-party Multi-party Non-partisan Coalitions between parties Parliamentary group Divided government Coalition government Confidence and supply Consensus government Cordon sanitaire Grand coalition Hung parliament Majority government Minority government National unity government Rotation government Tech-Trad Alliance Lists of political parties Ruling parties by country Political parties by region Banned political parties Politics portal v t e New Right is a term for various right-wing political groups or policies in different countries during different periods. One prominent usage was to describe the emergence of certain European parties after the collapse of the Soviet Union .

[ 1 ] In the United States, the Second New Right campaigned against abortion , LGBT civil rights , the Equal Rights Amendment (ERA), the Panama Canal Treaty , affirmative action , and most forms of taxation .

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] New Right appeared during the 1964 presidential campaign of Barry Goldwater to designate the emergence, in response to American style liberalism (i.e., social liberalism ), of a more combative, anti-egalitarian, and uninhibited right. Popularized by Richard Viguerie , the term became later used to describe a broader global movement: those proponents of the night-watchman state but who also tended to be socially conservative, such as Ronald Reagan , Margaret Thatcher , Turgut Özal or Augusto Pinochet . However, as Jean-Yves Camus and Nicolas Lebourg point out, this leaning had only a few aspects in common with the " European New Right " that had been emerging since the 1960s, more inspired by the conservative revolutionary Moeller van den Bruck than by the classical liberal Adam Smith .

[ 3 ] Anarcho-capitalism , a form of libertarianism that advocates for the replacement of all state institutions with private institutions, [ 4 ] is usually seen as part of the New Right.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] New Right by country [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] In Australia , the New Right refers to a late 1970s/1980s onward movement both within and outside of the Liberal / National Coalition which advocates economically liberal and increased socially conservative policies (as opposed to the old right which advocated economically conservative policies and " small-l liberals " with more socially liberal views).

[ 7 ] Unlike the United Kingdom and United States, but like neighbouring New Zealand, the 1980s saw the Australian Labor Party initiate Third Way economic reforms, which bear some familiarity to New Right ideology. After the John Howard Coalition ended the 13-year rule of the Hawke-Keating Labor government at the 1996 federal election , economic reforms were taken further, some examples being wholesale labor market deregulation (e.g., WorkChoices ), the introduction of a Goods and Services Tax (GST), the privatisation of the telecommunications monopoly Telstra , and sweeping welfare reform including " work for the dole ". The H. R. Nicholls Society , a think tank which advocates full workplace deregulation, contains some Liberal MPs as members and is seen to be of the New Right.

[ 8 ] Economic liberalism is also called economic rationalism in Australia. The term economic rationalism was first used by Labor's Gough Whitlam .

[ 9 ] to describe a market-oriented form of social democracy, but its meaning subsequently evolved. It is a philosophy which tends to advocate a free market economy , increased deregulation , privatisation , lower direct taxation and higher indirect taxation , and a reduction of the size of the welfare state . The politicians favouring New Right ideology were referred to as dries , while those advocating continuation of the economic policies of the post-war consensus , typically Keynesian economics, or were more socially liberal, were called wets (the term wets was similarly used in Britain to refer to those Conservatives who opposed Thatcherite economic policies, but dries in this context was much rarer in British usage).

[ 10 ] Brazil [ edit ] The New Right in Brazil has grown sharply in recent years within population, intelligentsia, and academia. That is mainly due to a generalized discontent with the previous [update] left-wing government and its policies.

[ 11 ] This new movement distinguishes itself from what is known in Brazil as old right , which was ideologically associated to the Brazilian military government , União Democrática Nacional (National Democratic Union), and Integralism .

[ 12 ] It is identified by positive views regarding democracy, personal freedom, free-market capitalism, reduction of bureaucracy, privatization of state-run companies, tax cuts, parliamentary , political reform. It rejects " cultural Marxism ", modern socialism and populism .

[ 13 ] There have been two major phenomena relating to the rise of the new Brazilian right: the Free Brazil Movement , which has managed to bring together millions of people on demonstrations against the government in March 2015; [ 14 ] and the creation of the New Party (Partido Novo) and Libertários , the first liberal party since the First Brazilian Republic .

[ 15 ] Some Brazilian new-right thinkers are: Kim Kataguiri , and his movement Movimento Brasil Livre (Free Brazil Moviment), Roberto Campos , [ 16 ] Wilson Martins , [ 17 ] [ 18 ] Olavo de Carvalho , [ 19 ] Luiz Felipe Pondé , [ 20 ] Paulo Francis , [ 21 ] José Guilherme Merquior , [ 19 ] Bruno Tolentino , [ 19 ] and Miguel Reale .

[ 19 ] As a result of this movement, in the 2018 Brazilian election, Jair Messias Bolsonaro was elected President of Brazil with 55% of the votes; his Minister of the Economy , Paulo Guedes , graduated from the University of Chicago , famous for its economically liberal school of economics .

Chile [ edit ] The term New Right (Spanish: Nueva derecha ) has come into mainstream political discourse since the election of Sebastián Piñera in 2010, when interior minister Rodrigo Hinzpeter used it to describe his government. Hinzpeter's introduction of the term caused a buzz among newspapers, politicians and analysts. According to a column published in The Clinic , the New Right is different from the old dictatorial right of Augusto Pinochet , in the sense that it embraces democracy. It is also different from the religiously conservative Unión Demócrata Independiente party, in that it is more open to discussing issues like divorce . According to the same analysis, the New Right is becoming increasingly pragmatic, as shown by their decision to increase taxes following the 2010 Chilean earthquake .

[ 22 ] France [ edit ] In France, the New Right (or Nouvelle Droite ) has been used as a term to describe a modern think-tank of French political philosophers and intellectuals led by Alain de Benoist . Another noted intellectual, who was once part of Alain de Benoist's GRECE, is Guillaume Faye . Although accused by some critics as being " far-right " in their beliefs, they themselves claim that their ideas transcend the traditional left–right divide and actively encourages free debate. France also has one Identitarian New Right group (which is connected with Thule Seminar in Germany); that is Terre et Peuple of Pierre Vial, who was once an integral part and founding member of Alain de Benoist's GRECE.

[ 23 ] Germany [ edit ] In Germany, the Neue Rechte (literally, new right ) consists of two parts: the Jungkonservative (literally, young conservatives), who search for followers in the civic part of the population; and, secondly, the "Nationalrevolutionäre" (national revolutionists), who are looking for followers in the ultra-right part of the German population and use the rhetoric of right-wing politicians such as Gregor and Otto Strasser . Another noted New Right group in Germany is Thule Seminar of Pierre Krebs.

[ 24 ] [ 23 ] Greece [ edit ] Failos Kranidiotis , a Greek politician who had been expelled by New Democracy chairman Kyriakos Mitsotakis for expressing views similar to those of political rival Golden Dawn , founded the New Right party, based on national liberalism , in May 2016.

[ 25 ] His views diverged from those of former Prime Minister of Greece Konstantinos Mitsotakis , whose legacy expressed the most important principle of its recently elected leadership, including Adonis Georgiadis , who had been a member only since leaving far-right Popular Orthodox Rally in 2012.

Iran [ edit ] In Iran, New Right and the term Modern Right ( Persian : راست مدرن ) is associated with the Executives of Construction Party , which has split from the traditional Right .

[ 26 ] Israel [ edit ] New Right is a right-wing political party in Israel, founded in 2018 and led by Ayelet Shaked and Naftali Bennett . The party aims to be a party open to both secular and religious people. The party advocates the preservation of a strong right-wing in Israel.

Netherlands [ edit ] The New Right (NR) was the name of a far-right/nationalist political party in the Netherlands from 2003 to 2007. The Party for Freedom (PVV), founded in 2005 and led by Geert Wilders , also is a New Right movement.

[ 27 ] Since March 2017, Forum for Democracy is another New Right party in the Dutch parliament.

New Zealand [ edit ] In New Zealand, as in Australia, it was the Labour Party that initially adopted New Right economic policies.

Rogernomics involved monetarist approaches to controlling inflation, corporatisation of government departments, and the removal of tariffs and subsidies , while the party also pursued social liberal stances such as decriminalisation of male homosexuality, pay equity for women and adopting a nuclear-free policy. This meant temporary realignment within New Zealand politics, as New Right middle-class voters voted Labour at the 1987 New Zealand general election in approval of its economic policies. At first, Labour corporatised many former government departments and state assets, then emulated the Conservative Thatcher administration and privatised them altogether during Labour's second term of office. However, recession and privatisation together led to increasing strains within the Labour Party, which led to schism, and the exit of Jim Anderton and his NewLabour Party , which later formed part of the Alliance Party with the Greens and other opponents of New Right economics.

[ 28 ] However, dissent and schism were not to be limited to the Labour Party and Alliance Party alone. During the Labour Party's second term in office, the Opposition New Zealand National Party (popularly known as National ) selected Ruth Richardson as Opposition finance spokesperson, and when National won the 1990 general election , Richardson became Minister of Finance, while Jenny Shipley became Minister of Social Welfare. Richardson introduced deunionisation legislation, known as the Employment Contracts Act, in 1991, while Shipley presided over social welfare benefit cuts, designed to reduce welfare dependency – both core New Right policy initiatives.

In the early 1990s, maverick National Party MP Winston Peters also came to oppose New Right economic policies and led his elderly voting bloc out of the National Party. As a result, his New Zealand First anti-monetarist party has been a partner in coalition governments led by both National (1996–98) and Labour (2005–08 and 2017–20). Due to the introduction of the MMP electoral system, a New Right "Association of Consumers and Taxpayers" party, known as ACT New Zealand , was formed by ex-Labour New Right–aligned Cabinet Ministers like Richard Prebble and others, and maintaining existing New Right policy initiatives such as the Employment Contracts Act, while also introducing U.S.-style welfare reform . ACT New Zealand aspired to become National's centre-right coalition partner but has been hampered by lack of party unity and populist leadership that often-lacked strategic direction.

As for Labour and National themselves, their fortunes have been mixed. Labour was out of office for most of the nineties, only regaining power when Helen Clark led it to victory and a Labour/Alliance coalition and centre-left government (1999–2002). However, the Alliance disintegrated in 2002. National was defeated in 1999 due to the absence of a suitable stable coalition partner, given New Zealand First's partial disintegration after Winston Peters abandoned the prior National-led coalition. When Bill English became leader of National in 2001, it was thought that he might lead the party away from its prior hardline New Right economic and social policies, but his indecisiveness and lack of firm policy direction led to ACT New Zealand gaining the New Right middle-class voting basis in 2002. When Don Brash became leader, New Right middle-class voters returned to National's fold, causing National's revival in fortunes at the 2005 New Zealand general election . However, at the same time, ACT New Zealand strongly criticised it for deviating from its former New Right economic policy perspectives, and at the same election, National did little to enable ACT's survival. Don Brash resigned as National party leader, being replaced by John Key , who was a more moderate National MP.

As for the centre-left, Helen Clark and her Labour-led coalition were criticised by ex-Alliance members and non-government organisations for their alleged lack of attention to centre-left social policies, while trade union membership recovered due to Labour's repeal of the Employment Contracts Act 1991 and labour market deregulation and the deunionisation that had accompanied it in the nineties. It is plausible that Clark and her Cabinet were influenced by Tony Blair and his British Labour Government, which pursued a similar balancing act between social and fiscal responsibility while in government.

[ 29 ] Poland [ edit ] In Poland, a conservative libertarian [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] and eurosceptic political party Congress of the New Right (New Right) was founded on 25 March 2011 from former political parties Freedom and Lawfulness (WiP) and Real Politics Union (UPR) by Janusz Korwin-Mikke . It is backed up by various voters, some conservatives, far left people who want to legalize marijuana and citizens who endorse free market and capitalism [ citation needed ] .

South Korea [ edit ] In South Korea, the South Korean New Right movement is a Korean attempt at neoconservative politics. The Lee Myung-bak government led by President Lee Myung-bak and the conservative Grand National Party is noted for being a benefactor of the domestic New Right movement.

[ 34 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Main article: Thatcherism In the United Kingdom, the term New Right more specifically refers to a strand of Conservatism that Margaret Thatcher and Ronald Reagan influenced. Thatcher's style of New Right ideology, known as Thatcherism , was heavily influenced by the work of Friedrich Hayek (in particular the book The Road to Serfdom ). They were ideologically committed to economic liberalism as well as being socially conservative .

[ 35 ] United States [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e This article is part of a series on Libertarianism in the United States Schools Agorism Anarcho-capitalism Austro Authoritarian Autarchism Bleeding-heart Christian Conservative Consequentialist Feminist Fusionism Geo Green Market anarchism Minarchism Natural-rights Neo Paleo Panarchism Paternalist Propertarianism Socialist Techno Transhumanist Voluntaryism Principles Anti-imperialism Civil libertarianism Constitutionalism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Economic freedom Evictionism Free banking Free market Free-market environmentalism Free migration Free trade Free will Freedom of association Freedom of contract Freedom of speech Homestead principle Individuality Individualism Liberty Limited government Localism Marriage privatization Natural rights and legal rights Non-aggression principle Non-interventionism Non-politics Non-voting Open border Polycentric law Private defense agency Private property Public choice theory Restorative justice Right to bear arms Right to privacy Rugged Individualism Self-ownership Single tax Small government Spoiled ballot Spontaneous order Stateless society Tax resistance Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntary association Voluntary society History Age of Enlightenment Abolitionism in the United States Classical liberalism Anti-Federalists Transcendentalism Individualist anarchism in the United States Old Right New Left New Right Freedom School Economics Austrian School Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Georgism Laissez-faire Neoliberalism Supply-side economics Intellectuals Andrews Barnett Block Boudreaux Brennan Caplan Carson Chamberlain Chartier Chodorov Cowen Ebeling Epstein Franklin D. Friedman M. Friedman P. Friedman R. Friedman Galambos Garrett George Griffin Gordon Harper Hazlitt Heinlein Hess Hoppe Hospers Huemer Jefferson Kinsella Konkin R. Lane Liggio LeFevre Machan Mencken Menger Mises Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Raico Read Robertson Rockwell Rothbard Samuels Schulman Sciabarra Scott Skousen Smith Spooner Somin Sowell Sumner Sutton Stephenson Szasz Taleb Thoreau Tuccille Tucker Volokh Wilder Williams Wilson (Clyde) Wilson (Robert) Politicians Amash Barr Brakey Burt Chafee Cleveland Flake Goldwater Jacobs Johnson Jorgensen Lee Massie McAfee Nolan Oliver Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Polis Sanford Sarwark Sununu Ventura Weld Wu Commentators Chamberlain Gillespie Gutfeld Jones Kauffman McElroy Miller Napolitano Postrel Pugsley Rogan Smith Soave Stone Stossel Welch Will Woods Activists Ben Garrison Jillette Koch (Charles) Koch (David) Reitman Kubrick Smith Prince Teller Thiel Literature The Anarchist Cookbook Anarchy, State, and Utopia The Betrayal of the American Right The Case Against Education Civil Disobedience Conceived in Liberty The Creature from Jekyll Island Defending the Undefendable The Discovery of Freedom End the Fed The Ethics of Liberty For a New Liberty Free to Choose The Future and Its Enemies The God of the Machine It Usually Begins with Ayn Rand Liberty The Machinery of Freedom Man, Economy and State The Moon is a Harsh Mistress The Mainspring of Human Progress The Market for Liberty The Myth of the Rational Voter No, They Can't No Treason New Libertarian Manifesto Our Enemy, the State The Problem of Political Authority Progress and Poverty Protection or Free Trade Radicals for Capitalism Seeing Like a State To Serve and Protect The Unconstitutionality of Slavery Issues Abortion Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political parties Politics State Theories of law Symbols Come and take it Gadsden flag Idols Ron Swanson Patrick Bateman Walter White Organizations Cato Institute Federalist Society Free State Project Foundation for Economic Education International Alliance of Libertarian Parties Libertarian Party Liberty International Mises Institute Reason Foundation Reason (magazine) Students for a Democratic Society Students for Liberty Young Americans for Liberty Movements American militia movement Boogaloo movement Dark Enlightenment Objectivist movement Objectivism Sovereign citizen movement Comparable Libertarianism in Hong Kong Libertarianism in the United Kingdom ( England ) Related Conservatism in the United States Left-libertarianism Liberalism in the United States Libertarian Democrat Libertarian Republican Libertarian science fiction On Democracy in America Outline of libertarianism Right-libertarianism Liberalism portal Conservatism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e Main article: Conservatism in the United States Not to be confused with Neo-conservatism , Alt-right , or Alt-lite .

In the United States, New Right refers to two historically distinct conservative political movements.

[ 36 ] : 624–25 These American New Rights are distinct from and opposed to the more moderate tradition of the so-called Rockefeller Republicans . The New Right also differs from the Old Right (1933–55) on issues concerning foreign policy with neoconservatives being opposed to the non-interventionism of the Old Right.

[ 36 ] : 625 First New Right [ edit ] The first New Right (1955–64) was centered on the right-wing libertarians , traditionalists , and anti-communists at William F. Buckley's National Review .

[ 36 ] : 624 Sociologists and journalists had used new right since the 1950s; it was first used as self-identification in 1962 by the student activist group Young Americans for Freedom .

[ 37 ] The first New Right embraced what it called " fusionism " (an ostensible synthesis of classical liberal economics, traditional social values, and anti-communism) [ 36 ] : 338–41 and coalesced in the years preceding the 1964 presidential campaign of Barry Goldwater . The Goldwater campaign, which failed to defeat incumbent President Lyndon B. Johnson , hastened the formation of a new political movement.

First New Right figures : William F. Buckley Jr.

, editor of National Review James Burnham , anti-communist political theorist M. Stanton Evans , journalist and author of Young Americans for Freedom 's Sharon Statement Barry Goldwater , U.S. Senator from Arizona and Republican U.S. presidential candidate Frank Meyer , anti-communist libertarian and creator of the "fusionist" political theory Second New Right [ edit ] The second New Right (1964 to present) was formed in the wake of the Goldwater campaign and had a more populist tone than the first New Right. The second New Right tended to focus on wedge issues (such as abortion) and was often linked with the Religious Right .

[ 38 ] The second New Right formed a policy approach and electoral apparatus that brought Ronald Reagan into the White House in the 1980 presidential election. The New Right was organized in the American Enterprise Institute and The Heritage Foundation to counter the so-called " liberal establishment", which they viewed as a contributor to corruption and mismanagement of the federal government. In elite think tanks and local community organizations alike, new policies, marketing strategies, and electoral strategies were crafted over the succeeding decades to promote strongly conservative policies.

[ 2 ] [ 39 ] The second New Right objected to a perceived decline in morality, including increased drug use, more public and open displays of sexuality , rising crime rates, race riots and unrest from civil rights protesters , and Vietnam War protesters .

[ 2 ] Second New Right figures : James Dobson , founder of Focus on the Family Pat Buchanan , political commentator, founder of The American Conservative , and candidate in the 1992 Republican Party presidential primaries [ citation needed ] George W. Bush , 43rd president of the United States Terry Dolan , founder of the National Conservative Political Action Committee Jerry Falwell , Southern Baptist minister, founder of Liberty University and Moral Majority Newt Gingrich , former Congressman , Speaker of the House , candidate for the Presidency of the United States, author Robert Grant , Christian right activist and founder of Christian Voice Rush Limbaugh , nationally syndicated talk radio and former cable news host, author Milton Friedman , neoclassical economist of the Chicago school of economics , recipient of the 1976 Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences Howard Phillips , founder of The Conservative Caucus Ronald Reagan , 40th president of the United States, actor, 33rd governor of California , union leader Phyllis Schlafly , anti-feminist activist and founder of the Eagle Forum Richard Viguerie , direct mail activist Paul Weyrich , founder of The Heritage Foundation and the Free Congress Research and Education Foundation See also [ edit ] Neoconservatism Neo-nationalism New Left Old Right (United States) One-nation conservatism (UK) References [ edit ] ^ Hanley, Seán (2008).

The New Right in the New Europe: Czech Transformation and Right-wing Politics, 1989–2006 . Routledge.

ISBN 9780415674898 ^ a b c "New Right" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 10 December 2021 . Retrieved 15 August 2022 .

^ Camus, Jean-Yves; Lebourg, Nicolas (20 March 2017).

Far-Right Politics in Europe . Harvard University Press. p. 122.

ISBN 978-0674971530 .

^ Geloso, Vincent; Leeson, Peter T. (2020).

"Are Anarcho-Capitalists Insane? Medieval Icelandic Conflict Institutions in Comparative Perspective" .

Revue d'économie politique .

130 (6): 957– 974.

doi : 10.3917/redp.306.0115 .

ISSN 0373-2630 .

S2CID 235008718 .

Anarcho-capitalism is a variety of libertarianism according to which all government institutions can and should be replaced by private ones.

^ Meltzer, Albert (2000).

Anarchism: Arguments for and Against . London: AK Press. p.

50 .

ISBN 978-1-873176-57-3 .

The philosophy of 'anarcho-capitalism' dreamed up by the 'libertarian' New Right, has nothing to do with Anarchism as known by the Anarchist movement proper.

^ Vincent, Andrew (2009).

Modern Political Ideologies (3rd ed.). Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons. p. 66.

ISBN 978-1-4443-1105-1 .

Whom to include under the rubric of the New Right remains puzzling. It is usually seen as an amalgam of traditional liberal conservatism, Austrian liberal economic theory (Ludwing von Mises and Hayek), extreme libertarianism (anarcho-capitalism), and crude populism.

^ Verity Archer, "Dole bludgers, tax payers and the New Right: Constructing discourses of welfare in 1970s Australia." Labour History 96 (2009): 177–190.

^ Marian Sawer, Australia and the new right (Sydney: G. Allen & Unwin, 1982).

^ "John Quiggin – Journal Articles 1997 – Economic rationalism" .

www.uq.edu.au . December 2015.

Archived from the original on 20 April 2020 . Retrieved 15 November 2007 .

^ Hugh Collins, "Political ideology in Australia: the distinctiveness of a Benthamite society." Daedalus (1985): 147–169.

online Archived 12 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine ^ Saad-Filho, Alfredo; Boito, Armando (2016). Panitch, Leo; Albo, Greg (eds.).

"Brazil: The Failure of the PT and the Rise of the 'New Right" .

Socialist Register : 213– 30.

Archived from the original on 12 July 2021 . Retrieved 31 August 2016 .

^ "Manifesto de 7 de Outubro de 1932" (in Portuguese).

Archived from the original on 1 March 2021 . Retrieved 23 October 2016 .

^ "Liberais, Libertários e conservadores, uni-vos" (in Portuguese).

Archived from the original on 12 July 2021 . Retrieved 23 October 2016 .

^ Saad-Filho, Alfredo; Boito, Armando (2016). Panitch, Leo; Albo, Greg (eds.).

Brazil: The Failure of the PT and the Rise of the 'New Right . p. 225.

ISBN 9781583675755 . Retrieved 31 August 2016 .

The upper middle class provides the mass base of the new right, for example, through the Free Brazil Movement (Movimento Brasil Livre), MBL, one of the groups leading the demonstrations.

{{ cite book }} : |journal= ignored ( help ) ^ "Interlibertarians" .

interlibertarian.altervista.org . Archived from the original on 10 December 2013 . Retrieved 23 October 2016 .

^ "Biografia" (in Portuguese).

Archived from the original on 13 July 2021 . Retrieved 23 October 2016 .

^ "A certeza da influência" (in Portuguese).

Archived from the original on 12 July 2021 . Retrieved 7 January 2017 .

^ "Morre o crítico literário Wilson Martins" (in Portuguese).

Archived from the original on 12 July 2021 . Retrieved 7 January 2017 .

^ a b c d "Um gênio conservador" (in Portuguese). Archived from the original on 21 September 2016 . Retrieved 23 October 2016 .

^ "Contra os comissionarios da ignorância" (in Portuguese).

Archived from the original on 12 July 2021 . Retrieved 23 October 2016 .

^ De Sá, Nelson (2011).

Dicionário da Corte (in Portuguese). Companhia das Letras. p. 9.

ISBN 978-8571645714 . Retrieved 23 October 2016 .

^ Marcelo Pollack, New Right in Chile (Springer, 1999).

[ ISBN missing ] ^ a b Simon Bornschier, "Why a right-wing populist party emerged in France but not in Germany: cleavages and actors in the formation of a new cultural divide." European Political Science Review 4.1 (2012): 121–145.

online Archived 12 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine ^ Michael Minkenberg, "The new right in Germany: The transformation of conservatism and the extreme right." European Journal of Political Research 22.1 (1992): 55–81.

^ Vasiliki Georgiadou, and Lamprini Rori. "Economic crisis, social and political impact. The new right-wing extremism in Greece." Anuari del Conflicte Social (2013).

online Archived 12 July 2021 at the Wayback Machine ^ Povey, Tara (2015), "The Rise of Social Movements in Iran since the 1990s", Social Movements in Egypt and Iran , Palgrave Macmillan, pp.

72– 96, doi : 10.1057/9781137379009_4 , ISBN 978-1-349-67751-1 ^ Gerard Delanty; et al. (2008).

Identity, Belonging and Migration . Oxford University Press. p. 262.

ISBN 978-1846314537 .

^ Michael Peters, and James Marshall. "Education, the new right and the crisis of the welfare state in New Zealand." Australian Journal of Education Studies 11.1 (1990): 77–90.

^ Roger Dale, "National reform, economic crisis and ‘New Right’ theory: A New Zealand perspective." Discourse 14.2 (1994): 17–29.

^ "Leader of Poland's Euro-sceptic party believes: "Women should not have right to vote." " . 7 April 2014. Archived from the original on 5 February 2016 . Retrieved 27 May 2014 .

^ Aleks Szczerbiak (23 May 2014).

"EU election: Polish campaign dominated by Ukraine crisis" .

Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 27 May 2014 .

^ Macdonald, Alastair (20 October 2014).

"UKIP, 5-Star welcome Polish radical to save EU voting bloc" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on 27 November 2018 . Retrieved 5 July 2021 .

^ "Polish MEP's racial slur sparks anger" .

The Japan Times . 17 July 2014.

Archived from the original on 18 August 2016 . Retrieved 19 October 2015 .

^ Yin-wah Chu; Siu-lun Wong (2010).

East Asia's New Democracies: Deepening, Reversal, Non-liberal Alternatives . Routledge. p. 199.

ISBN 978-1136991097 .

^ S. Lee; M. Beech (2016).

The Conservatives under David Cameron: Built to Last?

. Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp.

23– 24.

ISBN 978-0230237025 .

^ a b c d Frohnen, Bruce, Jeremy Beer, and Jeffrey O. Nelson (2006) American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia . ISI Books: Wilmington, DE.

[ ISBN missing ] ^ Viguerie, Richard .

The New Right: We're Ready to Lead . 1981, Caroline House, p. 53 [ ISBN missing ] ^ Gottfried, Paul ; Fleming, Thomas (1988).

The Conservative Movement . Boston: Twayne Publishers. pp.

77– 95.

ISBN 0805797238 .

^ Arin, Kubilay Yado: Think Tanks, the Brain Trusts of US Foreign Policy . Wiesbaden: VS Springer 2013.

Further reading [ edit ] Andrews, Geoff; Cockett, Richard ; Hooper, Alan; Williams, Michael (1999): New Left, New Right and Beyond. Taking the Sixties Seriously . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0333741474 Arin, Kubilay Yado (2013): Think Tanks, the Brain Trusts of US Foreign Policy . Wiesbaden: VS Springer [ ISBN missing ] Betz, Hans-George. (1993) "The new politics of resentment: radical right-wing populist parties in Western Europe." Comparative politics (1993): 413–427.

online Archived 9 February 2018 at the Wayback Machine Cunningham, Sean P. (2010).

Cowboy Conservatism: Texas and the Rise of the Modern Right [ ISBN missing ] Klatch, Rebecca E. (1999) A generation divided: The new left, the new right, and the 1960s (Univ of California Press, 1999).

[ ISBN missing ] Lyons, Paul. (1996) New left, new right, and the legacy of the sixties (Temple University Press, 1996).

[ ISBN missing ] Minkenberg, Michael. (1992) "The new right in Germany: The transformation of conservatism and the extreme right." European Journal of Political Research 22.1 (1992): 55–81.

Richards, David; Smith, Martin J. (2002).

Governance and Public Policy in the UK . New York: Oxford University Press. pp. 92–121.

[ ISBN missing ] Murray, Charles (1984).

Losing Ground: American Social Policy, 1950–1980 [ ISBN missing ] Murray, Charles (1999).

The Underclass Revisited [ ISBN missing ] Richard A. Viguerie (1980).

The New Right: We're Ready to Lead . Viguerie Company.

ISBN 978-0960481415 .

Stock, Catherine McNicol (2020).

Nuclear Country: The Origins of the Rural New Right . University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 978-0-8122-5245-3 .

Wink, Georg (2021): Brazil, Land of the Past: The Ideological Roots of the New Right . Cuernavaca, Mexico: Bibliotopía.

ISBN 978-6079934811 External links [ edit ] Free Speech Project , various New Right texts in English v t e Political spectrum Far-left Left Centre-left Centre Centre-right Right Far-right Political positions Post-leftism Ultra-leftism Anti-Stalinist left New Left Centrist Marxism Third Way Radical centrism New Right Political ideologies Anarchism Marxism Communism Socialism Social democracy Liberalism Christian democracy Conservatism Nationalism Fascism Nazism Religious politics Buddhist socialism Christian left Jewish left Islamic socialism Christian right Hindutva Islamism Religious Zionism Political pejoratives Baizuo Champagne socialist Hard left Liberal elite Limousine liberal Loony left Moonbat Red fascist Regressive left Social fascism Social imperialism Social justice warrior Soft left Wingnut Models Horseshoe theory Left–right political spectrum Nolan Chart Overton window Open–closed political spectrum Pournelle chart Right-wing authoritarianism See also Anti-authoritarianism Democratic transition Libertarianism Syndicalism Progressivism Green politics Identity politics Corporatism Authoritarianism Totalitarianism Revolutionary Reactionary Anti-establishment Collectivism Communitarianism The Establishment Individualism Hardline Populism Radical politics Triangulation v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=New_Right&oldid=1304247081 " Categories : New Right (Europe) Conservatism Conservatism in Canada Conservatism in Europe Conservatism in Russia Far-right politics Far-right politics in Europe Far-right politics in Russia New Right (United States) Political movements Political movements in Europe Political movements in Russia Political movements in the United States Republican Party (United States) Right-wing politics Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Portuguese-language sources (pt) CS1 errors: periodical ignored Pages with missing ISBNs CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2019 Articles containing potentially dated statements from April 2020 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing Persian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2025 Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 22:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents New Right 24 languages Add topic

