Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History and theory 2 Criticism 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Expeditionary economics 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Field of economics Part of the behavioral sciences Economics Outline Index Glossary Economists Principles of Economics Tools and methodology Economic theory Mathematical modeling Game theory Rational choice Cognitive science ( Behavioral ) Economic equilibrium Empirical methods Experimental National accounts Econometrics Time series Spatial Prescriptive and policy Welfare analysis Social choice theory Rational choice theory Cost–benefit analysis Branches and subfields Applied Econometrics International Heterodox Micro Macro Mainstream Mathematical Mech. design Methodology Political Industrial org.

Market design Applications Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Economics portal Society portal v t e Expeditionary economics is an emerging field of economic enquiry that focuses on the rebuilding and reconstructing of economies in post-conflict nations and providing support to disaster-struck nations.

The term was first introduced in 2010 in an essay [ 1 ] by Carl Schramm , the former president and CEO of the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation .

[ 2 ] It focuses on the need for good economic planning on the part of developed nations to help prevent the creation of failed states. It also emphasizes the need for the structuring on new firms to rebuild national economies.

[ 3 ] Since then, the theory has been used by the U.S. Government and the U.S. Army to restructure the economies of countries such as Iraq and Afghanistan and helping Haiti after its severe earthquake . Its aim is to provide economic stabilization and support the counterinsurgency tactics in such nations.

[ 4 ] History and theory [ edit ] Expeditionary economics and armies must focus on infusing entrepreneurship and "messy capitalism" which prevails in the U.S.

[ 5 ] He describes the strategy adopted by economists to quickly establish a trajectory toward economic growth with the formation of firms that can generate rapid growth in revenue and employment. He also asks the U.S. Army to "treat economic reconstruction as part of any successful three-legged strategy of invasion, stabilization or pacification, and economic reconstruction." The Pentagon has confirmed that it has applied the theory as a "weapon" to stabilize operations in countries with past conflict such as Iraq and Afghanistan and has planned various measures which will come into effect just as the army leaves the countries. With special reference to Iran and Afghanistan, reports show that significant resources have been dedicated to such efforts over the past decade, with hundreds of billions of dollars spent in the two countries. The theory rests to a huge extent on the dynamism of new firms, which constantly introduce innovations into the economy. The U.S Government's recent engagements have made it appreciate that post-conflict economic reconstruction must become a core competence of the U.S. military. However, their actions do not present any such appreciation.

Criticism [ edit ] There has been widespread criticism of the theory, particularly on the point that it should be carried out by the invading army. Many economists questioned the relative chances of its application by other post-conflict and military nations.

[ citation needed ] There have also been questions on whether the U.S. Army should be held liable or whether the objectives should be outsourced to private-sector enterprises or to other departments of the U.S. Government. The U.S. Army Stability Operations field manual (published in 2009) [ 6 ] offers no relevant guidance on what role economic development should play in the United States' post conflict strategy or how to help build dynamic, growth-oriented economies. That being said, NATO's preferred COIN operational approach—Clear, Hold, and Build (CHB)—"encompasses offensive, defensive, stability and enabling activities", which apply the principles of expeditionary economics.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Business and Economics portal Carl Schramm Entrepreneurial economics Expeditionary energy economics Experimental economics U.S. Army References [ edit ] ^ Schramm, Carl J. (2022-09-26).

"Expeditionary Economics" .

ISSN 0015-7120 . Retrieved 2022-11-15 .

^ "Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation Website" . Archived from the original on June 16, 2013 . Retrieved March 16, 2013 .

^ "Expeditionary Economics: A New Model for Post-Conflict Countries" .

Milken Institute . Archived from the original on March 7, 2013 . Retrieved March 29, 2013 .

^ "Role of Military in Reconstruction" .

Center for Conflict Studies . Archived from the original on March 4, 2016 . Retrieved March 29, 2013 .

^ "Haiti 2010 Earthquake and Expeditionary Economics" . Retrieved March 29, 2013 .

^ Army, United States; William B. Caldwell, IV; Flournoy, Michele (2009-02-24).

U.S Army Stability Operations Field Manual, 2009 . University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 9780472033904 .

^ Iftimie, Ion A. (2018-04-11).

"Expeditionary energy economics (e3): the securitization of energy entrepreneurship during megacity counterinsurgencies (a NATO perspective)" .

Journal of Innovation and Entrepreneurship .

7 (1): 4.

doi : 10.1186/s13731-018-0083-6 .

hdl : 10419/194828 .

ISSN 2192-5372 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Nanto, Dick K.

and National Security: Issues and Implications for U. S. Policy . DAINE Publishing House. Pg 4 Milonakis, Dimitris; Fine, Ben.

From Political Economy to Economics: Method, the social and the historical in the evolution of economic theory . Pg 306 External links [ edit ] Website Kauffman Foundation [ permanent dead link ] Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Expeditionary_economics&oldid=1295121294 " Category : Schools of economic thought Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2019 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 11 June 2025, at 21:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Expeditionary economics 1 language Add topic

