Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 Philosophy and theology 4 Legacy 5 Works Toggle Works subsection 5.1 Modern editions 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Citations 7.2 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Hugh of Saint Victor 29 languages Azərbaycanca Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano עברית Кыргызча Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German-French canon regular and theologian Hugh of Saint Victor Hugh of Saint Victor Born c.

1096 Probably the Duchy of Saxony Died 11 February 1141 Abbey of Saint-Victor, Paris Philosophical work Era Medieval philosophy Region Western philosophy School Scholasticism Hugh of Saint Victor ( c.

1096 – 11 February 1141) was a Saxon canon regular and a leading theologian and writer on mystical theology .

Life [ edit ] As with many medieval figures, little is known about Hugh's early life. He was probably born in the 1090s. His homeland may have been Lorraine , Ypres in Flanders , or the Duchy of Saxony .

[ 3 ] Some sources say that his birth occurred in the Harz district , being the eldest son of Baron Conrad of Blankenburg . Over the protests of his family, he entered the Priory of St. Pancras , a community of canons regular , where he had studied, located at Hamerleve or Hamersleben , near Halberstadt .

[ 4 ] Due to civil unrest shortly after his entry to the priory, Hugh's uncle, Reinhard of Blankenburg , who was the local bishop , advised him to transfer to the Abbey of Saint Victor in Paris , where he himself had studied theology. He accepted his uncle's advice and made the move at a date which is unclear, possibly 1115–18 or around 1120.

[ 5 ] He spent the rest of his life there, advancing to head the school.

[ 4 ] Works [ edit ] De claustro anime , 14th-century manuscript. Hereford, Cathedral Library, Manuscript collection, P.5.XII.

Hugh wrote many works from the 1120s until his death (Migne, Patrologia Latina contains 46 works by Hugh, and this is not a full collection), including works of theology (both treatises and sententiae ), commentaries (mostly on the Bible but also including one of pseudo-Dionysius ' Celestial Hierarchies ), mysticism, philosophy and the arts, and a number of letters and sermons.

[ 6 ] Hugh was influenced by many people, but chiefly by Saint Augustine , especially in holding that the arts and philosophy can serve theology.

Hugh's most significant works include: De sacramentis christianae fidei ( On the Mysteries of the Christian Faith / On the Sacraments of the Christian Faith ) [ 7 ] It is Hugh's most celebrated masterpiece and presents the bulk of Hugh's thoughts on theological and mystical ideas, ranging from God and angels to natural laws.

Didascalicon de studio legendi ( Didascalicon, or, On the Study of Reading ).

[ 8 ] The subtitle to the Didascalicon, De Studio Legendi, makes the purpose of Hugh's tract clear. Written for the students at the school of Saint Victor, the work is a preliminary introduction to the theological and exegetical studies  taught at the Parisian schools, the most advanced centers of learning in Europe in the 12th century. Citing a wide range classical and medieval sources, and with Augustine as his principal authority, Hugh sets forth a comprehensive synthesis of rhetoric, philosophy, and exegesis, designed to serve as a foundation for advanced theological study. The Didascalicon is primarily pedagogical, and not speculative, in nature. It provides the modern reader with a clear sense of the intellectual equipment expected of, if not always fully possessed by, high medieval theologians.

In 1125–30, Hugh wrote three treatises structured around Noah's ark: De arca Noe morali ( Noah's Moral Ark / On the Moral Interpretation of the Ark of Noah ), De arca Noe mystica ( Noah's Mystical Ark / On the Mystic Interpretation of the Ark of Noah ), and De vanitate mundi ( The World's Vanity ).

[ 9 ] De arca Noe morali and De arca Noe mystica reflect Hugh's fascination with both mysticism and the book of Genesis.

In Hierarchiam celestem commentaria ( Commentary on the Celestial Hierarchy ), a commentary on the work by pseudo-Dionysius, perhaps begun around 1125.

[ 10 ] After Eriugena 's translation of Dionysius in the ninth century, there is almost no interest shown in Dionysius until Hugh's commentary.

[ 11 ] It is possible that Hugh may have decided to produce the commentary (which perhaps originated in lectures to students) because of the continuing (incorrect) belief that the patron saint of the Abbey of Saint Denis, Saint Denis , was to be identified with pseudo-Dionysius. Dionysian thought did not form an important influence on the rest of Hugh's work. Hugh's commentary, however, became a major part of the twelfth and thirteenth-century surge in interest in Dionysius; his and Eriugena's commentaries were often attached to the Dionysian corpus in manuscripts, such that his thought had great influence on later interpretation of Dionysius by Richard of St Victor , Thomas Gallus , Hugh of Balma , Bonaventure and others.

[ 12 ] Other works by Hugh of St Victor include: In Salomonis Ecclesiasten ( Commentary on Ecclesiastes ).

[ 13 ] De tribus diebus ( On the Three Days ).

[ 14 ] De sapientia animae Christi .

[ 15 ] De unione corporis et spiritus ( The Union of the Body and the Spirit ).

[ 16 ] Epitome Dindimi in philosophiam ( Epitome of Dindimus on Philosophy ).

[ 17 ] Practica Geometriae ( The Practice of Geometry ).

[ 17 ] De Grammatica ( On Grammar ).

[ 17 ] Soliloquium de Arrha Animae ( The Soliloquy on the Earnest Money of the Soul ).

[ 18 ] De contemplatione et ejus speciebus ( On Contemplation and its Forms ). This is one of the earliest systematic works devoted to contemplation. It appears not to have been written by Hugh himself, but composed by one of his students, possibly from classnotes from his lectures.

[ 19 ] On Sacred Scripture and its Authors .

[ 20 ] Various other treatises exist whose authorship by Hugh is uncertain. Six of these are reprinted, in Latin in Roger Baron, ed, Hugues de Saint-Victor: Six Opuscules Spirituels , Sources chrétiennes 155, (Paris, 1969). They are: De meditatione , [ 21 ] De verbo Dei , De substantia dilectionis , Quid vere diligendus est , De quinque septenis , [ 22 ] and De septem donis Spiritus sancti [ 23 ] De anima is a treatise of the soul: the text will be found in the edition of Hugh's works in the Patrologia Latina of J. P. Migne . Part of it was paraphrased in the West Mercian dialect of Middle English by the author of the Katherine Group .

[ 24 ] Descriptio mappae mundi ( Description of a World Map ).

[ 25 ] Various other works were wrongly attributed to Hugh in later thought. One such particularly influential work was the Exposition of the Rule of St Augustine , now accepted to be from the Victorine school but not by Hugh of St Victor.

[ 26 ] A new edition of Hugh's works has been started.  The first publication is: Hugonis de Sancto Victore De sacramentis Christiane fidei , ed. Rainer Berndt, Münster: Aschendorff, 2008.

Philosophy and theology [ edit ] The early Didascalicon was an elementary, encyclopedic approach to God and Christ, in which Hugh avoided controversial subjects and focused on what he took to be commonplaces of Catholic Christianity. In it he outlined three types of philosophy or "science" [scientia] that can help mortals improve themselves and advance toward God: theoretical philosophy (theology, mathematics, physics) provides them with truth, practical philosophy (ethics, economics, politics) aids them in becoming virtuous and prudent, and "mechanical" or "illiberal" philosophy (e.g., carpentry, agriculture, medicine) yields physical benefits. A fourth philosophy, logic, is preparatory to the others and exists to ensure clear and proper conclusions in them. Hugh's deeply mystical bent did not prevent him from seeing philosophy as a useful tool for understanding the divine, or from using it to argue on behalf of faith.

Hugh was heavily influenced by Augustine's exegesis of Genesis . Divine Wisdom was the archetypal form of creation.  The creation of the world in six days was a mystery for man to contemplate, perhaps even a sacrament . God's forming order from chaos to make the world was a message to humans to rise up from their own chaos of ignorance and become creatures of Wisdom and therefore beauty. This kind of mystical-ethical interpretation was typical for Hugh, who tended to find Genesis interesting for its moral lessons rather than as a literal account of events.

Along with Jesus , the sacraments were divine gifts that God gave man to redeem himself, though God could have used other means. Hugh separated everything along the lines of opus creationis and opus restaurationis .

Opus Creationis was the works of the creation, referring to God's creative activity, the true good natures of things, and the original state and destiny of humanity. The opus restaurationis was that which dealt with the reasons for God sending Jesus and the consequences of that. Hugh believed that God did not have to send Jesus and that He had other options open to Him. Why he chose to send Jesus is a mystery we are to meditate on and is to be learned through revelation, with the aid of philosophy to facilitate understanding.

Legacy [ edit ] Within the Abbey of St Victor, many scholars who followed him are often known as the 'School of St Victor'.

Andrew of St Victor studied under Hugh.

[ 27 ] Others, who probably entered the community too late to be directly educated by Hugh, include Richard of Saint Victor and Godfrey.

[ 28 ] One of Hugh's ideals that did not take root in St Victor, however, was his embracing of science and philosophy as tools for approaching God.

[ citation needed ] His works are in hundreds of libraries all across Europe.

[ citation needed ] He is quoted in many other publications after his death, [ citation needed ] and Bonaventure praises him in De reductione artium ad theologiam .

He was also an influence on the critic Erich Auerbach , who cited this passage from Hugh of St Victor in his essay "Philology and World Literature": [ 29 ] It is therefore, a source of great virtue for the practiced mind to learn, bit by bit, first to change about in visible and transitory things, so that afterwards it may be able to leave them behind altogether. The person who finds his homeland sweet is a tender beginner; he to whom every soil is as his native one is already strong; but he is perfect to whom the entire world is as a foreign place. The tender soul has fixed his love on one spot in the world; the strong person has extended his love to all places; the perfect man has extinguished his.

Works [ edit ] Modern editions [ edit ] Latin text Latin texts of Hugh of St. Victor are available in the Migne edition at Documenta Catholica Omnia, http://www.documentacatholicaomnia.eu/30_10_1096-1141-_Hugo_De_S_Victore.html Henry Buttimer, Hugonis de Sancto Victore. Didascalicon. De Studio Legendi (Washington, DC: Catholic University Press, 1939).

Hugh of St Victor, L'oeuvre de Hugues de Saint-Victor. 1. De institutione novitiorum. De virtute orandi. De laude caritatis. De arrha animae , Latin text edited by H.B. Feiss & P. Sicard; French translation by D. Poirel, H. Rochais & P. Sicard. Introduction, notes and appendices by D. Poirel (Turnhout, Brepols, 1997) Hugues de Saint-Victor, L'oeuvre de Hugues de Saint-Victor. 2. Super Canticum Mariae. Pro Assumptione Virginis. De beatae Mariae virginitate. Egredietur virga, Maria porta , edited by B. Jollès (Turnhout: Brepols, 2000) Hugo de Sancto Victore, De archa Noe. Libellus de formatione arche , ed Patricius Sicard, CCCM vol 176, Hugonis de Sancto Victore Opera, I (Turnhout: Brepols, 2001) Hugo de Sancto Victore, De tribus diebus , ed Dominique Poirel, CCCM vol 177, Hugonis de Sancto Victore Opera, II (Turnhout: Brepols, 2002) Hugo de Sancto Victore, De sacramentis Christiane fidei , ed. Rainer Berndt (Münster: Aschendorff, 2008) Hugo de Sancto Victore, Super Ierarchiam Dionysii , CCCM vol 178, Hugonis de Sancto Victore Opera, III (Turnhout: Brepols, forthcoming) English translations Hugh of St Victor, Explanation of the Rule of St. Augustine , translated by Aloysius Smith (London, 1911) Hugh of St Victor, The Soul's Betrothal-Gift , translated by FS Taylor (London, 1945) [translation of De Arrha Animae ] Hugh of St Victor, On the sacraments of the Christian faith: (De sacramentis) , translated by Roy J Deferrari (Cambridge, MA: Mediaeval Academy of America, 1951) Hugh of Saint-Victor: Selected spiritual writings , translated by a religious of C.S.M.V.; with an introduction by Aelred Squire. (London: Faber, 1962) [reprinted in Eugene, Oregon: Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2009] [contains a translation of the first four books of De arca Noe morali and the first two (of four) books of De vanitate mundi ].

The Didascalicon of Hugh of St. Victor , translated by Jerome Taylor (New York and London: Columbia U. P., 1961) [reprinted 1991] [translation of the Didascalicon ] Soliloquy on the Earnest Money of the Soul , trans Kevin Herbert (Milwaukee, WI: Marquette University Press, 1984) [translation of Soliloquium de Arrha Animae ] Hugh of St Victor, Practica Geometriae , trans. Frederick A Homann (Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 1991) Hugh of St Victor, extracts from Introductory Notes on the Scriptures and on the Scriptural Writers , trans Denys Turner, in Denys Turner, Eros and Allegory: Medieval Exegesis of the Song of Songs (Kalamazoo, MI: Cistercian Publications, 1995), 265-274 Hugh of Saint Victor on the Sacraments of the Christian Faith , trans Roy Deferrari (Eugene, Oregon: Wipf & Stock Publishers, 2007) [translation of De Sacramentis Christianae Fidei ] Boyd Taylor Coolman and Dale M Coulter, eds, Trinity and creation: a selection of works of Hugh, Richard and Adam of St Victor (Turnhout: Brepols, 2010) [includes translation of Hugh of St Victor, On the Three Days and Sentences on Divinity ] Hugh Feiss, ed, On love: a selection of works of Hugh, Adam, Achard, Richard and Godfrey of St Victor (Turnhout: Brepols, 2011) [includes translations of The Praise of the Bridegroom , On the Substance of Love , On the Praise of Charity , What Truly Should be Loved?

, On the Four Degrees of Violent Love, trans. A.B. Kraebel, and Soliloquy on the Betrothal-Gift of the Soul ] Franklin T. Harkins and Frans van Liere, eds, Interpretation of scripture: theory. A selection of works of Hugh, Andrew, Richard and Godfrey of St Victor, and of Robert of Melun (Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols, 2012) [contains translations of: Didascalion on the study of reading , introduced and translated by Franklin T Harkins; On Sacred Scripture and its authors and The diligent examiner , introduced and translated by Frans van Liere; On the sacraments of the Christian faith, prologues , introduced and translated by Christopher P Evans] The Compendium of Philosophy ( Compendium Philosophiae ) attributed to Hugh of St Victor in several medieval manuscripts, upon rediscovery and examination in the 20th century, has turned out to have actually been a recension of William of Conches 's De Philosophia Mundi .

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] See also [ edit ] Art of memory § Principles , where Hugh's Didascalicon and Chronica are referred to.

Hendrik Mande The Mystic Ark , painting by Hugh References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Dominique Poirel, Les origines germaniques de la pensée d'Hugues de Saint-Victor p. 173 sqq.

^ Furnal, J., The Dialectic of Faith and Reason in Cornelio Fabro's Reading of Kierkegaard's Theology (Theological Studies, 2017, Vol. 78(3) 718–739), p. 735 ^ B McGinn, The Growth of Mysticism , (1994), p365 ^ a b Catholic Encyclopedia:Hugh of St. Victor ^ McGinn (1994), p365, gives 'around 1120' as the date.

^ A helpful, though not necessarily complete, list of Hugh's work – along with modern editions and translations – is printed in Hugh Feiss, ed, On Love , (2010), pp15-20.

^ Reprinted in PL 176:173-618 and in Hugonis de Sancto Victore De sacramentis Christiane fidei , ed. Rainer Berndt, Münster: Aschendorff, 2008. There is an English translation in Hugh of St Victor, On the sacraments of the Christian faith: (De sacramentis) , translated by Roy J Deferrari, (Cambridge, MA: Mediaeval Academy of America, 1951). An English translation of the Prologues is made in Franklin T. Harkins and Frans van Liere, eds, Interpretation of scripture: theory. A selection of works of Hugh, Andrew, Richard and Godfrey of St Victor, and of Robert of Melun , (Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols, 2012), pp253-268.

^ The Latin text is in Henry Buttimer, Hugonis de Sancto Victore. Didascalicon. De Studio Legendi , (Washington, DC: Catholic University Press, 1939). An older English translation is in Jerome Taylor, The Didascalicon of Hugh of St Victor , (New York: Columbia University Press, 1961). A more recent translation is Franklin T. Harkins and Frans van Liere, eds, Interpretation of scripture: theory. A selection of works of Hugh, Andrew, Richard and Godfrey of St Victor, and of Robert of Melun , (Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols, 2012), pp61-202.

^ These three treatises are printed in PL 176:617-740.

^ An older edition of the Latin text is in PL 175:928A. The modern edition is Hugonis de Sancto Victore Opera III: Super Ierarchiam Dionysii , (Turnhout: Brepols), CCCM, vol. 178.

^ David Luscombe, "The Commentary of Hugh of Saint-Victor on the Celestial Hierarchy", in T. Boiadjiev, G. Kapriev and A. Speer, eds, Die Dionysius-Rezeption im Mittelalter , (Turnholt:Brepols, 2000), pp160-164; D. Poirel, "Le 'chant dionysien' du IXe au XIIe siècle", in M. Goullet and M. Parisse (eds), Les historiens et le latin medieval , (Paris: Publications de la Sorbonne, 2001), pp151–176.

^ For further commentary on this work, see Rorem, Paul (2008). "The Early Latin Dionysius: Eriugena and Hugh of St. Victor".

Modern Theology .

24 (4): 601– 614.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0025.2008.00488.x .

^ Reprinted in PL 175:115A.

^ Reprinted in PL 176. A detailed study of this work exists in Dominique Porel, Livre de la nature et débat trinitaire au XXe siècle, Le De tribus diebus de Hugues de Saint-Victor , (Turnhout: Brepols, 2002), 169-198. Much of this introduction is summarised in the introduction to the English translation in Boyd Taylor Coolman and Dale M Coulter, eds, Trinity and creation: a selection of works of Hugh, Richard and Adam of St Victor , (Turnhout: Brepols, 2010).

^ Reprinted in PL 176:845-856.

^ Reprinted in PL 177:285-294.

^ a b c Reprinted in Roger Baron, ed., Hugonis de Sancto Victore Opera Propaedeutica (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1966).

^ Reprinted in Muller, Karl, ed., Hugo von St. Victor: Soliloquium de Arrha Animae Und De Vanitate Mundi (Bonn: A. Marcus Une E. Weber's Verlag,1913). There is an English translation in Soliloquy on the Earnest Money of the Soul , trans Kevin Herbert, (Milwaukee, WI: Marquette University Press, 1965).

^ See Bernard McGinn, The Growth of Mysticism , (1994), pp384-390. Latin text: Barthélemy Hauréau, Hugues de Saint-Victor . Paris, 1859 (pp. 177−210). A French translation is in Roger Baron, Hugues de Saint-Victor: La contemplation et ses espèces , (Tournai-Paris: Desclée, 1958).

^ An English translation is in Franklin T. Harkins and Frans van Liere, eds, Interpretation of scripture: theory. A selection of works of Hugh, Andrew, Richard and Godfrey of St Victor, and of Robert of Melun , (Turnhout, Belgium: Brepols, 2012) ^ Printed in PL176:993-998 ^ Printed in PL175:405-414.

^ Printed in PL176:405-414.

^ Eggebroten, Anne.

" "Sawles Warde": a retelling of "De Anima" for a female audience" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 August 2011 . Retrieved 23 December 2009 .

^ Gautier Dalché, Patrick.

La “Descriptio mappe mundi” de Hugues de Saint-Victor. Texte inédit avec introduction et commentaire.

(Paris: Études Augustiniennes, 1988).

^ Thomas F Martin OSA, Our Restless Heart: The Augustinian Tradition , (2003), p82 ^ Berndt, Rainer (2002). "Andrew of Saint-Victor". In André Vauchez (ed.).

Encyclopedia of the Middle Ages . James Clarke & Co.

^ B McGinn, The Growth of Mysticism , (1994), p366 ^ Erich Auerbach (2009). Damrosch, David; Melas, Natalie; Buthelezi, Mbongiseni (eds.).

The Princeton Sourcebook in Comparative Literature . Princeton: Princeton University Press. p. 124.

^ Ottaviano (1935) .

^ Ferrara (2016) , pp. 39–41.

Bibliography [ edit ] Ottaviano, Carmelo, ed. (1935), Un Brano Inedito della Philosophia di Guglielmo di Conches (in Latin), Naples: Alberto Morano .

Ferrara, Carmine (2016), Guglielmo di Conches e il Dragmaticon Philosophiae [ William of Conches and the Dragmaticon Philosophiae ] (in Italian), Fisciano: University of Salerno .

Luscombe, David (2000), "The Commentary of Hugh of Saint-Victor on the Celestial Hierarchy", Die Dionysius-Rezeption im Mittelalter , Turnholt: Brepols .

McGinn, Bernard (1994), The Growth of Mysticism , pp.

370– 395 .

External links [ edit ] Lewis E 213 Rule of Saint Augustine; Sermon on Matthew 25:6 at OPenn "Hugh of St. Victor" in: New Advent Latin texts of Hugh of St. Victor are available in the Migne edition at Documenta Catholica Omnia, http://www.documentacatholicaomnia.eu/1815-1875,_Migne,_Patrologia_Latina_03_Rerum_Conspectus_Pro_Auctoribus_Ordinatus,_MLT_H.html Alphandéry, Paul Daniel (1911).

"Hugh of St Victor" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 13 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 859.

v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists FID People Netherlands 2 Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hugh_of_Saint_Victor&oldid=1288424751 " Categories : 1090s births 1141 deaths Saxon nobility 12th-century German Roman Catholic priests 12th-century German Catholic theologians 12th-century Christian mystics 12th-century German philosophers 12th-century writers in Latin Augustinian canons Canonical Augustinian theologians Roman Catholic mystics Medieval geometers Scholastic philosophers Monastic theologians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2015 Articles containing Latin-language text CS1 Latin-language sources (la) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 2 May 2025, at 15:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hugh of Saint Victor 29 languages Add topic

