Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terms 2 Etymology and definitions Toggle Etymology and definitions subsection 2.1 Debate on the term and its limitations 2.2 Irrational fear 2.3 Relation to racism 3 Origins and causes Toggle Origins and causes subsection 3.1 History of the term 3.2 Increase in Islamophobia during 1990s 3.3 Contrasting views on Islam 3.4 Identity politics 3.5 Links to ideologies 3.6 Opposition to multiculturalism 4 Manifestations Toggle Manifestations subsection 4.1 Media 4.2 Movies 4.3 Organizations 4.4 Public opinion 4.5 Internalized Islamophobia 5 Trends Toggle Trends subsection 5.1 Anti-Islamic hate crimes data in the United States 5.2 Anti-Islamic hate crimes in Europe 5.3 Research on Islamophobia and its correlates 5.4 Regional trends 5.4.1 Anti-Muslim sentiment in Europe 5.4.2 Anti-Muslim sentiment elsewhere 6 Countering Islamophobia Toggle Countering Islamophobia subsection 6.1 International 6.2 European Union 6.2.1 Sweden 7 Tropes 8 Criticism 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Notes 10.2 Citations 10.3 Sources 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Islamophobia 72 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Discrimination against Islam or Muslims This article is about irrational fear, hatred of, or prejudice towards Muslims or Islam. For the historic persecution of Muslims, see Persecution of Muslims . For prejudice against those from the Middle East, see Anti–Middle Eastern sentiment .

This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( December 2024 ) Part of a series on Islamophobia Issues Airport profiling United States Conspiracy theories Counter-jihad Eurabia Great Replacement Halal-related Love jihad Hijabophobia Netherlands France Karnataka, India Immigration ban Media Orientalism Persecution minority groups Quran desecration Tropes 72 virgins Status by country Australia Austria Belgium Bosnia–Herzegovina Canada China France Germany Iceland India Indonesia Shia Israel Italy Myanmar Netherlands Norway Poland Russia [ ru ] Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom Conservative Party United States Stereotypes Violence Attacks on mosques: Al-Hidaya Al-Nurayn Bærum Babri Masjid Banya Bashi Bayonne Beit Lahia Bloomington Christchurch Corsica Gondar Hyderabad Ibrahim Kattankudy Kosovo Manili Malegaon Malmö Palimbang Quebec City Sweden (2014) Zürich Planned attacks California (2001) Singapore Genocide: Bosnian Ethnic cleansing Srebrenica Chechen (and Ingush) Deportation Crimean Tatar Deportation Circassian Algerians Palestinian Arab Sabra and Shatila Gazan Libyan Arab Sri Lankan Tamil Afghan Hyderabadi Muslim Volga Tatar Kazakh Ottoman Muslim Albanian Rohingya Massacres, torture, expulsion: Mecca (600s) Guangzhou (878–79) Jerusalem (1099) Ayyadieh (1191) Baghdad (1258) Granada (1482–92) Spain (1500–26) Moriscos (1609) İşkodra and Niş (1877–78) Harmanli (1878) Lasithi (1897) Albanians (1912–13) Šahovići (1924) Japan (1937–45) Kulen Vakuf (1941) Bukovica (1943) Sétif and Guelma (1945) Kafr Qasim (1956) Paris (1961) Shadian (1975) Beirut (1975) Karantina (1976) Sabra and Shatila (1982) Nellie (1983) Sohmor (1984) Big Excursion (1989) Northern Sri Lanka (1990) Bombay (1992–93) Cave of the Patriarchs (1994) Abu Ghraib (2000s) Walisongo (2000) Gujarat (2002) Norway (2011) Bossemptélé (2014) Assam (2014) Myanmar (2015) Sri Lanka (2018) Delhi (2020) Boyo (2021) Other incidents: Almondbury bullying incident Bendigo mosque protests Bulli Bai case / Sulli Deals CAA, 2019 Cronulla 2005 Erklärung 2018 Flying imams incident Jerry Klein Haridwar hate speeches Hindutva pop Holy Terror Innocence of Muslims Jyllands-Posten cartoons Kathua rape case Muslim Massacre (video game) Quran desecrations 2005 2010 2011 2019–23 Serbia Strong Persecution of Uyghurs in China 2021 London, Ontario truck attack Xinjiang internment camps Swiss minaret ban Trojan Horse affair Media Document.no FrontPage Magazine Gates of Vienna Innocence of Muslims Jihad Watch OpIndia Politically Incorrect Rebel News Stormfront The Brussels Journal WikiIslam Opposition Amnesty International CAIR Forum Against Islamophobia and Racism Human Rights Watch Islamophobia Watch Muslim American Society Muslims Condemn Southern Poverty Law Center Tell MAMA v t e Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Islamophobia is the irrational fear of, hostility towards, or hatred against the religion of Islam or Muslims in general.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Islamophobia is primarily a form of religious or cultural bigotry; [ 6 ] and people who harbour such sentiments often stereotype Muslims as a geopolitical threat or a source of terrorism .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Muslims, with diverse ethnic and cultural backgrounds, are often inaccurately portrayed by Islamophobes as a single homogeneous racial group.

[ 10 ] The causes of increased Islamophobia across the world since the end of the Cold War are many. These include the quasi-racialist stereotypes against Muslims that proliferated through the Western media since the 1990s, [ 11 ] the " war on terror " campaign launched by the United States after the September 11 attacks , [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] the rise of the Islamic State in the aftermath of the Iraq War , [ 15 ] terrorist attacks carried out by Islamist militants in the United States and Europe, anti-Muslim rhetoric disseminated by white nationalist organizations through the internet , [ 16 ] and the radicalization of Christian nationalist [ 17 ] and far-right groups with growing hostility towards Muslims in the United States and the European Union .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] A study conducted in 2013 revealed that Muslim women, especially those wearing headscarves or face veils, are more vulnerable to suffer from Islamophobic attacks than Muslim men.

[ 20 ] Due to the racialized nature of Islamophobic discrimination and attacks suffered by numerous Muslims in their daily lives, several scholars have asserted that Islamophobia has explicit racist dimensions.

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] On 15 March 2022, the United Nations General Assembly adopted a resolution by consensus which was introduced by Pakistan on behalf of the Organisation of Islamic Cooperation that proclaimed March 15 as ' International Day To Combat Islamophobia '.

[ 24 ] The exact definition of the term "Islamophobia" has been a subject of debate amongst Western analysts. Detractors of the term have proposed alternative terms, such as "anti-Muslim", to denote prejudice or discrimination against Muslims.

[ 25 ] It has been alleged, often by right-wing commentators, [ 26 ] [ 27 ] that the term is sometimes used to avoid criticism of Islam , by removing the distinction between racism and criticism of religious doctrine or practice.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 25 ] However, academics, activists and experts who support the terminology have denounced such characterizations as attempts to deny the existence of Islamophobia.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] Terms There are a number of other possible terms which are also used in order to refer to negative feelings and attitudes towards Islam and Muslims, such as anti-Muslimism , intolerance against Muslims , anti-Muslim prejudice , anti-Muslim bigotry , hatred of Muslims , anti-Islamism , Muslimophobia , demonisation of Islam , or demonisation of Muslims . In German, Islamophobie (fear) and Islamfeindlichkeit (hostility) are used. The Scandinavian term Muslimhat literally means "hatred of Muslims".

[ 34 ] When discrimination towards Muslims has placed an emphasis on their religious affiliation and adherence, it has been termed Muslimphobia, the alternative form of Muslimophobia, [ 35 ] Islamophobism, [ 36 ] antimuslimness and antimuslimism.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] Individuals who discriminate against Muslims in general have been termed Islamophobes , Islamophobists , [ 40 ] anti-Muslimists , [ 41 ] antimuslimists , [ 42 ] islamophobiacs , [ 43 ] anti-Muhammadan , [ 44 ] Muslimphobes or its alternative spelling of Muslimophobes , [ 45 ] while religiously intolerant individuals motivated by a specific anti-Muslim agenda or bigotry have been described as being anti-mosque , [ 46 ] anti-Shiites [ 47 ] (or Shiaphobes [ 48 ] ), anti-Sufism [ 49 ] (or Sufi-phobia ) [ 50 ] and anti-Sunni (or Sunniphobes ).

[ 51 ] Etymology and definitions The word Islamophobia is a neologism [ 52 ] formed from Islam and -phobia , a Greek suffix used in English to form "nouns with the sense 'fear of – – ' , 'aversion to – – '." [ 53 ] According to the Oxford English Dictionary , the word means "Intense dislike or fear of Islam, esp. as a political force; hostility or prejudice towards Muslims". It is attested in English as early as 1923 [ 54 ] to quote the French word islamophobie , found in a thesis published by Alain Quellien in 1910 to describe "a prejudice against Islam that is widespread among the peoples of Western and Christian civilization ".

[ 55 ] The expression did not immediately turn into the vocabulary of the English-speaking world though, which preferred the expression "feelings inimical to Islam", until its re-appearance in an article by Georges Chahati Anawati in 1976.

[ 56 ] The term did not exist in the Muslim world, [ a ] and was later translated in the 1990s as ruhāb al-islām (رُهاب الإسلام) in Arabic, literally "phobia of Islam".

[ 55 ] The University of California at Berkeley 's Islamophobia Research & Documentation Project suggested this working definition: "Islamophobia is a contrived fear or prejudice fomented by the existing Eurocentric and Orientalist global power structure. It is directed at a perceived or real Muslim threat through the maintenance and extension of existing disparities in economic, political, social and cultural relations, while rationalizing the necessity to deploy violence as a tool to achieve 'civilizational rehab' of the target communities (Muslim or otherwise). Islamophobia reintroduces and reaffirms a global racial structure through which resource distribution disparities are maintained and extended." [ 57 ] Debate on the term and its limitations In 1996, the Runnymede Trust established the Commission on British Muslims and Islamophobia (CBMI), chaired by Gordon Conway , the vice-chancellor of the University of Sussex . The Commission's report, Islamophobia: A Challenge for Us All , was published in November 1997 by the Home Secretary, Jack Straw . In the Runnymede report, Islamophobia was defined as "an outlook or world-view involving an unfounded dread and dislike of Muslims, which results in practices of exclusion and discrimination." [ 58 ] [ 59 ] The introduction of the term was justified by the report's assessment that "anti-Muslim prejudice has grown so considerably and so rapidly in recent years that a new item in the vocabulary is needed".

[ 60 ] [ 58 ] In 2008, a workshop on 'Thinking Through Islamophobia' proposed a definition of Islamophobia which rejected the idea of Islamophobia as being the product of closed and open views of Islam and focused on Islamophobia as performative which problematized Muslim agency and identity. The symposium was an early attempt to bring insights from critical race theory , postcolonial and decolonial thought to bear on the question of Islamophobia.

[ 61 ] At a 2009 symposium on "Islamophobia and Religious Discrimination", Robin Richardson, a former director of the Runnymede Trust [ 62 ] [ failed verification ] and the editor of Islamophobia: a challenge for us all , [ 63 ] said that "the disadvantages of the term Islamophobia are significant" on seven different grounds, including that it implies it is merely a "severe mental illness" affecting "only a tiny minority of people"; that use of the term makes those to whom it is applied "defensive and defiant" and absolves the user of "the responsibility of trying to understand them" or trying to change their views; that it implies that hostility to Muslims is divorced from factors such as skin color, immigrant status, fear of fundamentalism, or political or economic conflicts; that it conflates prejudice against Muslims in one's own country with dislike of Muslims in countries with which the West is in conflict; that it fails to distinguish between people who are against all religion from people who dislike Islam specifically; and that the actual issue being described is hostility to Muslims, "an ethno-religious identity within European countries", rather than hostility to Islam. Nonetheless, he argued that the term is here to stay, and that it is important to define it precisely.

[ 64 ] The exact definition of Islamophobia continues to be discussed, with academics such as Chris Allen saying that it lacks a clear definition.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] [ 67 ] According to Erik Bleich, in his article "Defining and Researching Islamophobia", even when definitions are more specific, there is still significant variation in the precise formulations of Islamophobia. As with parallel concepts like homophobia or xenophobia, Islamophobia connotes a broader set of negative attitudes or emotions directed at individuals of groups because of perceived membership in a defined category.

[ 68 ] Mattias Gardell defined Islamophobia as "socially reproduced prejudices and aversion to Islam and Muslims, as well as actions and practices that attack, exclude or discriminate against persons on the basis that they are or perceived to be Muslim and be associated with Islam".

[ 69 ] [ failed verification ] Irrational fear Speaker at a demonstration of the initiative We do not want Islam in the Czech Republic in 2015 As opposed to being a psychological or individualistic phobia, according to professors of religion Peter Gottschalk and Gabriel Greenberg, "Islamophobia" connotes a social anxiety about Islam and Muslims.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] Some social scientists have adopted this definition and developed instruments to measure Islamophobia in form of fearful attitudes towards, and avoidance of, Muslims and Islam, [ 72 ] [ 73 ] arguing that Islamophobia should "essentially be understood as an affective part of social stigma towards Islam and Muslims, namely fear".

[ 73 ] : 2 Relation to racism See also: Cultural racism Not to be confused with Anti-Arab racism or Anti–Middle Eastern sentiment .

Several scholars consider Islamophobia to be a form of racism . A 2007 article in Journal of Sociology defines Islamophobia as anti-Muslim racism and a continuation of anti- Asian , anti-Turkic and anti-Arab racism.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] In their books, Deepa Kumar and Junaid Rana have argued that formation of Islamophobic discourses has paralleled the development of other forms of racial bigotry.

[ 78 ] Similarly, John Denham has drawn parallels between modern Islamophobia and the antisemitism of the 1930s, [ 79 ] as have Maud Olofsson [ 80 ] and Jan Hjärpe , among others.

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] Others have questioned the relationship between Islamophobia and racism. Jocelyne Cesari writes that "academics are still debating the legitimacy of the term and questioning how it differs from other terms such as racism, anti-Islamism, anti-Muslimness, and anti-Semitism." [ 83 ] [ 84 ] Erdenir finds that "there is no consensus on the scope and content of the term and its relationship with concepts such as racism ..." [ 85 ] and Shryock, reviewing the use of the term across national boundaries, comes to the same conclusion.

[ 86 ] Some scholars view Islamophobia and racism as partially overlapping phenomena. Diane Frost defines Islamophobia as anti-Muslim feeling and violence based on "race" or religion.

[ 87 ] Islamophobia may also target people who have Muslim names, or have a look that is associated with Muslims.

[ 88 ] According to Alan Johnson , Islamophobia sometimes can be nothing more than xenophobia or racism "wrapped in religious terms".

[ 89 ] Sociologists Yasmin Hussain and Paul Bagguley stated that racism and Islamophobia are "analytically distinct", but "empirically inter-related".

[ 90 ] The European Commission against Racism and Intolerance (ECRI) defines Islamophobia as "the fear of or prejudiced viewpoint towards Islam, Muslims and matters pertaining to them", adding that whether "it takes the shape of daily forms of racism and discrimination or more violent forms, Islamophobia is a violation of human rights and a threat to social cohesion".

[ 69 ] Origins and causes See also: Criticism of Islam History of the term One early use cited as the term's first use is by the painter Alphonse Étienne Dinet and Algerian intellectual Sliman ben Ibrahim in their 1918 biography of Islam's prophet Muhammad .

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] Writing in French, they used the term islamophobie . Robin Richardson writes that in the English version of the book the word was not translated as "Islamophobia" but rather as "feelings inimical to Islam". Dahou Ezzerhouni has cited several other uses in French as early as 1910, and from 1912 to 1918.

[ 93 ] These early uses of the term did not, according to Christopher Allen , have the same meaning as in contemporary usage, as they described a fear of Islam by liberal Muslims and Muslim feminists , rather than a fear or dislike/hatred of Muslims by non-Muslims.

[ 92 ] [ 94 ] On the other hand, Fernando Bravo López argues that Dinet and ibn Sliman's use of the term was as a criticism of overly hostile attitudes to Islam by a Belgian orientalist, Henri Lammens, whose project they saw as a "'pseudo-scientific crusade in the hope of bringing Islam down once and for all.

' " He also notes that an early definition of Islamophobia appears in the 1910 Ph.D. thesis of Alain Quellien, a French colonial bureaucrat: For some, the Muslim is the natural and irreconcilable enemy of the Christian and the European; Islam is the negation of civilization, and barbarism, bad faith and cruelty are the best one can expect from the Mohammedans.

Furthermore, he notes that Quellien's work draws heavily on the work of the French colonial department's 1902–06 administrator, who published a work in 1906, which to a great extent mirrors John Esposito 's The Islamic Threat: Myth or Reality?

.

[ 95 ] The first recorded use of the term in English, according to the Oxford English Dictionary , was in 1923 in an article in The Journal of Theological Studies .

[ 54 ] The term entered into common usage with the publication of the Runnymede Trust's report in 1997.

[ 96 ] "Kofi Annan asserted at a 2004 conference entitled "Confronting Islamophobia" that the word Islamophobia had to be coined in order to "take account of increasingly widespread bigotry".

[ 97 ] Increase in Islamophobia during 1990s See also: Bosnian genocide During the Yugoslav Wars in the 1990s, far-right Serbian Orthodox Christian militants who were heavily indoctrinated with Islamophobic sentiments, perpetrated a genocide against Bosniak Muslims . Since 1989, Serbian leader Slobodan Milošević publicly disseminated Islamophobic rhetoric throughout Yugoslavia , inciting Serbian far-right militants to massacre Bosniak Muslims.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] The stereotyping of Bosniak Muslims as a hostile force threatening Europe with "terrorism" in Serbian propaganda was closely linked to the rise of Islamophobic narratives in Western media and European political discourse.

[ 101 ] Contrasting views on Islam The Runnymede report contrasted "open" and "closed" views of Islam, and stated that the following "closed" views are equated with Islamophobia: [ 102 ] Islam is seen as a monolithic bloc, static and unresponsive to change.

It is seen as separate and "other". It does not have values in common with other cultures, is not affected by them and does not influence them.

It is seen as inferior to the West. It is seen as barbaric, irrational, primitive, and sexist .

It is seen as violent, aggressive, threatening, supportive of terrorism , and engaged in a clash of civilizations .

It is seen as a political ideology , used for political or military advantage.

Criticisms made of "the West" by Muslims are rejected out of hand.

Hostility towards Islam is used to justify discriminatory practices towards Muslims and exclusion of Muslims from mainstream society.

Anti-Muslim hostility is seen as natural and normal.

These "closed" views are contrasted, in the report, with "open" views on Islam which, while founded on respect for Islam, permit legitimate disagreement, dialogue and critique.

[ 103 ] According to Benn and Jawad, The Runnymede Trust notes that anti-Muslim discourse is increasingly seen as respectable, providing examples on how hostility towards Islam and Muslims is accepted as normal, even among those who may actively challenge other prevalent forms of discrimination.

[ 104 ] Identity politics It has been suggested that Islamophobia is closely related to identity politics , and gives its adherents the perceived benefit of constructing their identity in opposition to a negative, essentialized image of Muslims. This occurs in the form of self-righteousness, assignment of blame and key identity markers.

[ 105 ] Davina Bhandar writes that: [ 106 ] [...] the term 'cultural' has become synonymous with the category of the ethnic or minority [...]. It views culture as an entity that is highly abstracted from the practices of daily life and therefore represents the illusion that there exists a spirit of the people. This formulation leads to the homogenisation of cultural identity and the ascription of particular values and proclivities onto minority cultural groups.

She views this as an ontological trap that hinders the perception of culture as something "materially situated in the living practices of the everyday, situated in time-space and not based in abstract projections of what constitutes either a particular tradition or culture." In some societies, Islamophobia has materialized due to the portrayal of Islam and Muslims as the national " Other ", where exclusion and discrimination occurs on the basis of their religion and civilization which differs with national tradition and identity. Examples include Pakistani and Algerian migrants in Britain and France respectively.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] This sentiment, according to Malcolm Brown and Robert Miles, significantly interacts with racism , although Islamophobia itself is not racism.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] Author Doug Saunders has drawn parallels between Islamophobia in the United States and its older discrimination and hate against Roman Catholics , saying that Catholicism was seen as backwards and imperial, while Catholic immigrants had poorer education and some were responsible for crime and terrorism.

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] [ 112 ] Brown and Miles write that another feature of Islamophobic discourse is to amalgamate nationality (e.g. Saudi), religion (Islam), and politics (terrorism, fundamentalism) – while most other religions are not associated with terrorism, or even "ethnic or national distinctiveness".

[ 108 ] They feel that "many of the stereotypes and misinformation that contribute to the articulation of Islamophobia are rooted in a particular perception of Islam", such as the notion that Islam promotes terrorism – especially prevalent after the September 11, 2001 attacks .

[ 7 ] The two-way stereotyping resulting from Islamophobia has in some instances resulted in mainstreaming of earlier controversial discourses, such as liberal attitudes towards gender equality [ 105 ] [ 106 ] and homosexuals.

[ 113 ] Christina Ho has warned against framing of such mainstreaming of gender equality in a colonial , paternal discourse, arguing that this may undermine minority women's ability to speak out about their concerns.

[ 114 ] Steven Salaita contends that, since 9/11, Arab Americans have evolved from what Nadine Naber described as an invisible group in the United States into a highly visible community that directly or indirectly has an effect on the United States' culture wars, foreign policy, presidential elections and legislative tradition.

[ 115 ] The academics S. Sayyid and Abdoolkarim Vakil maintain that Islamophobia is a response to the emergence of a distinct Muslim public identity globally, the presence of Muslims in itself not being an indicator of the degree of Islamophobia in a society. Sayyid and Vakil maintain that there are societies where virtually no Muslims live but many institutionalized forms of Islamophobia still exist in them.

[ 61 ] Links to ideologies The 2014 anti-Muslim riots in Sri Lanka followed rallies by Bodu Bala Sena (BBS), a hard-line Buddhist group.

An anti-Islam protest in the United States Cora Alexa Døving, a senior scientist at the Norwegian Center for Studies of the Holocaust and Religious Minorities , argues that there are significant similarities between Islamophobic discourse and European pre-Nazi antisemitism.

[ 105 ] Among the concerns are imagined threats of minority growth and domination, threats to traditional institutions and customs, skepticism of integration, threats to secularism , fears of sexual crimes, fears of misogyny , fears based on historical cultural inferiority, hostility to modern Western Enlightenment values, etc.

Matti Bunzl [ de ] has argued that there are important differences between Islamophobia and antisemitism. While antisemitism was a phenomenon closely connected to European nation-building processes, he sees Islamophobia as having the concern of European civilization as its focal point.

[ 116 ] Døving, on the other hand, maintains that, at least in Norway, the Islamophobic discourse has a clear national element.

[ 105 ] In a reply to Bunzl, French scholar of Jewish history, Esther Benbassa , agrees with him in that he draws a clear connection between modern hostile and essentializing sentiments towards Muslims and historical antisemitism. However, she argues against the use of the term Islamophobia , since, in her opinion, it attracts unwarranted attention to an underlying racist current.

[ 117 ] The head of the Media Responsibility Institute in Erlangen , Sabine Schiffer, and researcher Constantin Wagner, who also define Islamophobia as anti-Muslim racism, outline additional similarities and differences between Islamophobia and antisemitism.

[ 118 ] They point out the existence of equivalent notions such as "Judaisation/Islamisation", and metaphors such as "a state within a state" are used in relation to both Jews and Muslims. In addition, both discourses make use of, among other rhetorical instruments, "religious imperatives" supposedly "proven" by religious sources, and conspiracy theories.

The differences between Islamophobia and antisemitism consist of the nature of the perceived threats to the " Christian West ". Muslims are perceived as "inferior" and as a visible "external threat", while on the other hand, Jews are perceived as "omnipotent" and as an invisible "internal threat". However, Schiffer and Wagner also note that there is a growing tendency to view Muslims as a privileged group that constitute an "internal threat" and that this convergence between the two discources makes "it more and more necessary to use findings from the study of anti-Semitism to analyse Islamophobia". Schiffer and Wagner conclude, The achievement in the study of anti-Semitism of examining Jewry and anti-Semitism separately must also be transferred to other racisms, such as Islamophobia. We do not need more information about Islam, but more information about the making of racist stereotypes in general.

The publication Social Work and Minorities: European Perspectives describes Islamophobia as the new form of racism in Europe, [ 119 ] arguing that "Islamophobia is as much a form of racism as anti-semitism , a term more commonly encountered in Europe as a sibling of racism, xenophobia and intolerance." [ 120 ] Edward Said considers Islamophobia as it is evinced in Orientalism to be a trend in a more general antisemitic Western tradition.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] Others note that there has been a transition from anti-Asian and anti-Arab racism to anti-Muslim racism, [ 123 ] while some note a racialization of religion.

[ 124 ] According to a 2012 report by a UK anti-racism group, counter-jihadist outfits in Europe and North America are becoming more cohesive by forging alliances, with 190 groups now identified as promoting an Islamophobic agenda.

[ 125 ] In Islamophobia and its consequences on young people (p. 6) Ingrid Ramberg writes "Whether it takes the shape of daily forms of racism and discrimination or more violent forms, Islamophobia is a violation of human rights and a threat to social cohesion." Professor John Esposito of Georgetown University calls Islamophobia "the new anti-Semitism".

[ 126 ] In their 2018 American Muslim Poll, the Institute for Social Policy and Understanding found that when it came to their Islamophobia index (see Public Opinion), they found that those who scored higher on the index, (i.e. more islamophobic) were, "associated with 1) greater acceptance of targeting civilians, whether it is a military or individual/small group that is doling out the violence, 2) greater acquiescence to limiting both press freedoms and institutional checks following a hypothetical terror attack, and 3) greater support for the so-called "Muslim ban" and the surveillance of American mosques (or their outright building prohibition)." [ 127 ] Mohamed Nimer compares Islamophobia with anti-Americanism. He argues that while both Islam and America can be subject to legitimate criticisms without detesting a people as a whole, bigotry against both are on the rise.

[ 128 ] Gideon Rachman wrote in 2019 of a " clash of civilizations " between Muslim and non-Muslim nations, linking anti-Islam radicalisation outside the Muslim world to the rise of intolerant Islamism in some Muslim countries that used to be relatively free from that ideology.

[ 129 ] Blasphemy of Islam has been described as Islamophobia, while some countries consider blasphemy legal as freedom of speech .

[ 130 ] Opposition to multiculturalism According to Gabrielle Maranci, the increasing Islamophobia in the West is related to a rising repudiation of multiculturalism . Maranci concludes that "Islamophobia is a 'phobia' of multiculturalism and the transruptive effect that Islam can have in Europe and the West through transcultural processes." [ 131 ] Manifestations Flower wall memorial erected after mass-shootings in March 2019 targeting Al-Noor Mosque and Linwood Islamic Centre in Christchurch City , New Zealand . The terrorist attack was motivated by far-right extremism and resulted in 51 deaths.

Media Main article: Islamophobia in the media According to Elizabeth Poole in the Encyclopedia of Race and Ethnic Studies , the media have been criticized for perpetrating Islamophobia. She cites a case study examining a sample of articles in the British press from between 1994 and 2004, which concluded that Muslim viewpoints were underrepresented and that issues involving Muslims usually depicted them in a negative light. Such portrayals, according to Poole, include the depiction of Islam and Muslims as a threat to Western security and values .

[ 132 ] Benn and Jawad write that hostility towards Islam and Muslims are "closely linked to media portrayals of Islam as barbaric, irrational, primitive and sexist." [ 104 ] Egorova and Tudor cite European researchers in suggesting that expressions used in the media such as "Islamic terrorism", "Islamic bombs" and "violent Islam" have resulted in a negative perception of Islam.

[ 8 ] John E. Richardson's 2004 book (Mis)representing Islam: the racism and rhetoric of British broadsheet newspapers , criticized the British media for propagating negative stereotypes of Muslims and fueling anti-Muslim prejudice .

[ 133 ] In another study conducted by John E. Richardson, he found that 85% of mainstream newspaper articles treated Muslims as a homogeneous mass and portrayed them as a threat to British society.

[ 134 ] The Universities of Georgia and Alabama in the United States conducted a study comparing media coverage of "terrorist attacks" committed by Islamist militants with those of non-Muslims in the United States.  Researchers found that "terrorist attacks" by Islamist militants receive 357% more media attention than attacks committed by non-Muslims or whites. Terrorist attacks committed by non-Muslims (or where the religion was unknown) received an average of 15 headlines, while those committed by Muslim extremists received 105 headlines. The study was based on an analysis of news reports covering terrorist attacks in the United States between 2005 and 2015.

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] [ 137 ] This was despite the fact that far-right extremists were responsible for almost double the number of terrorist acts in US attributed to Muslim individuals between 2008 and 2016. In spite of this disparity, US and UK governments have been negligent in confronting far-right terrorists , instead focusing almost all their counter-terrorism resources on imposing surveillance measures on Muslim population and censoring Muslim activists. Many right-wing politicians have also engaged in anti-Muslim rhetoric, indirectly motivating far-right groups to intensify violent hate crimes against Muslims.

[ 138 ] [ 139 ] In 2009, Mehdi Hasan in the New Statesman criticized Western media for over-reporting a few Islamist terrorist incidents but under-reporting the much larger number of planned non-Islamist terrorist attacks carried out by "non-Irish white folks".

[ 140 ] A 2012 study indicates that Muslims across different European countries, such as France, Germany and the United Kingdom, experience the highest degree of Islamophobia in the media.

[ 73 ] Media personalities have been accused of Islamophobia. The obituary in The Guardian for the Italian journalist Oriana Fallaci described her as "notorious for her Islamaphobia"  [ sic ].

[ 141 ] The Institute for Social Policy and Understanding published a report in 2018 where they stated, "In terms of print media coverage, Muslim-perceived perpetrators received twice the absolute quantity of media coverage as their non-Muslim counterparts in the cases of violent completed acts. For "foiled" plots, they received seven and half times the media coverage as their counterparts." [ 142 ] Nathan Lean used the term "Islamophobia industry" in the 2012 book The Islamophobia Industry: How the Right Manufactures Fear of Muslims to describe how certain ideologies and political proclivities have converged to advance the same agenda.

[ 143 ] The "Islamophobia industry" has since been discussed by other scholars including Joseph Kaminski, [ 144 ] Hatem Bazian, [ 145 ] Arlene Stein, Zakia Salime, Reza Aslan , [ 146 ] Erdoan A. Shipoli, and Deepa Kumar , the latter drawing a comparison between the "Islamophobia industry" and Cold War era McCarthyism .

[ 147 ] Some media outlets are working explicitly against Islamophobia. In 2008 Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting ("FAIR") published a study "Smearcasting, How Islamophobes Spread Bigotry, Fear and Misinformation". The report cites several instances where mainstream or close to mainstream journalists, authors and academics have made analyses that essentialize negative traits as an inherent part of Muslims' moral makeup.

[ 148 ] FAIR also established the " Forum Against Islamophobia and Racism ", designed to monitor coverage in the media and establish dialogue with media organizations. Following the attacks of 11 September 2001 , the Islamic Society of Britain 's "Islam Awareness Week" and the "Best of British Islam Festival" were introduced to improve community relations and raise awareness about Islam.

[ 149 ] Silva and Meaux et al both theorized that one of the main causes of negative interactions, stigma , and marginalization toward the Arabic community is due to the fact that many media framing from news outlets tend to associate Arab-Muslims with terrorism and jihadist -inspired motivations when it came to mass violence incidents.

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] Silva noted in their research looking through New York Times articles about gun violence and noted that over the sixteen-year period of 2000 until 2016 this media framing would only increase through the time period.

[ 151 ] Silva compared his results to find out that Arabic perpetrators were significantly more like to be framed as terrorists than their White counterparts. Meaux et al note back to research conducted by Park et al that indicated that the most salient association that Americans held on to was Arab-Muslims to terrorism with the notion that people that believed in this association the strongest were more likely to hold implicit bias.

[ 150 ] [ 152 ] Movies Pro-Palestinian protest in Los Angeles against the war in Gaza and Hollywood's role in dehumanizing Muslims, November 2023 Throughout the twentieth century, Muslim characters were portrayed in Hollywood often negatively and with Orientalist stereotypes visualising them as being "uncivilised". Since the Post-9/11 era, in addition to these tropes, a securitization of Muslims; portraying them as a threat to the Western world , have drastically increased in movie depictions.

[ 153 ] There are growing instances of Islamophobia in Hindi cinema, or Bollywood , in films such as Aamir (2008), New York (2009) and My Name is Khan (2010), which corresponds to a growing anti-minorities sentiment that followed the resurgence of the Hindu right .

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] Organizations See also: List of organizations designated by the Southern Poverty Law Center as hate groups § Anti-Muslim An English Defence League demonstration. The placard reads Shut down the mosque command and control centre .

A report from the University of California Berkeley and the Council on American–Islamic Relations estimated that $206 million was funded to 33 groups whose primary purpose was "to promote prejudice against, or hatred of, Islam and Muslims" in the United States between 2008 and 2013, with a total of 74 groups contributing to Islamophobia in the United States during that period.

[ 156 ] Stop Islamization of America (SIOA) and the Freedom Defense Initiative are designated as hate groups by the Anti-Defamation League [ 157 ] and the Southern Poverty Law Center .

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] [ 160 ] In August 2012 SIOA generated media publicity by sponsoring billboards in New York City Subway stations claiming there had been 19,250 terrorist attacks by Muslims since 9/11 and stating "it's not Islamophobia, it's Islamorealism." [ 161 ] It later ran advertisements reading "In any war between the civilized man and the savage, support the civilized man. Support Israel. Defeat Jihad." Several groups condemned the advertisements as "hate speech" about all Muslims.

[ 162 ] [ 163 ] In early January 2013 the Freedom Defense Initiative put up advertisements next to 228 clocks in 39 New York subway stations showing the 2001 attacks on the World Trade Center with a quote attributed to the 151st verse of chapter 3 of the Quran: "Soon shall we cast terror into the hearts of the unbelievers." [ 164 ] [ 165 ] The New York City Transit Authority , which said it would have to carry the advertisements on First Amendment grounds, insisted that 25% of the ad contain a Transit Authority disclaimer.

[ 166 ] [ 167 ] These advertisements also were criticized.

[ 168 ] [ 169 ] The English Defence League (EDL), an organization in the United Kingdom, has been described as anti-Muslim. It was formed in 2009 to oppose what it considers to be a spread of Islamism, Sharia law and Islamic extremism in the UK.

[ 170 ] The EDL's former leader, Tommy Robinson , left the group in 2013 saying it had become too extreme and that street protests were ineffective.

[ 171 ] Furthermore, the 7 July 2005 London bombings and the resulting efforts of the British civil and law enforcement authorities to help seek British Muslims' help in identifying potential threats to create prevention is observed by Michael Lavalette as institutionalized Islamophobia. Lavalette alleges that there is a continuity between the former two British governments over prevention that aims to stop young Muslim people from being misled, misdirected and recruited by extremists who exploit grievances for their own "jihadist" endeavors. Asking and concentrating on Muslim communities and young Muslims to prevent future instances, by the authorities, is in itself Islamophobia as such since involvement of Muslim communities will highlight and endorse their compassion for Britain and negate the perceived threats from within their communities.

[ 172 ] Public opinion Anti-Islam rally in Poland in 2015 The extent of negative attitudes towards Muslims varies across different parts of Europe. Polls in Germany [ 173 ] [ 174 ] and the Czech Republic [ 175 ] (as well as South Korea) [ 176 ] have suggested that most respondents do not welcome Muslim refugees in those countries.

A 2017 Chatham House poll of more than 10,000 people in 10 European countries had on average 55% agreeing that all further migration from Muslim-majority countries should be stopped, with 20% disagreeing and 25% offered no opinion. By country, majority opposition was found in Poland (71%), Austria (65%), Belgium (64%), Hungary (64%), France (61%), Greece (58%), Germany (53%), and Italy (51%).

[ 177 ] Unfavourable views of Muslims, 2019 [ 178 ] Country Percent Poland 66% Czech Republic 64% Hungary 58% Greece 57% Lithuania 56% Italy 55% Spain 42% Sweden 28% France 22% Ukraine 21% Russia 19% United Kingdom 18% In Canada, surveys have suggested that 55% of respondents think the problem of Islamophobia is "overblown" by politicians and media, 42% think discrimination against Muslims is 'mainly their fault', and 47% support banning headscarves in public.

[ 179 ] In the United States, a 2011 YouGov poll found that 50% of respondents expressed an unfavourable view of Islam, compared to 23% expressing a favourable view.

[ 180 ] Another YouGov poll done in 2015 had 55% of respondents expressing an unfavourable view.

[ 181 ] However, according to a 2018 Institute for Social Policy and Understanding , 86% of American respondents said they wanted to "live in a country where no one is targeted for their religious identity", 83% told ISPU they supported "protecting the civil rights of American Muslims", 66% believed negative political rhetoric toward Muslims was harmful to U.S., and 65% agreed that Islamophobia produced discriminatory consequences for Muslims in America.

[ 127 ] The chart below displays collected data from the ISPU 2018 American Muslim Poll [ 127 ] which surveyed six different faith populations in the United States. The statements featured in this chart were asked to participants who then responded on a scale from strongly agree to strongly disagree. The total percentage of those who answered agree and strongly agree are depicted as follows: Question 1: "I want to live in a country where no one is targeted for their religious identity." Question 2: "The negative things politicians say regarding Muslims is harmful to our country." Question 3: "Most Muslims living in the United States are no more responsible for violence carried out by a Muslim than anyone else." Question 4: "Most Muslims living in the United States are victims of discrimination because of their faith." 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 Muslim Jewish Catholic Protestant White Evangelical Unaffiliated Question 1 (% Net agree) Question 2 (% Net agree) Question 3 (% Net Agree) Question 4 (% Net agree) The table below represents the Islamophobia Index, also from the 2018 ISPU poll.

[ 127 ] This data displays an index of Islamophobia among faith populations in the United States.

ISPU Islamophobia Index [ 127 ] Most Muslims living in the United States... (% Net agree shown) Muslim Jewish Catholic Protestant White Evangelical Non-Affiliated General Public Are more prone to violence 18% 15% 12% 13% 23% 8% 13% Discriminate against women 12% 23% 29% 30% 36% 18% 26% Are hostile to the United States 12% 13% 9% 14% 23% 8% 12% Are less civilized than other people 8% 6% 4% 6% 10% 1% 6% Are partially responsible for acts of violence carried out by other Muslims 10% 16% 11% 12% 14% 8% 12% Index (0 min- 100 max) 17 22 22 31 40 14 24 Internalized Islamophobia ISPU also highlighted a particular trend in relation to anti-Muslim sentiment in the U.S. – internalized Islamophobia among Muslim populations themselves. When asked if they felt most people want them to be ashamed of their faith identity, 30% of Muslims agreed (a higher percentage than any other faith group). When asked if they believed that their faith community was more prone to negative behavior than other faith communities, 30% of Muslims agreed, again, a higher percentage than other faith groups.

[ 127 ] Trends This section may contain an excessive number of citations .

Please help improve it by removing low-quality or irrelevant citations .

( September 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Islamophobia has become a topic of increasing sociological and political importance.

[ 108 ] According to Benn and Jawad, Islamophobia has increased since Ayatollah Khomeini 's 1989 fatwa inciting Muslims to attempt to murder Salman Rushdie , the author of The Satanic Verses , and since the September 11 attacks in 2001.

[ 182 ] Anthropologist Steven Vertovec writes that the purported growth in Islamophobia may be associated with increased Muslim presence in society and successes.

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] He suggests a circular model , where increased hostility towards Islam and Muslims results in governmental countermeasures such as institutional guidelines and changes to legislation, which itself may fuel further Islamophobia due to increased accommodation for Muslims in public life. Vertovec concludes: "As the public sphere shifts to provide a more prominent place for Muslims, Islamophobic tendencies may amplify." [ 183 ] [ 184 ] An anti-Islamic protest in Poland Patel, Humphries, and Naik (1998) claim that "Islamophobia has always been present in Western countries and cultures. In the last two decades, it has become accentuated, explicit and extreme." [ 185 ] [ 186 ] However, Vertovec states that some have observed that Islamophobia has not necessarily escalated in the past decades, but that there has been increased public scrutiny of it.

[ 183 ] [ 184 ] According to Abduljalil Sajid, one of the members of the Runnymede Trust's Commission on British Muslims and Islamophobia, "Islamophobias" have existed in varying strains throughout history, with each version possessing its own distinct features as well as similarities or adaptations from others.

[ 187 ] In 2005 Ziauddin Sardar , an Islamic scholar , wrote in the New Statesman that Islamophobia is a widespread European phenomenon.

[ 188 ] He noted that each country has anti-Muslim political figures, citing Jean-Marie Le Pen in France; Pim Fortuyn in the Netherlands; and Philippe van der Sande of Vlaams Blok , a Flemish nationalist party in Belgium. Sardar argued that Europe is "post-colonial, but ambivalent". Minorities are regarded as acceptable as an underclass of menial workers, but if they want to be upwardly mobile anti-Muslim prejudice rises to the surface. Wolfram Richter, professor of economics at Technical University of Dortmund , told Sardar: "I am afraid we have not learned from our history. My main fear is that what we did to Jews we may now do to Muslims. The next holocaust would be against Muslims." [ 188 ] Similar fears, as noted by Kenan Malik in his book From Fatwa to Jihad , had been previously expressed in the UK by Muslim philosopher Shabbir Akhtar in 1989, and Massoud Shadjareh, chair of the Islamic Human Rights Commission in 2000. In 2006 Salma Yaqoob , a Respect Party Councillor, claimed that Muslims in Britain were "subject to attacks reminiscent of the gathering storm of anti-Semitism in the first decades of the last century." [ 189 ] Malik, a senior visiting fellow in the Department of Political, International and Policy Studies at the University of Surrey , has described these claims of a brewing holocaust as "hysterical to the point of delusion"; whereas Jews in Hitler's Germany were given the official designation of Untermenschen , and were subject to escalating legislation which diminished and ultimately removed their rights as citizens, Malik noted that in cases where "Muslims are singled out in Britain, it is often for privileged treatment" such as the 2005 legislation banning "incitement to religious hatred", the special funding Muslim organizations and bodies receive from local and national government, the special provisions made by workplaces, school and leisure centres for Muslims, and even suggestions by the Archbishop of Canterbury Rowan Williams and the former Lord Chief Justice, Lord Phillips , that sharia law should be introduced into Britain. The fact is, wrote Malik, that such well-respected public figures as Akhtar, Shadjareh and Yaqoob need "a history lesson about the real Holocaust reveals how warped the Muslim grievance culture has become." [ 190 ] A protester opposing the Park51 project carries an anti-sharia sign.

Hindu nationalist politician Arun Pathak organised a celebration in Varanasi to commemorate the 1992 demolition of the Babri Masjid mosque .

In 2006 ABC News reported that "public views of Islam are one casualty of the post-September 11, 2001 conflict: Nearly six in 10 Americans think the religion is prone to violent extremism , nearly half regard it unfavourably, and a remarkable one in four admits to prejudicial feelings against Muslims and Arabs alike." They also report that 27 percent of Americans admit feelings of prejudice against Muslims.

[ 191 ] Gallup polls in 2006 found that 40 percent of Americans admit to prejudice against Muslims, and 39 percent believe Muslims should carry special identification.

[ 192 ] These trends have only worsened with the use of Islamophobia as a campaign tactic during the 2008 American presidential election (with several Republican politicians and pundits, including Donald Trump, asserting that Democratic candidate Barack Obama is secretly a Muslim), during the 2010 mid-term elections (during which a proposed Islamic community center was dubbed the "Ground Zero Mosque" [ 193 ] ), and the 2016 presidential election, during which Republican nominee Donald Trump proposed banning the entrance into the country of all Muslims. Associate Professor Deepa Kumar writes that "Islamophobia is about politics rather than religion per se" [ 194 ] and that modern-day demonization of Arabs and Muslims by US politicians and others is racist and Islamophobic, and employed in support of what she describes as an unjust war. About the public impact of this rhetoric, she says that "One of the consequences of the relentless attacks on Islam and Muslims by politicians and the media is that Islamophobic sentiment is on the rise." She also chides some "people on the left" for using the same "Islamophobic logic as the Bush regime".

[ 195 ] In this regard, Kumar confirms the assertions of Stephen Sheehi , who "conceptualises Islamophobia as an ideological formation within the context of the American empire. Doing so "allows us to remove it from the hands of 'culture' or from the myth of a single creator or progenitor, whether it be a person, organisation or community." An ideological formation, in this telling, is a constellation of networks that produce, proliferate, benefit from, and traffic in Islamophobic discourses." [ 196 ] The writer and scholar on religion Reza Aslan has said that "Islamophobia has become so mainstream in this country that Americans have been trained to expect violence against Muslims – not excuse it, but expect it".

[ 197 ] A January 2010 British Social Attitudes Survey found that the British public "is far more likely to hold negative views of Muslims than of any other religious group," with "just one in four" feeling "positively about Islam", and a "majority of the country would be concerned if a mosque was built in their area, while only 15 per cent expressed similar qualms about the opening of a church." [ 198 ] A 2016 report by CAIR and University of California, Berkeley 's Center for Race and Gender said that groups promoting islamophobia in the US had access to US$206 million between 2008 and 2013. The author of the report said that "The hate that these groups are funding and inciting is having real consequences like attacks on mosques all over the country and new laws discriminating against Muslims in America." [ 199 ] In the United States, religious discrimination against Muslims has become a significant issue of concern. In 2018, The Institute for Social Policy and Understanding found that out of the groups studied, Muslims are the most likely faith community to experience religious discrimination, the data having been that way since 2015. Despite 61% of Muslims reporting experiencing religious discrimination at some level and 62% reporting that most Americans held negative stereotypes about their community,  23% reported that their faith made them feel "out of place in the world".

[ 127 ] There are intersections with racial identity and gender identity, with 73% of Arabs surveyed being more likely to experience religious discrimination, and Muslim women (75%) and youth (75%) being the most likely to report experiencing racial discrimination. The study also found that, although, "most Muslims (86%) express pride in their faith identity, they are the most likely group studied to agree that others want them to feel shame for that identity (30% of Muslims vs. 12% of Jews, 16% of non-affiliated, and 4–6% of Christian groups)." [ 127 ] A 2021 survey affiliated with Newcastle University found that 83% of Muslims in Scotland said they experienced Islamophobia such as verbal or physical attacks. 75% of them said Islamophobia is a regular or everyday issue in Scottish society and 78% believed it was getting worse.

[ 200 ] Anti-Islamic hate crimes data in the United States A mannequin symbolizing a Muslim in a keffiyeh , strapped to a "Made in the USA" bomb display at a protest of Park51 in New York City A protest in Cincinnati, Ohio Protests against Executive Order 13769 in Tehran, Iran , 10 February 2017 Data on types of hate crimes have been collected by the U.S.

FBI since 1992, to carry out the dictates of the 1990 Hate Crime Statistics Act . Hate crime offenses include crimes against persons (such as assaults) and against property (such as arson ), and are classified by various race-based, religion-based, and other motivations.

The data show that recorded anti-Islamic hate crimes in the United States jumped dramatically in 2001. Anti-Islamic hate crimes then subsided, but continued at a significantly higher pace than in pre-2001 years. The step up is in contrast to decreases in total hate crimes and to the decline in overall crime in the U.S.

since the 1990s.

Specifically, the FBI's annual hate crimes statistics reports from 1996 to 2013 document average numbers of anti-Islamic offenses at 31 per year before 2001, then a leap to 546 in 2001 (the year of 9-11 attacks), and averaging 159 per since. Among those offenses are anti-Islamic arson incidents which have a similar pattern: arson incidents averaged 0.4 per year pre-2001, jumped to 18 in 2001, and averaged 1.5 annually since.

[ 201 ] Year-by-year anti-Islamic hate crimes, all hate crimes, and arson subtotals are as follows: Anti-Islamic hate crimes All hate crimes Year Arson offenses Total offenses Arson offenses Total offenses 1996 0 33 75 10,706 1997 1 31 60 9,861 1998 0 22 50 9,235 1999 1 34 48 9,301 2000 0 33 52 9,430 2001 18 546 90 11,451 2002 0 170 38 8,832 2003 2 155 34 8,715 2004 2 193 44 9,035 2005 0 146 39 8,380 2006 0 191 41 9,080 2007 0 133 40 9,006 2008 5 123 53 9,168 2009 1 128 41 7,789 2010 1 186 42 7,699 2011 2 175 42 7,254 2012 4 149 38 6,718 2013 1 165 36 6,933 Total 38 2,613 863 158,593 Average 2.1 145.2 47.9 8810.7 1996–2000 avg .40 30.6 57.0 9,707 2001 18 546 90 11,451 2002–2013 avg 1.50 159.5 40.7 8,217 In contrast, the overall numbers of arson and total offenses declined from pre-2001 to post-2001.

Anti-Islamic hate crimes in Europe There have also been reports of hate crimes targeting Muslims across Europe. These incidents have increased after terrorist attacks by extremist groups such as ISIL.

[ 202 ] Far-right and right-wing populist political parties and organizations have also been accused of fueling fear and hatred towards Muslims.

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] [ 205 ] [ 206 ] Hate crimes such as arson and physical violence have been attempted or have occurred in Norway, [ 207 ] Poland, [ 208 ] [ 209 ] Sweden, [ 210 ] France, [ 211 ] [ 212 ] Spain, [ 213 ] Denmark, [ 214 ] Germany [ 215 ] and Great Britain.

[ 216 ] Politicians have also made anti-Muslim comments when discussing the European migrant crisis .

[ 217 ] [ 218 ] [ 219 ] According to Yvonne Haddad : The Islamophobia Industry in America is "driven by neocon stars: Daniel Pipes, Robert Spencer, David Yerushalmi, Glenn Beck, Pamela Gellner, Paul Wolfowitz, David Horowitz, and Frank Gaffney as well as native informers Walid Shoebat, Walid Phares, Wafa Sultan, Ayaan Hirsi Ali, Ibn Warraq, Brigitte Gabriel, Tawfik Hamid, and Zuhdi Jasser. They have been prolific, producing and re-circulating false or exaggerated information about Islam and Muslims in order to gain lucrative speaking engagements and increase their influence among neocons in government." [ 220 ] Research on Islamophobia and its correlates According to data by the Pew Research Center elaborated by VoxEurop, in European Union countries the negative attitude towards Muslims is inversely proportional to actual presence.

[ 221 ] Various studies have been conducted to investigate Islamophobia and its correlates among majority populations and among Muslim minorities themselves. To start with, an experimental study showed that anti-Muslim attitudes may be stronger than more general xenophobic attitudes.

[ 222 ] Moreover, studies indicate that anti-Muslim prejudice among majority populations is primarily explained by the perception of Muslims as a cultural threat, rather than as a threat towards the respective nation's economy.

[ 223 ] [ 224 ] [ 225 ] Studies focusing on the experience of Islamophobia among Muslims have shown that the experience of religious discrimination is associated with lower national identification and higher religious identification.

[ 226 ] [ 227 ] In other words, religious discrimination seems to lead Muslims to increase their identification with their religion and to decrease their identification with their nation of residence. Some studies further indicate that societal Islamophobia negatively influences Muslim minorities' health.

[ 73 ] [ 228 ] One of the studies showed that the perception of an Islamophobic society is associated with more psychological problems , such as depression and nervousness , regardless whether the respective individual had personally experienced religious discrimination .

[ 73 ] As the authors of the study suggest, anti-discrimination laws may therefore be insufficient to fully protect Muslim minorities from an environment which is hostile towards their religious group.

Farid Hafez and Enes Bayrakli publish an annual European Islamophobia Report since 2015.

[ 229 ] The European Islamophobie Report aims to enable policymakers as well as the public to discuss the issue of Islamophobia with the help of qualitative data. It is the first report to cover a wide range of Eastern European countries like Serbia, Croatia, Hungary, Lithuania, and Latvia. Farid Hafez is also editor of the German-English Islamophobia Studies Yearbook .

[ 230 ] Regional trends Anti-Muslim sentiment in Europe See also: Eurabia conspiracy theory Muslim immigration into Europe has led some critics to label Islam incompatible with secular Western society.

[ 231 ] [ 232 ] [ 233 ] This criticism has been partly influenced by a stance against multiculturalism advocated by recent philosophers, closely linked to the heritage of New Philosophers , including the likes of Pascal Bruckner .

[ 234 ] [ 235 ] [ 236 ] [ 237 ] Jocelyne Cesari, in her study of discrimination against Muslims in Europe, [ 238 ] finds that anti-Islamic sentiment may be difficult to separate from other drivers of discrimination. Because Muslims are mainly from immigrant backgrounds and the largest group of immigrants in many Western European countries, xenophobia overlaps with Islamophobia, and a person may have one, the other, or both. So, for example, some people who have a negative perception of and attitude toward Muslims may also show this toward non-Muslim immigrants, either as a whole or certain group (such as, for example, Eastern Europeans, sub-Saharan Africans, or Roma), whereas others would not.

Unfavourable views of Muslims in Europe, 2019 [ 178 ] Country Percent Slovakia 77% Poland 66% Czech Republic 64% Hungary 58% Greece 57% Lithuania 56% Italy 55% Spain 42% Sweden 28% Netherlands 28% Germany 24% France 22% Russia 19% United Kingdom 18% The European Network Against Racism (ENAR) reports that Islamophobic crimes are on the increase in France, England and Wales. In Sweden crimes with an Islamophobic motive increased by 69% from 2009 to 2013.

[ 239 ] An increase of Islamophobia in Russia follows the growing influence of the strongly conservative sect of Wahhabism , according to Nikolai Sintsov of the National Anti-Terrorist Committee.

[ 240 ] Various translations of the Qur'an have been banned by the Russian government for promoting extremism and Muslim supremacy .

[ 241 ] [ 242 ] Akhmed Yarlikapov, an expert on Islam, said the Bible too could be banned just as easily for identical motives.

[ 242 ] Anti-Muslim rhetoric is on the rise in Georgia.

[ 243 ] In Greece, Islamophobia accompanies anti-immigrant sentiment, as immigrants are now 15% of the country's population and 90% of the EU's illegal entries are through Greece.

[ 244 ] In France Islamophobia is tied, in part, to the nation's long-standing tradition of secularism.

[ 245 ] With the popularization of the Bulgarian nationalist party ATAKA , Islamophobia in Bulgaria also showed an increase. The party itself participated in the 2011 Banya Bashi Mosque clashes .

[ 246 ] [ 247 ] Anti-Muslim sentiment elsewhere Rohingya Muslim refugees fleeing violence in Buddhist-majority Myanmar in October 2017 A report from Australia has found that "except for Anglicans, all Christian groups have Islamophobia scores higher than the national average" and that "among the followers of non-Christian religious affiliations, Buddhists and Hindus [also] have significantly higher Islamophobia scores." [ 248 ] Following the San Bernardino attack in 2015, Donald Trump , then a candidate for President, proposed "a total and complete shutdown of Muslims entering the United States, until we can figure out what the hell is going on".

[ 249 ] Throughout the campaign, Trump repeatedly described Islam and Muslim immigrants and refugees as a threat to the West , and condemned then-current President Barack Obama for not referring to Islamic State militants as "Islamic terrorists" or "radical Muslims", accusing Obama of cowardice in the face of radical Islam and claiming that Obama had "founded ISIS" through his foreign policy.

[ 250 ] [ 251 ] Trump's rhetoric was condemned by his opponent, Hillary Clinton , as well as numerous Muslim advocacy groups and activists, and became a focal issue in the 2016 United States presidential election .

[ 252 ] In 2016, the South Thailand Insurgency , having caused more than 6,500 deaths and purportedly fuelled in part by the Thai military's harsh tactics, [ 253 ] was reported to be increasing Islamophobia in the country.

[ 254 ] [ 255 ] The Mindanao conflict in the Philippines has also fuelled discrimination against Muslims by some Christian Filipinos.

[ 256 ] [ 257 ] The 2018 anti-Muslim riots in Sri Lanka was suggested to have been a possible trigger for the 2019 Easter bombings .

[ 258 ] Muslims in the country have reportedly faced increased harassment after the bombings, with some Sinhala Buddhist groups calling for boycotts of Muslim businesses and trade.

[ 259 ] In July 2019, the UN ambassadors from 22 nations, including Canada, Germany and France, signed a joint letter to the UNHRC condemning China's mistreatment of the Uyghurs as well as its mistreatment of other Muslim minority groups, urging the Chinese government to close the Xinjiang internment camps , [ 260 ] though ambassadors from 53 others, not including China, rejected said allegations.

[ 261 ] According to a 2020 report by the Australian Strategic Policy Institute , since 2017, Chinese authorities have destroyed or damaged 16,000 mosques in Xinjiang – 65% of the region's total.

[ 262 ] [ 263 ] Emigrants from nearly every predominantly Muslim country have immigrated to Canada.

[ 264 ] According to a 2013 poll, 54% of Canadians had an unfavourable view of Islam, which was higher than for any other religion (Hinduism, Sikhism etc.).

[ 265 ] The 2020 Delhi riots , which left more than 50 dead and hundreds injured, [ 266 ] [ 267 ] were triggered by protests against a citizenship law seen by many critics as anti-Muslim and part of Prime Minister Narendra Modi 's Hindu nationalist agenda.

[ 268 ] In Myanmar the 969 Movement has been accused of events such as the 2012 Rakhine State riots .

Countering Islamophobia According to a survey conducted by the European Commission in 2015 13% of the respondents would be completely uncomfortable about working with a Muslim person ( orange ), compared with 17% with a transgender or transsexual person ( green ) and 20% with a Romani person ( violet ).

[ 269 ] International The Organisation of Islamic Cooperation , in its 5th report to Islamophobia Observatory of 2012, found an "institutionalization and legitimization of the phenomenon of Islamophobia" in the West over the previous five years.

[ 270 ] On 16 March 2022, UN designated March 15 as International Day To Combat Islamophobia .

[ 271 ] European Union The largest project monitoring Islamophobia was undertaken following 9/11 by the EU watchdog, European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia (EUMC). Their May 2002 report "Summary report on Islamophobia in the EU after 11 September 2001", written by Chris Allen and Jorgen S. Nielsen of the University of Birmingham , was based on 75 reports  – 15 from each EU member nation.

[ 272 ] [ 273 ] The report highlighted the regularity with which ordinary Muslims became targets for abusive and sometimes violent retaliatory attacks after 9/11. Despite localized differences within each member nation, the recurrence of attacks on recognizable and visible traits of Islam and Muslims was the report's most significant finding. Incidents consisted of verbal abuse, blaming all Muslims for terrorism , forcibly removing women's hijabs , spitting on Muslims, calling children " Osama ", and random assaults. A number of Muslims were hospitalized and in one instance paralyzed.

[ 273 ] The report also discussed the portrayal of Muslims in the media. Inherent negativity, stereotypical images, fantastical representations, and exaggerated caricatures were all identified. The report concluded that "a greater receptivity towards anti-Muslim and other xenophobic ideas and sentiments has, and may well continue, to become more tolerated." [ 273 ] The European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia has since released a number of publications related to Islamophobia, including The Fight against Antisemitism and Islamophobia: Bringing Communities together (European Round Tables Meetings) (2003) and Muslims in the European Union: Discrimination and Islamophobia (2006).

[ 274 ] In 2016, the European Islamophobia Report (EIR) presented the "European Islamophobia Report 2015" [ 275 ] [ 276 ] at European Parliament which analyzes the "trends in the spread of Islamophobia" in 25 European states in 2015. The EIR defines Islamophobia as anti-Muslim racism. While not every criticism of Muslims or Islam is necessarily Islamophobic, anti-Muslim sentiments expressed through the dominant group scapegoating and excluding Muslims for the sake of power is.

[ 277 ] On 26 September 2018, the European Parliament in Brussels launched the "Counter-Islamophobia Toolkit" (CIK), with the goal of combatting the growing Islamophobia across the EU and to be distributed to national governments and other policy makers, civil society and the media. Based on the most comprehensive research in Europe, it examines patterns of Islamophobia and effective strategies against it in eight member states. It lists ten dominant narratives and ten effective counter-narratives.

[ 278 ] [ 279 ] [ 280 ] One of the authors of the CIK, Amina Easat-Daas, says that Muslim women are disproportionately affected by Islamophobia, based on both the "threat to the west" and "victims of...Islamic sexism" narratives. The approach taken in the CIK is a four-step one: defining the misinformed narratives based on flawed logic; documenting them; deconstructing these ideas to expose the flaws; and finally, reconstruction of mainstream ideas about Islam and Muslims, one closer to reality. The dominant ideas circulating in popular culture should reflect the diverse everyday experiences of Muslims and their faith.

[ 281 ] Sweden Anne Sophie Roald stated that Islamophobia was recognized as a form of intolerance alongside xenophobia and antisemitism at the "Stockholm International Forum on Combating Intolerance", [ 282 ] held in January 2001.

[ 283 ] The conference adopted a declaration to combat "genocide, ethnic cleansing, racism, antisemitism, Islamophobia and xenophobia, and to combat all forms of racial discrimination and intolerance related to it." [ 284 ] In 2014 Integrationsverket (the Swedish National Integration Board) defined Islamophobia as "racism and discrimination expressed towards Muslims." [ 285 ] Tropes Main article: Islamophobic trope See also: Antisemitic trope Criticism Although the term "Islamophobia" is widely recognized and used, [ 286 ] its use, construction, and the concept itself, have been criticized.

[ 287 ] Additionally, the exact meaning of Islamophobia continues to be debated amongst academics and policymakers alike. The term has proven problematic and is viewed by some as an obstacle to constructive criticism of Islam . Its detractors fear that it can be applied to any critique of Islamic practices and beliefs, suggesting terms such as "anti-Muslim" instead.

[ 288 ] Onkar Ghate of the Ayn Rand Institute calls islamophobia ”an anti-concept that has been deliberately originated to make discussion of the issue impossible” and a ”package deal meant to silence … meant to destroy the ability to think” and that this ”package deal” puts together irrational discriminatory behavior towards muslims (which needs to be denounced) with thoughtful, rational criticism against islam.

[ 289 ] Elan Journo , also of the Ayn Rand Institute, agrees and writes ”[b]y packaging together legitimate criticism with racism and bigotry, the term “Islamophobia” works to smear — and thereby marginalize, discourage, and silence — any substantive critique of the jihadist movement.” [ 290 ] The classification of "closed" and "open" views set out in the Runnymede report has been criticized as an oversimplification of a complex issue by scholars like Chris Allen , Fred Halliday , and Kenan Malik .

[ 291 ] Professor Mohammad H. Tamdgidi of the University of Massachusetts, Boston, has generally endorsed the definition of Islamophobia as defined by the Runnymede Trust's Islamophobia: A Challenge for Us All . However, he notes that the report's list of "open" views of Islam itself presents "an inadvertent definitional framework for Islamophilia": that is, it "falls in the trap of regarding Islam monolithically, in turn as being characterized by one or another trait, and does not adequately express the complex heterogeneity of a historical phenomenon whose contradictory interpretations, traditions, and sociopolitical trends have been shaped and has in turn been shaped, as in the case of any world tradition, by other world-historical forces." [ 292 ] Although a range of Western commentators have expressed objections to the term "Islamophobia", in his paper "A Measure of Islamophobia", British academic Salman Sayyid (2014) argues that these criticisms are a form of etymological fundamentalism and echo earlier comments on racism and antisemitism. Racism and antisemitism were also accused of blocking free speech, of being conceptually weak and too nebulous for practical purposes.

[ 293 ] The French philosopher Pascal Bruckner calls the term "a clever invention because it amounts to making Islam a subject that one cannot touch without being accused of racism." [ 294 ] [ 295 ] [ 296 ] The Organisation of Islamic Cooperation has been criticized for restricting freedom of speech and freedom of religion by describing apostasy and heresy as Islamophobia.

[ 297 ] The concept of Islamophobia as formulated by Runnymede was criticized by Fred Halliday . He writes that the target of hostility in the modern era is not Islam and its tenets as much as it is Muslims, suggesting that a more accurate term would be "Anti-Muslimism". He also states that strains and types of prejudice against Islam and Muslims vary across different nations and cultures, which is not recognized in the Runnymede analysis, as it was specifically about Muslims in Britain.

[ 298 ] Poole responds that many Islamophobic discourses attack what they perceive to be Islam's tenets, while Miles and Brown write that Islamophobia is usually based upon negative stereotypes about Islam which are then translated into attacks on Muslims. They also argue that "the existence of different 'Islamophobias' does not invalidate the concept of Islamophobia any more than the existence of different racisms invalidates the concept of racism." [ 7 ] [ 299 ] [ 300 ] In a 2011 paper in American Behavioral Scientist , Erik Bleich stated "there is no widely accepted definition of Islamophobia that permits systematic comparative and causal analysis", and advances "indiscriminate negative attitudes or emotions directed at Islam or Muslims" as a possible solution to this issue.

[ 301 ] In order to differentiate between prejudiced views of Islam and secularly motivated criticism of Islam, Roland Imhoff and Julia Recker formulated the concept "Islamoprejudice", which they subsequently operationalised in an experiment. The experiment showed that their definition provided a tool for accurate differentiation.

[ 302 ] Nevertheless, other researchers' experimental work indicates that, even when Westerners seem to make an effort to distinguish between criticizing (Muslim) ideas and values and respecting Muslims as persons, they still show prejudice and discrimination of Muslims—compared to non-Muslims—when these targets defend illiberal causes.

[ 303 ] See also Islam portal Al-Baqara 256 Islamophobic trope Criticism of Islam Hijabophobia International Day to Combat Islamophobia Islamophobia in the media Islamophobia Watch Supremacism  § Islamic Minority stress Nativism (politics) Nativism (politics) in the United States Peace in Islam Persecution of Muslims Religious intolerance Religious persecution Religious abuse Religious violence Religious war 9/11 7/7 Attacks World Hijab Day Weaponization of antisemitism References Notes ^ Persian had the expression islām harāsī (اسلام هراسی), "hostility to Islam", similar to ‛adā' al-islām (عَداء الإسلام) in Arabic.

Citations ^ "The Devastating Mental Health Effects of Islamophobia" .

TIME . 16 November 2023 . Retrieved 15 March 2024 .

^ Segal, Jody.

"LibGuides: Islam and Muslim Americans: Islamophobia" .

libguides.greenriver.edu . Retrieved 15 March 2024 .

^ "Islamophobia" .

Oxford Dictionaries . Archived from the original on 11 November 2016 . Retrieved 10 November 2016 .

^ "islamophobia" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d . Retrieved 10 November 2016 .

^ "Islamophobia" .

Collins Dictionary . Retrieved 10 November 2016 .

^ Hedges, Paul (2021).

Religious Hatred: Prejudice, Islamophobia and Antisemitism in Global Context . London: Bloomsbury Academic.

ISBN 978-1-3501-6287-7 .

LCCN 2020041827 .

^ a b c Miles & Brown 2003 , p. 166.

^ a b See Egorova; Tudor (2003) pp. 2–3, which cites the conclusions of Marquina and Rebolledo in: "A. Marquina, V. G. Rebolledo, 'The Dialogue between the European Union and the Islamic World' in Interreligious Dialogues: Christians, Jews, Muslims, Annals of the European Academy of Sciences and Arts, v. 24, no. 10, Austria, 2000, pp. 166–68. " ^ Wike, Richard; Stokes, Bruce; Simmons, Katie (July 2016).

Europeans Fear Wave of Refugees Will Mean More Terrorism, Fewer Jobs (PDF) (Report). Pew Research Center. p. 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 November 2016 . Retrieved 27 November 2016 .

^ Becker, Elisabeth; Rinado, Rachel; Guhin, Jeffrey (2023).

"Classifying Muslims: Contextualizing Religion and Race in the United Kingdom and Germany" .

Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion .

62 (4): 749– 769.

doi : 10.1111/jssr.12865 .

^ Miles & Brown 2003 , p. 164-168.

^ Beydoun, Khaled A. (April 2020).

"Exporting Islamophobia in the Global "War On Terror" " (PDF) .

New York University Law Review .

95 : 81– 100.

^ Hilal, Maha (2021).

Innocent Until Proven Muslim: Islamophobia, the War on Terror, and the Muslim Experience Since 9/11 . Minneapolis, USA: Broadleaf Books.

ISBN 978-1-5064-7046-7 .

^ Kiara Alfonseca (11 September 2021).

"20 years after 9/11, Islamophobia continues to haunt Muslims" .

ABC News .

^ Abbas, Tahir (2021).

"Reflection: the "war on terror", Islamophobia and radicalisation twenty years on" .

Critical Studies on Terrorism .

14 (4). Routledge: 402– 404.

doi : 10.1080/17539153.2021.1980182 .

hdl : 1887/3618299 – via tandfonline.

^ Spence, Duncan (2 November 2014).

"Why online Islamophobia is difficult to stop" .

Canadian Broadcasting Corporation .

^ Kumar, Deepa (2021). "7: The New McCarthyites: The right-wing islamophobia network and their liberal enablers".

Islamophobia and the Politics of Empire (2nd ed.). London: Verso. pp. 197, 198.

ISBN 978-1-78873-721-0 .

^ Idil Oztig, Lacin (2022).

"Islamophobic Discourse of European Right-Wing Parties" .

Social Currents .

10 (3). Sage Publishing: 1– 14.

doi : 10.1177/23294965221139852 – via Sage Journals.

^ Benkler, Yochai; Faris, Robert; Roberts, Hal (2018). "4: Immigration and Islamophobia: Breitbart and the Trump Party".

Network Propaganda: Manipulation, Disinformation, and Radicalization in American Politics . New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

105– 144.

ISBN 9780190923624 .

LCCN 2018020121 .

^ Siddique, Haroon (20 November 2013).

"Muslim Women more likely to suffer Islamophobic attacks than men - study" .

The Guardian .

^ Kulik, Rebecca M.

"Islamophobia" .

Encyclopaedia Britannica . Archived from the original on 4 July 2024.

^ Selod, Sahar (2024). "4: Anti-Muslim Racism and the Rise of Ethnonationalist Populism in the United States". In Aziz, Sahar F.; Esposito, John L. (eds.).

Global Islamophobia and the Rise of Populism . New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

56– 72.

doi : 10.1093/oso/9780197648995.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-764900-8 .

^ Abbas, Tahir (2019). "5: Islamophobia as New Racism".

Islamophobia and Radicalisation . New York: Oxford University Press. pp.

57– 70.

doi : 10.1093/oso/9780190083410.003.0005 .

ISBN 9780190083410 .

^ " 'Landmark resolution': UNGA declares March 15 as International Day to Combat Islamophobia" .

Dawn . 15 March 2022.

^ a b Scott (2014) , p. 377.

^ Babacan, Muhammed (30 April 2023).

" "Neither 'Islam' nor 'Muslim' is race": Islamophobia, racism and freedom of expression" .

Bilimname (49): 604.

doi : 10.28949/bilimname.1228143 – via ResearchGate.

^ Lean, Nathan (2017).

The Islamophobia Industry: How the Right Manufactures Hatred of Muslims (Second ed.). London: Pluto Press. pp. 84, 85, 173.

ISBN 978-0-7453-3717-3 .

^ "Quatre questions sur l'emploi du terme "islamophobie", qui fait (une nouvelle fois) débat" .

France Info (in French). 10 November 2019.

^ Benn, Piers (31 May 2007).

"On Islamophobia-phobia" .

New Humanist .

^ "Tackling denial of Islamophobia" . 24 November 2022. Archived from the original on 1 February 2023.

^ Zia-Ebrahimi, Reza (2020).

"The French origins of 'Islamophobia denial' " .

Patterns of Prejudice .

54 (4): 315– 346.

doi : 10.1080/0031322X.2020.1857047 .

^ York, Jillian (26 July 2010).

"Paranoid Politics: The Denial of Islamophobia" .

Huffington Post . Archived from the original on 10 June 2021.

^ Mcguinness, Alan (5 March 2020).

"Conservative Party accused of 'denial' over Islamophobia" .

Sky News . Archived from the original on 17 June 2021.

^ Kaya, Ayhan (2014). "Islamophobia". In Cesari, Jocelyne (ed.).

The Oxford Handbook of European Islam .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-960797-6 .

^ Carpente, Markus (2013).

Diversity, Intercultural Encounters, and Education . p. 65.

^ Pande, Rekha (2012).

Globalization, Technology Diffusion and Gender Disparity . p. 99.

^ Racism and Human Rights. p. 8, Raphael Walden – 2004 ^ Muslims in Western Europe. p. 169, Jørgen S. Nielsen – 2004 ^ Sedmak, Mateja; Walker, Sarah; Medarić, Zorana (9 May 2014).

Children's Voices: Studies of Interethnic Conflict and Violence in European Schools .

Routledge . p. 124.

ISBN 978-1-134-49345-6 .

^ Kuwara, Ibrahim (2004).

Islam Nigeria-UK Road Tour . p. 6.

^ 2002, Fred halliday, Two hours that shook the world, p. 97 ^ Kollontai, Pauline (2007).

Community Identity: Dynamics of Religion in Context . A&C Black. p. 254.

ISBN 9780567031570 .

^ Seid, Amine (2011).

Islamic Terrorism and the Tangential Response of the West . AuthorHouse. p. 39.

ISBN 9781467885676 .

^ Goknar, Erdag (2013).

Orhan Pamuk, Secularism and Blasphemy . p. 219.

^ Arasteh, Kamyar (2004).

The American Reichstag . p. 94.

^ Dressler, Markus (2011).

Secularism and Religion-Making . p.

250 .

^ Kaim, Markus (2013).

Great Powers and Regional Orders . p. 157.

^ 2013, Glen Perry, The International Relations of the Contemporary Middle East, p. 161 ^ Falola, Toyin (1998).

Violence in Nigeria: The Crisis of Religious Politics and Secular Ideologies .

University of Rochester Press . p. 240.

ISBN 978-1-58046-052-1 .

Anti-Sufism itself is therefore a marker of identity, and the formation of the Izala proves this beyond any reasonable doubt.

^ Colonialism and Revolution in the Middle East, p. 197, Juan Ricardo Cole – 1999, "Ironically, the Sufi-phobia of the British consuls in the aftermath of 1857 led them to look in the wrong places for urban disturbances in the 1860s.

" ^ 2005 , Ahmed Hashim, Insurgency and Counter-insurgency in Iraq , Cornell University Press (2006), ISBN 9780801444524 ^ Roland Imhoff & Julia Recker.

"Differentiating Islamophobia: Introducing a new scale to measure Islamoprejudice and Secular Islam Critique" .

Academia . Retrieved 19 September 2013 .

^ "-phobia, comb. form ".

Home : Oxford English Dictionary .

Oxford English Dictionary . Oxford University Press.

^ a b "Islamophobia".

Home : Oxford English Dictionary .

Oxford English Dictionary . Oxford University Press.

^ a b Jean-Loïc Le Quellec [in French] (19 June 2019).

"Histoire et mythe conspirationniste du mot " islamophobie " " .

Fragments sur les Temps Présents (in French) . Retrieved 31 August 2019 .

^ "What makes the task difficult, perhaps impossible, for a non-Muslim is that he is compelled, under penalty of being accused of Islamophobia, to admire the Koran in its totality and to guard against implying the smallest criticism of the text's literary value" (Anawati 1976).

^ Islamophobia Research & Documentation Project.

"Defining "Islamophobia" " . Center for Race & Gender, University of California at Berkeley. Archived from the original on 9 March 2017 . Retrieved 15 May 2018 .

^ a b Runnymede Trust (1997).

Islamophobia A Challenge For Us All - Report of the Runnymede Trust Commission on British Muslims and Islamophobia (PDF) .

The Runnymede Trust .

ISBN 0-902397-98-2 .

^ Encyclopedia of Race and Ethics, p. 215 ^ Meer, Nasar; Modood, Tariq (July 2009). "Refutations of racism in the 'Muslim question' ".

Patterns of Prejudice .

43 ( 3– 4): 335– 54.

doi : 10.1080/00313220903109250 .

S2CID 144359945 .

^ a b Sayyid, Salman ; Vakil, Abdoolkarim (2010).

Thinking Through Islamophobia: Global Perspectives . New York: Columbia University Press . p. 319.

ISBN 9780231702065 .

^ "Runnymede Trust – Ranimed, Runnymede and a Long Report" . Archived from the original on 25 February 2015 . Retrieved 18 March 2015 .

^ "MCB Brings Experts and Parliamentarians Together to Discuss Islamophobia" .

Muslim Council of Britain . 2010. Archived from the original on 6 March 2012.

^ Richardson, Robin (December 2009).

"Islamophobia or anti-muslim racism – or what?" (PDF) .

(119 KB) , Insted website. Accessed 30 December 2011.

^ Allen, Chris (2010).

Islamophobia . Ashgate. p.

21 .

ISBN 978-0754651390 .

^ Bleich, Erik (December 2011). "What Is Islamophobia and How Much Is There? Theorizing and Measuring an Emerging Comparative Concept".

American Behavioral Scientist .

55 (12): 1581– 1600.

doi : 10.1177/0002764211409387 .

S2CID 143679557 .

^ Burak Erdenir (2010). Anna Triandafyllidou (ed.).

Muslims in 21st Century Europe: Structural and Cultural Perspectives . Routledge. p. 28.

ISBN 978-0415497091 .

^ Bleich, Erik. "Defining and Researching Islamophobia".

Review of Middle East Studies .

46 (2): 181.

^ a b "Islamofobi – definitioner och uttryck" .

Forum för levande historia . Retrieved 18 March 2015 .

^ Corrina Balash Kerr (20 November 2007).

"Faculty, Alumnus Discuss Concept of "Islamophobia" in Co-Authored Book" .

Wesleyan University Newsletter . Archived from the original on 20 August 2008 . Retrieved 29 December 2007 .

^ "Images of Muslims: Discussing Islamophobia with Peter Gottschalk" .

Political Affairs Magazine . 19 November 2007.

Archived from the original on 6 December 2007 . Retrieved 29 December 2007 .

^ Lee, S. A.; Gibbons, J. A.; Thompson, J. M.; Timani, H. S. (2009). "The islamophobia scale: Instrument development and initial validation".

International Journal for the Psychology of Religion .

19 (2): 92– 105.

doi : 10.1080/10508610802711137 .

S2CID 146757435 .

^ a b c d e Kunst, J. R.; Sam, D. L.; Ulleberg, P. (2012).

"Perceived islamophobia: Scale development and validation" .

International Journal of Intercultural Relations .

37 (2): 225– 37.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijintrel.2012.11.001 .

^ "The Multicultural State We're In: Muslims,'Multiculture' and the 'Civic Re‐balancing' of British Multiculturalism" , Political Studies : 2009 Vol 57, 473–97 ^ Modood, Tariq (29 September 2005).

"Remaking multiculturalism after 7/7" (PDF) .

Centre for Research on the European Matrix . Archived from the original (PDF) on 21 September 2013.

The most important such form of cultural racism today is anti-Muslim racism, sometimes called Islamophobia.

^ Nathan Lean (2012).

The Islamophobia Industry: How the Right Manufactures Fear of Muslims . Pluto Press.

ISBN 978-0745332543 .

Biological racist discourses have now been replaced by what is called the 'new racism' or 'cultural racist' discourses ^ Poynting, S.; Mason, V. (2007). "The resistible rise of Islamophobia: Anti-Muslim racism in the UK and Australia before 11 September 2001".

Journal of Sociology .

43 (1): 61– 86.

doi : 10.1177/1440783307073935 .

S2CID 145065236 .

^ Erik Love (2013). "Review: beyond "post 9/11" ( Islamophobia and the Politics of Empire by Deepa Kumar; Terrifying Muslims: Race and Labor in the South Asian Diaspora by Junaid Rana)".

Contexts .

12 (1): 70– 72.

JSTOR 41960426 .

Taking these two works together, Kumar and Rana put forth a strong argument that while Islam is certainly a religion, and not a race, and Muslims (like all religious communities) are a highly diverse group in terms of ethnicity, nationality, and even racial backgrounds, Islamophobia is in fact a form of racism. Both books effectively provide historical accounts showing the parallel development of Islamophobic discourses alongside other forms of racial bigotry and discrimination.

^ "Fascism fears: John Denham speaks out over clashes" . 12 September 2009. Archived from the original on 10 May 2011 . Retrieved 18 March 2015 .

^ Dan Nilsson (19 October 2009).

"Reinfeldt: Kärnan i partiets idé" .

Svenska Dagbladet . Retrieved 18 March 2015 .

^ Meer, Nasar; Noorani, Tehseen (May 2008).

"A sociological comparison of anti-Semitism and anti-Muslim sentiment in Britain" (PDF) .

The Sociological Review .

56 (2): 195– 219.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-954X.2008.00784.x .

S2CID 142754091 .

Across Europe activists and certain academics are struggling to get across an understanding in their governments and their countries at large that anti-Muslim racism/Islamophobia is now one of the most pernicious forms of contemporary racism and that steps should be taken to combat it.

^ Schiffer, Sabine; Wagner, Constantin (1 January 2011). "Anti-Semitism and Islamophobia – new enemies, old patterns".

Race & Class .

52 (3): 77– 84.

doi : 10.1177/0306396810389927 .

S2CID 146753309 – via SAGE Journals.

^ Jocelyne Cesari "Muslims In Western Europe After 9/11: Why the term Islamophobia is more a predicament than an explanation" Submission to the Changing Landscape of Citizenship and Security: 6th PCRD of European Commission. 1 June 2006: p. 6 ^ John L. Esposito , ed. (2011).

Islamophobia: The Challenge of Pluralism in the 21st Century .

Oxford University Press . p.

21 .

ISBN 978-0199753642 .

^ Anna Triandafyllidou, ed. (2010).

Muslims in 21st Century Europe: Structural and Cultural Perspectives . Routledge. p. 28.

ISBN 978-0415497091 .

^ Andrew Shryock, ed. (2010).

Islamophobia/Islamophilia: Beyond the Politics of Enemy and Friend . Indiana University Press. pp.

6– 25.

ISBN 978-0253221995 .

^ Frost, D. (2008). "Islamophobia: Examining causal links between the media and "race hate" from "below" ".

International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy .

28 (11/12): 564– 78.

doi : 10.1108/01443330810915251 .

^ Islamofobi – en studie av begreppet, ungdomars attityder och unga muslimers utsatthet Archived 19 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine , published by Forum för levande historia [ sv ] The rise of anti-Muslim racism in Australia: who benefits?

Poynting; Mason (2006). "Tolerance, Freedom, Justice and Peace?: Britain, Australia and Anti-Muslim Racism since 11 September 2001".

Journal of Intercultural Studies .

27 (4): 365– 91.

doi : 10.1080/07256860600934973 .

hdl : 2292/23817 .

S2CID 145787451 .

^ Alan Johnson (6 March 2011). "The Idea of 'Islamophobia' ".

World Affairs .

^ Hussain, Yasmin & Bagguley, Paul (November 2012).

"Securitized Citizens: Islamophobia, Racism and the 7/7 London Bombings" (PDF) .

The Sociological Review .

60 (4): 715– 734.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-954X.2012.02130.x .

S2CID 143355490 .

^ Dinet, Alphonse Étienne; ben Ibrahim, Sliman (1918).

La Vie de Mohammed, Prophète d'Allah . Paris: Henri Piazza.

cited from Otterbeck, Jonas; Bevelander, Pieter (2006).

Islamofobi  – en studie av begreppet, ungdomars attityder och unga muslimars utsatthet (PDF) (in Swedish). Anders Lange. Stockholm: Forum för levande historia.

ISBN 978-91-976073-6-0 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 January 2012 . Retrieved 23 November 2011 .

modern orientalists [are partially] influenced by an islamofobia, which is poorly reconciled with science and hardly worthy of our time ^ a b Allen, Christopher (2010).

Islamophobia .

Ashgate Publishing . pp. 5–6.

^ Ezzerhouni, Dahou.

"L'islamophobie, un racisme apparu avec les colonisations" Archived 17 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine , Algerie-Focus , 3 February 2010. "Le mot serai ainsi apparu pour la première fois dans quelques ouvrages du début du XXème siècle. On peut citer entre autre « La politique musulmane dans l'Afrique Occidentale Française » d'Alain Quellien publié en 1910, suivi de quelques citations dans la Revue du monde musulman en 1912 et 1918, la Revue du Mercure de France en 1912, « Haut-Sénégal-Niger » de Maurice Delafosse en 1912 et dans le Journal of Theological Studies en 1924. L'année suivante, Etienne Dinet et Slimane Ben Brahim, employaient ce terme qui «conduit à l'aberration » dans leur ouvrage « L'Orient vu par l'Occident »." ^ Chris Allen (2007).

"Islamophobia and its Consequences" .

European Islam : 144– 67.

^ Bravo López, F. (2011).

"Towards a definition of Islamophobia: Approximations of the early twentieth century" (PDF) .

Ethnic and Racial Studies .

34 (4): 556– 73.

doi : 10.1080/01419870.2010.528440 .

S2CID 217534342 .

^ Otterbeck, Jonas; Bevelander, Pieter (2006).

Islamofobi  – en studie av begreppet, ungdomars attityder och unga muslimars utsatthet (PDF) (in Swedish). Anders Lange. Stockholm: Forum för levande historia.

ISBN 978-91-976073-6-0 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 19 January 2012 . Retrieved 23 November 2011 .

^ Annan, Kofi .

"Secretary-General, addressing headquarters seminar Wed Confronting Islamophobia" , United Nations , press release, 7 December 2004.

^ Baboulias, Yiannis (1 April 2019).

"The Balkans Are the World Capital of Islamophobia" .

Foreign Policy .

^ Sabic-El-Rayess, Amra (1 October 2020).

"Today's America reminds me of 1990s Bosnia and Herzegovina" .

Al Jazeera .

^ Najib, Kawtar (2022).

Spatialized Islamophobia . New York: Routledge. p. 32.

ISBN 978-0-367-89478-8 .

^ Miles & Brown 2003 , p. 164, 165.

^ "Islamophobia: A Challenge for Us All" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 September 2007 . Retrieved 7 May 2014 .

(69.7 KB) , Runnymede Trust , 1997.

^ Benn & Jawad 2003 , p. 162.

^ a b Benn & Jawad 2003 , p. 165.

^ a b c d Døving, Cora Alexa (2010).

"Anti-Semitism and Islamophobia: A Comparison of Imposed Group Identities" .

Tidsskrift for Islamforskning .

4 (2): 52– 76.

doi : 10.7146/tifo.v4i2.24596 .

^ a b Bhandar, D. (2010). "Cultural politics: Disciplining citizenship".

Citizenship Studies .

14 (3): 331– 43.

doi : 10.1080/13621021003731963 .

S2CID 146490574 .

^ Poole 2003 , p. 216.

^ a b c d Miles & Brown 2003 , p. 163.

^ Miles & Brown 2003 , p. 164.

^ Saunders, Doug (17 September 2012).

"Opinion: Catholics Then, Muslims Now" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 18 February 2014 .

^ Haddad 2002 , p. 19.

^ Islamophobia: A Challenge for Us All (Summary) , Runnymede Trust, 1997, p. 1, cited in Quraishi, Muzammil (2005).

Muslims and crime: a comparative study . Aldershot, Hants, England: Ashgate Publishing . p. 60.

ISBN 978-0-7546-4233-6 .

^ Mepschen, P.; Duyvendak, J. W.; Tonkens, E. H. (2010). "Sexual Politics, Orientalism and Multicultural Citizenship in the Netherlands".

Sociology .

44 (5): 962– 79.

doi : 10.1177/0038038510375740 .

S2CID 85645153 .

^ Ho, Christina (July–August 2007).

"Muslim women's new defenders: Women's rights, nationalism and Islamophobia in contemporary Australia" (PDF) .

Women's Studies International Forum .

30 (4): 290– 98.

doi : 10.1016/j.wsif.2007.05.002 .

hdl : 10453/3255 .

^ Salaita, Steven (Fall 2006).

"Beyond Orientalism and Islamophobia: 9/11, Anti-Arab Racism, and the Mythos of National Pride" .

CR: The New Centennial Review .

6 (2): 245– 266.

doi : 10.1353/ncr.2007.0011 .

S2CID 143847106 . Retrieved 20 November 2015 .

^ Bunzl, Matti (2007).

Anti-semitism and Islamophobia: hatreds old and new in Europe . Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press. p. 13.

ISBN 978-0-9761475-8-9 . Retrieved 23 November 2011 .

^ Benbassa, Esther (2007).

"Xenophobia, Anti-Semitism, and Racism" (PDF) . In Bunzl, Matti (ed.).

Anti-Semitism and Islamophobia: Hatred Old and New in Europe . Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press. pp. 86ff.

ISBN 978-0-9761475-8-9 . Retrieved 23 November 2011 .

^ Schiffer, S.; Wagner, C. (2011). "Anti-Semitism and Islamophobia – new enemies, old patterns".

Race & Class .

52 (3): 77– 84.

doi : 10.1177/0306396810389927 .

S2CID 146753309 .

^ Williams, Soydan & Johnson 1998 , p. 182.

^ Williams, Soydan & Johnson 1998 , p. 22.

^ Edward W. Said, 'Orientalism Reconsidered' in Francis Barker, Peter Hulme, Margaret Iversen, Diana Loxley (eds), Literature, Politics, and Theory, Methuen & Co, London 1986 pp. 210229, pp. 220ff.

^ Bryan Stanley Turner , introd. to Bryan S. Turner (ed.) Orientalism: Early Sources , (Vol 1, Readings in Orientalism), Routledge, London (2000) reprint 2002 p. 12 ^ The resistible rise of Islamophobia – Anti-Muslim racism in the UK and Australia before 11 September 2001 , Journal of Sociology March 2007 vol. 43 no. 1 61–86 ^ Contemporary racism and Islamaphobia in Australia – Racializing religion , Ethnicities December 2007 vol. 7 no. 4 564–589 ^ Mark Townsend (14 April 2012).

"Far-right anti-Muslim network on rise globally as Breivik trial opens" .

guardian.co.uk . London . Retrieved 15 April 2012 .

^ "Islamophobia: The new anti-Semitism" .

The Star . Toronto.

^ a b c d e f g h "American Muslim Poll 2018: Full Report | ISPU" .

Institute for Social Policy and Understanding . 30 April 2018 . Retrieved 5 December 2018 .

^ Mohamed Nimer (2011).

John L. Esposito (ed.).

Islamophobia: The Challenge of Pluralism in the 21st Century .

Oxford University Press . p.

76 .

ISBN 978-0199753642 .

^ Gideon Rachman (18 February 2019).

"Islamophobia and the new clash of civilisations" .

Financial Times . Archived from the original on 14 September 2021.

^ Í Skorini, Heini; Dyrberg, Torben Bech (17 February 2022). "Framing Blasphemy as a crime: the curious similarities between the secular left and the organization of Islamic cooperation".

Journal of Political Ideologies .

29 (3): 550– 570.

doi : 10.1080/13569317.2022.2040878 .

ISSN 1356-9317 .

^ Marranci, Gabriele (March 2004). "Multiculturalism, Islam and the clash of civilisations theory: rethinking Islamophobia".

Culture and Religion .

5 (1): 116 ff .

doi : 10.1080/0143830042000200373 .

S2CID 55652492 .

^ Poole 2003 , p. 217.

^ Richardson, John E. (2004).

(Mis)representing Islam: the racism and rhetoric of British broadsheet newspapers .

John Benjamins Publishing Company .

ISBN 978-90-272-2699-0 .

^ Richardson, J. E. (2009). " 'Get Shot of the Lot of Them': Election Reporting of Muslims in British Newspapers".

Patterns of Prejudice .

43 ( 3– 4): 355– 77.

doi : 10.1080/00313220903109276 .

S2CID 145772695 .

^ Chalabi, Mona (20 July 2018).

"Terror attacks by Muslims receive 357% more press attention, study finds" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 4 December 2020 .

^ Staff (19 February 2019).

"Terror Attacks By Muslims Get 357 percent More Media Coverage Than Other Terror Attacks, Study Shows" .

Georgia State News Hub . Retrieved 15 December 2020 .

^ Kearns, Erin M.; Betus, Allison E.; Lemieux, Anthony F. (19 September 2019). "Why Do Some Terrorist Attacks Receive More Media Attention Than Others?".

Justice Quarterly .

36 (6): 985– 1022.

doi : 10.1080/07418825.2018.1524507 .

ISSN 0741-8825 .

S2CID 220405703 .

^ Chalabi, Mona (20 July 2018).

"Terror attacks by Muslims receive 357% more press attention, study finds" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on 16 December 2018.

^ Neiwert, David (22 June 2017).

"Far-right extremists have hatched far more terror plots than anyone else in recent years" .

Reveal News . Archived from the original on 24 July 2019.

^ Mehdi Hasan (9 July 2009).

"Know your enemy" .

New Statesman . Retrieved 9 April 2010 .

^ Obituary of Oriana Fallaci – The Guardian , 16 September 2006. " Controversial Italian journalist famed for her interviews and war reports but notorious for her Islamaphobia " ^ "Equal Treatment? Measuring the Legal and Media Responses to Ideologically Motivated Violence in the US" .

The Institute for Social Policy and Understanding . Retrieved 5 December 2018 .

^ Lean, Nathan (2012).

The Islamophobia Industry: How the Right Manufactures Fear of Muslims . Pluto Press. p. 66.

^ Kaminski, Joseph (2014).

"The Islamophobia Industry, Hate, and Its Impact on Muslim Immigrants and OIC State Development" .

Islamophobia Studies Journal .

2 (2): 157– 176.

doi : 10.13169/islastudj.2.2.0157 .

^ Bazian, Hatem (21 December 2015). "The Islamophobia Industry and the Demonization of Palestine: Implications for American Studies".

American Quarterly .

67 (4): 1057– 1066.

doi : 10.1353/aq.2015.0073 .

ISSN 1080-6490 .

S2CID 146731799 .

^ Stein, Arlene; Salime, Zakia (1 February 2015).

"Manufacturing Islamophobia: Rightwing Pseudo-Documentaries and the Paranoid Style" .

Journal of Communication Inquiry .

281 (4): 2015– 1.

doi : 10.1177/0196859915569385 .

S2CID 145266067 .

^ Shipoli, Erdoan A. (2018).

Islam, Securitization, and US Foreign Policy .

Springer . p. 116.

ISBN 9783319711119 .

^ Rendall, Steve (1 November 2008).

"Making Islamophobia Mainstream: How Muslim-bashers broadcast their bigotry" .

Fairness and Accuracy in Reporting . Retrieved 7 June 2023 .

^ Encyclopedia of Race and Ethnic studies, p. 218 ^ a b Meaux, Lauren T.; Doran, Stephanie C.; Cox, Jennifer M. (26 November 2020).

"Aberration of mind or soul: the role of media in perceptions of mass violence" .

Journal of Aggression, Conflict and Peace Research .

12 (4): 209– 222.

doi : 10.1108/JACPR-07-2020-0526 .

ISSN 1759-6599 .

S2CID 229434546 .

^ a b Silva, Jason R. (13 September 2021).

"The news media's framing of mass shootings: gun access, mental illness, violent entertainment, and terrorism" .

Actual Problems of Economics and Law .

15 (2).

doi : 10.21202/1993-047x.15.2021.2.332-359 .

ISSN 1993-047X .

S2CID 225520354 .

^ Park, Sung-Yeon; Holody, Kyle J.; Zhang, Xiaoqun (September 2012).

"Race in Media Coverage of School Shootings: A Parallel Application of Framing Theory and Attribute Agenda Setting" .

Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly .

89 (3): 475– 494.

doi : 10.1177/1077699012448873 .

ISSN 1077-6990 .

S2CID 143792318 .

^ Senanayake, Harsha (2021).

"Hollywood and Wicked Other: The Identity Formation of "Western Us" Versus "Muslim Others" " .

Open Political Science .

4 (1): 64– 67.

doi : 10.1515/openps-2021-0007 .

S2CID 231920684 .

^ Gabriel, Karen, " The Country in the City: The Bye-lanes of Identity Archived 25 July 2020 at the Wayback Machine ", South Asian Journal Special Issue Cinema in South Asia , July – September 2010 pp. 53–64.

^ Gabriel, Karen and P. K. Vijayan, "Orientalism, Terrorism and Bombay Cinema", (2012) Journal of Postcolonial Writing Special Issue on Orientalism and Terrorism , July 2012 volume 48, number 3, pp. 299–310.

doi : 10.1080/17449855.2012.678744 .

^ "Funding fear of Muslims: $206m went to promoting 'hatred', report finds" .

The Guardian . 20 June 2016.

^ Anti-Defamation League , "Backgrounder: Stop Islamization of America (SIOA)" Archived 2 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Extremism , 25 March 2011 [26 August 2010]. Retrieved 16 February 2012.

^ Steinback, Robert (Summer 2011).

"Jihad Against Islam" .

The Intelligence Report . No. 142. Southern Poverty Law Center.

^ "Pamela Geller & Stop Islamization of America" . Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved 27 June 2011 .

^ Siemaszko, Corky (25 February 2011).

"Southern Poverty Law Center lists anti-Islamic NYC blogger Pamela Geller, followers a hate group" .

New York Daily News . Archived from the original on 15 August 2011.

^ * Anti-Islamic ad claiming "it's not Islamophobia, it's Islamorealism" goes up in NY train stations , Associated Press , 17 August 2012. Note that Bryan Fischer , Director of Issues Analysis for the American Family Association also used the phrase "Islamo-realism" in the column Times Square another argument for restricting Muslim immigration , 4 May 2010.

^ Ashwaq Masood (4 October 2012).

"Pro-Muslim Subway Ads to Hang Near Anti-Jihad Ads" .

The New York Times .

^ Jewish Council for Public Affairs.

"JCPA Condemns Bigoted, Divisive, and Unhelpful Anti-Muslim Ads" . JCPA. Archived from the original on 28 September 2018 . Retrieved 21 September 2012 .

^ "The Quranic Arabic Corpus – Translation" .

corpus.quran.com .

^ New anti-Muslim ads up in NYC subway stations , CBS News , 9 January 2013.

^ Epstein, Emily Anne (7 December 2012).

"New Anti-Islam Ads to Debut This Month, Now With 25% More MTA Disclaimer" .

The New York Observer . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ Matt Flegenheimer (13 December 2012).

"Controversial Group Plans More Ads in Subway Stations" .

New York Times .

^ Hussain, Murtaza (31 December 2012).

"Opinion: Anti-Muslim violence spiralling out of control in America" .

Al-Jazeera . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ Ali, Wajahat (31 December 2012).

"Death by brown skin: An Indian immigrant's subway tragedy is a reminder of a destructive Islamophobia that has spread across the country" .

Salon.com . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ Roland Imhoff.

"Differentiating Islamophobia: Introducing a new scale to measure Islamoprejudice and Secular Islam Critique" .

Academia . Retrieved 18 March 2015 .

^ Haroon Siddique (8 October 2013).

"Tommy Robinson quits EDL saying it has become 'too extreme' " .

The Guardian .

^ Lavalette, Michael (2014). "Institutionalised Islamophobia and the 'Prevent' agenda: 'winning hearts and minds' or welfare as surveillance and control?".

Race, Racism and Social Work: Contemporary issues and debates . England: Policy Press at the University of Bristol. pp.

167– 90.

^ "Almost two-thirds of Germans think Islam doesn't 'belong' to their country: poll" .

Reuters . 12 May 2016 . Retrieved 14 September 2021 .

^ Elizabeth Schumacher (16 August 2018).

"Germans tolerant of LGBT neighbors, but not Muslim ones" .

Deutsche Welle .

^ Jan Čulík (9 February 2017).

"Why is the Czech Republic So Hostile to Muslims and Refugees?" .

EuropeNow .

University of Glasgow .

^ Rich, Timothy S.; Bison, Kaitlyn; Kozovic, Aleksandra (17 June 2021).

"Who is welcome? South Korean public opinion on North Koreans and other refugees" .

Japanese Journal of Political Science .

22 (3).

Cambridge University Press : 117– 129.

doi : 10.1017/S1468109921000116 .

ISSN 1468-1099 .

^ "What Do Europeans Think About Muslim Immigration?" .

Chatham House .

^ a b "European Public Opinion Three Decades After the Fall of Communism — 6. Minority groups" .

Pew Research Center . 14 October 2019.

^ Azeezah Kanji (30 November 2020).

"Islamophobia in Canada – Submission to the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief" (PDF) .

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights .

^ "Islam Is Still A Disliked Religion To Many: 50% Are Unfavorable Towards It" .

YouGov . 14 September 2011.

Archived from the original on 29 June 2021.

^ Mona Chalabi (8 December 2015).

"How anti-Muslim are Americans? Data points to extent of Islamophobia" .

The Guardian .

^ Benn & Jawad 2003 , p. 111.

^ a b c Steven Vertovec, "Islamophobia and Muslim Recognition in Britain" ^ a b c Haddad 2002 , pp. 32–33.

^ Naina Patel, Beth Humphries and Don Naik, "The 3 Rs in social work; Religion,'race' and racism in Europe" ^ Williams, Soydan & Johnson 1998 , pp. 197–8.

^ Imam Abduljalil Sajid.

"Islamophobia: A new word for an old fear" . Archived from the original on 30 September 2007 . Retrieved 17 August 2007 .

^ a b "The next holocaust" , New Statesman , 5 December 2005.

^ Malik, Kenan.

From Fatwa to Jihad . Atlantic Books, London (2009): pp. 131–32.

^ Malik (2009): p. 132 ^ Cohen, Jon (8 March 2006).

"Poll: Americans Skeptical of Islam and Arabs" .

ABC News . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ "Islamophobia Felt 5 Years after 9/11" , Good Morning America , 9 September 2006.

^ Corbett, Rosemary R. (2016).

Making Moderate Islam: Sufism, Service, and the Ground Zero Mosque Controversy . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 9781503600812 .

^ Kumar, Kumar (2012).

Islamophobia and the Politics of Empire . Haymarket Books. p. 6.

ISBN 978-1608462117 .

^ Kumar, Deepa (3 April 2006).

"Fighting Islamophobia: A Response to Critics" . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ InpaperMagazine, From (8 July 2012).

"COVER STORY: Islamophobia: an ideological formation" .

DAWN.COM . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ Freedman, Samuel G. (10 August 2012).

"If the Sikh Temple Had Been a Mosque" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

^ "Britain divided by Islam, survey finds" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. 11 January 2010. Archived from the original on 14 January 2010 . Retrieved 4 April 2010 .

^ Kazem, Halima (20 June 2016).

"The Guardian: Funding Islamophobia: $206m went to promoting 'hatred' of American Muslims" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 24 June 2016 .

^ Douglas Barrie (29 June 2021).

"Islamophobia in Scotland on the rise as four-fifths of Muslims report verbal and physical attacks" .

Microsoft News .

Edinburgh Evening News .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2021.

^ The FBI reports anti-Islamic hate crimes directed against persons or property its annual reports indexed here [1] . Data reported here are from the FBI Hate Crime reports of 2013 , 2012 , 2011 , 2010 , 2009 , 2008 , 2007 , 2006 , 2005 , 2004 , 2003 , 2002 , 2001 , 2000 , 1999 , 1998 , 1997 , and 1996 . Totals and averages reported here are derived as calculations from the FBI data.

^ "Anti-Islam hate crimes triple in London after Paris attacks" .

BBC News . 4 December 2015.

^ "Anti-Islam movement PEGIDA stages protests across Europe" .

Reuters . 6 February 2017.

^ Nossiter, Adam (17 November 2015).

"Marine Le Pen's Anti-Islam Message Gains Influence in France" .

The New York Times .

^ Bender, Ruth (1 May 2016).

"Germany's AfD Adopts Anti-Islam Stance at Party Conference" .

Wall Street Journal .

^ Hume, Tim (9 May 2017).

"Poland's populist government let far-right extremism explode into mainstream" .

news.vice.com .

^ "Woman attempted to set fire to Oslo mosque" . 20 May 2016.

^ "Why are Polish people so wrong about Muslims in their country?" . openDemocracy. 13 January 2017. Archived from the original on 26 April 2017 . Retrieved 10 May 2017 .

^ "European Islamophobia Report" (PDF) . SETA. 2015.

^ "Sweden protest after three mosque fires in one week" .

BBC News . 2 January 2015.

^ Chazan, David; Finnigan, Lexi (27 July 2016).

"Fears of anti-Muslim backlash as police investigate possible arson attack on French mosque" .

The Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022.

^ Diallo, Rokhaya (13 May 2025).

"A worshipper is murdered in a French mosque. How can this be 'just another crime'?" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 13 May 2025 .

^ "Spanish hooligans held for assault on hijab-wearing pregnant Muslim woman" . 8 September 2016.

^ "Muslim School in Denmark Vandalised with Anti-Islam Graffiti" .

The Copenhagen Post . Archived from the original on 4 September 2019 . Retrieved 27 November 2016 .

^ "Bremen: Nach Messerangriff in Straßenbahn nimmt Polizei Mann fest" .

Die Welt . 5 June 2019.

^ "Anschlag mit Lieferwagen auf Londoner Muslime" .

www.merkur.de . 19 June 2017.

^ "Hungarian PM: We don't want more Muslims" .

www.aljazeera.com .

^ Tharoor, Ishaan.

"Slovakia's leader said Islam has 'no place' in his country. Now he's taking a leadership role in the E.U." www.washingtonpost.com .

^ Leszczyński, Adam (2 July 2015).

" 'Poles don't want immigrants. They don't understand them, don't like them' " .

The Guardian .

^ Haddad, Yvonne ; Harb, Nazir Nader (June 2014).

"Post-9/11: Making Islam an American Religion" .

Religions .

5 (2): 477– 501.

doi : 10.3390/rel5020477 .

ISSN 2077-1444 .

^ Ricci, Alexander Damiano (11 February 2019).

"Negative attitude towards Muslims inversely proportional to actual presence" .

VoxEurop/EDJNet . Retrieved 4 March 2019 .

^ Spruyt, B.; Elchardus, M. (2012).

"Are anti-Muslim feelings more widespread than anti-foreigner feelings? Evidence from two split-sample experiments" (PDF) .

Ethnicities .

12 (6): 800– 20.

doi : 10.1177/1468796812449707 .

S2CID 145497111 .

^ González, K. V.; Verkuyten, M.; Weesie, J.; Poppe, E. (2008).

"Prejudice Towards Muslims in The Netherlands: Testing Integrated Threat Theory" (PDF) .

The British Journal of Social Psychology .

47 (4): 667– 85.

doi : 10.1348/014466608x284443 .

hdl : 11370/1faf663e-15b0-4391-aac2-b3a56b417887 .

PMID 18284782 .

S2CID 39911409 .

^ Savelkoul, M.; Scheepers, P.; Tolsma, J.; Hagendoorn, L. (2010). "Anti-Muslim attitudes in the Netherlands: Tests of contradictory hypotheses derived from ethnic competition theory and intergroup contact theory".

European Sociological Review .

27 (6): 741– 58.

doi : 10.1093/esr/jcq035 .

hdl : 2066/99505 .

^ Schlueter, E.; Scheepers, P. (2010).

"The relationship between outgroup size and anti-outgroup attitudes: A theoretical synthesis and empirical test of group threat- and intergroup contact theory" .

Social Science Research .

39 (2): 285– 95.

doi : 10.1016/j.ssresearch.2009.07.006 .

hdl : 11370/a16d7bfe-0b28-4542-b8b1-2db75a3714e9 .

S2CID 131765316 .

^ Kunst, J. R.; Tajamal, H.; Sam, D. L.; Ulleberg, P. (2012).

"Coping with Islamophobia: The effects of religious stigma on Muslim minorities' identity formation" .

International Journal of Intercultural Relations .

36 (4): 518– 32.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijintrel.2011.12.014 .

^ Verkuyten, M.; Yildiz, A. A. (2007).

"National (dis)identification and ethnic and religious identity: A study among Turkish-Dutch Muslims" .

Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin .

33 (10): 1448– 62.

doi : 10.1177/0146167207304276 .

hdl : 11370/7a25d4ce-7574-47ac-aac9-ebed396dc934 .

PMID 17933739 .

S2CID 24997994 .

^ Johnston, D.; Lordan, G. (2011). "Discrimination makes me sick! An examination of the discrimination–health relationship".

Journal of Health Economics .

31 (1): 99– 111.

doi : 10.1016/j.jhealeco.2011.12.002 .

PMID 22366167 .

^ "European Islamophobia" .

^ Hafez, Farid.

"Jahrbuch für Islamophobieforschung" . Islamophobieforschung. Archived from the original on 18 May 2022 . Retrieved 28 July 2023 .

^ Pieper, Oliver.

In Germany, discrimination is on the rise .

DW News . Retrieved on 11 June 2025 ^ Tariq Modood (6 April 2006).

Multiculturalism, Muslims and Citizenship: A European Approach (1st ed.). Routledge. pp.

3 , 29, 46.

ISBN 978-0-415-35515-5 .

^ Kilpatrick, William (2016).

The Politically Incorrect Guide to Jihad . Regnery. p. 256.

ISBN 978-1621575771 .

^ "Pascal Bruckner: Enlightenment fundamentalism or racism of the anti-racists? (24/01/2007) - signandsight" .

www.signandsight.com . Retrieved 18 June 2024 .

^ Pascal Bruckner – A reply to Ian Buruma and Timothy Garton Ash: "At the heart of the issue is the fact that in certain countries Islam is becoming Europe's second religion. As such, its adherents are entitled to freedom of religion, to decent locations and to all of our respect. On the condition, that is, that they themselves respect the rules of our republican, secular culture, and that they do not demand a status of extraterritoriality that is denied other religions, or claim special rights and prerogatives" ^ Pascal Bruckner – A reply to Ian Buruma and Timothy Garton Ash "It's so true that many English, Dutch and German politicians, shocked by the excesses that the wearing of the Islamic veil has given way to, now envisage similar legislation curbing religious symbols in public space. The separation of the spiritual and corporeal domains must be strictly maintained, and belief must confine itself to the private realm." ^ Nazir-Ali, Michael (6 January 2008).

"Extremism flourished as UK lost Christianity" .

The Sunday Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 10 January 2008.

^ Cesari, Jocelyne (1 June 2006).

"Muslims In Western Europe After 9/11: Why the term Islamophobia is more a predicament than an explanation" (PDF) .

Euro-Islam Info .

^ Draper, Lucy (6 May 2015).

"New report exposes huge rise in racist crime in Europe" .

Newsweek .

^ "Wahhabism expansion in Russia leads to growth of Islamophobia – National Anti-Terrorist Committee" .

Rossiyskaya Gazeta . 25 June 2013. Archived from the original on 23 August 2013.

^ Kalder, Daniel (8 October 2013).

"Russian court bans Qur'an translation" .

The Guardian .

^ a b Husna Haq (9 October 2013).

"Russia blacklists translation of the Quran" .

Christian Science Monitor .

^ "No change for the better: Georgia appears to have moved backwards under Bidzina Ivanishvili" .

The Economist . 12 October 2013.

^ "Rising tide of Islamophobia engulfs Athens" .

Globe and Mail . Toronto. 3 January 2011.

^ Ben McPartland (15 February 2013).

"Islamophobia has been trivialized in France" .

The Local .

^ "Сблъсъци пред джамията "Баня баши" в София - Портал ЕВРОПА" .

old.europe.bg . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ Penchev, Pencho.

"The opportunistic national-populism of the Bulgarian political party Ataka in a historical perspective" .

L'Europe a Contre-Pied: Ideologie Populiste et Extremisme de Droite en Europe Centrale et Orientale : 75– 89.

^ "Islamophobia, social distance and fear of terrorism in Australia: a preliminary report" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 October 2018 . Retrieved 28 July 2023 .

^ "Donald Trump: ban all Muslims entering US" .

the Guardian . 8 December 2015 . Retrieved 25 September 2022 .

^ "Obama lashes out at Trump, says using the phrase 'radical Islam' is 'not a strategy' " .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 25 September 2022 .

^ "Donald Trump: President Barack Obama 'Is the Founder of ISIS' " .

ABC News . Retrieved 25 September 2022 .

^ Spangler, Todd.

"Clinton, Trump spar over Islamophobia, Syrian refugees" .

Detroit Free Press . Retrieved 25 September 2022 .

^ Joshua Kurlantzick (20 October 2016).

"A New Approach to Thailand's Insurgency" .

Council on Foreign Relations . Retrieved 14 September 2021 .

^ Andre, Virginie (2016), "Thai Cyber-Actors: Evidence of an Islamophobic Effect", Fear of Muslims? International Perspectives on Islamophobia , Boundaries of Religious Freedom: Regulating Religion in Diverse Societies, Deakin University : Springer International Publishing , pp.

111– 130, doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-29698-2_8 , ISBN 978-3-319-29698-2 ^ "Islamophobia on the rise in Thailand's North" .

KBR (news agency) . May 2016 . Retrieved 14 September 2021 .

^ Amina Rasul (2007).

"Radicalisation of Muslims in the Philippines" .

Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung .

^ Zempi, Irene; Awan, Imran (11 February 2019).

The Routledge International Handbook of Islamophobia . United Kingdom: Routledge . p. 516.

ISBN 978-1-351-13553-5 .

^ Srinivasan, Meera (27 April 2019).

"Sri Lanka Easter blasts: 'Anti-Muslim riots a possible trigger' " .

The Hindu .

ISSN 0971-751X .

^ Kadirgamar, Niyanthini (1 August 2019).

"The perils of being a woman and a Muslim in Sri Lanka" .

The Hindu .

ISSN 0971-751X . Retrieved 14 September 2021 .

^ "More than 20 ambassadors condemn China's treatment of Uighurs in Xinjiang" .

The Guardian . 11 July 2019.

^ "Joint Statement on Xinjiang at Third Committee" (PDF) .

unmeetings.org . 29 October 2019. Archived from the original (PDF) on 11 October 2021 . Retrieved 13 August 2020 .

^ Davidson, Helen (25 September 2020).

"Thousands of Xinjiang mosques destroyed or damaged, report finds" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 26 September 2020 .

^ Skopeliti, Clea (25 September 2020).

"China: Nearly two-thirds of Xinjiang mosques damaged or demolished, new report shows" .

The Independent . Retrieved 26 September 2020 .

^ "Census of Canada: Census of Population, Census of Agriculture" . Archived from the original on 27 February 2021 . Retrieved 12 June 2023 .

^ "Canadian Public Opinion Poll" (PDF) .

angusreidglobal.com . 2 October 2013. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 March 2016 . Retrieved 10 December 2013 .

^ "Delhi riots: Violence that killed 53 in Indian capital 'was anti-Muslim pogrom', says top expert" .

The Independent . 7 March 2020.

^ "For Jews, the New Delhi riots have a painfully familiar ring" .

The Times of Israel . 11 March 2020.

^ "Anti-Muslim violence in Delhi serves Modi well" .

The Guardian . 26 February 2020.

^ Bona, Marzia (2 August 2018).

"How widespread is anti-Roma prejudice?" .

OBC Transeuropa/EDJNet . Retrieved 29 August 2018 .

^ "OIC warns of exploiting Islamophobia phenomenon" .

Arab News . 13 November 2012 . Retrieved 18 October 2013 .

^ "UN Designated March 15, Combat Day To Islamophobia" .

Dawn News .

^ "EUMC presents reports on Discrimination and Islamophobia in the EU" . European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia media release. 18 December 2006. Archived from the original on 31 January 2008.

^ a b c Allen, Chris and Nielsen, Jorgen S.

"Summary report on Islamophobia in the EU after 11 September 2001" Archived 12 November 2007 at the Wayback Machine , EUMC, May 2002.

^ EUMC website – Publications Archived 23 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved 17 November 2007.

^ "Reports – European Islamophobia" (.html/.pdf) .

European Islamophobia Reports EIR (2015). 3 May 2016 . Retrieved 18 May 2016 .

^ "EIR_2015.pdf" (PDF) .

European Islamophobia Reports EIR (2015). 3 May 2016 . Retrieved 18 May 2016 .

^ "Definition – About European Islamophobia Report (EIR)" (.html) .

©2016 European Islamophobia . European Parliament. 3 May 2016 . Retrieved 12 May 2016 .

When talking about Islamophobia, we mean anti-Muslim racism. As Anti-Semitism Studies has shown, the etymological components of a word do not necessarily point to its complete meaning, nor how it is used. Such is also the case with Islamophobia Studies. Islamophobia has become a well known term used in academia as much as in the public sphere. Criticism of Muslims or of the Islamic religion is not necessarily Islamophobic. Islamophobia is about a dominant group of people aiming at seizing, stabilizing and widening their power by means of defining a scapegoat – real or invented – and excluding this scapegoat from the resources/rights/definition of a constructed 'we'. Islamophobia operates by constructing a static 'Muslim' identity, which is attributed in negative terms and generalized for all Muslims. At the same time, Islamophobic images are fluid and vary in different contexts, because Islamophobia tells us more about the Islamophobe than it tells us about the Muslims/Islam.

^ "CIK Toolkit Launch – European Parliament, Brussels" .

University of Leeds . 26 September 2018. Archived from the original on 1 March 2019 . Retrieved 1 March 2019 .

^ "Counter-Islamophobia Kit" .

Equinet European Network of Equality Bodies . 4 October 2019 . Retrieved 1 March 2019 .

^ Law, Ian; Amina, Easat-Daas; Sayyid, S. (September 2018).

"Counter-Islamophobia kit:briefing paper and toolkit of counter-narratives to Islamophobia" (PDF) .

University of Leeds . Archived from the original (PDF) on 8 August 2019 . Retrieved 1 March 2019 .

^ Amina, Easat-Daas (21 February 2019).

"How to tackle Islamophobia – the best strategies from around Europe" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 1 March 2019 .

^ Roald, Anne Sophie (2004).

New Muslims in the European Context: The Experience of Scandinavian Converts . Brill. p.

53 .

ISBN 978-90-04-13679-3 .

^ "Fasena.de" (PDF) .

^ "Conference Two: Combating Intolerance" . Chancellery of the Government of Sweden. Archived from the original on 23 September 2010 . Retrieved 19 November 2011 .

^ Ehle, David (23 February 2014).

"Terminologi – islamofobi" .

Motargument (in Swedish) . Retrieved 2 January 2023 .

rasistiska och diskriminerande uttryck gentemot muslimer ^ Poole 2003 , p. 218, The Runnymede Trust has been successful in that the term Islamophobia is now widely recognized and used, though many right-wing commentators reject its existence or argue that it is justified. However, now becoming a catch-all label for any harassment involving Muslims, it should not be considered unproblematic .

^ Moten, Abdul Rashid (2014). "Islamophobia". In Shahin, Emad El-Din (ed.).

The Oxford Encyclopedia of Islam and Politics . Vol. 1. Oxford University Press. pp.

618– 620.

ISBN 978-0-19-973935-6 .

^ John Scott, ed. (2014).

"Islamophobia" .

A Dictionary of Sociology (4th ed.). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-968358-1 .

^ Charlie Hebdo, the West and the Need to Ridicule Religion (the discussion about islamophobia starts at around 0:18:38) ^ What Critics of ”Islamophobia Get Wrong , Ayn Rand Institute, 2016-10-25 ^ Chris Allen (2009).

"Islamophobia" . In John L. Esposito (ed.).

The Oxford Encyclopedia of the Islamic World . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-530513-5 .

^ Tamdgidi, Mohammad H. (2012).

"Beyond Islamophobia and Islamophilia as Western Epistemic Racisms: Revisiting Runnymede Trust's Definition in a World-History Context" (PDF) .

Islamophobia Studies Journal .

1 (1): 76. Archived from the original (PDF) on 29 October 2013.

^ Sayyid (2014) 'A measure of Islamophobia' Islamophobia Studies Journal, Vol 2. No. 1, pp. 10–25.

^ Michael Walzer (Winter 2015).

"Islamism and the Left" .

Dissent . Retrieved 2 November 2015 .

^ Bruckner, Pascal (23 November 2010).

"L'invention de l'"islamophobie" " .

Libération (in French).

^ Lévy, Elisabeth; Mihaely, Gil (29 October 2012).

"Pascal Bruckner : L'islamophobie, ça n'existe pas !" .

Causeur (in French).

^ Marshall, Paul; Shea, Nina (1 December 2011).

Silenced: How Apostasy and Blasphemy Codes are Choking Freedom Worldwide . Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199812264.001.0001 .

ISBN 978-0-19-981226-4 .

^ Aldridge, Alan (1 February 2000).

Religion in the Contemporary World: A Sociological Introduction . Polity Press. p.

138 .

ISBN 978-0-7456-2083-1 .

^ Miles & Brown 2003 , p. 165.

^ Poole 2003 , p. 219.

^ Bleich, Erik (2011). "What Is Islamophobia and How Much Is There? Theorizing and Measuring an Emerging Comparative Concept".

American Behavioral Scientist .

55 (12): 1581– 1600.

doi : 10.1177/0002764211409387 .

S2CID 143679557 .

^ Imhoff, Roland; Recker, Julia (17 August 2012).

"Differentiating Islamophobia: Introducing a new scale to measure Islamoprejudice and Secular Islam Critique" .

Political Psychology .

33 (6).

International Society of Political Psychology (published December 2012): 811– 924.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9221.2012.00911.x – via Wiley .

^ Van Der Noll, Jolanda; Saroglou, Vassilis; Latour, David; Dolezal, Nathalie (2018). "Western Anti-Muslim Prejudice: Value Conflict or Discrimination of Persons Too?".

Political Psychology .

39 (2): 281– 301.

doi : 10.1111/pops.12416 .

Sources Benn, Tansin & Jawad, H. A. (2003).

Muslim Women in the United Kingdom and Beyond: Experiences and Images .

Brill Publishers . p. 178.

ISBN 978-90-04-12581-0 .

Davison, Alan (2022). "Multiculturalism, Social Distance and "Islamophobia": Reflections on Anti-racism Research in Australia and Beyond".

Journal Society (59) .

59 (1). springer: 42– 51.

doi : 10.1007/s12115-021-00641-4 .

hdl : 10453/151199 .

S2CID 244581073 .

Egorova, Y. & Parfitt, T. (2003).

Jews, Muslims, and Mass Media: Mediating the 'Other' . London: Routledge Curzon.

ISBN 978-0-415-31839-6 .

Haddad, Yvonne Yazbeck (2002).

Muslims in the West: From Sojourners to Citizens . Oxford: Oxford University Press . p. 336.

ISBN 978-0-19-514805-3 .

Miles, Robert & Brown, Malcolm (2003).

Racism . London, New York: Psychology Press . p. 197.

ISBN 9780415296779 .

Poole, E. (2003). "Islamophobia". In Cashmore, Ellis (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Race and Ethnic Studies .

Routledge . pp.

215– 19.

ISBN 978-0-415-44714-0 .

Runnymede Trust (1997).

Islamophobia A Challenge For Us All - Report of the Runnymede Trust Commission on British Muslims and Islamophobia (PDF) .

The Runnymede Trust .

ISBN 0-902397-98-2 .

Williams, Charlotte; Soydan, Haluk & Johnson, Mark (1998).

Social Work and Minorities: European Perspectives . London, New York: Routledge . p. 273.

ISBN 978-0-415-16962-2 .

Further reading Ali, Wajahat; Clifton, Eli; Duss, Matthew; Fang, Lee; Keyes, Scott; and Shakir, Faiz (August 26, 2011) " Fear, Inc.: The Roots of the Islamophobia Network in America ".

American Progress . Accessed 24 February 2015.

Allen, Chris (2011).

Islamophobia . Ashgate Publishing Company.

Abbas, Tahir (2005).

Muslim Britain: Communities Under Pressure . Zed.

ISBN 978-1-84277-449-6 .

Duss, Matthew; Taeb; Yasmine; Gude, Ken; and Sofer, Ken (February 11, 2015) " Fear, Inc. 2.0: The Islamophobia Network's Efforts to Manufacture Hate in America ".

American Progress . Accessed 24 February 2015.

Gottschalk, P.; Greenberg, G. (2007).

Islamophobia: Making Muslims the Enemy . Lanham: Rowman & Littlefield publishers.

ISBN 978-0-7425-5286-9 .

Greaves, R. (2004).

Islam and the West Post 9/11 . Ashgate publishing Ltd.

ISBN 978-0-7546-5005-8 .

Itaoui, Rhonda (2016). "The Geography of Islamophobia in Sydney: mapping the spatial imaginaries of young Muslims", in Australian Geographer . Vol 47:3, 261–79.

Kaplan, Jeffrey (2006). " Islamophobia in America?: September 11 and Islamophobic Hate Crime Archived 12 June 2018 at the Wayback Machine ", Terrorism and Political Violence (Routledge), 18 :1, 1–33.

Kincheloe, Joe L. and Steinberg, Shirley R. (2004).

The Miseducation of the West: How the Schools and Media Distort Our Understanding of Islam . Westport, Connecticut: Praeger Press. (Arabic Edition, 2005).

Kincheloe, Joe L. and Steinberg, Shirley R. (2010).

Teaching Against Islamophobia . New York: Peter Lang.

Konrad, Felix (2011).

From the "Turkish Menace" to Exoticism and Orientalism: Islam as Antithesis of Europe (1453–1914)?

, European History Online , Mainz: Institute of European History . Retrieved: 22 June 2011.

Kundnani, Arun. (2014) The Muslims Are Coming! Islamaphobia, Extremism, and the Domestic War on Terror (Verso; 2014) 327 pages Lajevardi, N. (2020). Outsiders at Home: The Politics of American Islamophobia. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Love, Erik (2017).

Islamophobia and Racism in America . NYU Press.

ISBN 978-1479838073 .

Pynting, Scott & Mason, Victoria (2007).

" The Resistible Rise of Islamophobia: Anti-Muslim Racism in the UK and Australia before 11 September 2001".

Journal of Sociology" (PDF) .

The Australian Sociological Association .

43 (1): 61– 86.

doi : 10.1177/1440783307073935 .

S2CID 145065236 .

Quraishi, M. (2005).

Muslims and Crime: A Comparative Study . Ashgate Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-7546-4233-6 .

Ramadan, T. (2004).

Western Muslims and the Future of Islam . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-517111-2 .

Richardson, John E. (2004).

(Mis)representing Islam: the racism and rhetoric of British broadsheet newspapers .

John Benjamins Publishing Company .

ISBN 978-90-272-2699-0 .

Scott, John (2014).

A Dictionary of Sociology (4th ed.) . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-968358-1 .

Sheehi, Stephen (2011).

Islamophobia: The Ideological Campaign Against Muslims . Clarity Press.

Shryock, Andrew, ed. (2010).

Islamophobia/Islamophilia: Beyond the Politics of Enemy and Friend .

Indiana University Press . p. 250. Essays on Islamophobia past and present; topics include the "neo-Orientalism" of three Muslim commentators today: Ayaan Hirsi Ali, Reza Aslan, and Irshad Manji .

Silva, Derek (2017). " The Othering of Muslims: Discourses of Radicalization in the New York Times, 1969–2014 ", Sociological Forum , 32 :1, 138–161.

Tausch, Arno with Bischof, Christian; Kastrun, Tomaz; and Mueller, Karl (2007).

Against Islamophobia: Muslim Communities, Social-Exclusion and the Lisbon Process in Europe . Hauppauge, N.Y.: Nova Science Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-60021-535-3 .

Tausch, Arno with Bischof, Christian and Mueller, Karl (2008).

Muslim Calvinism: Internal Security and the Lisbon Process in Europe.

Purdue University Press.

ISBN 978-905170995-7 .

Tausch, Arno (2007).

Against Islamophobia: Quantitative Analyses of Global Terrorism, World Political Cycles and Center Periphery Structures . Hauppauge, N.Y.: Nova Science Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-60021-536-0 .

van Driel, B. (2004).

Confronting Islamophobia In Educational Practice . Trentham Books.

ISBN 978-1-85856-340-4 .

External links Islamophobia at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Islamophobia Studies Journal – Islamophobia Research & Documentation Project, UC Berkeley Reports – European Islamophobia – European Islamophobia Reports EIR Islamophobia Today newspaper Archived 22 September 2021 at the Wayback Machine – an Islamophobia news clearing house Sammy Aziz Rahmatti, Understanding and Countering Islamophobia v t e Islamophobia by country Australia Austria Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Canada China Denmark France Georgia Germany Greece Iceland India Israel Italy Myanmar Netherlands Norway Poland Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom United States v t e Islam topics Outline of Islam Beliefs God in Islam Allah Tawhid Muhammad In Islam Prophets of Islam Angels Revelation Qadar Judgement Day Holiest sites Five Pillars Shahada Salah Sawm Zakat Hajj History Leaders Timeline of the history of Islam Succession to Muhammad Early conquests Golden Age Historiography Sahaba Ahl al-Bayt Shi'a Imams Caliphates Rashidun Umayyad Abbasid Córdoba Fatimid Almohad Sokoto Ottoman Religious texts Quran Hadith Tafsir Seerah Story of Prophets Denominations Sunni Ash'arism Atharism Maturidism Mu'tazili Salafi Wahhabism Sufi Shia Twelver Shi'ism Isma'ilism Alawites Alevism Bektashi Alevism Zaydism Muhakkima / Khawarij Azariqa Moderate Kharijites Ibadi Azzabas Nukkari Wahbi Sufri Najdat Nation of Islam Ahmadiyya Lahori Quranism Non-denominational Life Culture Animals Art Association football Calendar Children Clothing Flags Holidays Mosques Madrasas Moral teachings Music Peace Pacifism Philosophy Political aspects Democracy Petro-Islam Liberalism and progressivism Qurbani Science Social welfare Women LGBT Islam by country Law Jurisprudence Economics Banking Economic history Sukuk Takaful Murabaha Riba Hygiene Ghusl Miswak Najis Tayammum Toilet Wudu Family Marriage Sex Haya Marriage contract Mahr Mahram Nikah Nikah mut'ah Zina Other aspects Baligh Cleanliness Criminal Violence Domestic violence Islamic extremism Islamic terrorism Apostasy Blasphemy Death penalty Dhabiĥa Dhimmi Divorce Diet Ethics Etiquette Gambling Gender segregation Honorifics Hudud Inheritance Jizya Leadership Ma malakat aymanukum Military POWs Slavery Sources of law Theological Kalam Schools of islamic jurisprudence Islamic studies Arts Arabesque Architecture Calligraphy Carpets Gardens Geometric patterns Music Pottery Medieval science Alchemy and chemistry Astronomy Cosmology Geography and cartography Mathematics Medicine Ophthalmology Physics Philosophy Early Contemporary Eschatology Theological Other areas Astrology Creationism (evolution) Feminism Inventions Literature poetry Psychology Shu'ubiyya Conversion to mosques Other Other religions Christianity Catholicism Mormonism Protestantism Druzism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Sikhism Apostasy Apostasy in Islam by country Ex-Muslims List of former Muslims List of ex-Muslim organisations Related topics Criticism of Islam Muhammad Quran Cultural Muslim Islamism Criticism Post-Islamism Qutbism Islamophobia Islamic view of miracles Nursing Persecution of Muslims Minority Muslim Sectarian Quran and miracles Symbolism Islam portal Category v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons v t e Religious persecution and discrimination By group Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Methods Censorship Blasphemy law Blood libel Communal violence Cultural genocide Deprogramming Desecration Domicide Discrimination Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Extrajudicial killing Extrajudicial punishment Exclusivism Forced conversion Forced displacement Hate crime Iconoclasm Intolerance Pogrom Police Political violence Population cleansing Population transfer Sectarian violence Social cleansing Segregation State atheism State religion Terrorism Violence War Events Golden calf massacre (c.1250 BC) Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire (64–313) Persecution of pagans in the late Roman Empire (c. 324–c. 491) Decline of Buddhism in the Indian subcontinent (c.550–c. 1200) Yellow Turban Rebellion (c.184–c. 205) Battle of Tours (732) Rhineland massacres (1096) Jerusalem massacre (1099) Muslim conquests in the Indian subcontinent (643–1526) Inquisition (1184–1908) Massacre at Ayyadieh (1191) Northern Crusades (12th–16th cent.) Crusades against Christians (13th–15th cent.) Forced conversions of Muslims in Spain (1500–1526) European wars of religion (1522–1712) Ottoman–Habsburg wars (1526–1791) Goa Inquisition (1561–1812) French Wars of Religion (1562–1598) Expulsion of the Moriscos (1609–1614) Test Acts (1673–1829) Persecution of Muslims during the Ottoman contraction (1683–1922) Christianization of the Sámi people (1700s) French Revolutionary dechristianisation (1789–1801) Utah War (1857–1858) 1860 Mount Lebanon civil war (1860) Circassian genocide (1864) Dungan Revolt (1862–1877) Adana massacre (1909) Massacres of Albanians in the Balkan Wars (1912–1913) Greek genocide (1913–1922) Pontic Greek genocide Assyrian genocide (1914–1924) Armenian genocide (1915–1923) Persecution of Christians in the Eastern Bloc (1917–1990) Soviet persecution (1922–1991) 1917–1921 1921–1928 1928–1941 1958–1964 1970–1987 legislation Šahovići massacre (1924) White Terror (Spain) (1936–1975) Nazi boycott of Jewish businesses (1933) The Holocaust (1939–1945) Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia (1941–1945) Communist Polish persecution (1945–1989) Communist Romanian persecution (1945–1989) Noakhali riots (1946) Direct Action Day (1946) 1946 Bihar riots (1946) Rawalpindi massacres (1947) Persecution of Hindus in Pakistan (1947–ongoing) Violence against Muslims in India (1947–ongoing) Violence against Hindus in independent India (1947–ongoing) 1948 Palestinian expulsion and flight (1948) Jewish exodus from the Muslim world (1948–1980) Antireligious campaigns in China (1949–ongoing) Persecution of Tibetans (1950–ongoing) Exodus of Turks from Bulgaria (1950) Religious violence in Nigeria (1953–ongoing) Istanbul pogrom (1955) Persecution of Papuans (1962–ongoing) Buddhist crisis (1963) Huế Phật Đản shootings (1963) Thích Quảng Đức (1963) Xá Lợi Pagoda raids (1963) Cultural Revolution (1966–1976) Four Olds (1966) Famen Temple (1966) Bangladesh genocide (1971) Persecution of Hindus in Bangladesh (1971–ongoing) Lebanese Civil War (1975–1990) Cambodian genocide (1975–1979) East Timor genocide (1975–1999) 1984 anti-Sikh riots (1984) Revival Process (1984–1989) 1989 expulsion of Turks from Bulgaria (1989) Exodus of Kashmiri Hindus (1990) Yugoslav Wars (1991–2001) Ethnic cleansing in the Bosnian War (1992–1996) Bosnian genocide (1995) War crimes in the Kosovo War (1999) Walisongo school massacre (2000) Kosheh massacres (2000) September 11 attacks (2001) 2002 Gujarat riots (2002) South Thailand insurgency (2004–ongoing) Boko Haram insurgency (2009–ongoing) Maspero demonstrations (2011) Attacks by Islamic extremists in Bangladesh (2013–2016) Yazidi genocide (2014–2017) Genocide of Christians by ISIL (2014–ongoing) Iraqi Turkmen genocide (2014–2017) Persecution of Uyghurs in China (2014–ongoing) Rohingya genocide (2016–ongoing) Christchurch mosque shootings (2019) 2019 Sri Lanka Easter bombings (2019) 2020 Delhi riots (2020) 2024 Istanbul church shooting Crocus City Hall attack (2024) Mar Elias Church attack (2025) Religion v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Islamophobia&oldid=1306182594 " Categories : Islamophobia Political neologisms Xenophobia Racism Hidden categories: Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 interwiki-linked names Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Wikipedia articles in need of updating from December 2024 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Use dmy dates from August 2018 Articles with excerpts All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from September 2021 Articles with failed verification from August 2024 Wikipedia references cleanup from September 2021 All articles needing references cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from September 2021 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 10:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Islamophobia 72 languages Add topic

