Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Gallery 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Antheridium 31 languages Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Nederlands Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a plant producing and containing male gametes General structure of antheridia. Antheridia consist of a thin cellular layer that holds many sperm inside. Here, the diagram of a liverwort antheridium is shown.

An antheridium is a haploid structure or organ producing and containing male gametes (called antherozoids or sperm ). The plural form is antheridia , and a structure containing one or more antheridia is called an androecium .

[ 1 ] The androecium is also the collective term for the stamens of flowering plants .

Antheridia are present in the gametophyte phase of cryptogams like bryophytes and ferns .

[ 2 ] Many algae and some fungi , for example, ascomycetes and water moulds , also have antheridia during their reproductive stages. In gymnosperms and angiosperms , the male gametophytes have been reduced to pollen grains , and in most of these, the antheridia have been reduced to a single generative cell within the pollen grain. During pollination , this generative cell divides and gives rise to sperm cells.

The female counterpart to the antheridium in cryptogams is the archegonium , and in flowering plants is the gynoecium .

An antheridium typically consists of sterile cells and spermatogenous tissue . The sterile cells may form a central support structure or surround the spermatogenous tissue as a protective jacket. The spermatogenous cells give rise to spermatids via mitotic cell division . In some bryophytes , the antheridium is borne on an antheridiophore , a stalk-like structure that carries the antheridium at its apex.

[ 3 ] Gallery [ edit ] Oogonium (larger) and antheridium (with red centre) of the alga Chara , produced on the stem of a plant Magnified view of developing antheridia in Hypnum cupressiforme "Moss flowers": each shoot has a cluster of antheridia, i.e., an androecium.

Sperm of the liverwort Marchantia polymorpha are produced on the upper surface of antheridiophores.

Cross-sectional micrograph of the antheridial head of Marchantia sp., showing antheridia containing spermatogenous tissue.

Antheridium (indicated by the red box) of an Equisetum sp.

Micrograph of antheridium anatomy in Porella , a leafy liverwort See also [ edit ] Hornworts have antheridia, in some cases arranged within androecia.

Microsporangia produce spores that give rise to male gametophytes.

References [ edit ] ^ D. Christine Cargill; Karen S. Renzaglia; Juan Carlos Villarreal & R. Joel Duff (2005), "Generic concepts within hornworts: Historical review, contemporary insights and future directions", Australian Systematic Botany , 18 : 7– 16, doi : 10.1071/sb04012 ^ Voeller, Bruce (1971). "Developmental Physiology of Fern Gametophytes: Relevance for Biology".

BioScience .

21 (6): 266– 270.

doi : 10.2307/1295968 .

JSTOR 1295968 .

^ Shimamura, Masaki (2016-02-01), "Marchantia polymorpha: Taxonomy, Phylogeny and Morphology of a Model System" , Plant and Cell Physiology , 57 (2): 230– 256, doi : 10.1093/pcp/pcv192 , ISSN 0032-0781 , PMID 26657892 Further reading [ edit ] C.Michael Hogan. 2010.

Fern . Encyclopedia of Earth. National council for Science and the Environment . Washington, DC v t e Botany History Outline Subdisciplines Archaeobotany Astrobotany Bryology Dendrology Ethnobotany Paleobotany Phycology Phytochemistry Phytogeography Geobotany Plant anatomy Plant ecology Plant intelligence Plant pathology Plant physiology Plant groups Algae Archaeplastida Bryophyte Non-vascular plants Vascular plants Fern Lycophyte Spermatophytes Gymnosperm Angiosperm Plant anatomy Plant morphology ( glossary ) Plant cells Cell wall Phragmoplast Plastid Plasmodesma Vacuole Tissues Cork Ground tissue Mesophyll Meristem Storage organs Vascular tissue Vascular bundle Wood Vegetative Bulb Root Rhizoid Rhizome Shoot Bud Leaf Cataphyll Petiole Sessility Stem Reproductive (incl. Flower) Archegonium Antheridium Androecium Pollen Stamen Anther Filament Staminode Tapetum Flower Aestivation Flower development Floral diagram Floral formula Floral symmetry Whorl Fruit Anatomy Berry Capsule Nut Pyrena Seed Dispersal Endosperm Gametophyte Gynandrium Gynoecium Carpel Ovary Locule Ovule Stigma Style Hypanthium (Floral cup) Inflorescence Bract Pedicellate Raceme Umbel Perianth Tepal Petal Sepal Plant embryo Receptacle Sporophyll Sporophyte Surface structures Cuticle Epicuticular wax Epidermis Nectar Stoma Thorns, spines, and prickles Trichome Plant physiology Materials Aleurone Apical dominance Bulk flow Cellulose Nutrition Photosynthesis Chlorophyll Phytomelanin Plant hormones Respiration Gas Exchange Cellular respiration Sap Starch Sugar Transpiration Turgor pressure Plant growth and habit Habit Cushion plants Rosettes Shrubs Prostrate shrubs Subshrubs Succulent plants Trees Vines Lianas Herbaceous plants Secondary growth Woody plants Reproduction Evolution Ecology Alternation of generations Double fertilization Evolutionary development Evolutionary history timeline Flora Germination Pollination Artificial Pollinators Pollen tube Self Sporangium Microsporangia Microspore Megasporangium Megaspore Spore Plant taxonomy Biological classification Botanical nomenclature Botanical name Correct name Author citation International Code of Nomenclature (ICN) ICN for Cultivated Plants (ICNCP) Cultivated plant taxonomy Citrus taxonomy Cultigen Cultivar Group Grex History of plant systematics Herbarium International Association for Plant Taxonomy (IAPT) Plant taxonomy systems Taxonomic rank Practice Agronomy Floriculture Forestry Horticulture Phytochemical Lists Related Botanical terms Botanists by author abbreviation Botanical expeditions Individual trees Oldest trees Superlative trees Tallest trees Plants Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Antheridium&oldid=1271278383 " Categories : Plant anatomy Plant reproduction Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 January 2025, at 09:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Antheridium 31 languages Add topic

