Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Issues and activities Toggle Issues and activities subsection 2.1 Groups and conferences 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Alter-globalization 27 languages Ænglisc العربية Arpetan Беларуская Български Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kurdî Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Social movement Alter-globalization slogans during the protests in Le Havre against the 37th G8 summit in Deauville, France Alter-globalization (also known as alter-globo , alternative globalization or alter-mundialization —from the French alter- mondialisation ) is a social movement whose proponents support global cooperation and interaction, but oppose what they describe as the negative effects of economic globalization , considering it to often work to the detriment of, or to not adequately promote, human values such as environmental and climate protection , economic justice , labor protection , protection of indigenous cultures , peace and civil liberties . The movement is related to the global justice movement .

The name may have been derived from a popular slogan of the movement, namely "another world is possible", which came out of the World Social Forum .

[ 1 ] The alter-globalization movement is a cooperative movement designed to "protest the direction and perceived negative economic, political, social, cultural and ecological consequences of neoliberal globalization".

[ 2 ] Many alter-globalists seek to avoid the "disestablishment of local economies and disastrous humanitarian consequences". Most members of this movement shun the label " anti-globalization " as pejorative and incorrect since they actively support human activity on a global scale and do not oppose economic globalization per se .

Proponents view the movement as an alternative to what they term "neoliberal globalization" in which international institutions (the World Trade Organization , World Bank , International Monetary Fund and the like) and major corporations devote themselves to enriching the developed world while giving little or no attention to what critics say are the detrimental effects of their actions on the people and environments of less developed countries , countries whose governments are often too weak or too corrupt to resist or regulate them. This is not to be confused with proletarian internationalism as put forth by communists in that alter-globalists do not necessarily oppose the free market , but a subset of free-market practices characterized by certain business attitudes and political policies [ example needed ] that they say often lead to violations of human rights.

History [ edit ] Anarchist protest against capitalist neo-liberalism, Argentina The 1970s saw resistance to global expansion by both government and non-government parties. U.S. Senator Frank Church was concerned with the role multinational corporations were beginning to play in global trade and created a subcommittee that reviewed corporate practices to see if they were advancing U.S. interests or not (i.e. exporting jobs that could be kept within the United States). The results prompted some countries in the Global South (ranging from Tanzania to the Philippines) to call for rules and collective action that would raise or stabilize raw material prices and increase Southern exports.

[ 3 ] The World Trade Organization Ministerial Conference of 1999 brought significant attention to the outcry against neoliberal economic integration through media coverage, support groups, and activists.

[ how?

] Though this opposition first became highly popularized in the 1999 Seattle WTO protests , it can be traced back prior to the 1980s when the Washington Consensus became a dominant development in thinking and policymaking.

[ 3 ] Issues and activities [ edit ] The neutrality of this section is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( July 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Alter-globalization activists fight for better treatment of developing countries and their economies, workers' rights, fair trade, and equal human rights.

[ 4 ] They oppose the exploitation of labor , outsourcing of jobs to foreign nations (though some argue this is a nationalistic rather than alter-globalist motive), pollution of local environments, and harm to foreign cultures to which jobs are outsourced.

Aspects of the movement include: Attempts at an alter-globalization movement to reform policies and processes of the WTO include: "alternative principles of public accountability, the rights of people and the protection of the environment" through the theoretical framework of Robert Cox.

[ 5 ] Labor movement and trade union initiatives have begun to respond to economic and political globalisation by extending their cooperation and initiatives to the transnational level.

[ 6 ] Fair trade initiatives, corporate codes of conduct, and social clauses as well as a return to local markets instead of relying too heavily on global markets.

[ 7 ] "Alter-globalization activists have promoted alternative water governance models through North-South red-green alliances between organized labor, environmental groups, women's groups, and indigenous groups" (spoken in response to the increase in privatization of the global water supply ).

[ 8 ] "The first current of the alter-globalization movement considers that instead of getting involved in a global movement and international forums, the path to social change lies through giving life to horizontal, participatory, convivial and sustainable values in daily practices, personal life and local spaces. Many urban activists cite the way that, for example, the Zapatistas in Mexico and other Latin American indigenous movements now focus on developing communities' local autonomy via participatory self-government, autonomous education systems and improving the quality of life. They appreciate too, the convivial aspect of local initiatives and their promise of small but real alternatives to corporate globalization and mass consumption." [ 9 ] Groups and conferences [ edit ] Opening walk of 2002 World Social Forum , held by participants in the movement Advocates of alter-globalization have set up an online global news network, the Independent Media Center , to report on developments pertinent to the movement. Groups in favor of alter-globalization include ATTAC , an international trade reform network headquartered in France.

The largest forum for alter-globalization activity is the annual World Social Forum , organized as a democratic space reflecting the movement's values.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Society portal Alternative movement Anarchism Anarchist communism Anti-capitalism Anti-globalization Autonomia Communism Democratic mundialization Direct democracy Global citizens movement Global justice movement Horizontalidad Mundialization New International Economic Order Popular sovereignty Socialism Socialism of the 21st century Trade justice Trade Justice Movement Transformation of culture References [ edit ] ^ Hinkelammert, Franz Josef; Ulrich Duchrow (2004).

Property for People, Not for Profit: Alternatives to the Global Tyranny of Capital . Progressio. pp. vii.

ISBN 1-84277-479-4 .

^ Krishna-Hensel, Sai (2006).

Global Cooperation: Challenges and Opportunities in the Twenty-first Century . Ashgate Publishing. p. 202.

^ a b Broad, Robin; Zahara Heckscher (August 2003).

Before Seattle: The Historical Roots of the Current Movement against Corporate-Led Globalisation . Taylor & Francis, Ltd. pp.

713– 728.

^ Razsa, Maple.

Bastards of Utopia: Living Radical Politics After Socialism .  Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2015 ^ Paterson, William (December 2006).

Before Seattle: The Historical Roots of the Current Movement against Corporate-Led Globalisation . University of Stirling. Archived from the original on 2011-07-18.

^ Jakopovich, Dan (February 1, 2011).

"The construction of a trans-European labour movement" .

Capital & Class .

35 (1): 63– 79.

doi : 10.1177/0309816810394737 .

S2CID 143386396 – via SAGE Journals.

^ Broad, Robin; John Cavanagh.

Development Redefined: How the Market Met its Match .

^ Bakker, Karen (2006). "The Commons Versus the Commodity: Alter-globalization, Anti-privatization and the Human Right to Water in the Global South".

Antipode .

39 (3): 430– 455.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8330.2007.00534.x .

^ Pleyers, Geoffrey (March 2009).

"WSF 2009: A generation's challenge" .

OpenSpaceForum . Archived from the original on 2018-09-28 . Retrieved 2009-04-09 .

Pleyers, Geoffrey (December 2010). "Alter-Globalization".

Polity Press .

^ Scerri, Andy (2013). "The World Social Forum : Another World Might Be Possible".

Social Movement Studies .

12 (1): 111– 120.

doi : 10.1080/14742837.2012.711522 .

S2CID 146295322 .

Further reading [ edit ] Razsa, Maple.

Bastards of Utopia: Living Radical Politics After Socialism .  Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2015 Graeber, David.

Fragments of an Anarchist Anthropology , Chicago: Prickly Paradigm Press,  2004 Klein, Naomi.

No Logo . London: Fourth Estate (2010) External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Alter-globalisation .

"Henrietta L. Moore review of "Alter-Globalization. Becoming actors in the global age" by "Geoffrey Pleyers" , Cambridge, Polity, 2011.

"The ABCs of the Global Economy" from Dollars & Sense Magazine The other world Photo-documentary on the alter-globalization movement 2003–2005.

Archived from the original.

(in French) fr:Altermondialisme v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alter-globalization&oldid=1298777085 " Categories : Alter-globalization World democracy World government Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles needing examples Articles needing examples from June 2018 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2018 Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from July 2024 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 16:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alter-globalization 27 languages Add topic

