Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theory 2 Application 3 Safety precautions Toggle Safety precautions subsection 3.1 Room integrity testing 3.2 Suffocation 3.3 Accidents 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Gaseous fire suppression 6 languages Deutsch Nederlands Русский Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Use of inert gases and chemical agents to extinguish a fire This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Gaseous fire suppression" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( May 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Canisters containing argon gas for use in extinguishing fire in a server room without damaging equipment Gaseous fire suppression , also called clean agent fire suppression , is the use of inert gases and chemical agents to extinguish a fire . These agents are governed by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Standard for Clean Agent Fire Extinguishing Systems – NFPA 2001 in the US, with different standards and regulations elsewhere. The system typically consists of the agent, agent storage containers, agent release valves, fire detectors , fire detection system (wiring control panel, actuation signaling), agent delivery piping, and agent dispersion nozzles.

Theory [ edit ] There are four means used by the agents to extinguish a fire. They act on the " fire tetrahedron ": [ 1 ] Reduction or isolation of fuel. No agents currently use this as the primary means of fire suppression.

Reduction of heat. Representative agents: Clean agent FS 49 C2 (NAF S 227, MH227, FM-200), Novec 1230 , pentafluoroethane (NAF S125, ECARO-25).

Reduction or isolation of oxygen: Representative agents: IG-01 ( argon ); Argonite / IG-55 (ProInert) (a blend of 50% argon, 50% nitrogen ); CO 2 , carbon dioxide ; Inert Gas 541 IG-541 Inergen (a blend of 52% nitrogen, 40% argon, and 8% CO 2 ); and IG-100 (NN100), nitrogen .

Inhibiting the chain reaction of the above components. Representative agents: FE-13 , 1,1,1,2,3,3,3-Heptafluoropropane , FE-25 , haloalkanes , bromotrifluoromethane , trifluoroiodomethane , NAF P-IV, NAF S-III, NAF S 125, NAF S 227, and Triodide ( Trifluoroiodomethane ).

Application [ edit ] Broadly speaking, there are two methods for applying an extinguishing agent: total flooding and local application: Systems working on a total flooding principle apply an extinguishing agent to a room in order to achieve a concentration of the agent (volume percent of the agent in air) adequate to extinguish the fire. These types of systems may be operated automatically by detection and related controls or manually by the operation of a system actuator.

Systems working on a local application principle apply an extinguishing agent directly onto a fire (usually a two dimensional area), or into the three dimensional region immediately surrounding the substance or object on fire. The main difference in local application from total flooding design is the absence of physical barriers enclosing the fire space.

In the context of automatic extinguishing systems, local application generally refers to the use of systems that have been emplaced some time prior to their usage rather than the use of manually operated wheeled or portable fire extinguishers, although the nature of the agent delivery is similar and many automatic systems may also be activated manually. The lines are blurred somewhat with portable automatic extinguishing systems, although these are not common.

Safety precautions [ edit ] Room integrity testing [ edit ] Room integrity testing (RIT) is also required in conjunction with gas fire suppression systems. RIT ensures that in the event of a fire, the room's containment is sufficient to ensure the effectiveness of the suppression system. RIT works by creating pressure within the room or enclosure where the suppression system has been installed and ensuring that the gas does not escape from the room so quickly that it is unable to extinguish the fire.

[ 2 ] Suffocation [ edit ] Warning sign for fire suppression system An extinguishing system which is primarily based on inert gases, such as CO 2 or nitrogen, in enclosed spaces presents a risk of suffocation.

[ 3 ] Some incidents have occurred where individuals in these spaces have been killed by inert gas release. When installed according to fire codes the systems have an excellent safety record. To prevent such occurrences, additional life safety systems are typically installed with a warning alarm that precedes the agent release. The warning, usually an audible and visible alert, advises the immediate evacuation of the enclosed space. After a preset time, the agent starts to discharge. This can be paused by activating an abort switch, which pauses the countdown as long as it is activated, allowing everyone to evacuate the area. Accidents have also occurred during maintenance of these systems, so proper safety precautions must be taken beforehand.

[ 4 ] The pressure differential caused by these gases may be sufficient to break windows and walls. Pressure vents are mandatory on inert gases and may be required on synthetic agents. These are installed working on the physical strength of the protected space and vary in size.

Accidents [ edit ] A study carried out by the Italian Workers' Compensation Authority and the Italian Fire Brigade (Piccolo et al., 2018) reported 12 different accidents caused by inert gas fire suppression systems that in many cases have resulted in serious injuries. From the cases analyzed, it was determined that the over pressure of inert gas systems can constitute a risk even in the presence of a system designed and built according to technical standards.

[ 5 ] On September 20, 2018, two people died after an inert gas leak from a fire suppression system located in the State Archives in Arezzo (Italy).

[ 6 ] On 8 July 2013 an explosion of Argonite cylinders tore through a Hertfordshire (U.K.) construction site, killing a plumber and injuring six other workers.

[ 7 ] Red Bee Media had a major incident with their broadcast playout facility in London, England, that is used by BBC Television , Channel 4 , Channel 5 and ViacomCBS . The broadcasters upload programs and continuity links to Red Bee's servers and then broadcast to tv and online. On 25 September 2021 a gaseous fire suppression system at the facility was triggered, causing loss of service. It was found that an acoustic shock wave from the gas release nozzles had severely damaged the servers resulting in the hard drives being destroyed.

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Fire protection Hypoxic air technology for fire prevention References [ edit ] ^ "Information about the Fire Triangle/Tetrahedron and Combustion" . Safelincs Fire & Safety Solutions . Retrieved 25 June 2022 .

^ BBC Fire and Security, Room Integrity Testing Archived 2021-04-18 at the Wayback Machine , accessed 14 May 2021 ^ Tür (2012).

"Asphyxia due to accidental nitrogen gas inhalation: a case report" .

Hong Kong Journal of Emergency Medicine .

19 : 46– 48.

doi : 10.1177/102490791201900108 .

S2CID 6835532 . Retrieved 16 June 2022 .

^ "Gas extinguishing system may blow out walls and windows" .

blog.anta.net . 2009-04-14.

ISSN 1797-1993 . Archived from the original on 2011-07-26 . Retrieved 2009-04-14 .

^ "Atti del Convegno (Conference Proceedings)" (PDF) .

^ " "Arezzo, due impiegati morti soffocati dal gas del sistema antincendio all'Archivio di Stato" " .

La Repubblica .

^ "Crown House and Kidde fined nearly £700k for gas cylinder carnage" .

^ "Broadcast Centre Incident" (PDF) . London: OFCOM . 20 June 2022.

External links [ edit ] Fire Suppression Systems Association National Fire Protection Association EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency v t e Fire protection Fundamental concepts Backdraft Boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE) Boilover Combustibility and flammability Conflagration Dangerous goods (HAZMAT) Deflagration Detonation Dust explosion Enthalpy of vaporization Explosive Fire classification Fire control Fire loading Fire point Fire triangle Flammability diagram Flammability limit Flammable liquid Flashover Flash point Friction loss Gas leak Heat transfer Jet fire K-factor (fire protection) Pool fire Pyrolysis Spontaneous combustion Structure fire Thermal radiation Water pressure Technology Active fire protection Automatic fire suppression Condensed aerosol fire suppression Detonation flame arrester External water spray system Fire bucket Fire prevention Fire protection Fire retardant Fire-retardant fabric Fire retardant gel Fire-safe polymers Fire safety Fire sprinkler system Fire suppression system Firefighting foam Flame arrester Flame retardant Flashback arrestor Fusible link Gaseous fire suppression Hypoxic air technology for fire prevention Inerting system Intumescent Passive fire protection Personal protective equipment (PPE) Relief valve Spark arrestor Tank blanketing Vehicle fire suppression system Building design Annulus (firestop) Area of refuge Booster pump Compartmentation Crash bar Electromagnetic door holder Electromagnetic lock Emergency exit Emergency light Exit sign Fire curtain Fire cut Fire damper Fire door Fire escape Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire pump Fire sprinkler Firestop Firestop pillow Firewall (construction) Grease duct Heat and smoke vent Packing (firestopping) Penetrant (mechanical, electrical, or structural) Penetration (firestop) Pressurisation ductwork Safety glass Smoke control Smoke damper Smoke exhaust ductwork Smokeproof enclosure Standpipe (firefighting) Fire alarm systems Aspirating smoke detector Carbon monoxide detector Circuit integrity Explosive gas leak detector Fire alarm call box Fire alarm control panel Fire alarm notification appliance Fire drill Flame detector Heat detector Manual fire alarm activation Smoke detector Professions, trades, and services Duct cleaning Fire insurance Fire protection engineering Fireproofing Fire-resistance rating Fire Safety Evaluation System (FSES) Fire test Kitchen exhaust cleaning Listing and approval use and compliance Sprinkler fitting Industry organizations Institution of Fire Engineers (IFE) National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Society of Fire Protection Engineers (SFPE) Underwriters Laboratories (UL) Standards CE marking EN 3 EN 54 EN 16034 Flame spread GHS hazard statements GHS precautionary statements Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) List of R-phrases List of S-phrases Safety data sheet UL 94 Awards Arthur B. Guise Medal Harry C. Bigglestone Award See also Template:Fire Template:Firefighting Template:HVAC Category Commons v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gaseous_fire_suppression&oldid=1291980668 " Categories : Active fire protection Fire suppression Firefighting equipment Industrial gases Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2007 All articles needing additional references Articles with limited geographic scope from May 2021 This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 14:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gaseous fire suppression 6 languages Add topic

