Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 In popular culture and fiction 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Alter ego 47 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Alternative self or personality distinct from the actual identity "Double life" and "Alternate self" redirect here. For identical stranger, see doppelgänger . For the concept in African-American studies, see double consciousness . For other uses, see Double Life and Alter Ego (disambiguation) .

This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( January 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An alter ego ( Latin for "other I") means an alternate self , which is believed to be distinct from a person's normal or true original personality . Finding one's alter ego will require finding one's other self, one with a different personality. Additionally, the altered states of the ego may themselves be referred to as alterations .

A distinct meaning of alter ego is found in the literary analysis used when referring to fictional literature and other narrative forms, describing a key character in a story who is perceived to be intentionally representative of the work's author (or creator), by oblique similarities, in terms of psychology , behaviour, speech, or thoughts, often used to convey the author's thoughts. The term is also sometimes, but less frequently, used to designate a hypothetical "twin" or "best friend" to a character in a story. Similarly, the term alter ego may be applied to the role or persona taken on by an actor [ 1 ] or by other types of performers.

Origin [ edit ] Cicero coined the term as part of his philosophical construct in 1st-century Rome , but he described it as "a second self, a trusted friend".

[ 2 ] [ citation needed ] The existence of "another self" was first fully recognized in the 18th century, when Anton Mesmer and his followers used hypnosis to separate the alter ego.

[ 3 ] These experiments showed a behavior pattern that was distinct from the personality of the individual when he was in the waking state compared with when he was under hypnosis. Another character had developed in the altered state of consciousness but in the same body.

[ 4 ] Sigmund Freud , throughout his career, would appeal to such instances of dual consciousness to support his thesis of the unconscious.

[ 5 ] He considered that "We may most aptly describe them as cases of a splitting of the mental activities into two groups, and say that the same consciousness turns to one or the other of these groups alternately".

[ 6 ] Freud considered the roots of the phenomenon of the alter ego to be in the narcissistic stage of early childhood.

[ 7 ] Heinz Kohut would identify a specific need in that early phase for mirroring, by another which resulted later in what he called the "twinship or alter ego transference".

[ 8 ] In popular culture and fiction [ edit ] Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde Fred Terry as the Scarlet Pimpernel (alter ego of Sir Percy Blakeney) in the 1905 West End production of The Scarlet Pimpernel The title characters in Robert Louis Stevenson 's thriller Strange Case of Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde represent an exploration of the concept that good and evil exist within one person, constantly at war.

[ 9 ] Edward Hyde represents the doctor's other self, a psychopath who is unrestrained by the conventions of civilized society, and who shares a body with the doctor. The names (Jekyll and Hyde) since become synonymous with a split personality or an alter ego that can overpower the original self.

In the novel The Count of Monte Cristo by Alexandre Dumas , the main character Edmond Dantes , after escaping from the Chateau d'If , assumes three alter egos: the count of Monte Cristo, the Italian abbe called Giacomo Busoni, and the Englishman Lord Wilmore. In the novel, the Count of Monte Cristo rewards those who had been good to him while punishing those who contributed in one way or the other to his imprisonment. He leads M. Danglars to lose all his fortune, M. de Villefort to his madness, Fernand Mandego to commit suicide and others more to their fate.

Norman Douglas in the late 1890s wrote a short story, "The Familiar Spirit", about a man who became aware while drowning of a conformist second self – "the presence within him of this Spirit, his alter ego , which is bent on crushing his ambition".

[ 10 ] Published in 1905, the Scarlet Pimpernel 's titular protagonist is the prototype hero with a secret identity .

[ 11 ] Sir Percy Blakeney leads a double life: He appears to be just a wealthy fop, but in reality he is the Scarlet Pimpernel, a formidable swordsman and a quick-thinking master of disguise and escape artist who establishes a network of supporters, The League of the Scarlet Pimpernel, that aids his endeavors. By drawing attention to his alter ego, Blakeney hides behind his public face of a thinking foppish playboy (similar to Batman , who hides himself as Bruce Wayne) [ 12 ] In comic books , superheroes and their secret identities are often considered the alter egos . The archetypal comic book hero, Superman , assumes the identity of the "mild-mannered" newspaper reporter Clark Kent to live among the citizens of Metropolis without arousing suspicion.

The Incredible Hulk comic book series further complicates this theme, as Bruce Banner loses control to the Hyde-like Hulk whenever he becomes angry, yet also depends upon the Hulk's superpowers to combat villains.

In the film and novel Fight Club , the narrator has an alter ego he loses control of, Tyler Durden .

In the 1999 Malayalam film Ustaad , written by Ranjith and directed by Sibi Malayil , actor Mohanlal plays both the characters Ustaad, an underworld don, and his alter ego Parmeshwaran, a soft-spoken businessman who leads a normal life.

In Disney's Hannah Montana , Miley Stewart (played by Miley Cyrus ), leads the life of a high school student, and the life of teen pop sensation Hannah Montana allowing her to get the best of both worlds. Likewise, Miley's friends, Lilly Truscott (played by Emily Osment ) and Oliver Oken (played by Mitchel Musso ), also lead the lives of high school students and are what make up Hannah's entourage, Lola Luftnagle, and Mike Stanley III respectively.

In Pretty Little Liars , Vivian Darkbloom is the alter ego of Alison Dilaurentis .

In Beavis and Butt-Head , Cornholio is Beavis 's alter ego.

Several famous musicians have adopted alter egos over the years, usually to indicate a new creative direction or a deep dive into their emotions removed from their popular stage persona—notable examples being David Bowie (with Ziggy Stardust and Aladdin Sane ) and Prince (with Camille).

[ 13 ] Rolling Stone wrote Bowie's invention of Ziggy Stardust was "the alter ego that changed music forever and sent his career into orbit".

[ 14 ] Particularly during the 2000s, several big-name singers dedicated album eras to reveal their alter egos, including Janet Jackson with Damita Jo , Mariah Carey with The Emancipation of Mimi , and Beyoncé with I Am ... Sasha Fierce .

[ 15 ] Many rappers have also employed alter egos, notably Eminem (Slim Shady), Shock G (Humpty Hump), Nicki Minaj (Roman Zolanski), Tyler, the Creator (Wolf Haley, Igor et al.

), and MF DOOM ( Viktor Vaughn and King Geedorah et al.

) Singer Lisa ’s debut solo album titled Alter Ego showcases 5 alter egos, Vixi, Kiki, Speedi, Roxi, and Sunni . They are all associated with a color and a character in the album’s comic book of the same title. They also have songs specifically for them on the album.

Darth Vader is considered to be Anakin Skywalker's alter ego following his fall to the dark side of The Force .

In the 2023 Tamil Film Leo: Bloody Sweet actor Joseph Vijay plays the character Leo Das and his alter-ego Parthiban.

The 2006 animated film Paprika features a psychologist named Atsuko and her dream-self, Paprika.

In the video game Elden Ring , one of the most important characters, "Miquella the kind" has an alter ego called "St. Trina." See also [ edit ] Author surrogate Demonic Possession Ego-state therapy Gothic double Heteronym Moniker (nickname) Mononymous person Pen name Persona Fursona Pseudonym Ring name Rebirth (Buddhism) Reincarnation Schizophrenia Stage name Subpersonality True self and false self Tulpa References [ edit ] ^ Glenn Daniel Wilson (1991).

Psychology and Performing Arts . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 90-265-1119-1 .

^ "Alter Ego" .

Collins English Dictionary - Complete and Unabridged 10th Edition . William Collins Sons & Co. Ltd. 2009 . Retrieved 13 January 2013 .

^ J Haule, Jung in the 21st Century II (2010) p. 88 ^ Pedersen, David (1994).

Cameral Analysis: A Method of Treating the Psychoneuroses Using Hypnosis . London, U.K.: Routledge. p. 20.

ISBN 0-415-10424-6 .

^ Freud, S., Five Lectures on Psycho-Analysis (Penguin 1995) p. 21 ^ Freud, S.

On Metapsychology (PFL 11) p. 172 ^ Freud, S., 'The Uncanny' Imago V (1919) p. 41 ^ Kohut, H., How Does Analysis Cure?

(London 1984) p. 192-3 ^ I. Ousby ed., The Cambridge Guide to Literature in English (Cambridge 1995) p. 263 ^ N. Douglas, Looking Back (London 1934) p. 274 ^ Naversen, Ron (2015). "The (Super) Hero's Masquerade". In Bell, Deborah (ed.).

Masquerade: Essays on Tradition and Innovation Worldwide . McFarland. pp. 217 ff .

ISBN 978-0-7864-7646-6 .

^ Robb, Brian J. (May 2014).

A Brief History of Superheroes: From Superman to the Avengers, the Evolution of Comic Book Legends . Hatchet UK.

^ Kotrial, Utsav (August 30, 2018).

"The Origin Stories of Music's Biggest Alter Egos" .

Rolling Stone . Retrieved November 16, 2019 .

^ " 'Ziggy Stardust': How Bowie Created the Alter Ego That Changed Rock" .

Rolling Stone . Retrieved 19 July 2021 .

^ Juzwiak, Rich (June 18, 2019).

"Madonna: Madame X Album Review" .

Pitchfork . Retrieved November 16, 2019 .

v t e Superhero fiction Media Comics Novels Film Podcasts Television American Kamishibai Plot elements Superhero Supervillain Superpower Secret identity Alter ego Comic book death Continuity Continuity Canon Retroactive continuity Reboot Crossover Superhero fiction Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alter_ego&oldid=1301928295 " Categories : Alter egos Conceptions of self Latin words and phrases Superhero fiction themes Ego psychology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles that may contain original research from January 2022 All articles that may contain original research All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 This page was last edited on 22 July 2025, at 12:19 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alter ego 47 languages Add topic

