Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Illustrations 2 Physicochemical interpretation 3 See also 4 External links 5 References Toggle the table of contents The Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine 2 languages Français Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1599 alchemical book by Basil Valentine The Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine The second key. Woodcut from 1618.

Author Basil Valentine Original title Ein kurtz summarischer Tractat, von dem grossen Stein der Uralten Translator Michael Maier Language German Subject Alchemy Publisher Johann Thölde Publication date 1599 The Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine ( German : Ein kurtz summarischer Tractat, von dem grossen Stein der Uralten lit.

'A Short Summary Tract: Of the Great Stone of the Ancients') is a widely reproduced alchemical book attributed to Basil Valentine . It was first published in 1599 by Johann Thölde who is likely the book's true author.

[ 1 ] It is presented as a sequence of alchemical operations encoded allegorically in words, to which images have been added.

The first part of the book is a discussion of general alchemical principles and advice about the philosopher's stone . The second half of Ein kurtz summarischer Tractat , under the subtitle "The Twelve Keys", contains twelve short chapters. Each chapter, or "key", is an allegorical description of one step in the process by which the philosopher's stone may be created. With each step, the symbolic names ( Deckname , or code name) used to indicate the critical ingredients are changed, just as the ingredients themselves are transformed. The keys are written in such a fashion as to conceal as well as to illuminate: only a knowledgeable reader or alchemical adept was expected to correctly interpret the veiled language of the allegorical text and its related images.

[ 2 ] Illustrations [ edit ] The 1599 edition does not include illustrations. Woodcuts appear in the 1602 edition. Revised engravings for all twelve steps appear in Tripus Aureus ("Golden Tripod"). This 1618 Latin translation by Michael Maier includes three works, the first of which is Basil Valentine's.

[ 2 ] : 153 [ 3 ] Since the texts predate the images, the texts should be considered primary.

[ 2 ] : 144 The Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine , as engraved by Matthaeus Merian (1593–1650), and published in the collection Musaeum hermeticum , Francofurti : Apud Hermannum à Sande, 1678 First key.

Second key Third key Fourth key Fifth key Sixth key Seventh key Eighth key Ninth key Tenth key Eleventh key Twelfth key Physicochemical interpretation [ edit ] The allegorical text and fantastic visual imagery of alchemical writings make them difficult to interpret. A physicochemical reading was proposed in the twenty-first century. Chemist and historian Lawrence M. Principe has drawn on knowledge of chrysopoetic symbolism and experimentally tested possible chemical processes and practices which may correspond to several of Basil Valentine's twelve steps. Visually he refers to the 1602 woodcuts.

[ 2 ] : 144 Principe speculates that the twelve keys may involve descriptions of varying types. Some of the early keys may encode descriptions of actual laboratory techniques and observed results. Other keys may be theoretical extrapolations of what could be accomplished: ideas for experiments that had not yet been successfully carried out. The final keys may be descriptions of methods based on other writers' textual precedents.

[ 2 ] : 157–8 There is evidence that the "father of chemistry", Robert Boyle , also volatilized gold by following the steps in Basil Valentine's keys.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Sir Isaac Newton also seriously studied the writings attributed to 'Basil Valentine'.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Three hares External links [ edit ] German edition with alternate woodcuts.

Textual description of the twelve woodcuts.

References [ edit ] ^ John Maxson Stillman. "Basil Valentine. A Seventeenth Century Hoax." The Popular Science Monthly , 1912.

^ a b c d e Principe, Lawrence M. (2013).

The Secrets of Alchemy . Chicago and London: The University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226923789 .

: 152–153 ^ McLean, Adam.

"12 Keys of Basil Valentine" . Retrieved 25 November 2013 .

^ Keiger, Dale (February 1999).

"All that glitters" .

Johns Hopkins Magazine . Retrieved 26 November 2013 .

^ Principe, Lawrence M. (1998).

The aspiring adept : Robert Boyle and his alchemical quest : including Boyle' s "lost" Dialogue on the Transmutation of Metals . Princeton: Princeton university press.

ISBN 0691050821 .

^ Brewster, David (1855).

Memoirs of the life, writings, and discoveries of Sir Isaac Newton . Edinburgh: T. Constable and Co.

v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Twelve_Keys_of_Basil_Valentine&oldid=1264382114 " Categories : Alchemical documents Emblem books 1599 books 1599 in science Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 21 December 2024, at 20:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine 2 languages Add topic

