Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Distribution and habitat 2 Description 3 Cultivation Toggle Cultivation subsection 3.1 Cultivars 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Baccharis pilularis 5 languages Azərbaycanca Cebuano Español Русский Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Coyote brush ) Species of shrub Baccharis pilularis Scientific classification Kingdom: Plantae Clade : Tracheophytes Clade : Angiosperms Clade : Eudicots Clade : Asterids Order: Asterales Family: Asteraceae Genus: Baccharis Species: B. pilularis Binomial name Baccharis pilularis DC.

Synonyms [ 1 ] Baccharis pilularis var.

angustissima DC.

Baccharis pilularis var.

latifolia DC.

Baccharis congesta DC., syn of subsp.

consanguinea Baccharis consanguinea DC.

, syn of subsp.

consanguinea Baccharis pilularis flowering in a garden.

Baccharis pilularis , called coyote brush [ 2 ] (or bush), chaparral broom , and bush baccharis , is a shrub in the family Asteraceae native to California , Oregon , Washington , and Baja California .

[ 3 ] There are reports of isolated populations in New Mexico , most likely introduced.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Distribution and habitat [ edit ] The plants are found in a variety of habitats, from coastal bluffs, oak woodlands, and grasslands, including on hillsides and in canyons, below 2,000 feet (610 m).

Coyote brush is known as a secondary pioneer plant in communities such as coastal sage scrub and chaparral . It does not regenerate under a closed shrub canopy because seedling growth is poor in the shade.

Coast live oak , California bay , Rhus integrifolia , and other shade producing species replace coastal sage scrub and other coyote bush-dominated areas, particularly when there has not been a wildfire or heavy grazing.

In California grasslands , it comes in late and invades and increases in the absence of fire or grazing. Coyote bush invasion of grasslands is important because it helps the establishment of other coastal sage species. However, establishment of coyote bush can be concerning because it also displaces highly biodiverse grassland habitat that are important to carbon storage and resilient to wildfires. After grassland restoration, coyote bush can be a major concern and plant invader that overtakes grassland habitat, especially if restoration activities are limited and nonperiodic.

[ 7 ] Description [ edit ] The Baccharis pilularis shrub is generally smaller than 3 metres (9.8 ft) in height. Erect plants are generally mixed with (and sometimes grow to become) prostrate plants. Its leaves are smooth, without spines or hairs, and generally sticky to the touch.

[ 8 ] The stems are prostrate to erect with branches spreading or ascending. The leaves are 8–55 millimetres (0.31–2.17 in) long and are entire to toothed and oblanceolate to obovate, with three principal veins.

[ 8 ] The flower heads are in a leafy panicle . The involucres are hemispheric to bell shaped. This species is dioecious ( pistillate and staminate flowers occur on separate plants). Both staminate and pistillate heads are 3.5–5 millimetres (0.14–0.20 in) long.

Phyllaries are in 4–6 series, ovate, and glabrous. The receptacles are convex to conic and honeycombed. The staminate flowers range from 20–30 and there are 19–43 pistillate flowers.

[ 8 ] This and other Baccharis species are nectar sources for most of the predatory wasps, native skippers (small butterflies), and native flies in their ranges.

Subspecies [ 1 ] [ 8 ] Baccharis pilularis subsp.

consanguinea (DC.) C.B.Wolf — primarily in coastal chaparral Baccharis pilularis subsp.

pilularis —  sandy coastal bluffs and beaches in California.

Cultivation [ edit ] Baccharis pilularis is cultivated as an ornamental plant , and used frequently in drought tolerant , native plant , and wildlife gardens , and in natural landscaping and habitat restoration projects. The cultivar ground cover selections have various qualities of height and spread, leaf colors, and textures. The upright forms are useful for hedges and fence lines, and year-round foliage.

Coyote brush is usually deer-resistant. The plants are also drought tolerant after maturity, requiring watering once a week until established, and then about once per month during the first summer. They can mature in one to two years. The plants prefer good drainage.

Only male plants of Baccharis pilularis are cultivated for landscaping use. If these are substituted for Baccharis pilularis subsp.

consanguinea in ecological restoration , there will not be as much seed set, nor recruitment of new individuals.

Cultivars [ edit ] Cultivars , often with the common name "dwarf coyote brush" or "dwarf baccharis" indicating ground cover selections, include: Baccharis pilularis 'Pigeon Point'—from Pigeon Point , California coast.

[ 9 ] Baccharis pilularis 'Twin Peaks'—from coast along Sonoma to Monterey Counties.

[ 10 ] Baccharis pilularis 'Santa Ana' [ 11 ] See also [ edit ] California coastal sage and chaparral ecoregion California montane chaparral and woodlands ecoregion Fire ecology References [ edit ] ^ a b " Baccharis pilularis DC." .

The Global Compositae Checklist (GCC) – via The Plant List .

Note that this website has been superseded by World Flora Online ^ Steinberg, Peter D. (2002).

"Baccharis pilularis" .

Fire Effects Information System (FEIS) . US Department of Agriculture (USDA), Forest Service (USFS), Rocky Mountain Research Station, Fire Sciences Laboratory . Retrieved 26 May 2015 .

^ CONABIO. 2009. Catálogo taxonómico de especies de México. 1. In Capital Nat. México. CONABIO, México D.F.

^ NRCS .

" Baccharis pilularis " .

PLANTS Database .

United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) . Retrieved 23 March 2013 .

^ Bogler, David (2012).

" Baccharis pilularis " . In Jepson Flora Project (ed.).

Jepson eFlora .

The Jepson Herbarium , University of California, Berkeley . Retrieved 2018-03-23 .

^ Kartesz, John T. (2014).

" Baccharis pilularis " .

County-level distribution map from the North American Plant Atlas (NAPA) . Biota of North America Program (BONAP).

^ Luong, Justin C. (4 March 2022).

"Nonperiodic grassland restoration management can promote native woody shrub encroachment" .

Restoration Ecology .

30 (8): e13650.

doi : 10.1111/rec.13650 .

^ a b c d Sundberg, Scott D.; Bogler, David J. (2006).

" Baccharis pilularis " . In Flora of North America Editorial Committee (ed.).

Flora of North America North of Mexico (FNA) . Vol. 20. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press – via eFloras.org, Missouri Botanical Garden , St. Louis, MO & Harvard University Herbaria , Cambridge, MA.

^ "Theodore Payne.org: Baccharis pilularis 'Pigeon Point' " . Archived from the original on 2015-03-21 . Retrieved 2013-03-18 .

^ Las Pilitas: Baccharis pilularis "Twin Peaks" ^ Las Pilitas: Baccharis pilularis ' Santa Ana' External links [ edit ] Media related to Baccharis pilularis at Wikimedia Commons Data related to Baccharis pilularis at Wikispecies Calflora Jepson Manual treatment Native Plant Database profile , Lady Bird Johnson Wildflower Center, University of Texas at Austin Baccharis pilularis in the CalPhotos photo database, University of California, Berkeley Taxon identifiers Baccharis pilularis Wikidata : Q1028765 Wikispecies : Baccharis pilularis Calflora: 1031 CoL : K7JG EoL : 469341 EPPO : BACPI FEIS: bacpil FNA : 250066185 GBIF : 3129497 GRIN : 6237 iNaturalist : 53359 IPNI : 183599-1 IRMNG : 10202184 ISC : 8167 ITIS : 35693 MoBotPF : 277403 NatureServe : 2.135380 NCBI : 2042367 Open Tree of Life : 3898915 PfaF : Baccharis pilularis Plant List : gcc-4120 PLANTS : BAPI POWO : urn:lsid:ipni.org:names:183599-1 Tropicos : 2709532 WFO : wfo-0000084764 WoRMS : 1083795 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Baccharis_pilularis&oldid=1257811413 " Categories : Baccharis Flora of California Flora of Baja California Flora of Oregon Flora of Washington (state) Natural history of the California chaparral and woodlands Natural history of the California Coast Ranges Natural history of the Central Valley (California) Natural history of the Channel Islands of California Natural history of the Peninsular Ranges Natural history of the San Francisco Bay Area Natural history of the Santa Monica Mountains Natural history of the Transverse Ranges Plants described in 1836 Butterfly food plants Garden plants of North America Drought-tolerant plants Groundcovers Shrubs Taxa named by Augustin Pyramus de Candolle Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with 'species' microformats Taxonbars with 20–24 taxon IDs Flora without expected TNC conservation status This page was last edited on 16 November 2024, at 19:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Baccharis pilularis 5 languages Add topic

