Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Further problems 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Theory of equations 11 languages العربية Català Español Français 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano Русский Slovenščina Tagalog 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of polynomial equations Not to be confused with equational theory .

This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( May 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Theory of equations" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2024 ) In algebra , the theory of equations is the study of algebraic equations (also called "polynomial equations"), which are equations defined by a polynomial . The main problem of the theory of equations was to know when an algebraic equation has an algebraic solution . This problem was completely solved in 1830 by Évariste Galois , by introducing what is now called Galois theory .

Before Galois, there was no clear distinction between the "theory of equations" and "algebra". Since then algebra has been dramatically enlarged to include many new subareas, and the theory of algebraic equations receives much less attention. Thus, the term "theory of equations" is mainly used in the context of the history of mathematics , to avoid confusion between old and new meanings of "algebra".

History [ edit ] Until the end of the 19th century, "theory of equations" was almost synonymous with "algebra". For a long time, the main problem was to find the solutions of a single non-linear polynomial equation in a single unknown . The fact that a complex solution always exists is the fundamental theorem of algebra , which was proved only at the beginning of the 19th century and does not have a purely algebraic proof. Nevertheless, the main concern of the algebraists was to solve in terms of radicals , that is to express the solutions by a formula which is built with the four operations of arithmetics and with nth roots . This was done up to degree four during the 16th century.

Scipione del Ferro and Niccolò Fontana Tartaglia discovered solutions for cubic equations .

Gerolamo Cardano published them in his 1545 book Ars Magna , together with a solution for the quartic equations , discovered by his student Lodovico Ferrari . In 1572 Rafael Bombelli published his L'Algebra in which he showed how to deal with the imaginary quantities that could appear in Cardano's formula for solving cubic equations.

The case of higher degrees remained open until the 19th century, when Paolo Ruffini gave an incomplete proof in 1799 that some fifth degree equations cannot be solved in radicals followed by Niels Henrik Abel 's complete proof in 1824 (now known as the Abel–Ruffini theorem ).

Évariste Galois later introduced a theory (presently called Galois theory ) to decide which equations are solvable by radicals.

Further problems [ edit ] Other classical problems of the theory of equations are the following: Linear equations : this problem was solved during antiquity.

Simultaneous linear equations : The general theoretical solution was provided by Gabriel Cramer in 1750. However devising efficient methods ( algorithms ) to solve these systems remains an active subject of research now called linear algebra .

Finding the integer solutions of an equation or of a system of equations. These problems are now called Diophantine equations , which are considered a part of number theory (see also integer programming ).

Systems of polynomial equations : Because of their difficulty, these systems, with few exceptions, have been studied only since the second part of the 19th century. They have led to the development of algebraic geometry .

See also [ edit ] Root-finding algorithm Properties of polynomial roots Quintic function References [ edit ] https://www.britannica.com/science/mathematics/Theory-of-equations Further reading [ edit ] Uspensky, James Victor, Theory of Equations (McGraw-Hill), 1963 Dickson, Leonard E., Elementary Theory of Equations (Internet Archive), originally 1914 [1] Authority control databases : National Latvia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Theory_of_equations&oldid=1297667734 " Categories : History of algebra Polynomials Equations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from May 2014 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles needing additional references from June 2024 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 27 June 2025, at 18:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Theory of equations 11 languages Add topic

