Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Ancient Greece and Rome 1.2 Medieval Europe 1.3 In non-Western theatre 2 Formats Toggle Formats subsection 2.1 In film 2.2 On stage and street 2.3 In literature 3 List of mime artists Toggle List of mime artists subsection 3.1 Fictional mime artists 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Mime artist 35 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu བོད་ཡིག Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी עברית Latina Македонски Bahasa Melayu Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Русский Simple English Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски తెలుగు Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Person who uses mime as a theatrical medium or performance art "Mime" redirects here. For other uses, see Mime (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Mime artist" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Mime artists Jean Soubeyran and Brigitte Soubeyran in 1950 Part of a series on Performing arts Acrobatics Ballet Circus skills Clown Dance Gymnastics Magic Mime Music Opera Professional wrestling Puppetry Speech Stand-up comedy Street performance Theatre Ventriloquism v t e A mime artist , or simply mime (from Greek μῖμος , mimos , "imitator, actor"), [ 1 ] is a person who uses mime (also called pantomime outside of Britain), the acting out of a story through body motions without the use of speech , as a theatrical medium or as a performance art . In earlier times, in English, such a performer would typically be referred to as a mummer . Miming is distinguished from silent comedy , in which the artist is a character in a film or skit without sound.

Jacques Copeau , strongly influenced by Commedia dell'arte and Japanese Noh theatre, used masks in the training of his actors. His pupil Étienne Decroux was highly influenced by this, started exploring and developing the possibilities of mime, and developed corporeal mime into a highly sculptural form, taking it outside the realms of naturalism.

Jacques Lecoq contributed significantly to the development of mime and physical theatre with his training methods.

[ 2 ] As a result of this, the practice of mime has been included in the list of Intangible Cultural Heritage elements in France since 2017.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Ancient Greece and Rome [ edit ] Main articles: Ancient Greek comedy and Theatre of ancient Rome § Roman comedy The performance of mime originates at its earliest in Ancient Greece ; the name is taken from a single masked dancer called Pantomimus , although performances were not necessarily silent. The first recorded mime was Telestēs in the play Seven Against Thebes by Aeschylus . Tragic mime was developed by Puladēs of Kilikia; comic mime was developed by Bathullos of Alexandria.

[ 4 ] Mime ( mimus ) was an aspect of Roman theatre from its earliest times, [ 5 ] paralleling the Atellan farce in its improvisation (if without the latter's stock characters).

[ 6 ] It gradually began to replace the Atellanae as interludes [embolium] or postscripts [exodium] on the main theatre stages; [ 7 ] became the sole dramatic event at the Floralia in the second century BC; and in the following century received technical advances at the hands of Publius Syrus and Decimus Laberius , who used expressions, situations and titles of Plautus' comedies.

[ 6 ] Under the Empire mime became the predominant Roman drama, [ 6 ] if with mixed fortunes under different emperors.

Trajan banished mime artists; Caligula favored them; Marcus Aurelius made them priests of Apollo .

Nero himself acted as a mime.

[ 8 ] The mime was distinguished from other dramas by its absence of masks, and by the presence of female as well as male performers.

[ 9 ] Stock characters included the lead (or archymimus[a] ), the stooge or stupidus, [ 6 ] and the gigolo , or cultus adulter in the Mimus Zelotypi or Jealous Mime.

[ 10 ] Medieval Europe [ edit ] In medieval Europe, early forms of mime such as mummer plays and later dumbshows evolved. In early nineteenth-century Paris, Jean-Gaspard Deburau solidified the many attributes that have come to be known in modern times—the silent figure in whiteface.

In non-Western theatre [ edit ] Two mime artists playing with children in Indonesia.

Analogous performances are evident in the theatrical traditions of other civilizations.

[ citation needed ] Classical Indian musical theatre , although often erroneously labeled a "dance," is a group of theatrical forms in which the performer presents a narrative via stylized gesture, an array of hand positions, and mime illusions to play different characters, actions, and landscapes. Recitation, music, and even percussive footwork sometimes accompany the performance. The Natya Shastra , an ancient treatise on theatre by Bharata Muni , mentions silent performance, or mukabhinaya .

[ citation needed ] In Kathakali , stories from Indian epics are told with facial expressions, hand signals and body motions. Performances are accompanied by songs narrating the story while the actors act out the scene, followed by actor detailing without background support of narrative song.

[ citation needed ] The Japanese Noh tradition has greatly influenced many contemporary mime and theatre practitioners including Jacques Copeau and Jacques Lecoq because of its use of mask work and highly physical performance style.

[ citation needed ] Butoh , though often referred to as a dance form, has been adopted by various theatre practitioners as well.

[ citation needed ] Formats [ edit ] In film [ edit ] A Dog's Life (1918), Charlie Chaplin Before the work of Étienne Decroux there was no major treatise on the art of mime, and so any recreation of mime as performed prior to the twentieth century is largely conjecture, based on interpretation of diverse sources. However, the twentieth century also brought a new medium into widespread usage: the motion picture. The restrictions of early motion picture technology meant that stories had to be told with minimal dialogue, which was largely restricted to intertitles . This often demanded a highly stylized form of physical acting largely derived from the stage. Thus, mime played an important role in films prior to advent of talkies (films with sound or speech). The mimetic style of film acting was used to great effect in German Expressionist film .

Silent film comedians like Charlie Chaplin , Harold Lloyd , and Buster Keaton learned the craft of mime in the theatre, but, through film, they had a profound influence on mimes working in live theatre decades after their deaths. Indeed, Chaplin may be the best-documented mime in history.

Harpo Marx , of the Marx Brothers comedy team, continued the mime tradition in the sound film era, his silent persona working in counterpoint to the verbal comedy of his brothers Groucho and Chico . The famous French comedian, writer, and director Jacques Tati achieved his initial popularity working as a mime, and his later films had only minimal dialogue, relying instead on many subtle expertly choreographed visual gags. Tati, like Chaplin before him, would mime out the movements of every single character in his films and ask his actors to repeat them.

On stage and street [ edit ] Whitefaced mime on Boston Common in 1980 Mime has been performed on stage, with Marcel Marceau and his character "Bip" being the most famous. Mime is also a popular art form in street theatre and busking . Traditionally, these sorts of performances involve the actor/actress wearing tight black and white clothing with white facial makeup. However, contemporary mimes often perform without whiteface. Similarly, while traditional mimes have been completely silent, contemporary mimes, while refraining from speaking, sometimes employ vocal sounds when they perform. Mime acts are often comical, but some can be very serious.

In literature [ edit ] Canadian author Michael Jacot's first novel, The Last Butterfly , tells the story of a mime artist in Nazi-occupied Europe who is forced by his oppressors to perform for a team of Red Cross observers.

[ 11 ] Nobel laureate Heinrich Böll 's The Clown relates the downfall of a mime artist, Hans Schneir, who has descended into poverty and drunkenness after being abandoned by his beloved.

[ 12 ] List of mime artists [ edit ] Rowan Atkinson Samuel Avital Steven Banks [ 13 ] Jean-Louis Barrault Blue Man Group Wolfe Bowart David Bowie Tony Brown Charlie Chaplin Michel Courtemanche Adam Darius Jean-Gaspard Deburau Étienne Decroux Ryan Drummond Jogesh Dutta [ 14 ] Ladislav Fialka Dario Fo George L. Fox Chris Harris Bill Irwin Alejandro Jodorowsky Doug Jones Buster Keaton Lindsay Kemp Stan Laurel Thomas Leabhart Grigory Gurevich Jacques Lecoq Paul Legrand Tina Lenert Partha Pratim Majumder Marcel Marceau Ennio Marchetto Kari Margolis Carlos Martínez Harpo Marx Irene Mawer Samy Molcho Tony Montanaro Mummenschanz Stefan Niedziałkowski Adrian Pecknold Lenka Pichlíková-Burke Slava Polunin Oleg Popov Nola Rae Bari Rolfe Gene Sheldon Richmond Shepard Shields and Yarnell Red Skelton Steam Powered Giraffe Daniel Stein Marko Stojanović Jacques Tati Pan Tau Modris Tenisons [ 15 ] Teller Tik and Tok Henryk Tomaszewski Dick Van Dyke Sam Wills Vahram Zaryan Achille Zavatta Benedikt Negro Fictional mime artists [ edit ] Art the Clown Mr. Mime Mime Jr.

Mime (Happy Tree Friends) Luan Loud Mime (comics) Mimey See also [ edit ] Busking Corporeal mime Dumbshow Lip sync Liquid and digits Sociae Mimae Mummers play Pantomime Popping Physical theatre Turfing References [ edit ] ^ μῖμος , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus Digital Library ^ Callery, Dympha (2001).

Through the Body: A Practical Guide to Physical Theatre . London: Nick Hern Books.

ISBN 1-85459-630-6 .

^ "Patrimoine-culturel-immateriel" . www.culture.gouv.fr . Retrieved 26 September 2021 .

^ Lust, Annette.

"The Origins and Development of the Art of Mime".

Archived 8 January 2020 at the Wayback Machine From the Greek Mimes to Marcel Marceau and Beyond: Mimes, Actors, Pierrots and Clowns: A Chronicle of the Many Visages of Mime in the Theatre . 9 March 2000. Retrieved 14 February 2010.

^ "Mime and pantomime | visual art" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 10 March 2020 . Retrieved 15 November 2019 .

^ a b c d H Nettleship ed., A Dictionary of Classical Antiquities (London 1894) p. 393 ^ H J Rose, A Handbook of Latin Literature (London 1967) p. 152 ^ Broadbent, R. J. (1901) A History of Pantomime , Chapter VI.

Archived 17 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine London. Retrieved 14 February 2010.

^ H J Rose, A Handbook of Latin Literature (London 1967) p. 150 ^ G Highet, Juvenal the Satirist (Oxford 1962) p. 274 ^ Broyard, Anatole. " A Laugh Before Dying ." The New York Times . 7 March 1974. p. 37 ^ Stern, Daniel. "Without Shmerz." The New York Times . 4 January 1965. Book Review. p. 4 ^ Scpr.org Retrieved 29 April 2015 ^ "Mime wizard's final act" , The Times of India . 22 August 2009. Retrieved 31 December 2009.

^ "Modris Tenisons: Režisors un scenogrāfs, dizaina mākslinieks, profesionāla pantomīmas teātra izveidotājs Kauņā." Archived 23 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine 2003. Retrieved 6 October 2010.

Further reading [ edit ] Kipnis, Claude (1988).

The mime book (2nd ed.). Colorado Springs, Colo.: Meriwether Pub.

ISBN 0916260550 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Mimes .

Look up mime in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikisource has the text of the 1905 New International Encyclopedia article  " Mime ".

World Mime Index International mime theatre information MOVEO , international school of corporeal mime and physical theatre in Barcelona International Theatre School Jacques Lecoq Archived 31 May 2020 at the Wayback Machine London International School of Performing Arts Innovo Conservatory of Physical Theatre v t e Clowns List of clowns / List of jesters Types Blackface Bouffon Canadian Chou Circus Evil Harlequin Harlequinade Heyoka Jester Mime Modern Pierrot Pueblo Ritual Rodeo Scaramouche Silly Billy Skomorokh Organizations World Clown Association Clown Conservatory Clowns of America International The World Festival of Clowns in Yekaterinburg Loldiers of Odin Clandestine Insurgent Rebel Clown Army Related 2016 clown sightings Clown alley Clown bicycle Clown car Clown Care Clowns Gallery-Museum Clown ministry Clown's Prayer Clown society Coulrophilia International Clown Hall of Fame International Clown Week Motley Ringling Bros. and Barnum & Bailey Clown College Documentaries The Clowns (1970) Category v t e France topics History Overviews History Timeline Political history Military history Language Economic Foreign relations Journalism Liberalism and radicalism Regions History of Brittany History of Normandy Ancient Prehistory Greek colonies Celtic Gaul Roman Gaul Middle Ages Visigothic Kingdom Francia West Francia Middle Ages Kingdom of France Fundamental laws Early Modern Early modern era House of Bourbon Absolute monarchy Ancien Régime Wars of Religion Thirty Years' War Peace of Westphalia Second Hundred Years' War Louis XIV War of the Spanish Succession Diplomatic Revolution of 1756 Seven Years' War Revolution French Revolution Napoleonic era First Republic First Empire Late Modern Long nineteenth century Restoration July Monarchy Revolution of 1848 Second Republic Coup of 2 December 1851 Second Empire Government of National Defense Third Republic Belle Époque World War I Interwar Années folles World War II Vichy France Free France Liberation Provisional Government Contemporary 1900 to present Fourth Republic Algerian War Fifth Republic May 68 2005 riots Great Recession 2015 Paris attacks 2017 presidential election Coronavirus pandemic 2021 labor protests 2022 presidential election Geography Administrative divisions Cities Climate change Borders Islands Lakes Mountains National parks Rivers World Heritage Sites Politics Constitutions Elections presidential Foreign relations Politics Political scandals Human rights Intersex LGBT Judiciary Law history enforcement criminal law Military Parliament Political parties Economy Agriculture Automotive industry Banking Central bank Economic history Energy Euro Exports Franc (former currency) French subdivisions by GDP Mining Stock exchange Science and technology Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport Rail Society Abortion Birth control Censorship Corruption Crime Demographics Education Health care Homelessness Immigration Life expectancy People Poverty Religion secularism Racism Social class Welfare Culture Anthem Architecture Art Coat of arms Cinema Cuisine Cultural icons Fashion Flag Gardens Language Literature Media Music Philosophy Public holidays Sport History Symbols Theatre Outline Category Portal WikiProject Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic 2 Israel Other Yale LUX v t e Nonverbal communication Modalities Physical Blushing Body language / Kinesics Body-to-body communication Facial expression Facial Action Coding System Microexpression Subtle expression Gesture List Speech-independent gestures Haptic communication Imitation Interpersonal synchrony Laughter Oculesics Eye contact Pupil dilation Olfaction Posture Proxemics Speech Affect Emotional prosody Paralanguage Intonation Loudness Prosody Rhythm Stress Tone Voice quality Social context Chronemics Conventions Display rules Habitus High-context and low-context cultures Interpersonal relationship Social norm Other Emoticon / Smiley One-bit message Missed call Silent service code Unconscious Microexpression Non-verbal leakage Multi-faceted Affect display Deception Emotion recognition First impression Intimacy Broader concepts Cognitive academic language proficiency Communication Emotional intelligence Nunchi People skills Semiotics Social behavior Social competence Social cue Social skills Unsaid Further information Disorders Aprosodia Asperger syndrome Autism Fragile X Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder Rett syndrome Dyssemia Nonverbal learning disorder Social (pragmatic) communication disorder Neuroanatomy Limbic system / Limbic lobe Mirror neuron Applications Cold reading Lie detection Freudian slip Poker tell Targeted advertising Technology Computer processing of body language Emotion recognition in conversation Gesture recognition List of facial expression databases Sentiment analysis Key people Ray Birdwhistell Charles Darwin Paul Ekman Related Animal communication Behavioral communication Aggressive Assertive Passive Passive-aggressive Impression management Meta-communication Monastic sign lexicons Verbal communication Manual-tactile verbal Sign language Tactile signing Tadoma Art and literature Mime Mimoplastic art Subtext NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐6rl2c
Cached time: 20250816094128
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.703 seconds
Real time usage: 0.912 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3577/1000000
Revision size: 14987/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 157037/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5444/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 70492/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.458/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25821689/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  752.573      1 -total
 19.69%  148.192      7 Template:Lang
 13.94%  104.918     10 Template:Navbox
 13.81%  103.919      1 Template:Reflist
 10.00%   75.234      1 Template:Performing_arts
  9.79%   73.705      1 Template:Sidebar
  9.78%   73.581      2 Template:Cite_book
  8.71%   65.575      1 Template:Short_description
  7.53%   56.703      1 Template:More_citations_needed
  7.13%   53.653      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2101689:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816094128 and revision id 1304011119. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mime_artist&oldid=1304011119 " Categories : Mime Pantomime Theatrical genres Theatrical occupations Silence Theatre of France Acting Culture of France Entertainment occupations Filmmaking occupations Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2017 Articles needing additional references from November 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Greek-language text Interlanguage link template existing link Articles containing Latin-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2015 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 11:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mime artist 35 languages Add topic

