Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Australia 2 Belgium 3 Canada 4 Dominican Republic 5 Finland 6 Germany 7 Greece 8 India 9 New Zealand 10 Norway 11 South Africa 12 United Kingdom Toggle United Kingdom subsection 12.1 Employment 13 United States and Canada Toggle United States and Canada subsection 13.1 Education and training 13.1.1 APA-recognized specialties 13.1.2 Services 13.1.2.1 Prescriptive Authority for Psychologists (RxP) 13.1.3 Licensure 13.1.4 Ambiguity of title 13.1.5 Differences with psychiatrists 13.2 Mental health professions 13.3 Employment 14 See also 15 Notes 16 References Toggle the table of contents Psychologist 65 languages Afrikaans العربية Արեւմտահայերէն অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Bikol Central བོད་ཡིག Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kabɩyɛ Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Magyar मैथिली മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Ripoarisch Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Sunda Suomi Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Professional who evaluates, diagnoses, treats and studies behavior and mental processes Not to be confused with Psychiatrist .

Psychologist Occupation Names Psychologist Description Competencies Psychotherapy , psychological assessment and testing, depends on specialty Education required Differs by jurisdiction, typically a terminal degree such as PsyD or PhD Fields of employment Clinical neuropsychology , clinical , Medical , community , counselling , Hospital support , educational and developmental , forensic , health , organisational or sport and exercise Related jobs Psychiatrist psychotherapist A psychologist is a professional who practices psychology and studies mental states , perceptual , cognitive , emotional , and social processes and behavior. Their work often involves the experimentation , observation , and interpretation of how individuals relate to each other and to their environments.

[ 1 ] Psychologists usually acquire a bachelor's degree in psychology, followed by a master's degree or doctorate in psychology. Unlike psychiatrists and psychiatric nurse-practitioners, psychologists usually cannot prescribe medication , but depending on the jurisdiction, some psychologists with additional training can be licensed to prescribe medications; qualification requirements may be different from a bachelor's degree and master's degree.

[ 2 ] Psychologists receive extensive training in psychological testing , communication techniques, scoring, interpretation, and reporting, while psychiatrists are not usually trained in psychological testing. Psychologists are also trained in, and often specialize in, one or more psychotherapies to improve symptoms of many mental disorders , including but not limited to treatment for anxiety , depression , post-traumatic stress disorder , schizophrenia , bipolar disorder , personality disorders and eating disorders . Treatment from psychologists can be individual or in groups .

Cognitive behavioral therapy is a commonly used, well studied [ 3 ] and high efficacy psychotherapy practiced by psychologists.

[ 4 ] Psychologists can work with a range of institutions and people, such as schools, prisons, in a private clinic, in a workplace, or with a sports team.

[ 5 ] Applied psychology applies theory to solve problems in human and animal behavior. Applied fields include clinical psychology , counseling psychology , sport psychology , forensic psychology , industrial and organizational psychology , health psychology and school psychology .

[ 6 ] Licensing and regulations can vary by state and profession.

[ 1 ] Australia [ edit ] In Australia, the psychology profession, and the use of the title "psychologist", is regulated by an Act of Parliament, the Health Practitioner Regulation (Administrative Arrangements) National Law Act 2008, following an agreement between state and territorial governments. Under this national law, registration of psychologists is administered by the Psychology Board of Australia (PsyBA).

[ 7 ] Before July 2010, the professional registration of psychologists was governed by various state and territorial Psychology Registration Boards.

[ 8 ] The Australian Psychology Accreditation Council (APAC) oversees education standards for the profession.

The minimum requirements for general registration in psychology, including the right to use the title "psychologist", are an APAC approved four-year degree in psychology followed by either a two-year master's program or two years of practice supervised by a registered psychologist.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] However, the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (AHPRA) is currently in the process of phasing out the 4 + 2 internship pathway.

[ 11 ] Once the 4 + 2 pathway is phased out, a master's degree or PhD will be required to become a psychologist in Australia. This is because of concerns about public safety, and to reduce the burden of training on employers.

[ 12 ] There is also a '5 + 1' registration pathway, including a four-year APAC approved degree followed by one year of postgraduate study and one year of supervised practice.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Endorsement within a specific area of practice [ a ] requires additional qualifications.

[ 15 ] These notations are not "specialist" titles (Western Australian psychologists could use "specialist" in their titles during a three-year transitional period from 17 October 2010 to 17 October 2013).

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] Membership with the Australian Psychological Society (APS) differs from registration as a psychologist. The standard route to full membership (MAPS) of the APS usually requires four years of APAC-accredited undergraduate study, plus a master's or doctorate in psychology from an accredited institution. An alternate route is available for academics and practitioners who have gained appropriate experience and made a substantial contribution to the field of psychology.

Restrictions apply to all individuals using the title "psychologist" in all states and territories of Australia. However, the terms "psychotherapist", "social worker", and "counselor" are currently self-regulated, with several organizations campaigning for government regulation.

[ b ] Belgium [ edit ] Since 1933, the title "psychologist" has been protected by law in Belgium. It can only be used by people who are on the National Government Commission list. The minimum requirement is the completion of five years of university training in psychology (master's degree or equivalent). The title of "psychotherapist" is not legally protected. As of 2016, Belgian law recognizes the clinical psychologist as an autonomous health profession. It reserves the practice of psychotherapy to medical doctors, clinical psychologists and clinical orthopedagogists.

[ 19 ] Canada [ edit ] A professional in the U.S. or Canada must hold a graduate degree in psychology (MA, Psy.D., Ed.D., or Ph.D.), or have a provincial license to use the title "psychologist".

[ 20 ] Provincial regulators include: [ 21 ] Alberta: College of Alberta Psychologists British Columbia: College of Psychologists of British Columbia Manitoba: Psychological Association of Manitoba Newfoundland and Labrador: Newfoundland and Labrador Psychology Board New Brunswick: College of Psychologists of New Brunswick Northwest Territories: Office of the Registrar, Northwest Territories (NWT) Professional Licensing Nova Scotia: Nova Scotia Board of Examiners in Psychology Nunavut: Registrar, Professional Licensing Kugluktuk Ontario: College of Psychologists of Ontario Prince Edward Island: Prince Edward Island Psychologists Registration Board Quebec: Order of Psychologists of Quebec Saskatchewan: Saskatchewan College of Psychologists Dominican Republic [ edit ] A professional psychologist in the Dominican Republic must have a suitable qualification and be a member of the Dominican College of Psychologists .

[ 22 ] Finland [ edit ] In Finland , the title "psychologist" is protected by law. The restriction for psychologists (licensed professionals) is governed by National Supervisory Authority for Welfare and Health (Finland) (Valvira).

[ 23 ] It takes 330 ECTS-credits (about six years) to complete the university studies (master's degree). There are about 6,200 licensed psychologists in Finland.

[ 24 ] Germany [ edit ] In Germany , the use of the title Diplom-Psychologe (Dipl.-Psych.) is restricted by law, and a practitioner is legally required to hold the corresponding academic title, which is comparable to a M.Sc.

degree and requires at least five years of training at a university. Originally, a diploma degree in psychology awarded in Germany included the subject of clinical psychology. With the Bologna-reform, this degree was replaced by a master's degree. The academic degree of Diplom-Psychologe or M.Sc. (Psychologie) does not include a psychotherapeutic qualification, which requires three to five years of additional training. The psychotherapeutic training combines in-depth theoretical knowledge with supervised patient care and self-reflection units. After having completed the training requirements, psychologists take a state-run exam, which, upon successful completion (Approbation), confers the official title of "psychological psychotherapist" ( Psychologischer Psychotherapeut ).

[ 25 ] After many years of inter-professional political controversy, non-physician psychotherapy was given an adequate legal foundation through the creation of two new academic healthcare professions.

[ 26 ] Greece [ edit ] Since 1979, the title "psychologist" has been protected by law in Greece . It can only be used by people who hold a relevant license or certificate, which is issued by the Greek authorities, to practice as a psychologist. The minimum requirement is the completion of university training in psychology at a Greek university, or at a university recognized by the Greek authorities.

[ 27 ] Psychologists in Greece are legally required to abide by the Code of Conduct of Psychologists (2019).

[ 28 ] Psychologists in Greece are not required to register with any psychology body in the country in order to legally practice the profession.

[ 29 ] Titles such as "psychotherapist" or "counselor" are not protected by law in Greece and anyone may call themselves a "psychotherapist" or "counselor" without having earned a graduate degree in psychology.

[ 30 ] India [ edit ] In India, "clinical psychologist" is specifically defined in the Mental Health Act, 2017.

[ 31 ] An MPhil in Clinical Psychology degree of two years duration recognized by the Rehabilitation Council of India is required to apply for registration as a clinical psychologist. PsyD and Professional diploma in Clinical Psychology is also a less popular way to get license of Clinical Psychologist in India. This procedure has been criticized by some stakeholders since clinical psychology is not limited to the area of rehabilitation.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] Titles such as "counselor", "psychoanalyst", "psychoeducator" or "psychotherapist" are not protected at present. In other words, an individual may call themselves a "psychotherapist" or "counselor" without having any recognized degree from Rehabilitation council of India and without having to register with the Rehabilitation Council of India.

[ 33 ] Rehabilitation psychologists also require a license from RCI to practice.

Psychologs magazine is the major media, working on mental health awareness. Tele-MANAS is a nationwide governmental program launched by Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in October 2021.

[ 35 ] New Zealand [ edit ] In New Zealand, the use of the title "psychologist" is restricted by law. Prior to 2004, only the title "registered psychologist" was restricted to people qualified and registered as such. However, with the proclamation of the Health Practitioners Competence Assurance Act, in 2003, the use of the title "psychologist" was limited to practitioners registered with the New Zealand Psychologists Board. The titles "clinical psychologist", "counseling psychologist", "educational psychologist", "intern psychologist", and "trainee psychologist" are similarly protected.

[ 36 ] This is to protect the public by providing assurance that the title-holder is registered and therefore qualified and competent to practice, and can be held accountable. The legislation does not include an exemption clause for any class of practitioner (e.g., academics, or government employees).

Norway [ edit ] In Norway, the title "psychologist" is restricted by law and can only be obtained by completing a six-year integrated program, leading to the Candidate of Psychology degree. Psychologists are considered health personnel, and their work is regulated through the "health personnel act".

[ 37 ] South Africa [ edit ] South African psychologist Pumla Gobodo-Madikizela In South Africa , [ 38 ] psychologists are qualified in either clinical, counseling, educational, organizational, or research psychology.
As below, qualification requires at least five years of study, and at least one of internship.

To become qualified, one must complete a recognized master's degree in Psychology , an appropriate practicum at a recognized training institution, [ 39 ] and take an examination set by the Professional Board for Psychology.

[ 40 ] Registration with the Health Professions Council of South Africa (HPCSA) [ 41 ] is required and includes a Continuing Professional Development component.

The practicum usually involves a full year internship , and in some specializations, the HPCSA requires completion of an additional year of community service . The master's program consists of seminars , coursework -based theoretical and practical training , and a dissertation of limited scope, and is (in most cases) two years in duration. 
Prior to enrolling in the master's program, the student studies psychology for three years as an undergraduate ( B.A.

or B.Sc.

, and, for organizational psychology, also B.Com.

), followed by an additional postgraduate honours degree in psychology; see List of universities in South Africa .

The undergraduate B.Psyc. is a four-year program integrating theory and practical training, and—with the required examination set by the Professional Board for Psychology—is sufficient for practice as a psychometrist or counselor .

[ 42 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] In the UK, "registered psychologist" and "practitioner psychologist" are protected titles.

[ 43 ] The title of "neuropsychologist" is not protected.

[ 43 ] In addition, the following specialist titles are also protected by law: "clinical psychologist", "counselling psychologist", "educational psychologist", "forensic psychologist", "health psychologist", "occupational psychologist" and "sport and exercise psychologist".

[ 44 ] The Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC) is the statutory regulator for practitioner psychologists in the UK. In the UK, the use of the title "chartered psychologist" is also protected by statutory regulation, but that title simply means that the psychologist is a chartered member of the British Psychological Society , but is not necessarily registered with the HCPC. However, it is illegal for someone who is not in the appropriate section of the HCPC register to provide psychological services.

[ 45 ] The requirement to register as a clinical, counselling, or educational psychologist is a professional doctorate (and in the case of the latter two the British Psychological Society's Professional Qualification, which meets the standards of a professional doctorate).

[ 46 ] The title of "psychologist", by itself, is not protected.

[ 43 ] The British Psychological Society is working with the HCPC to ensure that the title of "neuropsychologist" is regulated as a specialist title for practitioner psychologists.

[ 47 ] Employment [ edit ] As of December 2012 [update] , in the United Kingdom, there are 19,000 practitioner psychologists registered [ 48 ] across seven categories: clinical psychologist, counselling psychologist, educational psychologist , forensic psychologist , health psychologist , occupational psychologist , sport and exercise psychologist . At least 9,500 of these are clinical psychologists, [ 49 ] which is the largest group of psychologists in clinical settings such as the NHS. Around 2,000 are educational psychologists.

[ 50 ] United States and Canada [ edit ] Education and training [ edit ] In the United States and Canada, full membership in each country's professional association— American Psychological Association (APA) and Canadian Psychological Association (CPA), respectively—requires doctoral training (except in some Canadian provinces, such as Alberta , where a master's degree is sufficient).

[ c ] The minimal requirement for full membership can be waived in circumstances where there is evidence that significant contribution or performance in the field of psychology has been made. Associate membership requires at least two years of postgraduate studies in psychology or an approved related discipline.

[ 51 ] The University of Pennsylvania was the first institution to offer formal education in clinical psychology in the U.S.

Some U.S. schools offer accredited programs in clinical psychology resulting in a master's degree . Such programs can range from forty-eight to eighty-four units, most often taking two to three years to complete after the undergraduate degree. Training usually emphasizes theory and treatment over research, quite often with a focus on school or couples and family counseling. Similar to doctoral programs, master's level students usually must complete a clinical practicum under supervision; some programs also require a minimum amount of personal psychotherapy.

[ 52 ] While many graduates from master's level training go on to doctoral psychology programs, a large number also go directly into practice—often as a licensed professional counselor (LPC), marriage and family therapist (MFT), or other similar licensed practice, which varies by state.

[ 53 ] There is stiff competition to gain acceptance into clinical psychology doctoral programs (acceptance rates of 2–5% are not uncommon).

[ citation needed ] Clinical psychologists in the U.S. undergo many years of graduate training—usually five to seven years after the bachelor's degree—to gain demonstrable competence and experience. Licensure as a psychologist may take an additional one to two years post-PhD/PsyD. Some states require a 1-year postdoctoral residency, while others do not require postdoctoral supervised experience and allow psychology graduates to sit for the licensure exam immediately. Some psychology specialties, such as clinical neuropsychology , require a 2-year postdoctoral experience regardless of the state, as set forth in the Houston Conference Guidelines. Today in America, about half of all clinical psychology graduate students are being trained in PhD programs that emphasize melding research with practice and are conducted by universities—with the other half in PsyD programs, which less focus on research (similar to professional degrees for medicine and law).

[ 54 ] Both types of doctoral programs (PhD and PsyD) envision practicing clinical psychology in a research-based, scientifically valid manner, and most are accredited by the APA.

[ 55 ] APA accreditation [ 56 ] is very important for U.S. clinical, counseling, and school psychology programs because graduating from a non-accredited doctoral program may adversely affect employment prospects and present a hurdle for becoming licensed in some jurisdictions.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ 60 ] Doctorate (PhD and PsyD) programs usually involve some variation on the following 5 to 7 year, 90–120 unit curriculum: Bases of behavior—biological, cognitive-affective, and cultural-social Individual differences—personality, lifespan development, psychopathology History and systems—development of psychological theories, practices and scientific knowledge Clinical practice—diagnostics, psychological assessment, psychotherapeutic interventions, psychopharmacology, ethical and legal issues Coursework in statistics and research design Clinical experience Practicum—usually three or four years of working with clients under supervision in a clinical setting. Most practicum placements begin in either the first or second year of doctoral training.

Doctoral internship—usually an intensive one or two-year placement in a clinical setting Dissertation—PhD programs usually require original quantitative empirical research, while PsyD dissertations involve original quantitative or qualitative research, theoretical scholarship, program evaluation or development, critical literature analysis or clinical application and analysis. The dissertation typically takes 2–3 years to complete.

Specialized electives—many programs offer sets of elective courses for specializations, such as health, child/adolescent, family, community, or neuropsychology.

Personal psychotherapy—many programs require students to undertake a certain number of hours of personal psychotherapy (with a non-faculty therapist) although in recent years this requirement has become less frequent.

Comprehensive exams or master's thesis: a thesis can involve original data collection and is distinct from a dissertation.

Psychologists can be seen as practicing within two general categories of psychology: health service psychology, which includes "practitioners" or "professionals" and research-oriented psychology which includes "scientists" or "scholars". The training models ( Boulder and Vail models) endorsed by the APA require that health service psychologists be trained as both researchers and practitioners, [ d ] and that they possess advanced degrees.

Psychologists typically have one of two degrees: PsyD or PhD . The PsyD program prepares the student primarily as a practitioner for clinical practice (e.g., testing, psychotherapy), but also as a scholar that consumes research. Depending on the specialty (industrial/organizational, social, clinical, school, etc.), a PhD may be trained in clinical practice as well as in scientific methodology, to prepare for a career in academia or research. Both the PsyD and PhD programs prepare students to take the national psychology licensing exam, the Examination for Professional Practice in Psychology (EPPP).

Within the two main categories are many further types of psychologists as reflected by APA's 54 Divisions, which are specialty or subspecialty or topical areas, [ 61 ] including clinical , counseling , and school psychologists . Such professionals work with persons in a variety of therapeutic contexts. People often think of the discipline as involving only such clinical or counseling psychologists. While counseling and psychotherapy are common activities for psychologists, these health service psychology fields are just two branches in the larger domain of psychology.

[ 62 ] There are other classifications such as industrial and organizational and community psychologists, whose professionals mainly apply psychological research, theories, and techniques to "real-world" problems of business, industry, social benefit organizations , government, [ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] and academia .

APA-recognized specialties [ edit ] Clinical psychology Clinical neuropsychology Clinical child and adolescent psychology School psychology Behavioral and cognitive psychology Couple and family psychology Clinical health psychology Geropsychology Police and public safety psychology Sleep psychology Rehabilitation psychology Group psychology and group psychotherapy Forensic psychology Industrial and organizational psychology Psychoanalysis Counseling psychology Serious mental illness psychology Clinical psychopharmacology Clinical psychologists receive training in a number of psychological therapies, including behavioral, cognitive, humanistic, existential, psychodynamic, and systemic approaches, as well as in-depth training in psychological testing , and to some extent, neuropsychological testing .

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Services [ edit ] Clinical psychologists can offer a range of professional services, including: [ 68 ] Psychological treatment (psychotherapy) Administering, scoring, and interpreting psychological tests Prescribing medications (in six states) Conducting psychological research Teaching Developing prevention programs Consulting Program administration Expert testimony Supervision of students or other mental health professionals In practice, clinical psychologists might work with individuals, couples, families, or groups in a variety of settings, including private practices, hospitals, community mental health centers, schools, businesses, and non-profit agencies.

Most clinical psychologists who engage in research and teaching do so within a college or university setting. Clinical psychologists may also choose to specialize in a particular field.

Prescriptive Authority for Psychologists (RxP) [ edit ] Psychologists in the United States campaigned for legislative changes to enable specially-trained psychologists to prescribe psychotropic medications . Legislation in Idaho , Iowa , Louisiana , New Mexico , Illinois , and Colorado has granted those who complete an additional master's degree program in clinical psychopharmacology authority to prescribe medications for mental and emotional disorders.

[ 69 ] As of 2019 [update] , Louisiana is the only state where the licensing and regulation of the practice of medical psychology by medical psychologists (MPs) is regulated by a medical board (the Louisiana State Board of Medical Examiners) rather than a board of psychologists.

[ 70 ] While other states have pursued prescriptive authority, they have not succeeded. Similar legislation in the states of Hawaii and Oregon passed through their respective legislative bodies, but in each case the legislation was vetoed by the state's governor.

[ 69 ] In 1989, the U.S Department of Defense was directed to create the Psychopharmacology Demonstration Project (PDP). By 1997, ten psychologists were trained in psychopharmacology and granted the ability to prescribe psychiatric medications.

[ 71 ] Licensure [ edit ] The practice of clinical psychology requires a license in the United States and Canada. Although each of the U.S. states is different in terms of requirements and licenses (see [ 72 ] and [ 73 ] for examples), there are three common requirements: [ 74 ] Graduation from an accredited school with the appropriate degree Completion of supervised clinical experience Passing a written and/or oral examination All U.S. state and Canada provincial licensing boards are members of the Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards (ASPPB) which created and maintains the Examination for Professional Practice in Psychology (EPPP). Many states require other examinations in addition to the EPPP, such as a jurisprudence (i.e., mental health law) examination or an oral examination.

[ 74 ] Nearly all states also require a certain number of continuing education credits per year in order to renew a license. Licensees can obtain this through various means, such as taking audited classes and attending approved workshops.

There are professions whose scope of practice overlaps with the practice of psychology (particularly with respect to providing psychotherapy) and for which a license is required.

Ambiguity of title [ edit ] To practice with the title of "psychologist", in almost all cases a doctoral degree is required (PhD, PsyD, or EdD in the U.S.). Normally, after the degree, the practitioner must fulfill a certain number of supervised postdoctoral hours ranging from 1,500 to 3,000 (usually taking one to two years), and pass the EPPP and any other state or provincial exams.

[ 75 ] By and large, a professional in the U.S. must hold a doctoral degree in psychology (PsyD, EdD, or PhD), and/or have a state license to use the title psychologist .

[ 20 ] [ 76 ] However, regulations vary from state to state. For example, in the states of Michigan, West Virginia, and Vermont, there are psychologists licensed at the master's level.

Differences with psychiatrists [ edit ] Further information: Mental health professional § Psychiatrists and clinical psychology Although clinical  psychologists and psychiatrists share the same fundamental aim—the alleviation of mental distress—their training, outlook, and methodologies are often different. Perhaps the most significant difference is that psychiatrists are licensed physicians , and, as such, psychiatrists are apt to use the medical model to assess mental health problems and to also employ psychotropic medications as a method of addressing mental health problems.

[ 77 ] Psychologists generally do not prescribe medication, although in some jurisdictions they do have prescription privileges. In five U.S. states (New Mexico, Louisiana, Illinois, Iowa, Idaho, and Colorado), psychologists with clinical psychopharmacology training have been granted prescriptive authority for mental health disorders.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] Psychologists receive extensive training in psychological test administration, scoring, interpretation, and reporting, while psychiatrists are not trained in psychological testing. In addition, psychologists (particularly those from PhD programs) spend several years in graduate school being trained to conduct behavioral research; their training includes research design and advanced statistical analysis. While this training is available for physicians via dual MD/PhD programs, it is not typically included in standard medical education, although psychiatrists may develop research skills during their residency or a psychiatry fellowship (post-residency).

Psychiatrists, as licensed physicians, have been trained more intensively in other areas, such as internal medicine and neurology, and may bring this knowledge to bear in identifying and treating medical or neurological conditions that present with primarily psychological symptoms such as depression, anxiety, or paranoia (e.g., hypothyroidism presenting with depressive symptoms, or pulmonary embolism with significant apprehension and anxiety).

[ 80 ] Mental health professions [ edit ] Comparison of mental health professionals in the US Occupation Degree Common licenses Prescription privilege Mean 2022 income (USD) Clinical psychologist PhD/PsyD/EdD Psychologist Varies by state $90,130 Counseling psychologist (doctorate) PhD/PsyD/EdD Psychologist No $65,000 Counselor (master's) MA/MS/MEd MFT/LPC/LHMC/LPA No $49,710 School psychologist PhD/EdD/MS/EdS School psychologist No $81,500 Psychiatrist MD/DO Psychiatrist Yes $226,880 Clinical social worker PhD/DSW/MSW LCSW No $55,350 Psychiatric nurse MSN/BSN RN No $75,330 Psychiatric and mental health nurse practitioner DNP/PhD/MSN APRN/APN/PMHNP Yes (varies by state) $121,610 Expressive/Art therapist MA ATR No $55,900 Sources: [ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 86 ] Marriage and Family Therapist (MFT) . An MFT license requires a doctorate or master's degree. In addition, it usually involves two years of post-degree clinical experience under supervision, and licensure requires passing a written exam, commonly the National Examination for Marriage and Family Therapists, which is maintained by the American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy. In addition, most states require an oral exam. MFTs, as the title implies, work mostly with families and couples, addressing a wide range of common psychological problems.

[ 87 ] Some jurisdictions have exemptions that let someone practice marriage and family therapy without meeting the requirements for a license. That is, they offer a license but do not require that marriage and family therapists obtain one.

[ 88 ] [ self-published source?

] Licensed Professional Counselor (LPC).

Similar to the MFT, the LPC license requires a master's or doctorate degree, a minimum number of hours of supervised clinical experience in a pre-doc practicum, and the passing of the National Counselor Exam. Similar licenses are the Licensed Mental Health Counselor (LMHC), Licensed Clinical Professional Counselor (LCPC), and Clinical Counselor in Mental Health (CCMH). In some states, after passing the exam, a temporary LPC license is awarded and the clinician may begin the normal 3000-hour supervised internship leading to the full license allowing to practice as a counselor or psychotherapist, usually under the supervision of a licensed psychologist.

[ 89 ] Some jurisdictions have exemptions that allow counseling to practice without meeting the requirements for a license. That is, they offer a license but do not require that counselors obtain one.

[ 88 ] Licensed Psychological Associate (LPA) Twenty-six states offer a master's-only license, a common one being the LPA, which allows for the therapist to either practice independently, or, more commonly, under the supervision of a licensed psychologist, depending on the state.

[ 90 ] Common requirements are two to four years of post-master's supervised clinical experience and passing a Psychological Associates Examination. Other titles for this level of licensing include psychological technician (Alabama), psychological assistant (California), licensed clinical psychotherapist (Kansas), licensed psychological practitioner (Minnesota), licensed behavioral practitioner (Oklahoma), licensed psychological associate (North Carolina) or psychological examiner (Tennessee).

Licensed behavior analysts Main article: Professional practice of behavior analysis Licensed behavior analysts are licensed in five states to provide services for clients with substance abuse , developmental disabilities , and mental illness . This profession draws on the evidence base of applied behavior analysis and the philosophy of behaviorism . Behavior analysts have at least a master's degree in behavior analysis or in a mental health related discipline, as well as having taken at least five core courses in applied behavior analysis. Many behavior analysts have a doctorate. Most programs have a formalized internship program, and several programs are offered online. Most practitioners have passed the examination offered by the Behavior Analyst Certification Board The model licensing act for behavior analysts can be found at the Association for Behavior Analysis International 's website.

Employment [ edit ] In the United States, of 181,600 jobs for psychologists in 2021, 123,300 are employed in clinical, counseling, and school positions; 2,900 are employed in industrial-organizational positions, and 55,400 are in "all other" positions.

The median salary in the U.S. for clinical, counseling, and school psychologists in May 2021 was US$82,510 [ 91 ] and the median salary for industrial-organizational psychologists was US$105,310.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Psychologists can work in applied or academic settings. Academic psychologists educate higher education students, as well as conduct research, with graduate-level research being an important part of academic psychology. Academic positions can be tenured or non-tenured, with tenured positions being highly desirable.

[ 94 ] See also [ edit ] List of psychologists Mental health professional List of psychological topics List of psychologists on postage stamps Notes [ edit ] ^ e.g.

clinical neuropsychology , clinical , community , counselling , educational and developmental , forensic , health , organisational or sport and exercise ^ e.g.

Australian Counseling Association and Psychotherapy and Counseling Federation of Australia ^ APA membership is not a requirement for licensure in any of the 50 US states. This fact should not be confused with APA accreditation of graduate psychology programs and clinical internships.

^ See: Scientist–practitioner model and Practitioner–scholar model References [ edit ] ^ a b "Psychologists : Occupational Outlook Handbook: : U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics" .

www.bls.gov . Retrieved 24 September 2019 .

^ DeAngelis, Tori (2023).

"Prescriptive authority gains new momentum" .

www.apa.org . Retrieved 23 February 2025 .

^ Cognitive behavioral therapy . Institute for Quality and Efficiency in Health Care (IQWiG). 8 September 2016.

^ David, Daniel; Cristea, Ioana; Hofmann, Stefan G. (29 January 2018).

"Why Cognitive Behavioral Therapy Is the Current Gold Standard of Psychotherapy" .

Frontiers in Psychiatry .

9 : 4.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00004 .

ISSN 1664-0640 .

PMC 5797481 .

PMID 29434552 .

^ "Psychologists and psychology" .

Healthdirect . October 2019.

^ "What is Applied Psychology? Top Applied Psychology Careers" .

www.gmercyu.edu . Retrieved 1 October 2019 .

^ Psychology Board of Australia . Psychologyboard.gov.au. Retrieved on 22 November 2011.

^ "Psychology Council of New South Wales" .

www.psychreg.health.nsw.gov.au . Archived from the original on 31 August 2007 . Retrieved 13 September 2007 .

^ The Australian Psychological Society (APS) (July 2010).

"Australian Psychological Society : Study pathways" . Archived from the original on 15 July 2016 . Retrieved 12 July 2016 .

^ The Psychology Board of Australia (PsyBA) (24 May 2016).

"Psychology Board of Australia – General registration" . Retrieved 12 July 2016 .

^ "Retirement of the 4+2 internship pathway to general registration" . Psychologyboard.gov.au. 24 May 2019 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 .

^ "Retirement of the 4+2 internship program" . Psychologyboard.gov.au. 7 October 2019 . Retrieved 3 January 2020 .

^ "Psychology Internship Pathways – Find My Pathway" .

Find My Pathway . Retrieved 29 September 2018 .

^ "Psychology Board of Australia – 5+1 internship program" .

www.psychologyboard.gov.au . Retrieved 29 September 2018 .

^ "Psychology Board of Australia – Endorsement" . Psychologyboard.gov.au. 1 July 2010 . Retrieved 13 August 2012 .

^ Specialist titles – Transition provisions for Western Australia psychologists Archived 15 May 2013 at the Wayback Machine Specialist titles: Transition provisions for Western Australia psychologists , Psychology Board of Australia, 15 November 2010, archived from the original (PDF) on 4 April 2011 Originally made available at: "Western Australia psychologists transition: Statement from the Psychology Board of Australia" .

Psychology Board of Australia .

Ahpra . 15 November 2010 . Retrieved 23 November 2016 .

^ The Australian Psychological Society (2 July 2013).

"Cessation of use of specialist titles in Western Australia" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 April 2017 . Retrieved 23 November 2016 .

^ Psychology Board of Australia (17 October 2013).

"Specialist title transition period for WA psychologists is ending" . Retrieved 23 November 2016 .

^ Belgium: New Law On Mental Health Professions Archived 17 May 2018 at the Wayback Machine April 2018 ^ a b Becoming a psychologist or psychologist associate Ontario Psychological Association.

^ "Provincial and Territorial Regulatory Bodies - Canadian Psychological Association" .

cpa.ca/public . Canadian Psychological Association. 10 August 2018 . Retrieved 2 December 2022 .

^ "Solicitud de Exequátur" .

Ministerio de Educación Superior, Ciencia y Tecnología (in Spanish) . Retrieved 16 August 2022 .

^ Professional practice rights 12 December 2008 by valvira.fi ^ Finnish Psychological Association – Welcome Archived 11 March 2017 at the Wayback Machine psyli.fi ^ "BDP – Profession" . Retrieved 15 August 2016 .

^ Vangermain D., Brauchle G. (2010).

A Long Way to Professionalism: The History of the German Psychotherapy Law Archived 21 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine .

(English Version of) Verhaltenstherapie, 20(2), 93–100.

^ "Ανακοίνωση του Διοικητικού Συμβουλίου του Συλλόγου Ελλήνων Ψυχολόγων" [Announcement of the Board of Directors of the Association of Greek Psychologists].

Association of Greek Psychologists (in Greek). 19 April 2011 . Retrieved 27 June 2019 .

^ "Κώδικας Δεοντολογίας Ψυχολόγων" [Code of Ethics for Psychologists].

Tax Heaven (in Greek). 18 June 2019 . Retrieved 27 June 2019 .

^ «ΔΟΑΤΑΠ: Διευκρίνιση για το Ρόλο του» Archived 2020-09-24 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Psychology Now" . Archived from the original on 9 November 2015 . Retrieved 1 November 2015 .

^ Mental Healthcare Act, 2017 Archived 7 August 2020 at the Wayback Machine , chap. I, §2(1)(g).

^ "Quest For The Elusive: Regulatory Needs And Efforts In Psychology In India" . Retrieved 27 February 2022 .

^ a b Raghuraman, Shruti.

What You Need to Know Before You Look for Mental Health Support on Social Media .

The Wire Science (15 July 2020).

^ "Home | PRSIndia" (PDF) .

^ "Community Mental-Health Digital platform MANAS launched by the Principal Scientific Adviser" .

pib.gov.in .

^ "Use of the title "Psychologist" " .

www.psychologistsboard.org.nz . Archived from the original on 14 September 2017 . Retrieved 14 September 2017 .

^ "Educated abroad, but want to practice as a psychologist in Norway?" .

^ Sourced from the Departments of Psychology: University of Cape Town , University of the Witwatersrand Archived 28 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine , University of South Africa ^ List of accredited universities in South Africa Archived 10 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine , Professional Board for Psychology ^ Professional Board for Psychology Archived 21 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine . HPCSA. Retrieved on 22 November 2011.

^ HPCSA . HPCSA. Retrieved on 22 November 2011.

^ BA Hons vs BPsych Archived 10 December 2014 at the Wayback Machine , Psychological Society of South Africa ^ a b c "HCPC – Health Professions Council – Practitioner psychologists" . 4 April 2018 . Retrieved 5 April 2018 .

^ HCPC – Health Professions Council – Becoming registered as a practitioner psychologist Archived 19 December 2010 at the Wayback Machine . Hpc-uk.org. Retrieved on 22 November 2011.

^ HPC – Health Professions Council – Protected titles Archived 7 November 2018 at the Wayback Machine . Hpc-uk.org. Retrieved on 22 November 2011.

^ HCPC – Health and Care Professions Council – News Archived 16 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine . Hpc-uk.org (11 June 2009). Retrieved on 22 November 2011.

^ "Qualification in Clinical Neuropsychology" . Archived from the original on 15 July 2020 . Retrieved 2 August 2020 .

^ "HCPC – Health and Care Professions Council – Professions" . Retrieved 15 August 2016 .

^ "BPS Server" . Archived from the original on 21 August 2016 . Retrieved 15 August 2016 .

^ Kelly, Diana; Gray, Carol (July 2000).

"Current Role, Good Practice and Future Directions" (PDF) .

Digital Education Resource Archive (DERA) . Educational Psychology Services (England) . Retrieved 16 April 2017 .

^ APA Membership information . Apa.org. Retrieved on 22 November 2011.

^ Antioch University. (2006).

Master of Arts in Psychology Program Options & Requirements Archived 10 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Proceedings of the Summit on Master's Training in Psychological Practice" (PDF) .

American Psychological Organization . 2–6 December 2016 . Retrieved 2 August 2020 .

^ Norcross, J. & Castle, P. (2002).

Appreciating the PsyD: The Facts.

Eye on Psi Chi , 7(1), 22–26.

^ "Database of APA-Accredited Psychology Programs" .

APA.org . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

^ "Understanding APA Accreditation" .

APA.org . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

^ "About Accreditation > Why is accreditation important?" .

APA.org . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

^ "Choosing a Program > Will I have trouble getting a job or becoming licensed if I don't go to an accredited program?" .

APA.org . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

^ Bailey, Deborah Smith (2004).

"Why accreditation matters" .

GradPSYCH Magazine . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

^ Marcus, David (7 June 2014).

"Choosing a Graduate Program in Clinical Psychology" .

Psychology Today . Retrieved 6 April 2018 .

^ "Divisions of APA" . Retrieved 15 August 2016 .

^ What is Psychology?

Archived 3 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine at everydaypsychology.com ^ Peterson, Donald R. (1976). "Is psychology a profession?".

American Psychologist .

31 (8): 572– 581.

doi : 10.1037/0003-066X.31.8.572 .

PMID 1008340 .

^ Spector, P.E (2011). Industrial and Organizational Psychology: Research and Practice, (6th Edition) NJ, US: Wiley.

^ Dalton, J. H., Elias, M. J., & Wandersman, A. (2001). "Community Psychology: Linking Individuals and Communities". Stamford, CT: Wadsworth.

^ "APA-Recognized Specialties" .

^ American Board of Professional Psychology, Specialty Certification in Professional Psychology Archived 14 December 2006 at the Wayback Machine ^ Compas, Bruce & Gotlib, Ian. (2002).

Introduction to Clinical Psychology.

New York, NY : McGraw-Hill Higher Education.

ISBN 0-07-012491-4 ^ a b Louisiana Psychological Association Archived 6 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine . Louisianapsychologist.org. Retrieved on 22 November 2011.

^ "Louisiana RxP psychologist defends regulatory change – The National Psychologist" . March 2010. Archived from the original on 16 August 2016 . Retrieved 15 August 2016 .

^ "NAMI: National Alliance on Mental Illness – NAMI: The National Alliance on Mental Illness" . Archived from the original on 20 July 2015 . Retrieved 15 August 2016 .

^ "BBS – MFT Intern and Licensing Information" . Archived from the original on 6 April 2007 . Retrieved 11 March 2019 .

^ "FAQ" (PDF) .

www.bbs.ca.gov . Retrieved 26 August 2019 .

^ a b "Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards" . Retrieved 17 February 2007 .

^ Kerewsky, Shoshana. (2000). Some US states also require additional requirements, such as an oral exam and extra coursework Beyond Internship: Helpful Resources for Obtaining Licensure .

^ "Currently, all (State) jurisdictions have laws that limit the use of the term psychologist to those who are licensed or who are specifically exempt, as in an exempt setting." (Reference: American Psychological Association ( APA ) Division 14,  Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology ( SIOP ) ) ^ Graybar, S.; Leonard, L. (2005). "In Defense of Listening".

American Journal of Psychotherapy .

59 (1): 1– 19.

doi : 10.1176/appi.psychotherapy.2005.59.1.1 .

PMID 15895765 .

^ "APA Applauds Landmark Illinois Law Allowing Psychologists to Prescribe Medications" . Retrieved 15 August 2016 .

^ "Louisiana grants psychologists prescriptive authority" . 5 May 2004 . Retrieved 16 July 2009 .

^ Dorsey, Steven T. (22 September 2002).

"Medical Conditions that Mimic Psychiatric Disease: A Systematic Approach for Evaluation of Patients Who Present with Psychiatric Symptomatology" .

www.ahcmedia.com . Emergency Medicine Reports. AHC Media / Relias / Bertelsmann Education Group .

ISSN 0746-2506 .

LCCN 83008791 .

OCLC 09881608 . Retrieved 23 May 2018 .

^ APA (2003).

"Salaries in Psychology 2003: Report of the 2003 APA Salary Survey" .

^ NIH: Office of Science Education (2006).

"Lifeworks: Psychiatrist" .

^ U.S. Department of Labor: Bureau of Labor Statistics (2004).

"Occupational Outlook Handbook: Social Workers" .

^ U.S. Department of Labor: Bureau of Labor Statistics (2004).

"Occupational Outlook Handbook: Registered Nurses" .

^ NIH: Office of Science Education (2006).

"Advance News Magazines. (2005)" (PDF) .

^ "Lifeworks: Art Therapist" . Retrieved 17 February 2007 .

^ American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy, Frequently Asked Questions on Marriage and Family Therapists Archived 4 April 2007 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Plamondon, Robert (6 December 2014).

"Practicing Your Profession In Oregon Without a License, Legally and Ethically" .

Alternative & Unlicensed Practitioners .

[ self-published source ] ^ "National Board for Certified Counselors" . Retrieved 17 February 2007 .

^ "Licensure Information" .

North American Association of Masters in Psychology . 2004. Archived from the original on 10 March 2009 . Retrieved 3 March 2018 .

^ "Psychologists Salary BLS" . 28 December 2021.

^ U.S. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Occupational Outlook Handbook: Psychologists ^ Organizational Psychologists . Bls.gov. Retrieved on 28 December 2021.

^ "What Type of Careers are in Academic Psychology?" .

Online Psychology Degree Guide . Retrieved 23 September 2019 .

v t e Psychology History Philosophy Portal Psychologist Basic psychology Abnormal Affective neuroscience Affective science Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Behaviorism Cognitive / Cognitivism Cognitive neuroscience Social Comparative Cross-cultural Cultural Developmental Differential Ecological Evolutionary Experimental Gestalt Intelligence Mathematical Moral Neuropsychology Perception Personality Psycholinguistics Psychophysiology Quantitative Social Theoretical Applied psychology Anomalistic Applied behavior analysis Art Assessment Aviation Biography of famous people Clinical Coaching Color Community Consumer Counseling Critical Educational Ergonomics Fashion Feminist Food Forensic Health History Humanistic Industrial and organizational Legal Media Medical Military Music Occupational health Pastoral Peace and war Political Positive Photography Psychometrics Psychotherapy Religion School Sex differences Space Sport and exercise Suicidology Systems Trading Traffic Methodologies Animal testing Archival research Behavior epigenetics Case study Content analysis Experiments Human subject research Interviews Neuroimaging Observation Psychophysics Qualitative research Quantitative research Self-report inventory Statistical surveys Concepts Behavior Behavioral engineering Behavioral genetics Behavioral neuroscience Cognition Competence Consciousness Consumer behavior Emotions Feelings Human factors and ergonomics Intelligence Maslow's hierarchy of needs Mental state Mind Psychology of religion Psychometrics Sex differences Terror management theory Psychologists Wilhelm Wundt William James Ivan Pavlov Sigmund Freud Edward Thorndike Carl Jung John B. Watson Clark L. Hull Kurt Lewin Jean Piaget Gordon Allport J. P. Guilford Carl Rogers Erik Erikson B. F. Skinner Donald O. Hebb Ernest Hilgard Harry Harlow Raymond Cattell Abraham Maslow Neal E. Miller Jerome Bruner Donald T. Campbell Hans Eysenck Herbert A. Simon David McClelland Leon Festinger George A. Miller Richard Lazarus Stanley Schachter Robert Zajonc Albert Bandura Roger Brown Endel Tulving Lawrence Kohlberg Noam Chomsky Ulric Neisser Jerome Kagan Walter Mischel Elliot Aronson Daniel Kahneman Paul Ekman Michael Posner Amos Tversky Bruce McEwen Larry Squire Richard E. Nisbett Martin Seligman Ed Diener Shelley E. Taylor John Anderson Ronald C. Kessler Joseph E. LeDoux Richard Davidson Susan Fiske Roy Baumeister Lists Counseling topics Disciplines Organizations Outline Psychologists Psychotherapies Research methods Schools of thought Timeline Topics Category Wiktionary definition Wiktionary category Wikisource Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikinews Wikibooks Authority control databases National Germany 2 United States 2 France 2 BnF data 2 Japan Czech Republic 2 Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐fvbq7
Cached time: 20250817044024
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.885 seconds
Real time usage: 1.066 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6634/1000000
Revision size: 61346/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 174232/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8609/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 263050/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.562/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22220093/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  908.242      1 -total
 45.24%  410.929      2 Template:Reflist
 32.18%  292.307     57 Template:Cite_web
  9.54%   86.684      3 Template:Lang
  9.09%   82.550      1 Template:Psychology
  8.87%   80.571      1 Template:Navbox
  7.72%   70.080      1 Template:Infobox_Occupation
  7.42%   67.364      1 Template:Short_description
  7.13%   64.781      1 Template:Infobox
  6.06%   55.013      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:72132:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044024 and revision id 1296509277. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Psychologist&oldid=1296509277 " Categories : Psychology Mental health occupations Psychologists Social science occupations Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 Greek-language sources (el) All accuracy disputes Accuracy disputes from February 2015 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2022 Articles containing German-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2012 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2019 All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from February 2015 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 20 June 2025, at 11:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Psychologist 65 languages Add topic

