Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theoretical perspective 2 Non-conscious affect and perception 3 Arousal 4 Affect and mood 5 Gender 6 Affect and child development 7 Disorders and physical disabilities Toggle Disorders and physical disabilities subsection 7.1 Flat, blunted and restricted affect 7.2 Facial paralysis and surgery 8 Strategic display 9 See also 10 References Toggle the table of contents Affect display 2 languages العربية فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Verbal and non-verbal displays of emotion For more information, see the related article Emotion .

Affect displays are the verbal and non-verbal displays of affect ( emotion ).

[ 1 ] These displays can be through facial expressions , gestures and body language , volume and tone of voice , laughing , crying , etc. Affect displays can be altered or faked so one may appear one way, when they feel another (e.g., smiling when sad). Affect can be conscious or non-conscious and can be discreet or obvious.

[ 2 ] The display of positive emotions, such as smiling, laughing, etc., is termed " positive affect ", while the displays of more negative emotions , such as crying and tense gestures, is respectively termed " negative affect ".

Affect is important in psychology as well as in communication , mostly when it comes to interpersonal communication and non-verbal communication. In both psychology and communication, there are a multitude of theories that explain affect and its impact on humans and quality of life.

[ 3 ] Theoretical perspective [ edit ] Affect can be taken to indicate an instinctual reaction to stimulation occurring before the typical cognitive processes considered necessary for the formation of a more complex emotion.

Robert B. Zajonc asserts that this reaction to stimuli is primary for human beings and is the dominant reaction for lower organisms. Zajonc suggests affective reactions can occur without extensive perceptual and cognitive encoding, and can be made sooner and with greater confidence than cognitive judgments.

[ 4 ] Lazarus [ 5 ] on the other hand considers affect to be post-cognitive. That is, affect is elicited only after a certain amount of cognitive processing of information has been accomplished. In this view, an affective reaction, such as liking, disliking, evaluation, or the experience of pleasure or displeasure, is based on a prior cognitive process in which a variety of content discriminations are made and features are identified, examined for their value, and weighted for their contributions.

[ 6 ] A divergence from a narrow reinforcement model for emotion allows for other perspectives on how affect influences emotional development. Thus, temperament , cognitive development, socialization patterns, and the idiosyncrasies of one's family or subculture are mutually interactive in non-linear ways. As an example, the temperament of a highly reactive, low self-soothing infant may "disproportionately" affect the process of emotion regulation in the early months of life.

[ 7 ] Non-conscious affect and perception [ edit ] In relation to perception , a type of non-conscious affect may be separate from the cognitive processing of environmental stimuli. A monohierarchy of  perception, affect and cognition considers the roles of arousal , attentional tendencies, affective primacy, [ 8 ] evolutionary constraints , [ 9 ] [ 10 ] and covert perception [ 11 ] within the sensing and processing of preferences and discrimination. Emotions are complex chains of events triggered by certain stimuli. There is no way to completely describe an emotion by knowing only some of its components. Verbal reports of feelings are often inaccurate because people may not know exactly what they feel, or they may feel several different emotions at the same time. There are also situations that arise in which individuals attempt to hide their feelings, and there are some who believe that public and private events seldom coincide exactly, and that words for feelings are generally more ambiguous than are words for objects or events.

Affective responses, on the other hand, are more basic and may be less problematic in terms of assessment. Brewin has proposed two experiential processes that frame non-cognitive relations between various affective experiences: those that are prewired dispositions (i.e., non-conscious processes), able to "select from the total stimulus array those stimuli that are casually relevant, using such criteria as perceptual salience, spatiotemporal cues, and predictive value in relation to data stored in memory", [ 12 ] and those that are automatic (i.e., subconscious processes), characterized as "rapid, relatively inflexible and difficult to modify... (requiring) minimal attention to occur and... (capable of being) activated without intention or awareness" (1989 p. 381).

Arousal [ edit ] Arousal is a basic physiological response to the presentation of stimuli. When this occurs, a non-conscious affective process takes the form of two control mechanisms; one mobilization, and the other immobilization. Within the human brain, the amygdala regulates an instinctual reaction initiating this arousal process, either freezing the individual or accelerating mobilization.

The arousal response is illustrated in studies focused on reward systems that control food-seeking behavior.

[ 13 ] Researchers focused on learning processes and modulatory processes that are present while encoding and retrieving goal values. When an organism seeks food, the anticipation of reward based on environmental events becomes another influence on food seeking that is separate from the reward of food itself. Therefore, earning the reward and anticipating the reward are separate processes and both create an excitatory influence of reward-related cues. Both processes are dissociated at the level of the amygdala and are functionally integrated within larger neural systems.

Affect and mood [ edit ] Mood , like emotion, is an affective state. However, an emotion tends to have a clear focus (i.e., a self-evident cause), while mood tends to be more unfocused and diffused. Mood, according to Batson, Shaw, and Oleson (1992), involves tone and intensity and a structured set of beliefs about general expectations of a future experience of pleasure or pain, or of positive or negative affect in the future. Unlike instant reactions that produce affect or emotion, and that change with expectations of future pleasure or pain, moods, being diffused and unfocused, and thus harder to cope with, can last for days, weeks, months, or even years.

[ 14 ] Moods are hypothetical constructs depicting an individual's emotional state. Researchers typically infer the existence of moods from a variety of behavioral referents.

[ 15 ] Positive affect and negative affect represent independent domains of emotion in the general population, and positive affect is strongly linked to social interaction. Positive and negative daily events show independent relationships to subjective well-being , and positive affect is strongly linked to social activity. Recent research suggests that "high functional support is related to higher levels of positive affect".

[ 16 ] The exact process through which social support is linked to positive affect remains unclear. The process could derive from predictable, regularized social interaction, from leisure activities where the focus is on relaxation and positive mood, or from the enjoyment of shared activities.

Gender [ edit ] Main article: Gender and emotional expression This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( February 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Research has indicated many differences in affective displays due to gender . Gender, as opposed to sex, is one's self-perception of being masculine or feminine (i.e., a male can perceive himself to be more feminine or a female can perceive herself to be more masculine).  It can also be argued, however, that hormones (typically determined by sex) greatly affect affective displays and mood.

Affect and child development [ edit ] According to studies done in the late '80s and early '90s, infants within their first year of life are not only able to begin recognizing affect displays but can begin mimicking the displays and also begin developing empathy. A study in 2011 followed up on these earlier studies by testing fifteen 6-12 month old infants' arousal, via pupil dilation, when looking at both positive and negative displays. Results showed that when presented with negative affect, an infant's pupil will dilate and stay dilated for a longer period of time when compared to neutral affect. When presented with positive affect however, the pupil dilation is much larger, but stays dilated for shorter amount of time. While this study does not prove an infant's ability to empathize with others, it does show that infants do recognize and acknowledge both positive and negative displays of emotion.

[ 17 ] In the early 2000s over the period of about seven years, a study was done on about 200 children whose mother had "a history of juvenile-onset unipolar depressive disorder" or simply, depression as children themselves. In the cases of unipolar depression, a person generally displays more negative affect and less positive affect than a person without depression. Or, they are more likely to show when they are sad or upset, than when they are excited or happy. This study that was published in 2010 discovered that the children of mothers that have unipolar depression, had lower levels of positive affect when compared to the control group. Even as the children grew older, while the negative affect began to stay the same, the children still showed consistently lower positive affect. This study suggests that "Reduced PA [positive affect] may be one source of developmental vulnerability to familial depression..." meaning that while having family with depression, increases the risk of children developing depression, reduced positive affect increases the risk of this development. But knowing this aspect of depression, might also be able to help prevent the onset of depression in young children well into their adulthood.

[ 18 ] Disorders and physical disabilities [ edit ] Main article: Reduced affect display There are some diseases, physical disabilities and mental health disorders that can change the way a person's affect displays are conveyed. Reduced affect is when a person's emotions cannot be properly conveyed or displayed physically. There is no actual change in how intensely they truly feel emotions; there is simply a disparity between emotions felt and how intensely they are conveyed. These disorders can greatly affect a person's quality of life, depending on how intense the disability is.

Flat, blunted and restricted affect [ edit ] These are symptoms in which an affected person feels an emotion, but does not or cannot display it.

[ 19 ] Flat being the most severe in where there is very little to absolutely no show of emotions. Restricted and blunted are, respectively, less severe. Disorders involving these reduced affect displays most commonly include schizophrenia , post traumatic stress disorder , depression , autism and persons with traumatic brain injuries.

[ 20 ] One study has shown that people with schizophrenia that experience flat affect, can also experience difficulty perceiving the emotions of a healthy individual.

[ 21 ] Facial paralysis and surgery [ edit ] People who have facial deformities or paralysis may also be physically incapable of displaying emotions. This is beginning to be corrected though, through "Facial Reanimation Surgery" which is proving not only to successfully improve a patient's affect displays, but also bettering their psychological health.

[ 22 ] There are multiple types of surgeries that can help fix facial paralysis. Some more popular types include fixing the actual nerve damage, specifically any damage to the hypoglossal nerve; facial grafts where nerves taken from a donor's leg are transplanted into the patient's face; or if the damage is more muscular versus actual nerves, muscle may be transferred into the patient's face.

[ 23 ] Strategic display [ edit ] See also: Psychological manipulation Emotions can be displayed in order to elicit desired behaviors from others.

People have been known to display positive emotions in various settings. Service workers often engage in emotional labor , a strive to maintain positive emotional expressions despite difficulties in working conditions or rude customers, in order to conform to organizational rules. Such strategic displays are not always effective, since if they are detected, lower customer satisfaction results.

[ 24 ] Perhaps the most notable attempt to feign negative emotion could be seen with Nixon's madman theory . Nixon's administration attempted to make the leaders of other countries think Nixon was mad , and that his behavior was irrational and volatile. Fearing an unpredictable American response, leaders of hostile Communist Bloc nations would avoid provoking the United States .

[ 25 ] This diplomatic strategy was not ultimately successful.

The effectiveness of the strategic display depends on the ability of the expresser to remain undetected. It may be a risky strategy since if detected, the person's original intent could be discovered, undermining the future relationship with the target.

[ 26 ] According to the appraisal theory of emotions, the experience of emotions is preceded by an evaluation of an object of significance to that individual. When individuals are seen to display emotions, it serves as a signal to others of an event important to that individual.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Thus, deliberately altering the emotion display toward an object could be used make the targets of the strategic emotion think and behave in ways that benefit the original expresser. For example, people attempt to hide their expressions during a poker game in order to avoid giving away information to the other players, i.e., keep a poker face .

See also [ edit ] Psychology portal Affect (psychology) Affect theory Affective Affective spectrum Deception Discrete emotions theory Display rules Emotion Emotional contagion Emotional labor Empathy Facial communication Interpersonal deception theory Psychopathy Self-awareness Self-deception Sincerity Silvan Tomkins References [ edit ] ^ McCornack, Steven, and Joseph Ortiz.

Choices & connections: an introduction to communication . 2nd ed., Bedford/St. Martins, 2017.

^ Batson, C.D., Shaw, L. L., Oleson, K. C. (1992). "Emotion".

Differentiating affect, mood and emotion: Toward functionally based conceptual distinctions . Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

^ Hommel, Bernhard (2019-10-01).

"Affect and control: A conceptual clarification" .

International Journal of Psychophysiology .

144 : 1– 6.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2019.07.006 .

hdl : 1887/81987 .

ISSN 0167-8760 .

^ Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Feelings and Thinking: Preferences need no Inferences.

American Psychologist , 35(2), pp. 151–175 ^ Lazarus, R. S. (1982). Thoughts on the Relations between Emotions and Cognition.

American Physiologist , 37(10), pp. 1019–1024 ^ Brewin, C. R. (1989). Cognitive Change Processes in Psychotherapy.

Psychological Review , 96(45), pp. 379–394 ^ Griffiths, P. E. (1997).

What Emotions Really Are: The Problem of Psychological Categories . The University of Chicago Press: Chicago ^ Zajonc, R. B. (1980). Feelings and Thinking: Preferences need no Inferences.

American Psychologist , 35(2), pp. 151–175 ^ Shepard, R. N. (1984). Ecological constraints on internal representation Psychological Review , 91, pp. 417–447 ^ * Shepard, R. N. (1994) Perceptual-cognitive universals as reflections of the world.

Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 1, pp. 2–28 ^ Weiskrantz, L. (1997).

Consciousness Lost and Found . Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press ^ Brewin, C. R. (1989). Cognitive Change Processes in Psychotherapy.

Psychological Review , 96(45), pp. 379–394 ^ Balliene, B. W. (2005). Dietary Influences on Obesity: Environment, Behavior and Biology.

Physiology & Behavior , 86 (5), pp. 717–730 ^ Schucman, H., Thetford, C. (1975).

A Course in Miracle . New York: Viking Penguin ^ Blechman, E. A. (1990).

Moods, Affect, and Emotions . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates: Hillsdale, NJ ^ Blechman, E. A. (1990).

Emotions and the Family.

Lawrence Erlbaum Associates: Hillsdale, NJ ^ Geangu, Elena, et al. Infant Pupil Diameter Changes in Response to Others' Positive and Negative Emotions. PLoS ONE, vol. 6, no. 11, 2011, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0027132 ^ Olino, Thomas M., et al. "Developmental trajectories of positive and negative affect in children at high and low familial risk for depressive disorder." Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, vol. 52, no. 7, June 2010, pp. 792–799., doi:10.1111/j.1469-7610.2010.02331.x.

^ Raquel E Gur, Christian G Kohler, J Daniel Ragland, Steven J Siegel, Kathleen Lesko, Warren B Bilker, Ruben C Gur; Flat Affect in Schizophrenia: Relation to Emotion Processing and Neurocognitive Measures, Schizophrenia Bulletin, Volume 32, Issue 2, 1 April 2006, Pages 279–287, https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbj041 ^ Pedersen, T. (2016). Flat Affect. Psych Central.

https://psychcentral.com/encyclopedia/flat-affect/ ^ Raquel E Gur, Christian G Kohler, J Daniel Ragland, Steven J Siegel, Kathleen Lesko, Warren B Bilker, Ruben C Gur; Flat Affect in Schizophrenia: Relation to Emotion Processing and Neurocognitive Measures, Schizophrenia Bulletin, Volume 32, Issue 2, 1 April 2006, Pages 279–287, https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbj041 ^ Dey, Jacob K., et al. "Facial Reanimation Surgery Restores Affect Display." Otology & Neurotology, vol. 35, no. 1, Jan. 2014, pp. 182–187., doi:10.1097/mao.0b013e3182a1ea8a.

^ Hadlock, Tessa A., Mack L. Cheney, and Michael J. McKenna. "Facial reanimation surgery." Surgery of the ear and temporal bone. Philadelphia (PA): Lippincott Williams and Wilkins (2005): 461-72.

^ Groth, Markus; Hennig-Thurau, Walsh (2009).

"Customer reactions to emotional labor: The roles of employee acting strategies and customer detection accuracy" (PDF) .

Academy of Management Journal .

52 (5): 958.

doi : 10.5465/AMJ.2009.44634116 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2016-03-05 . Retrieved 2013-06-07 .

^ Haldeman, H. R.

(1978).

The Ends of Power . Times Books. p.

122 .

ISBN 9780812907247 .

^ Van Kleef, Gerben; De Dreu (2010).

"Longer-term consequences of anger expression in negotiation: Retaliation or spillover?" .

Journal of Experimental Social Psychology .

46 (5): 753.

doi : 10.1016/j.jesp.2010.03.013 .

SSRN 1298530 .

^ Parkinson, Brian; Gwenda (2012).

"Worry spreads: Interpersonal transfer of problem-related anxiety" .

Cognition & Emotion .

26 (3): 462– 479.

doi : 10.1080/02699931.2011.651101 .

PMID 22471852 .

S2CID 24211816 .

^ Schlicht, Erik; Shimojo, Camerer; Battaglia, Nakayama (2010). Rustichini, Aldo (ed.).

"Human Wagering Behavior Depends on Opponents' Faces" .

PLOS ONE .

5 (7): e11663.

Bibcode : 2010PLoSO...511663S .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0011663 .

PMC 2908123 .

PMID 20657772 .

v t e Nonverbal communication Modalities Physical Blushing Body language / Kinesics Body-to-body communication Facial expression Facial Action Coding System Microexpression Subtle expression Gesture List Speech-independent gestures Haptic communication Imitation Interpersonal synchrony Laughter Oculesics Eye contact Pupil dilation Olfaction Posture Proxemics Speech Affect Emotional prosody Paralanguage Intonation Loudness Prosody Rhythm Stress Tone Voice quality Social context Chronemics Conventions Display rules Habitus High-context and low-context cultures Interpersonal relationship Social norm Other Emoticon / Smiley One-bit message Missed call Silent service code Unconscious Microexpression Non-verbal leakage Multi-faceted Affect display Deception Emotion recognition First impression Intimacy Broader concepts Cognitive academic language proficiency Communication Emotional intelligence Nunchi People skills Semiotics Social behavior Social competence Social cue Social skills Unsaid Further information Disorders Aprosodia Asperger syndrome Autism Fragile X Pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified Childhood disintegrative disorder Rett syndrome Dyssemia Nonverbal learning disorder Social (pragmatic) communication disorder Neuroanatomy Limbic system / Limbic lobe Mirror neuron Applications Cold reading Lie detection Freudian slip Poker tell Targeted advertising Technology Computer processing of body language Emotion recognition in conversation Gesture recognition List of facial expression databases Sentiment analysis Key people Ray Birdwhistell Charles Darwin Paul Ekman Related Animal communication Behavioral communication Aggressive Assertive Passive Passive-aggressive Impression management Meta-communication Monastic sign lexicons Verbal communication Manual-tactile verbal Sign language Tactile signing Tadoma Art and literature Mime Mimoplastic art Subtext v t e Evolutionary psychology History Evolutionary thought Theoretical foundations Adaptationism Cognitive revolution Cognitivism Gene selection theory Modern synthesis Criticism Evolutionary processes Adaptations Altruism Cheating Hamiltonian spite Reciprocal Baldwin effect By-products Evolutionarily stable strategy Exaptation Fitness Inclusive Kin selection Inbreeding avoidance Kin recognition Parental investment Parent–offspring conflict Mismatch Natural selection Sexual selection Costly signaling Male / female intrasexual competition Mate choice Sexual dimorphism Social selection Species-typical behavior Areas Cognition / Emotion Affect Display Display rules Facial expression Behavioral modernity Cognitive module / modularity of mind Adaptive unconscious / Unconscious cognition Automatic and controlled processes Cognitive specialization Computational theory of mind Domain generality Domain specificity / learning Dual process theory Cognitive tradeoff hypothesis Evolution of the brain Evolution of nervous systems Fight-or-flight response Arachnophobia Basophobia Ophidiophobia Folk biology / taxonomy Folk psychology / theory of mind Intelligence Flynn effect Wason selection task Motor control / skill Multitasking Numerical cognition Number sense Approximate number system Parallel individuation system Sleep Visual perception Color vision Eye Naïve physics Culture Aesthetics Literary criticism Musicology Anthropology Biological Crime Language Origin Psychology Speech Morality Moral foundations Religion Origin Universals Development Attachment Bonding Affectional / maternal / paternal bond Caregiver deprivation Childhood attachment Cinderella effect Cognitive development Education Language acquisition Personality development Socialization Human factors / Mental health Cognitive ergonomics Computer-mediated communication Engineering psychology Human–computer interaction Media naturalness theory Neuroergonomics Depression Digital media use and mental health Hypophobia Imprinted brain hypothesis Mind-blindness Psychological effects of Internet use Rank theory of depression Schizophrenia Screen time Smartphones and pedestrian safety Social aspects of television Societal effects of cars Distracted driving Lead–crime hypothesis Mobile phones and driving safety Texting while driving Sex Activity Adult attachment Age disparity Arousal Concealed ovulation Coolidge effect Desire Fantasy Hormonal motivation Incest taboo Westermarck effect Jealousy Mate guarding Mating preferences Mating strategies Orientation Ovulatory shift hypothesis Pair bond Physical / Sexual attraction Sexuality / male / female Sexy son hypothesis Sex differences Aggression Autism Cognition Crime Division of labour Emotional intelligence Empathising–systemising theory Gender role Intelligence Memory Mental health Narcissism Neuroscience Schizophrenia Substance abuse Suicide Variability hypothesis Related subjects Academic disciplines Behavioral / evolutionary economics Behavioral epigenetics / genetics Affective / behavioral / cognitive / evolutionary neuroscience Biocultural anthropology Biolinguistics Biological psychiatry Cognitive ethology Cognitive psychology Cognitive science Comparative psychology Cross-cultural psychology Ethology Evolutionary biology Evolutionary medicine Functional psychology Neuropsychology Philosophy of mind Population genetics Primatology Sociobiology Research topics Animal / comparative cognition Animal communication Animal consciousness Animal culture Animal language Animal navigation Animal training Animal-made art Cognitive bias Emotion g factor in non-humans Great ape language Human–animal communication Number sense Primate cognition Theory of mind Tool use Cultural evolution Evolutionary epistemology Missing heritability problem Unit of selection Coevolution Cultural group selection Dual inheritance theory Fisher's principle Group selection Hologenome theory Lamarckism / acquired characteristics Population Punctuated equilibrium Recent human evolution Species Species complex Transgenerational epigenetic inheritance Trivers–Willard hypothesis Theoretical positions Cultural selection theory Determinism / indeterminism Biological determinism Connectionism Cultural determinism Environmental determinism Nature versus nurture Psychological nativism Social constructionism Social determinism Standard social science model Functionalism Memetics Multilineal evolution Neo-Darwinism Neoevolutionism Sociocultural evolution Unilineal evolution Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.eqiad.main‐74cbc45b88‐rmd4r
Cached time: 20250812024055
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.506 seconds
Real time usage: 0.628 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1503/1000000
Revision size: 20333/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 124322/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 714/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 56305/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.296/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5883716/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  498.572      1 -total
 29.75%  148.333      1 Template:Reflist
 23.72%  118.269      5 Template:Cite_journal
 21.95%  109.425      1 Template:Nonverbal_communication
 21.38%  106.604      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 17.92%   89.347      1 Template:Short_description
 10.52%   52.438      6 Template:Navbox
 10.37%   51.718      1 Template:Unreferenced_section
  9.95%   49.593      2 Template:Pagetype
  9.32%   46.476      1 Template:Unreferenced Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:13255208:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812024055 and revision id 1231122258. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Affect_display&oldid=1231122258 " Categories : Emotion Evolutionary psychology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2020 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 26 June 2024, at 15:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Affect display 2 languages Add topic

