Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Reception 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Public Culture Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article contains promotional content .

Please help improve it by removing promotional language and inappropriate external links , and by adding encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view .

( May 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Academic journal Public Culture Discipline Cultural studies Language English Edited by Arjun Appadurai and Erica Robles-Anderson Publication details History 1988–present Publisher Duke University Press (United States) Frequency Triannually Standard abbreviations ISO 4 ( alt ) · Bluebook ( alt ) NLM ( alt ) · MathSciNet ( alt ) ISO 4 Public Cult.

Indexing CODEN ( alt · alt2 ) · JSTOR ( alt ) · LCCN ( alt ) MIAR · NLM ( alt ) · Scopus · W&L CODEN PUCUE7 ISSN 0899-2363 (print) 1527-8018 (web) LCCN 89644254 OCLC no.

18040687 Links Journal homepage Current issue Public Culture is a peer-reviewed , interdisciplinary academic journal of cultural studies published by Duke University Press . It is sponsored by the Department of Media, Culture, and Communication at New York University .

Public Culture has a focus on ethnographies, and analyses of cultural politics in globalization. The journal also acts as a forum for discourse on occasions where cultural, social, and political differences emerge as public eruptions. It is published three time per year.

History [ edit ] The journal was established in 1988 by anthropologists Carol Breckenridge and Arjun Appadurai . Professor of Sociology and Director of the Institute for Public Knowledge at New York University Eric Klinenberg served as Public Culture's editor-in-chief from 2010 to 2015, during which time he initiated the online book review offshoot Public Books .

[ 1 ] From 2015 to 2019, Public Culture was edited by Shamus Khan , Professor of Sociology at Columbia University . Since 2020, the journal is edited by Arjun Appadurai and Erica Robles-Anderson, Professors of Media, Culture, and Communication at New York University .

Reception [ edit ] Public Culture received awards for Best New Journal in 1992 [ 2 ] and Best Special Issue in 2000 [ 3 ] from The Council of Editors of Learned Journals . In 2013, the same body named Public Culture co-winner of the Phoenix Award for Significant Editorial Achievement, [ 4 ] recognizing the journal's revitalization and transformation with a "marked emphasis on accessibility and broader relevance." [ 5 ] The journal has also been reviewed in the Times Literary Supplement .

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ Monaghan, Peter. " Cultural-Studies Journal Gets Revamped for a 'Different Intellectual Moment' ." The Chronicle of Higher Education (Washington, D.C.) May 13, 2012.

^ "Best New Journal | The Council of Editors of Learned Journals" .

The Council of Editors of Learned Journals . Archived from the original on November 2, 2011 . Retrieved January 11, 2012 .

^ "Best Special Issue | The Council of Editors of Learned Journals" .

The Council of Editors of Learned Journals . Archived from the original on July 30, 2014 . Retrieved January 11, 2012 .

^ "Phoenix Award for Significant Editorial Achievement; The Council of Editors of Learned Journals" .

The Council of Editors of Learned Journals . Retrieved September 3, 2014 .

^ "Winter Newsletter 2014; Public Culture " . Public Culture . Retrieved September 4, 2014 .

^ Danchev, Alex. "Social studies." Times Literary Supplement (London, England) November 3, 2006: 23-24.

Times Literary Supplement Historical Archive . Retrieved March 14, 2013.

External links [ edit ] Journal page at Duke University Press, including submissions information Public Books The Institute for Public Knowledge at New York University Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Public_Culture&oldid=1227091985 " Categories : Triannual journals English-language journals Academic journals established in 1988 Duke University Press academic journals Globalization-related journals Cultural journals Hidden categories: Articles with a promotional tone from May 2020 All articles with a promotional tone Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Triannual journals (infobox) This page was last edited on 3 June 2024, at 17:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Public Culture Add languages Add topic

