Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Special use 3 Monuments 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Alma mater 82 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego ГӀалгӀай 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Hulontalo Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Kurdî Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Scots Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் တႆး ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia School or university that a person has attended or graduated from For the type of song, see Alma mater (song) . For other uses, see Alma mater (disambiguation) .

The Alma Mater statue at Columbia University in New York City . Cast by Daniel Chester French (1903).

Alma mater (Latin: alma mater ; pl.

: almae matres ) is an allegorical Latin phrase meaning 'nourishing mother'. It personifies a school that a person has attended or graduated from.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The term is related to alumnus , literally meaning 'nursling', which describes a school graduate.

[ 4 ] In its earliest usage, alma mater was an honorific title for various mother goddesses , especially Ceres or Cybele .

[ 5 ] Later, in Catholicism , it became a title for Mary, mother of Jesus . By the early 17th century, the nursing mother became an allegory for universities. Used by many schools in Europe and North America, it has special association with the University of Bologna , whose motto Alma Mater Studiorum ("nurturing mother of studies") emphasizes its role in originating the modern university .

Several university campuses in North America have artistic representations of alma mater , depicted as a robed woman wearing a laurel wreath crown.

Etymology [ edit ] John Legate 's Alma Mater for the University of Cambridge , written in 1600 Although alma (nourishing) was a common epithet for Ceres , Cybele , Venus , and other mother goddesses, it was not frequently used in conjunction with mater in classical Latin.

[ 6 ] In the Oxford Latin Dictionary , the full phrase's origin is attributed to De rerum natura , in which Lucretius uses the term as an epithet for an unnamed earth goddess: Denique caelesti sumus omnes semine oriundi omnibus ille idem pater est, unde alma liquentis umoris guttas mater cum terra recepit (2.991–993) [ 7 ] We are all sprung from that celestial seed, all of us have same father, from whom earth, the nourishing mother, receives drops of liquid moisture After the fall of Rome , the term was used in Christian liturgy to describe Jesus' mother, Mary . " Alma Redemptoris Mater " is a well-known eleventh century antiphon devoted to Mary.

[ 6 ] The earliest documented use of the term to refer to a university is in 1600, when the University of Cambridge printer, John Legate , began using an emblem for the university press .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The first-known appearance of the device is on the title-page of a book by William Perkins , A Golden Chain , where the Latin phrase Alma Mater Cantabrigia ("nourishing mother Cambridge") is inscribed on a pedestal bearing a lactating woman wearing a mural crown .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] In reference works of English etymology, often the first university-related usage is cited as 1710, when an academic mother figure is mentioned in a remembrance of Henry More by Richard Ward.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Special use [ edit ] The University of Bologna , the world's oldest university in continuous operation , known in Latin as Alma Mater Studiorum (nourishing mother of studies).

Many historic European universities have adopted Alma Mater as part of the Latin translation of their official name. The Latin name of the University of Bologna , Alma Mater Studiorum (nourishing mother of studies), refers to its status as the oldest continuously operating university in the world . At other European universities, such as the Alma Mater Lipsiensis in Leipzig, Germany, or Alma Mater Jagiellonica , Poland, the title emphasizes historic ties to a founding city or dynasty.

The Alma Mater Europaea in Salzburg , Austria, an international university founded by the European Academy of Sciences and Arts in 2010, uses the term as its official name.

In the United States , the College of William & Mary in Williamsburg, Virginia , has been called the "Alma Mater of the Nation" because of its ties to the founding of the country.

[ 14 ] At Queen's University in Kingston, Ontario , and the University of British Columbia in Vancouver, British Columbia, the main student government is known as the Alma Mater Society.

Monuments [ edit ] Modern sculptures of Alma Mater are found on several North American university campuses. In 1901, a bronze statue of Alma Mater by Daniel Chester French was installed of steps of Columbia University 's Low Library . A similar sculpture, cast in 1919 by Mario Korbel , sits on the main entrance steps at the University of Havana .

[ 15 ] Later American tributes to alma mater include Lorado Taft's 1929 sculpture at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign and Cyrus Dallin's 1925 sculpture at the Mary Institute in 1925, commissioned by Washington University supporters.

An altarpiece mural in Yale University's Sterling Memorial Library , painted in 1932 by Eugene Savage , depicts the Alma Mater as a bearer of light and truth, standing in the midst of figures representing the arts and sciences.

Depictions of Alma Mater Alma Mater at the University of Havana Alma Mater by Lorado Taft (1929) at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign Alma Mater by Cyrus Dallin at Mary Institute and St. Louis Country Day School Alma Mater altarpiece mural by Eugene Savage at Yale University (1932) References [ edit ] ^ "alma" , Oxford Dictionaries. Retrieved October 11, 2018.

^ "Definition of 'Alma mater' " .

Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 3 April 2022 .

^ Ayto, John (2005).

Word Origins (2nd ed.). London: A&C Black.

ISBN 9781408101605 . Retrieved 18 May 2015 .

^ Cresswell, Julia (2010).

Oxford Dictionary of Word Origins . Oxford University Press. p. 12.

ISBN 978-0199547937 . Retrieved 18 May 2015 .

^ Shorter Oxford English Dictionary , 3rd edition ^ a b Sollors, Werner (1986).

Beyond Ethnicity: Consent and Descent in American Culture . Oxford University Press. p.

78 .

ISBN 9780198020721 .

^ Titus Lucretius Carus .

"Liber II" .

De rerum natura (in Latin) – via Wikisource .

^ Stokes, Henry Paine (1919).

Cambridge stationers, printers, bookbinders, &c . Cambridge: Bowes & Bowes. p. 12 . Retrieved 18 May 2015 .

^ Roberts, S. C.

(1921).

A History of the Cambridge University Press 1521–1921 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . Retrieved 18 May 2015 .

^ Stubbings, Frank H. (1995).

Bedders, Bulldogs and Bedells: A Cambridge Glossary (2nd ed.). p. 39.

^ Perkins, William (1600).

A Golden Chaine: Or, the Description of Theologie, containing the order and causes of salvation and damnation, according to God's word . Cambridge: University of Cambridge . Retrieved 18 May 2015 .

^ Harper, Douglas.

"Alma mater" .

Online Etymological Dictionary . Retrieved 18 May 2015 .

^ Ward, Richard (1710).

The Life of the Learned and Pious Dr. Henry More, Late Fellow of Christ's College in Cambridge . London: Joseph Downing. p. 148 . Retrieved 18 May 2015 .

^ "History & Traditions" . William & Mary.

^ Cremata Ferrán, Mario (20 February 2014).

"Dos rostros, dos estatuas habaneras" .

Opus Habana . Retrieved 21 January 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Alma mater at Wikimedia Commons The dictionary definition of alma mater at Wiktionary Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alma_mater&oldid=1305943636 " Categories : School terminology Latin words and phrases Academic terminology Hidden categories: CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 00:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alma mater 82 languages Add topic

