Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Applications 2 Principle of operation Toggle Principle of operation subsection 2.1 Impaction head 2.2 Neutralizer 2.3 DMA (Differential Mobility Analyzer) 2.4 CPC (Condensation particle counter) 2.5 Results 3 References Toggle the table of contents Scanning mobility particle sizer 2 languages Français Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia A scanning mobility particle sizer ( SMPS ) is an analytical instrument that measures the size and number concentration of aerosol particles with diameters from 2.5 nm to 1000 nm.

[ 1 ] They employ a continuous, fast-scanning technique to provide high-resolution measurements.

Applications [ edit ] The particles that are investigated can be of biological or chemical nature. The instrument can be used for air quality measurement indoors, vehicle exhaust, [ 2 ] research in bioaerosols , atmospheric studies, and toxicology testing.

Principle of operation [ edit ] The air to be analyzed is pumped through an ionizing source (or neutralizer) which will establish a known charge distribution. Then, exposure to an electric field in the DMA will isolate a certain particle diameter, which is a function of the voltage generating the field (a voltage value corresponding to a particle diameter value that passes through the DMA). Finally, these particles of the same diameter will be counted by an optical device (CPC).

[ 3 ] The air inlet to be analyzed can be equipped with an impaction head.

Impaction head [ edit ] An impaction head, or fractionator head, is a device that uses the principles of fluid mechanics to trap, by their inertia, the largest particles present in the air. The sampling inlet of the SMPS is thus protected from large dust and insects, the air that enters it contains only the fine particles to be quantified.

[ 4 ] These are usually called "PM10 inlet" or "PM2.5 inlet".

Neutralizer [ edit ] The air flow then passes through an ionizing source. The sampled air will be exposed to high concentrations of positive and negative ions, after a certain number of collisions the charge distribution will be stable and known. The neutralizer is also used to eliminate electrostatic charges from aerosol particles. The charge distribution from the neutralizer is a balanced charge distribution that follows Boltzmann's law.

[ 5 ] DMA (Differential Mobility Analyzer) [ edit ] The sample then enters a differential mobility analyzer. The air and aerosol (whose charge distribution is now balanced and known) are then introduced into an air flow channel. A central tubular electrode, and another concentric one, generate an electric field in this fluid path. In the channel, the particles are subjected to a uniform electric field and an air flow. The particles then move at a speed that depends on their electrical mobility. At a given voltage, only particles of a certain diameter will follow this channel until they exit; the smaller and larger will crash into the electrodes.

[ 6 ] CPC (Condensation particle counter) [ edit ] The air now contains only particles of a certain diameter. The flow is introduced into a CPC, a condensation particle counter , which measures the concentration of particles in an aerosol sample. The CPC works by using butanol vapor condensation on the particles present in the air sample. The particles are exposed to butanol vapor heated to 39 °C. The butanol vapor condenses on the particles, increasing their size and thus facilitating their optical detection. The particles are then exposed to a laser beam, and each particle scatters light. The peaks of scattered light intensity are continuously counted and expressed in particles/cm 3 .

Results [ edit ] The results obtained by this type of device therefore include the distribution of particle sizes in the air continuously. The DMA will generate voltage back-and-forth between its electrodes from 0 to 10,000 V, corresponding to a measurement range of 8 nm to 800 or 1000 nm, and the CPC will quantify each of these diameters.

References [ edit ] ^ Lev Solomonovich Ruzer; Naomi H. Harley (2013).

Aerosols Handbook: Measurement, Dosimetry, and Health Effects (Second ed.).

CRC Press . pp. 234–.

ISBN 978-1-4398-5519-5 . Retrieved 28 April 2013 .

^ Burtscher, H. (2005). "Physical characterization of particulate emissions from diesel engines: a review".

Journal of Aerosol Science .

36 (7): 896– 932.

Bibcode : 2005JAerS..36..896B .

doi : 10.1016/j.jaerosci.2004.12.001 .

ISSN 0021-8502 .

^ University of Manchester, " Scanning Mobility Particle Sizer (SMPS) ", http://www.cas.manchester.ac.uk , . (retrieved 21 december 2023.) ^ Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association, " On the techniques and standards of particulate matter sampling ", https://www.tandfonline.com . (retrieved 18 january 2024.) ^ Journal of chemical engineering of Japan, " Electrical neutralization of charged arerosol particles by bipolar ions ", https://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/ , Journal of chemical engineering of Japan. (retrieved 14 january 2024.) ^ University of Manchester, " Scanning Mobility Particle Sizer (SMPS) ", http://www.cas.manchester.ac.uk , . (retrieved 21 december 2023.) v t e Aerosol terminology Aerosol types Bioaerosol Indoor Cloud Dust Mist Fog Fume Haze Nanoparticle Particle Particulates Smog Smoke Spray Aerosol terms Aerosol impaction Agglomerate Primary particle Flocculate Primary aerosol Secondary aerosol Deposition Dispersity Monodisperse Polydisperse Aerosol measurement Particle counters Condensation particle counter Laser particle counter Optical particle counter Particle sizers Scanning electrical mobility spectrometer Diffusion battery Inertial classifier Time-of-flight Time-of-flight mass spectrometer Time-of-flight particle sizer Cascade impactors Low pressure impactor Microorifice imapctor Andersen impactor Combination Scanning mobility particle sizer Microscopy Optical microscope Scanning electron microscope Transmission electron microscope Category Aerosol measurement Commons Aerosol measurement Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Scanning_mobility_particle_sizer&oldid=1253636917 " Categories : Spectrometers Electronic test equipment Signal processing Measuring instruments Laboratory equipment Aerosols Aerosol measurement This page was last edited on 27 October 2024, at 02:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Scanning mobility particle sizer 2 languages Add topic

