Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Philosophical work Toggle Philosophical work subsection 3.1 Philosophy of mind 3.2 Philosophy of language 3.2.1 Background 3.2.2 Two-dimensional semantics 3.2.3 Philosophy of verbal disputes 3.3 Technology and virtual reality 4 Personal life 5 Bibliography 6 Notes 7 External links Toggle the table of contents David Chalmers 32 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Australian philosopher and cognitive scientist For other people with the same name, see David Chalmers (disambiguation) .

David Chalmers Chalmers in 2021 Born David John Chalmers ( 1966-04-20 ) 20 April 1966 (age 59) Sydney , New South Wales , Australia Academic background Alma mater University of Adelaide ( BSc , 1986) University of Oxford (1987–1988) Indiana University Bloomington ( PhD , 1993) Thesis Toward a Theory of Consciousness (1993) Doctoral advisor Douglas Hofstadter Academic work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School or tradition Analytic Institutions New York University Main interests Philosophy of mind Consciousness Philosophy of language Notable ideas Hard problem of consciousness , extended mind , two-dimensional semantics , naturalistic dualism , philosophical zombie , further facts David John Chalmers ( / ˈ tʃ ɑː m ər z / ; [ 1 ] born 20 April 1966) [ 2 ] is an Australian philosopher and cognitive scientist , specializing in philosophy of mind and philosophy of language . He is a professor of philosophy and neural science at New York University (NYU), as well as co-director of NYU's Center for Mind, Brain and Consciousness (along with Ned Block ).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] In 2006, he was elected a fellow of the Australian Academy of the Humanities .

[ 5 ] In 2013, he was elected as a fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences .

[ 6 ] Chalmers is best known for formulating the hard problem of consciousness , and for popularizing the philosophical zombie thought experiment.

Chalmers and David Bourget co-founded PhilPapers ; a database of journal articles for philosophers.

Early life and education [ edit ] David Chalmers was born in Sydney , New South Wales , and subsequently grew up in Adelaide , South Australia , where he attended Unley High School .

[ 7 ] As a child, he experienced synesthesia .

[ 7 ] He began coding and playing computer games at the age of 10 on a PDP-10 at a medical center.

[ 8 ] He also performed exceptionally in mathematics , and secured a bronze medal in the International Mathematical Olympiad .

[ 7 ] When Chalmers was 13, he read Douglas Hofstadter 's 1979 book Gödel, Escher, Bach , which awakened an interest in philosophy.

[ 9 ] Chalmers received his undergraduate degree in pure mathematics from the University of Adelaide .

[ 10 ] After graduating, Chalmers spent six months reading philosophy books while hitchhiking across Europe, [ 11 ] before continuing his studies at the University of Oxford , [ 10 ] where he was a Rhodes Scholar but eventually withdrew from the course.

[ 12 ] In 1993, Chalmers received his PhD in philosophy and cognitive science from Indiana University Bloomington under Douglas Hofstadter , [ 13 ] writing a doctoral thesis entitled Toward a Theory of Consciousness .

[ 12 ] He was a postdoctoral fellow in the Philosophy-Neuroscience-Psychology program directed by Andy Clark at Washington University in St. Louis from 1993 to 1995.

[ 10 ] [ 14 ] Career [ edit ] In 1994, Chalmers presented a lecture at the inaugural Toward a Science of Consciousness conference.

[ 13 ] According to the Chronicle of Higher Education , this "lecture established Chalmers as a thinker to be reckoned with and goosed a nascent field into greater prominence." [ 13 ] He went on to co-organize the conference (renamed "The Science of Consciousness") for some years with Stuart Hameroff , but stepped away when he felt it became too divergent from mainstream science.

[ 13 ] Chalmers is a founding member of the Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness and one of its past presidents.

[ 15 ] Having established his reputation, Chalmers received his first professorship at UC Santa Cruz , from August 1995 to December 1998. In 1996 he published the widely cited book The Conscious Mind . Chalmers was subsequently appointed Professor of Philosophy (1999–2004) and then Director of the Center for Consciousness Studies (2002–2004) at the University of Arizona .

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] In 2004, Chalmers returned to Australia, encouraged by an ARC Federation Fellowship , becoming professor of philosophy and director of the Center for Consciousness at the Australian National University .

[ 18 ] Chalmers accepted a part-time professorship at the philosophy department of New York University in 2009, becoming a full-time professor in 2014.

[ 19 ] In 2013, Chalmers was elected a Fellow of the American Academy of Arts & Sciences .

[ 6 ] He is an editor on topics in the philosophy of mind for the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

[ 20 ] In May 2018, it was announced that he would serve on the jury for the Berggruen Prize .

[ 21 ] In 2023, Chalmers won a bet—made in 1998, for a case of wine—with neuroscientist Christof Koch that the neural underpinnings for consciousness would not be resolved by the year 2023, while Koch had bet that they would.

[ 22 ] Philosophical work [ edit ] Philosophy of mind [ edit ] Chalmers on stage for an Alan Turing Year event at De La Salle University , Manila, 27 March 2012 Chalmers is best known for formulating what he calls the " hard problem of consciousness ," in both his 1995 paper "Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness" and his 1996 book The Conscious Mind . He makes a distinction between "easy" problems of consciousness, such as explaining object discrimination or verbal reports, and the single hard problem, which could be stated "why does the feeling which accompanies awareness of sensory information exist at all?" The essential difference between the ( cognitive ) easy problems and the ( phenomenal ) hard problem is that the former are at least theoretically answerable via the dominant strategy in the philosophy of mind: physicalism . Chalmers argues for an " explanatory gap " from the objective to the subjective, and criticizes physicalist explanations of mental experience, making him a dualist . Chalmers characterizes his view as " naturalistic dualism": naturalistic because he believes mental states supervene "naturally" on physical systems (such as brains); dualist because he believes mental states are ontologically distinct from and not reducible to physical systems. He has also characterized his view by more traditional formulations such as property dualism .

[ 23 ] In support of this, Chalmers is famous for his commitment to the logical (though, not natural) possibility of philosophical zombies .

[ 24 ] These zombies are complete physical duplicates of human beings, lacking only qualitative experience. Chalmers argues that since such zombies are conceivable to us, they must therefore be logically possible. Since they are logically possible, then qualia and sentience are not fully explained by physical properties alone; the facts about them are further facts . Instead, Chalmers argues that consciousness is a fundamental property ontologically autonomous of any known (or even possible) physical properties, [ 25 ] and that there may be lawlike rules which he terms "psychophysical laws" that determine which physical systems are associated with which types of qualia.  He further speculates that all information -bearing systems may be conscious, leading him to entertain the possibility of conscious thermostats and a qualified panpsychism he calls panprotopsychism . Chalmers maintains a formal agnosticism on the issue, even conceding that the viability of panpsychism places him at odds with the majority of his contemporaries. According to Chalmers, his arguments are similar to a line of thought that goes back to Leibniz 's 1714 "mill" argument ; the first substantial use of philosophical "zombie" terminology may be Robert Kirk 's 1974 "Zombies vs. Materialists".

[ 26 ] After the publication of Chalmers's landmark paper, more than twenty papers in response were published in the Journal of Consciousness Studies .  These papers (by Daniel Dennett , Colin McGinn , Francisco Varela , Francis Crick , and Roger Penrose , among others) were collected and published in the book Explaining Consciousness: The Hard Problem .

[ 27 ] John Searle critiqued Chalmers's views in The New York Review of Books .

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] With Andy Clark , Chalmers has written " The Extended Mind ", an article about the borders of the mind.

[ 30 ] The "fading qualia" (left) and the "dancing qualia" (right) are two thought experiments about consciousness and brain replacement. Chalmers argues that both are contradicted by the lack of reaction of the subject to changing perception, and are thus impossible in practice. He concludes that the equivalent silicon brain will have the same perceptions as the biological brain.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] According to Chalmers, systems that have the same functional organization "at a fine enough grain" (that are "functionally isomorphic ") will have "qualitatively identical conscious experiences". In 1995, he proposed the reductio ad absurdum "fading qualia" thought experiment . It involves progressively replacing each neuron of a brain with a functional equivalent, for example implemented on a silicon chip . Since each substitute neuron performs the same function as the original, the subject would not notice any change. But, Chalmers argues, if qualia (for example, the perceived color of objects) were to fade or disappear, the brain's holder could notice the difference, which would alter the information processing in the brain, leading to a contradiction. He concludes that such fading qualia are impossible in practice, and that after each neuron is replaced, the resulting functionally isomorphic robotic brain would be as conscious as the original biological one. In addition, Chalmers proposed a similar thought experiment, "dancing qualia", which concludes that a robotic brain that is functionally isomorphic to a biological one would not only be as conscious, but would also have the same conscious experiences (e.g., the same perception of color when seeing an object).

[ 32 ] [ 31 ] In 2023, he analyzed whether large language models could be conscious, and suggested that they were probably not conscious, but could become serious candidates for consciousness within a decade.

[ 33 ] Philosophy of language [ edit ] Chalmers has published works on the "theory of reference" concerning how words secure their referents. He, together with others such as Frank Jackson , played a major role in developing two-dimensional semantics .

[ 34 ] Background [ edit ] Before Saul Kripke delivered his famous lecture series Naming and Necessity in 1970, the descriptivism advocated by Gottlob Frege and Bertrand Russell was the orthodoxy. Descriptivism suggests that a name is an abbreviation of a description, which is a set of properties. This name secures its reference by a process of properties fitting: whichever object fits the description most, is the referent of the name. Therefore, the description provides the sense of the name, and it is through this sense that the reference of the name is determined.

[ 35 ] However, as Kripke argued in Naming and Necessity , a name does not secure its reference via any process of description fitting. Rather, a name determines its reference via a historical-causal link tracing back to the process of naming. And thus, Kripke thinks that a name does not have a sense, or, at least, does not have a sense which is rich enough to play the reference-determining role. Moreover, a name, in Kripke's view, is a rigid designator , which refers to the same object in all possible worlds . Following this line of thought, Kripke suggests that any scientific identity statement such as "Water is H 2 O" is also a necessary statement, i.e. true in all possible worlds. Kripke thinks that this is a phenomenon that descriptivism cannot explain.

[ 36 ] And, as also proposed by Hilary Putnam and Kripke himself, Kripke's view on names can also be applied to the reference of natural kind terms. The kind of theory of reference that is advocated by Kripke and Putnam is called the direct reference theory .

[ 37 ] Two-dimensional semantics [ edit ] Chalmers disagrees with Kripke, and direct reference theorists in general. He thinks that there are two kinds of intension of a natural kind term, a stance called two-dimensionalism . For example, the statement "Water is H 2 O" expresses two distinct propositions, often referred to as a primary intension and a secondary intension , which together form its meaning.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] The primary intension of a word or sentence is its sense , i.e., is the idea or method by which we find its referent. The primary intension of "water" might be a description, such as "the substance with water-like properties". The entity identified by this intension could vary in different hypothetical worlds. In the twin Earth thought experiment , for example, inhabitants might use "water" to mean their equivalent of water, even if its chemical composition is not H 2 O. Thus, for that world, "water" does not refer to H 2 O.

[ 37 ] The secondary intension of "water" is whatever "water" refers to in this world. When considered according to its secondary intension, water means H 2 O in every world. Through this concept, Chalmers provides a way to explain how reference is determined by distinguishing between epistemic possibilities (primary intension) and metaphysical necessities (secondary intension), ensuring that the referent (H 2 O) is uniquely identified across all metaphysically possible worlds.

[ 37 ] Philosophy of verbal disputes [ edit ] In some more recent work, Chalmers has concentrated on verbal disputes.

[ 39 ] He argues that a dispute is best characterized as "verbal" when it concerns some sentence S which contains a term T such that (i) the parties to the dispute disagree over the meaning of T, and (ii) the dispute arises solely because of this disagreement. In the same work, Chalmers proposes certain procedures for the resolution of verbal disputes. One of these he calls the "elimination method", which involves eliminating the contentious term and observing whether any dispute remains.

Technology and virtual reality [ edit ] Chalmers addressed the issue of virtual and non-virtual worlds in his 2022 book Reality+ . While Chalmers recognises that virtual reality is not the same as non-virtual reality, he does not consider virtual reality to be an illusion, but rather a "genuine reality" in its own right.

[ 40 ] Chalmers sees virtual reality as potentially offering as meaningful a life as non-virtual reality, [ 41 ] and argues that we could already be inhabitants of a simulation without knowing it.

[ 42 ] Chalmers proposes that computers are forming a form of "exo-cortex", where a part of human cognition is 'outsourced' to corporations such as Apple and Google .

[ 11 ] Chalmers was featured in the 2012 documentary film entitled The Singularity by filmmaker Doug Wolens , which focuses on the theory proposed by techno-futurist Ray Kurzweil , of that "point in time when computer intelligence exceeds human intelligence." [ 43 ] [ 44 ] He was a featured philosopher in the 2020 Daily Nous series on GPT-3 , which he described as "one of the most interesting and important AI systems ever produced." [ 45 ] Personal life [ edit ] As of 2012 [update] Chalmers was the lead singer of the Zombie Blues band, which performed at the music festival Qualia Fest in 2012 in New York.

[ 46 ] Regarding religion, Chalmers said in 2011: "I have no religious views myself and no spiritual views, except watered-down humanistic spiritual views. And consciousness is just a fact of life. It's a natural fact of life".

[ 47 ] Bibliography [ edit ] The Conscious Mind : In Search of a Fundamental Theory (1996). Oxford University Press. hardcover: ISBN 0-19-511789-1 , paperback: ISBN 0-19-510553-2 Toward a Science of Consciousness III: The Third Tucson Discussions and Debates (1999). Stuart R. Hameroff, Alfred W. Kaszniak and David J. Chalmers (Editors). The MIT Press.

ISBN 0-262-58181-7 Philosophy of Mind: Classical and Contemporary Readings (2002). (Editor). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-514581-X or ISBN 0-19-514580-1 The Character of Consciousness (2010). Oxford University Press. hardcover: ISBN 0-19-531110-8 , paperback: ISBN 0-19-531111-6 Constructing the World (2012). Oxford University Press. hardcover: ISBN 978-0-19-960857-7 , paperback: ISBN 978-0199608584 Reality+: Virtual Worlds and the Problems of Philosophy (2022).

W. W. Norton & Company . Hardcover: ISBN 978-0-393-63580-5 Notes [ edit ] ^ "Chalmers" .

Dictionary.com Unabridged (Online). n.d.

^ "The Thinking Ape: The Enigma of Human Consciousness" , via YouTube ^ "David Chalmers" .

philosophy.fas.nyu.edu . Department of Philosophy, New York University. Archived from the original on 17 May 2017 . Retrieved 5 May 2011 .

^ "People" .

wp.nyu.edu . Center for Mind, Brain and Consciousness, New York University . Retrieved 11 December 2016 .

^ "Professor David Chalmers" .

humanities.org.au . Australian Academy of the Humanities . Retrieved 19 January 2022 .

^ a b "David Chalmers receives top Chancellor's Award" . Australian National University. 17 January 2014 . Retrieved 2 October 2018 .

^ a b c Keane, Daniel (6 July 2017).

"Philosopher David Chalmers on consciousness, the hard problem and the nature of reality" . Australia: ABC News . Retrieved 28 September 2018 .

^ Chalmers, David (2022).

Reality+: Virtual Worlds and the Problems of Philosophy . New York: W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 9780393635805 .

^ "What Is It Like to Be a Philosopher?" .

What Is It Like to Be a Philosopher?

. Retrieved 3 May 2022 .

^ a b c Lovett, Christopher (2003).

"Column: Interview with David Chalmers" (PDF) .

Cognitive Science Online .

1 (1) . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ a b Thornhill, John (11 February 2022).

"David Chalmers: 'We are the gods of the virtual worlds we create' " .

Financial Times . London . Retrieved 3 May 2022 .

^ a b "David Chalmers" .

National Portrait Gallery . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ a b c d Bartlett, Tom (6 June 2018).

"Is This the World's Most Bizarre Scholarly Meeting?" .

The Chronicle of Higher Education . Retrieved 19 June 2018 .

^ Harryman, William (2 March 2014).

"Integral Options Cafe: Interview: David Chalmers and Andy Clark (NewPhilosopher Magazine)" .

Integral Options Cafe . Retrieved 6 October 2024 .

^ "David Chalmers" .

Edge.org . Retrieved 30 September 2018 .

^ "David Chalmers" .

Closer To Truth . Retrieved 6 October 2024 .

^ "CV – David Chalmers" . Retrieved 6 October 2024 .

^ "Professor David Chalmers" .

Australian National University . Retrieved 6 October 2024 .

^ Jackson, Sarah (27 March 2017).

"Are We Living in the Matrix?" . Washington Square News . Retrieved 9 October 2018 .

^ "Editorial Board (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)" .

plato.stanford.edu . Retrieved 10 December 2016 .

^ "The Berggruen Prize | Philosophy & Culture | Berggruen" .

philosophyandculture.berggruen.org . Archived from the original on 9 October 2018 . Retrieved 1 June 2018 .

^ "Neuroscientist loses a 25-year bet on consciousness — to a philosopher" .

Big Think . 12 July 2023.

^ Chalmers, David John (1997).

The conscious mind: in search of a fundamental theory . Philosophy of mind series (1. issued as an Oxford University Press paperback ed.). New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-511789-9 .

^ Burkeman, Oliver (21 January 2015).

"Why can't the world's greatest minds solve the mystery of consciousness?" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 7 January 2017 .

^ Chalmers, D. J. (1 March 1995).

"Facing up to the problem of consciousness" .

Journal of Consciousness Studies .

2 (3): 200– 219 . Retrieved 10 October 2018 .

In physics, it occasionally happens that an entity has to be taken as fundamental. Fundamental entities are not explained in terms of anything simpler. Instead, one takes them as basic, and gives a theory of how they relate to everything else in the world.

^ David Chalmers.

"Zombies on the web" .

consc.net . Retrieved 7 January 2017 .

As far as I know, the first paper in the philosophical literature to talk at length about zombies under that name was Robert Kirk's "Zombies vs. Materialists" in Mind in 1974, although Keith Campbell's 1970 book Body and Mind talks about an "imitation-man" which is much the same thing, and the idea arguably goes back to Leibniz's "mill" argument.

^ Shear, John, ed. (June 1996).

Explaining Consciousness: The Hard Problem . MIT Press.

ISBN 978-0-262-69221-2 .

^ Searle, John (6 March 1997).

"Consciousness & the Philosophers" .

The New York Review of Books . Retrieved 11 December 2019 .

^ Chalmers, David; Searle, John (15 May 1997).

" 'Consciousness & the Philosophers': An Exchange" .

The New York Review of Books . Retrieved 11 December 2019 .

^ consc.net Analysis 58:10-23, 1998. Reprinted in The Philosopher's Annual, 1998.

^ a b "An Introduction to the Problems of AI Consciousness" .

The Gradient . 30 September 2023 . Retrieved 5 October 2024 .

^ a b Chalmers, David (1995).

"Absent Qualia, Fading Qualia, Dancing Qualia" .

Conscious Experience .

^ Chalmers, David (9 August 2023).

"Could a Large Language Model Be Conscious?" .

^ "Two-Dimensional Semantics" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . 2021.

^ Speaks, Jeff (5 April 2005).

"Kripke's attack on descriptivism" .

University of Notre Dame . Retrieved 6 October 2024 .

^ Roberts, Sam (21 September 2022).

"Saul Kripke, Philosopher Who Found Truths in Semantics, Dies at 81" .

The New York Times .

^ a b c d Chalmers, David (2006).

"Two-Dimensional Semantics" .

The Oxford Handbook to the Philosophy of Language . Oxford University Press.

^ for a fuller explanation see Chalmers, David.

The Conscious Mind . Oxford UP: 1996. Chapter 2, section 4.

^ consc.net Philosophical Review, 120:4, 2011.

^ Wilson, Kit.

"Reality+ by David J Chalmers review – is our universe just a computer simulation?" .

The Times .

ISSN 0140-0460 . Retrieved 4 May 2022 .

^ Marchese, David (13 December 2021).

"Can We Have a Meaningful Life in a Virtual World?" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 4 May 2022 .

^ "Reality+ by David J Chalmers review – are we living in a simulation?" .

The Guardian . 19 January 2022 . Retrieved 4 May 2022 .

^ "The Singularity Film" . Retrieved 31 July 2020 .

^ Pevere, Geoff (6 June 2013).

"What happens when our machines get smarter than we are? (No, don't ask Siri)" .

The Globe and Mail . Retrieved 31 July 2020 .

^ Weinberg, Justin, ed. (30 July 2020).

"GPT-3 and General Intelligence" .

Daily Nous . Philosophers on GPT-3 (updated with replies by GPT-3) . Retrieved 31 July 2020 .

^ Kaminer, Ariel (9 December 2012).

"Where Theory and Research Meet to Jam About the Mind" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2 October 2018 .

^ "David Chalmers on the Big Conundrum: Consciousness" .

ABC listen . 10 August 2003 . Retrieved 27 October 2024 .

External links [ edit ] David Chalmers at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Official website An in-depth autobiographical interview with David Chalmers "The Singularity" a documentary film featuring Chalmers The Moscow Center for Consciousness Studies video interview with David Chalmers David Chalmers at TED v t e Analytic philosophy Related articles Areas of focus Metaphysics Epistemology Language Mathematics Science Turns Aretaic Historical Linguistic Performative Logic Classical Deviant Mathematical Non-classical Paraconsistent Philosophical Predicate Theories Anti-realism Causal theory of reference Descriptivism Emotivism Feminism Functionalism Logical atomism Logical positivism Marxism Neurophilosophy Ordinary language Pragmatism Quietism Scientific structuralism Sense data Analytic theology Analytical Thomism Concepts Analysis ( paradox of analysis ) Analytic–synthetic distinction Counterfactual Natural kind Reflective equilibrium Supervenience Modality Actualism Necessity Possibility Possible world Realism Rigid designator Philosophers Noam Chomsky Keith Donnellan Gottlob Frege Edmund Gettier Jaakko Hintikka Giuseppe Peano Russ Shafer-Landau Ernest Sosa Barry Stroud Australian realism David Malet Armstrong David Chalmers J. L. Mackie Peter Singer J. J. C. Smart Cambridge Arif Ahmed Charlie Broad Casimir Lewy Norman Malcolm G. E. Moore Graham Priest Bertrand Russell Frank P. Ramsey Ludwig Wittgenstein Oxford G. E. M. Anscombe J. L. Austin Michael Dummett Antony Flew Philippa Foot Peter Geach Paul Grice R. M. Hare Alasdair MacIntyre Derek Parfit Gilbert Ryle John Searle P. F. Strawson Richard Swinburne Charles Taylor Bernard Williams Timothy Williamson Logical positivists A. J. Ayer Ernest Nagel Berlin Circle Carl Gustav Hempel Hans Reichenbach Vienna Circle Rudolf Carnap Hans Hahn Otto Neurath Moritz Schlick Friedrich Waismann Harvard Roderick Chisholm Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett Nelson Goodman Christine Korsgaard Thomas Nagel Robert Nozick Hilary Putnam W. V. O. Quine John Rawls Notre Dame Robert Audi Peter van Inwagen Pittsburgh School Robert Brandom Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Adolf Grünbaum John McDowell Ruth Millikan Alexander Pruss Nicholas Rescher Wilfrid Sellars Bas van Fraassen Pragmatism Susan Haack Nicholas Rescher Morton White Princeton Alonzo Church Jerry Fodor Kurt Gödel David Lewis Jaegwon Kim Saul Kripke Richard Rorty Nathan Salmon Michael Walzer Quietism James F. Conant Alice Crary Cora Diamond Reformed Alvin Plantinga William Lane Craig Nicholas Wolterstorff Science Paul Feyerabend Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Karl Popper Stanford School Nancy Cartwright John Dupré Peter Galison Ian Hacking Patrick Suppes Lwow–Warsaw Jan Łukasiewicz Alfred Tarski Category v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force v t e Consciousness Figures Philosophy Alfred North Whitehead Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Bertrand Russell Brian O'Shaughnessy Charles Augustus Strong Christopher Peacocke Colin McGinn Daniel Dennett David Chalmers David Hume David Papineau David Pearce Donald Davidson Douglas Hofstadter Edmund Husserl Frank Jackson Fred Dretske Galen Strawson George Berkeley George Henry Lewes Georges Rey Gottfried Leibniz Immanuel Kant John Eccles John Locke John Polkinghorne John Searle Joseph Levine Karl Popper Keith Frankish Kenneth M. Sayre Maurice Merleau-Ponty Max Velmans Michael Tye Martin Heidegger Ned Block Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Philip Goff René Descartes Thomas Metzinger Thomas Nagel William Kingdon Clifford William Lycan William Seager Psychology Carl Gustav Jung Donald D. Hoffman Franz Brentano Gustav Fechner Julian Jaynes Kurt Koffka Max Wertheimer Sigmund Freud Wilhelm Wundt William James Wolfgang Köhler Neuroscience Anil Seth Antonio Damasio Benjamin Libet Bernard Baars Christof Koch Francis Crick Francisco Varela Gerald Edelman Giulio Tononi Karl Pribram Lawrence Weiskrantz Michael Gazzaniga Michael Graziano Patrick Wilken Roger Sperry Stanislas Dehaene Steven Laureys Stuart Hameroff Wolf Singer Others Annaka Harris David Bohm Eugene Wigner Erwin Schrödinger Marvin Minsky Max Planck Roger Penrose Susan Blackmore Victor J. Stenger Wolfgang Pauli Theories Philosophy of mind Anomalous monism Computationalism Double-aspect theory Eliminative materialism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Idealism Interactionism Materialism Mind–body dualism Monism Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Panpsychism Parallelism Physicalism Property dualism Reflexive monism Revisionary materialism Solipsism Type physicalism (reductive materialism, identity theory) Science Attention schema theory Consciousness causes collapse Dynamic core hypothesis Damasio's theory of consciousness Electromagnetic theories of consciousness Global workspace theory Higher-order theories of consciousness Holonomic brain theory Integrated information theory Lamme's recurrent feedback hypothesis Multiple drafts model Orchestrated objective reduction Topics Agnosia Altered state of consciousness Animal consciousness Artificial consciousness Attention Attentional control Awareness Binding problem Binocular rivalry Blindsight Brain Cartesian theater Consciousness after death Disorders of consciousness Divided consciousness Dual consciousness (split-brain) Experience Explanatory gap Free will Flash suppression Hallucination Hard problem of consciousness Heterophenomenology Higher consciousness Illusion Introspection illusion Knowledge argument Locked-in syndrome Mind Mind–body problem Minimally conscious state Neural correlates of consciousness Neurophenomenology Ontology Phenomenology Philosophical zombie Philosophy of mind Primary consciousness Problem of other minds Qualia Quantum mind Reentry Sakshi Purusha Secondary consciousness Sentience Sentientism Sociology of human consciousness Soul Stream of consciousness Subconscious Subjective character of experience Subjectivity and objectivity Unconscious mind Unconsciousness Upanishads Visual masking Consciousness causes collapse Yogachara Works A Universe of Consciousness Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness Consciousness and Cognition Consciousness Explained Cosmic Consciousness How the Self Controls Its Brain Journal of Consciousness Studies Online Consciousness Conference Psyche The Astonishing Hypothesis The Conscious Mind The Emperor's New Mind The Science of Consciousness Understanding Consciousness " What Is It Like to Be a Bat?

" Wider than the Sky Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH PhilPeople MathSciNet Artists MusicBrainz People Trove DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=David_Chalmers&oldid=1305685631 " Categories : 1966 births 20th-century Australian philosophers 21st-century Australian philosophers Academic staff of the Australian National University Alumni of Lincoln College, Oxford Analytic philosophers Australian Rhodes Scholars Consciousness researchers and theorists Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Fellows of the Australian Academy of the Humanities Indiana University Bloomington alumni International Mathematical Olympiad participants Living people New York University faculty Australian philosophers of language Australian philosophers of mind Philosophers of technology Australian philosophy academics Quantum mind University of Adelaide alumni Washington University in St. Louis fellows Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from December 2022 Articles with hCards Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012 All articles containing potentially dated statements Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 13:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents David Chalmers 32 languages Add topic

