Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Ordination and further education 3 Priestly life Toggle Priestly life subsection 3.1 Auxiliary Bishop of New York 3.2 Bishop of Rochester 3.3 Ecumenical efforts 4 Media career Toggle Media career subsection 4.1 Radio 4.2 Television 4.3 International cassette tape ministry 4.4 Evangelization 5 Falling-out with Cardinal Spellman 6 Later years 7 Death and legacy 8 Cause for canonization Toggle Cause for canonization subsection 8.1 Transfer of remains 8.2 Miracle recognized for beatification 8.3 Postponement of beatification 9 Selected bibliography 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Fulton J. Sheen 24 languages Čeština Deutsch Español Français Gaeilge 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latina Magyar മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American Catholic bishop, televangelist, and venerable "The Catholic Hour" redirects here. For the TV series, see The Catholic Hour (TV series) .

Venerable Fulton J. Sheen TOCarm Titular Archbishop of Newport Bishop Emeritus of Rochester Sheen on the set of his show Life Is Worth Living Church Catholic Church See Rochester Appointed October 21, 1966 Term ended October 6, 1969 Predecessor James Edward Kearney Successor Joseph Lloyd Hogan Other post(s) Titular Archbishop of Neoportus (Latin: Newport, Wales ; 1969–1979) Previous post(s) Auxiliary Bishop of New York (1951–1966) Titular Bishop of Caesariana (1951–1966) Orders Ordination September 20, 1919 by Edmund M. Dunne Consecration June 11, 1951 by Adeodato Giovanni Piazza Personal details Born Peter John Sheen ( 1895-05-08 ) May 8, 1895 [ 1 ] El Paso, Illinois , U.S.

[ 1 ] Died December 9, 1979 (1979-12-09) (aged 84) New York City , U.S.

Buried St. Patrick's Cathedral , New York City (1979–2019) St. Mary's Cathedral , Peoria, Illinois (since 2019) Nationality American Occupation Catholic bishop evangelist professor Education St. Viator College ( BA , MA ) St. Paul Seminary Catholic University of America ( JCB ) Catholic University of Leuven ( PhD ) Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas ( STD ) Motto Da per matrem me venire (English: "Grant that I may come [to You] through the mother [Mary]") Signature Coat of arms Sainthood Shrines Tomb (St. Mary's Cathedral, Peoria, Illinois) Birthplace museum in El Paso, Illinois Fulton Sheen Museum, Peoria Ordination history History Priestly ordination Ordained by Edmund M. Dunne Date September 20, 1919 Episcopal consecration Principal consecrator Adeodato Giovanni Piazza Co-consecrators Martin John O'Connor Leone Giovanni Battista Nigris Date June 11, 1951 Episcopal succession Bishops consecrated by Fulton J. Sheen as principal consecrator Joseph Brendan Houlihan [ it ] November 20, 1960 Styles of Fulton J. Sheen Reference style The Most Reverend Spoken style Your Excellency Religious style Your Excellency Posthumous style Venerable Fulton John Sheen (born Peter John Sheen ; May 8, 1895 – December 9, 1979) was an American Catholic prelate who served as Bishop of Rochester from 1966 to 1969. He was known for his preaching, especially on television and radio.

Ordained a priest of the Diocese of Peoria in Illinois, in 1919, [ 1 ] Sheen quickly became a renowned theologian, earning the Cardinal Mercier Prize for International Philosophy in 1923. He went on to teach theology and philosophy at the Catholic University of America in Washington, D.C. and served as a parish priest before he was appointed an auxiliary bishop for the Archdiocese of New York in 1951. He held this position until 1966 when he was made Bishop of Rochester . He resigned in 1969 as his 75th birthday approached and was made archbishop of the titular see of Newport, Wales .

[ 2 ] For 20 years as "Father Sheen", later monsignor , he hosted the night-time radio program The Catholic Hour on NBC (1930–1950) before he moved to television and presented Life Is Worth Living (1952–1957). Sheen's final presenting role was on the syndicated The Fulton Sheen Program (1961–1968) with a format that was very similar to that of the earlier Life Is Worth Living show. For that work, Sheen twice won an Emmy Award for Most Outstanding Television Personality, and was featured on the cover of Time magazine .

[ 3 ] Starting in 2009, his shows were being re-broadcast on the EWTN and the Trinity Broadcasting Network 's Church Channel cable networks.

[ 4 ] His contribution to televised preaching resulted in Sheen often being called one of the first televangelists .

[ 5 ] The cause for his canonization was officially opened in 2002. In June 2012, Pope Benedict XVI officially recognized a decree from the Congregation for the Causes of Saints stating that he lived a life of " heroic virtues ," a major step towards beatification , and he is now referred to as venerable .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] On July 5, 2019, Pope Francis approved a reputed miracle that occurred through the intercession of Sheen, clearing the way for his beatification.

[ 8 ] Sheen was scheduled to be beatified in Peoria on December 21, 2019, but this was postponed after Bishop Salvatore Matano of Rochester expressed concern that Sheen's alleged assignment of a priest who had been the subject of a 1963 sexual misconduct case might be cited unfavorably in a forthcoming report from the New York Attorney General . The Diocese of Peoria countered that the priest had been assigned not by Sheen but by his successor, and that Sheen had been "exonerated" following thorough examination of the matter, having "never put children in harm's way." [ 9 ] In May 2025 its bishop, Louis Tylka , said he would urge newly-elected Pope Leo XIV , who like Sheen was born in Illinois, to complete the process.

[ 10 ] Early life [ edit ] Fulton Sheen was born on May 8, 1895, in El Paso, Illinois , the oldest of four sons of Newton and Delia Sheen. His parents were of Irish descent, and their own parents were from Croghan , County Roscommon, Connacht . He was known as "Fulton", his mother's maiden name, but he was baptized as "Peter John Sheen".

[ 1 ] [ 11 ] As an infant, Sheen contracted tuberculosis .

[ 12 ] After the family had moved to nearby Peoria, Illinois , Sheen's first role in the Catholic Church was as an altar boy at Cathedral of Saint Mary of the Immaculate Conception in Peoria.

[ 1 ] [ 11 ] Sheen graduated in 1913 from high school at Spalding Institute in Peoria with valedictorian honors.  He then entered St. Viator College in Bourbonnais, Illinois. Deciding to become a priest, he started his studies at Saint Paul Seminary in St. Paul, Minnesota.

Ordination and further education [ edit ] Sheen was ordained a priest for the Diocese of Peoria at the Cathedral of Saint Mary in Peoria on September 20, 1919 by Bishop Edmund Dunne .

[ 1 ] After his 1919 ordination, Sheen continued his studies at the Catholic University of America in Washington, D.C..

[ 11 ] [ 13 ] He celebrated his first Christmas mass at St. Mark Parish in Peoria.

[ 14 ] His youthful appearance was still evident on one occasion when a local priest, unaware of his identity, asked Sheen to assist as altar boy during the celebration of the mass.

[ 11 ] After finishing his studies at Catholic University of America, he entered the Catholic University of Leuven in Belgium , earning a Doctor of Philosophy degree in 1923.

[ 13 ] [ 15 ] His doctoral thesis was titled "The Spirit of Contemporary Philosophy and the Finite God".

[ 16 ] At Leuven , he became the first American to win the Cardinal Mercier Prize for the best philosophical treatise.

[ 11 ] In 1924, Sheen went to Rome to attend the Pontificium Collegium Internationale Angelicum , where he was awarded a Doctor of Sacred Theology degree.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Priestly life [ edit ] After Sheen returned to Peoria in 1926, Bishop Dunn assigned him as curate at St. Patrick's, a poor parish in Peoria. At that time, both Columbia University in New York and Oxford University in England wanted Sheen to teach philosophy.  However, Sheen took the assignment at St. Patrick's without any complaints and later said that he enjoyed his time there. Nine months later, Dunne summoned Sheen to his office. Dunne told him: I promised you to Catholic University over a year ago. They told me that with all your traipsing around Europe, you'd be so high hat you couldn't take orders. But Father Cullen says you've been a good boy at St. Patrick's. So run along to Washington.

[ 19 ] However, instead of Catholic University of America, Sheen chose to teach theology at St. Edmund's College in Ware, England, where he met Reverend Ronald Knox .  He also assisted the pastor at St. Patrick's Parish in the Soho section of London . In 1928, Sheen finally returned to Catholic University of America, where he would teach philosophy until 1950.

[ 20 ] [ 11 ] In 1929, Sheen delivered a speech at a meeting of the National Catholic Educational Association in which he encouraged teachers to "educate for a Catholic Renaissance" in the United States. Sheen was hoping that American Catholics would become more influential through education, which would help attract others to Catholicism. He believed that Catholics should "integrate" their faith into the rest of their daily life.

[ 21 ] In 1950, Sheen became the national director of the Society for the Propagation of the Faith . During his 16 years as director, Sheen raised millions of dollars for missionary efforts worldwide. He also donated $10 million that he earned from his later television programs.

[ 1 ] Auxiliary Bishop of New York [ edit ] Reverend Sheen On May 28, 1951, Pope Pius XII appointed Sheen as an auxiliary bishop for New York. He was consecrated in Rome at the Basilica of Santi Giovanni e Paulo on June 11, 1951.

[ 2 ] The principal consecrator was Cardinal Adeodato Giovanni Piazza . The co-consecrators were Archbishop Leone Giovanni Battista Nigris and Archbishop Martin John O'Connor .

[ 2 ] Bishop of Rochester [ edit ] On October 21, 1966, Pope Paul VI named Sheen as bishop of Rochester.

[ 2 ] While serving in Rochester, Sheen created the Sheen Ecumenical Housing Foundation. He also spent some of his energy on political activities such as his denunciation of American involvement in the Vietnam War in late July 1967.

[ 22 ] On Ash Wednesday in 1967, Sheen decided to give St. Bridget's Parish building to the federal Housing and Urban Development program. Sheen wanted to let the government use it for black Americans . There was a protest since Sheen acted on his own accord. The pastor disagreed by saying, "There is enough empty property around without taking down the church and the school." The deal fell through.

[ 23 ] On October 6, 1969, Sheen resigned as bishop of Rochester.

[ 2 ] Paul VI then named him as archbishop of the titular see of Newport, Wales .

Ecumenical efforts [ edit ] In the 1950s and 1960s, Sheen made notable efforts to seek common ground with Christians from non-Catholic churches, both Eastern Orthodox and Protestant. He occasionally celebrated the Byzantine Divine Liturgy , with papal permission awarding him certain bi-ritual faculties .

[ 24 ] He often commended the Protestant devotion to Bible study: "The first subject of all to be studied is Scripture, and this demands not only the reading of it but the study of commentaries. ... Protestant commentaries, I discovered, were also particularly interesting because Protestants have spent more time on Scripture than most of us." [ 25 ] : 79 Sheen's autobiography summarized his ecumenical outlook: "The combination of travel, the study of world religions and personal encounter with different nationalities and peoples made me see that the fullness of truth is like a complete circle of 360 degrees. Every religion in the world has a segment of that truth." [ 25 ] : 148 Media career [ edit ] Radio [ edit ] In 1930, Sheen began a weekly NBC Sunday-night radio broadcast, The Catholic Hour .

[ 13 ] During one broadcast, Sheen termed World War II as not just a political struggle but also a "theological one". He referred to German Chancellor Adolf Hitler as an example of the " Anti-Christ ".

[ 26 ] Time Magazine referred to Sheen in 1946 as "the golden-voiced Msgr. Fulton J. Sheen, U.S. Catholicism's famed proselytizer", and reported that his radio broadcast received 3,000 to 6,000 letters weekly from listeners. By 1950, The Catholic Hour had a weekly audience of four million listeners.

[ 27 ] Television [ edit ] Monsignor Sheen on Life Is Worth Living (1958) At the Catholic University of America, Sheen in 1940 provided voice-over commentary for an Easter Sunday mass. Broadcast on the experimental station W2XBS , it was one of the first televised religious services in the United States. During the sermon, Sheen remarked, "This is the first religious television in the history of the world. Let therefore its first message be a tribute of thanks to God for giving the minds of our day the inspiration to unravel the secrets of the universe." [ 28 ] [ 29 ] On February 12, 1952, Sheen began a weekly television program on the DuMont Television Network called Life Is Worth Living .

[ 30 ] Filmed at the Adelphi Theatre in New York City, the program consisted of Sheen speaking extemporaneously before a live audience. The show did not have a script or cue cards , although Sheen occasionally used a chalkboard . He was not paid for the program.

Life is Worth Living was scheduled in a prime time slot on Tuesday nights at 8:00 p.m. Its competition was the Texaco Star Theater on NBC , a variety show starring comedian Milton Berle and the Frank Sinatra Show , another variety program on CBS .

[ 31 ] Defying all expectations, Life is Worth Living became very popular.  The Frank Sinatra Show was canceled in April 1952, leading to speculation that it was due to the success of Sheen's show.

[ 31 ] Berle, known as "Uncle Miltie", frequently used old vaudeville material on his show. Joking about Sheen, he said. "He uses old material, too." Berle also observed, "If I'm going to be eased off the top by anyone, it's better that I lose to the One for whom Bishop Sheen is speaking." [ 11 ] Sheen responded to Berle, saying that perhaps people should start calling him "Uncle Fultie".

[ 32 ] Life and Time magazines ran feature stories on Sheen. The number of stations carrying Life Is Worth Living jumped from three to fifteen in less than two months. The show started receiving 8,500 letters per week. The show received four times as many requests for studio tickets as could be fulfilled. The sponsor Admiral , a manufacturer of TVs and appliances, paid the production costs in return for a one-minute commercial at the show's opening and another minute at its close.

[ 32 ] In 1952, Sheen won an Emmy Award for Most Outstanding personality .

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] In accepting his Emmy, Sheen, "I feel it is time I pay tribute to my four writers – Matthew, Mark, Luke and John." At that time, Berle quipped, "We both work for 'Sky Chief ' ", a reference to God and Berle's sponsor, Texaco .

Time called Sheen "the first 'televangelist ' " and the Archdiocese of New York could not meet the demand for tickets.

[ 11 ] Sheen received a second Emmy nomination in 1953.

[ 34 ] One of Sheen's best-remembered presentations came in February 1953, when he forcefully denounced the Soviet Union . Sheen gave a dramatic reading of the burial scene from Shakespeare's Julius Caesar .

He substituted the names of  Soviet leaders (Stalin, Lavrenty Beria , Georgy Malenkov, and Andrey Vyshinsky ) for those of characters in the play (Julius Caesar, Gaius Cassius Longinus , Marc Antony and Marcus Junius Brutus ). Sheen concluded the presentation by saying, "Stalin must one day meet his judgment." Days later, Stalin suffered a stroke and died within the week.

[ 35 ] Sheen was often quick to rebuke what he considered wrongful conduct. For example, in his televised sermon "False Compassion", he shouted: "There are sob sisters; there are the social slobberers who insist on compassion being shown to the muggers, to the dope fiends, to the throat slashers, to the beatniks, to the prostitutes, to the homosexuals, to the punks, so that today the decent man is practically off the reservation." Sheen then told his viewers to "hate the sin ... and love the sinner." [ 36 ] Life Is Worth Living ran until 1957, drawing as many as 30 million people weekly, mostly non-Catholics.

[ 37 ] He received his third Emmy nomination in 1957.

Sheen returned to television in 1961 with a nationally-syndicated series, The Fulton Sheen Program.

Running until to 1968, it was broadcast first in black-and-white and later in color. The format of the series was essentially the same as Life Is Worth Living .

International cassette tape ministry [ edit ] In September 1974, Auxiliary Bishop Thomas William Lyons of Washington asked Sheen to speak at a retreat for diocesan priests at the Loyola Retreat House in Faulkner, Maryland . Sheen's talks were recorded on reel-to-reel tape .

[ 38 ] Sheen requested for the recorded talks to be produced for distribution. This was the first production of a worldwide cassette tape ministry called Ministr-O-Media, a nonprofit company that operated on the grounds of St. Joseph's Parish in Pomfret, Maryland . The retreat album was Renewal and Reconciliation and included nine 60-minute audiotapes.

[ 38 ] Evangelization [ edit ] According to a 1952 article in Time Magazine , Sheen was responsible for converting to Catholicism the writer Heywood Broun , the politician Clare Boothe Luce , the automaker Henry Ford II , the writer Louis F. Budenz , the union organizer Bella Dodd , the theatrical designer Jo Mielziner and the violinist and composer Fritz Kreisler .

[ 39 ] Each conversion process took an average of 25 hours of lessons, and reportedly more than 95% of his students in private instruction were baptized.

[ 11 ] Falling-out with Cardinal Spellman [ edit ] Cardinal Spellman (1946) In the foreword of the 2008 edition of Sheen's autobiography, Treasure in Clay: The Autobiography of Fulton J. Sheen , the journalist Raymond Arroyo explains why Sheen ended Life Is Worth Living.

[ 40 ] Arroyo wrote that "It is widely believed that Cardinal Francis Spellman drove Sheen off the air." [ 40 ] "In the late 1950s, the government donated millions of dollars' worth of powdered milk to the New York Archdiocese. In turn, Cardinal Spellman handed that milk over to the Society for the Propagation of the Faith to distribute to the poor of the world. On at least one occasion, he demanded that the director of the Society, Bishop Sheen, pay the Archdiocese for the donated milk. He wanted millions of dollars. Despite Cardinal Spellman's considerable powers of persuasion and influence in Rome, Sheen refused. These were funds donated by the public to the missions, funds Sheen himself had personally contributed to and raised over the airwaves. He felt an obligation to protect them, even from the itchy fingers of his own Cardinal." [ 40 ] Spellman pleaded his case about the funds directly to Pope Pius XII , who sided with him. Spellman later confronted Sheen and stated, "I will get even with you. It may take six months or ten years, but everyone will know what you are like." [ 40 ] Besides being pressured to leave television, Sheen also "found himself unwelcome in the churches of New York City. Spellman canceled Sheen's annual Good Friday sermons at St. Patrick's Cathedral and discouraged clergy from socializing with him." [ 40 ] In 1966, Spellman allegedly persuaded Pope Paul VI to appoint Sheen as bishop of Rochester and terminate his leadership at the Society for the Propagation of the Faith.

[ 40 ] On December 2, 1967, Spellman died in New York City.

Sheen never talked about the quarrel with Spellman, making only vague references to his "trials both inside and outside the Church".

[ 40 ] In his autobiography, Sheen even went so far as to praise Spellman.

[ 40 ] Later years [ edit ] On October 15, 1969, one month after celebrating his 50th anniversary as a priest, Sheen resigned as bishop of Rochester. Pope Paul VI then appointed him as archbishop of the titular see of Newport, Wales . The ceremonial position allowed Sheen to devote more time to his extensive writing. During his lifetime, Sheen wrote 73 books and numerous articles and columns.

[ 33 ] On October 2, 1979, two months before Sheen's death, Pope John Paul II visited St. Patrick's Cathedral during his papal visit to the United States. During the ceremony, the pope embraced Sheen and said, "You have written and spoken well of the Lord Jesus Christ. You are a loyal son of the Church." [ 41 ] Death and legacy [ edit ] Beginning in 1977, Sheen "underwent a series of surgeries that sapped his strength and even made preaching difficult".

[ 40 ] Throughout that time, he continued to work on his autobiography, parts of which "were recited from his sickbed as he clutched a crucifix." [ 40 ] Soon after that, Sheen underwent open-heart surgery at Lenox Hill Hospital in Manhattan.

[ 33 ] Sheen died on December 9, 1979, in his private chapel while praying before the Blessed Sacrament .

[ 3 ] He was interred in the crypt of St. Patrick's Cathedral near the deceased archbishops of New York . In 2019, after a long legal battle, the archdiocese transferred Sheen's remains to the Diocese of Peoria, which re-interred them in the Cathedral of St. Mary in Peoria.

[ 42 ] The official repository of Sheen's papers, television programs, and other materials is at St. Bernard's School of Theology and Ministry in Rochester.

[ 43 ] Joseph Campanella introduced the reruns of Sheen's various programs that are aired on EWTN. Reruns are also aired on the Trinity Broadcasting Network .

The Fulton J. Sheen Museum in Peoria houses the largest set of Sheen's personal items in five collections. It is operated by the Diocese of Peoria.

[ 44 ] The Archbishop Fulton John Sheen Spiritual Center is located in El Paso, Illinois. The museum contains more Sheen artifacts.

[ 45 ] The Sheen Center for Thought & Culture in Lower Manhattan is named after him.

[ 46 ] The actor Ramón Gerard Antonio Estévez adopted the stage name of Martin Sheen partly in admiration of the bishop.

[ 47 ] Sheen frequently celebrated mass at Saint Agnes Church , in Midtown Manhattan .

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] On October 7, 1980, New York Mayor Ed Koch renamed East 43rd Street in front of Saint Agnes as "Archbishop Fulton J. Sheen Place".

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] Cause for canonization [ edit ] The Archbishop Fulton J. Sheen Foundation was formed in 1998 by Gregory J. Ladd and Lawrence F. Hickey to spread information about Sheen's life. The foundation approached Cardinal John O'Connor of the Archdiocese of New York for permission to commence the process of his cause, which was under the authority of the Diocese of Peoria .

[ 4 ] In 2002, Sheen's cause for canonization was officially opened by Bishop Daniel R. Jenky of Peoria. From then on, Sheen was referred to as a " Servant of God ". On February 2, 2008, Sheen's archives were sealed at a ceremony during a special mass at the Cathedral of Saint Mary of the Immaculate Conception in Peoria.

[ 33 ] In 2009, the diocesan phase of the investigation ended  and the records were sent to the Congregation for the Causes of Saints at the Vatican.

On June 28, 2012, the Vatican announced that it had recognized Sheen's life as one of "heroic virtue", [ 52 ] a major step towards eventual beatification.

[ 51 ] From then on, Sheen has been styled "Venerable Servant of God". According to the Catholic News Service and The Catholic Post (the official newspaper of the Peoria Diocese), the case of a newborn boy who had no discernible pulse for 61 minutes, who was about to be declared dead at OSF Saint Francis Medical Center in Peoria, Illinois, as a stillborn infant, and yet lived to be healthy without physical or mental impairment was in the preliminary stages of being investigated as the possible miracle needed for Sheen's potential beatification. If the miracle is approved at the diocesan level and then by the Congregation for the Causes of Saints at the Vatican by being both medically unexplainable and directly attributable theologically to Sheen's intercession according to expert panels in both subject areas, beatification may proceed. Another such miracle would be required for him to be considered for canonization.

On September 7, 2011, a tribunal of inquiry was sworn in to investigate the alleged healing. During a special mass on December 11, 2011, at St. Mary's Cathedral in Peoria, the documentation gathered by the tribunal over nearly three months was boxed and sealed. It was then shipped to the Vatican for consideration by the Congregation for the Causes of Saints, concluding the diocesan tribunal's work.

[ 53 ] On Sunday, September 9, 2012, a mass of Thanksgiving and banquet was held at St. Mary's Cathedral and the Spalding Pastoral Center in celebration of the advancement of Sheen's cause. Attendees included Bishop Jenky, and his predecessor as Bishop of Peoria, Archbishop John J. Myers along with many clergy and religious from around the country. Copies of the positio , the book detailing the documentation behind his cause, were presented to Myers and other attendees. According to statements made at the service, the medical and theological study of the possible miracles needed for his beatification and canonization was well underway. At least one miracle was being seriously considered. New procedures under Pope Benedict XVI stated that beatification should ideally occur in the candidate's home diocese. Therefore, Sheen's beatification would likely take place in Peoria, where it would be the first.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] Transfer of remains [ edit ] Archbishop Sheen's tomb, St. Mary's Cathedral, Peoria, Illinois (2023) In September 2014, it was announced that the canonization cause would be suspended because of a disagreement with the Archdiocese of New York concerning the return of Sheen's remains to the Diocese of Peoria.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] In a press release on June 14, 2016, it was announced that Sheen's surviving family petitioned the New York Supreme Court to allow the transfer of Sheen's remains to Peoria. The press release stated that "on several occasions, the Archdiocese [of New York] has declared its desire to cooperate with the wishes of the family." [ 59 ] In an action brought in New York Supreme Court on November 16, 2016, Justice Arlene P. Bluth ordered the Archdiocese of New York to grant permission to disinter Sheen's body. The court ruled that the archdiocese's objection that Sheen would not want the disinterment was without factual basis. Given that his elevation to sainthood was being blocked, the court found the family had sufficient justification for moving his body.

[ 60 ] However, on February 6, 2018, the New York State Appellate Division overturned Bluth's decision and ordered an evidentiary hearing be held as to whether moving Sheen's body would be consistent with his wishes.

[ 61 ] The court noted that, "it is unclear if Archbishop Sheen's direction in his will to be buried in 'Calvary Cemetery, the official cemetery of the Archdiocese of New York' evinces an express intention to remain buried in the Archdiocese of New York, or was merely a descriptive term for Calvary Cemetery." However, after re-examining the case and holding the evidentiary hearing on June 9, 2018, Bluth affirmed her earlier ruling. The archdiocese allowed Peoria to begin the work on his cause for canonization, which eventually would have required at the least a collection of his relics.

[ 62 ] The archdiocese announced on June 9, 2019 that it was officially giving up the fight to keep Sheen's remains at St. Patrick's Cathedral.

[ 63 ] On June 27, 2019, the remains were transferred to St. Mary's Cathedral in Peoria.

[ 42 ] Miracle recognized for beatification [ edit ] On July 6, 2019, the Congregation for the Causes of Saints promulgated the decree approving Sheen's miracle needed for beatification. The miracle involved the unexplained recovery of James Fulton Engstrom, a boy stillborn in September 2010 to Bonnie and Travis Engstrom of the town of Goodfield , near Peoria. Engstrom's parents prayed for the intercession of Sheen for their son's recovery. Pope Francis approved the miracle, and Sheen was scheduled for beatification on December 21, 2019, at the Cathedral of St. Mary in Peoria.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] Postponement of beatification [ edit ] On December 3, 2019, the Diocese of Peoria announced that the Vatican had postponed Sheen's beatification.

[ 66 ] Salvatore Matano , the bishop of Rochester, had expressed concern that Sheen's alleged posting of a priest who had been named in a 1963 sexual misconduct case might be cited unfavorably in a report from New York State Attorney General Letitia James . The Diocese of Peoria countered that the priest had been assigned not by Sheen but by his successor, and that Sheen's involvement in the matter had already been "thoroughly examined" and that he had been "exonerated" and "never put children in harm's way." [ 9 ] As of August 2023, the Vatican had not announced whether or when the beatification would move ahead.

[ 67 ] As of April 2024, New York State's Rochester investigation was still ongoing.

[ 68 ] The Diocese of Peoria continues to promote the beatification of Sheen.

[ 69 ] In May 2025, its bishop, Louis Tylka , said he would be urging newly-elected Pope Leo XIV , who like Sheen was born in Illinois, to move forward with the beatification.

[ 10 ] Selected bibliography [ edit ] God and Intelligence in Modern Philosophy (1925, Longmans, Green, and Co.) The Seven Last Words (1933, The Century Co.) Philosophy of Science (1934, Bruce Publishing Co.) The Eternal Galilean (1934, Appleton-Century-Crofts) The Mystical Body of Christ (1935, Sheed and Ward) Calvary and the Mass (1936, P. J. Kenedy & Sons) The Cross and the Beatitudes (1937, P. J. Kenedy & Sons) Seven Words of Jesus and Mary (1945, P. J. Kenedy & Sons) Communism and the Conscience of the West (1948, Bobbs-Merrill) Peace of Soul (1949, McGraw–Hill) [ 70 ] Three to Get Married (1951, Appleton-Century-Crofts) The World's First Love (1952, McGraw-Hill) Life Is Worth Living Series 1–5 (1953–1957, McGraw–Hill) Way to Happiness (1953, Maco Magazine) Way to Inner Peace (1955, Garden City Books) Life of Christ (1958, McGraw–Hill) Missions and the World Crisis (1963, Bruce Publishing Co.) The Power of Love (1965, Simon & Schuster) Footprints in a Darkened Forest (1967, Meredith Press) Lenten and Easter Inspirations (1967, Maco Ecumenical Books) Treasure in Clay: The Autobiography of Fulton J. Sheen (1980, Doubleday & Co.) Finding True Happiness (2014, Dynamic Catholic) Your Life Is Worth Living: 50 Lessons to Deepen Your Faith , Foreword by Bishop Robert Barron (2019, Image Catholic Books) References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g "Biography – Archbishop Fulton Sheen" .

Archbishop Fulton John Sheen Foundation . Retrieved September 13, 2022 .

^ a b c d e "Archbishop Fulton John Sheen" .

Catholic-Hierarchy.org . David M. Cheney . Retrieved January 21, 2015 .

^ a b "Biography of Fulton J. Sheen" . Catholic University of America . Retrieved December 4, 2020 .

^ a b "Archbishop Fulton J. Sheen" . Archived from the original on May 13, 2008 . Retrieved September 14, 2009 .

^ Rodgers, Ann (August 29, 2006).

"Emmy-winning televangelist on path toward sainthood: Sheen would be 1st American-born man canonized" .

Chicago Sun-Times . Archived from the original on October 25, 2012 . Retrieved July 16, 2012 – via HighBeam Research .

^ Otterman, Sharon (June 29, 2012).

"For a 1950s TV Evangelist, a Step Toward Sainthood" .

The New York Times . Retrieved July 5, 2012 .

^ "The Venerable Fulton J. Sheen: a model of virtue for our time" .

News.va . Pontifical Council for Social Communications. June 30, 2012. Archived from the original on July 7, 2012 . Retrieved July 5, 2012 .

^ "Archbishop Fulton Sheen to be beatified" , America .

Associated Press , July 6, 2019.

^ a b Flynn, J.D.; Condon, Ed (December 4, 2019).

"Rochester bishop requested Fulton Sheen beatification delay" .

Catholic News Agency . Retrieved December 4, 2019 .

^ a b Berger, Alex (May 14, 2025).

"The possible path for Archbishop Fulton Sheen to become a Saint" .

Yahoo News . Retrieved May 15, 2025 .

^ a b c d e f g h i "Bishop Fulton Sheen: The First 'Televangelist' " .

Time . April 14, 1952. Archived from the original on January 22, 2008 . Retrieved May 10, 2020 .

^ Fulton J. Sheen.

Treasure in Clay , Ch. 2 "The Molding of the Clay", p. 9, 1980.

^ a b c "About Fulton J. Sheen" . Fulton J. Sheen website. Archived from the original on October 20, 2007.

^ Reeves, Thomas C.

(2001).

America's Bishop: The Life and Times of Fulton J. Sheen . San Francisco: Encounter Books. p. 56.

ISBN 1-893554-25-2 .

^ Sheen Cunningham, Joan; Rodriguez, Janel (2019).

My Uncle Fulton Sheen . Ignatius Press. pp.

28– 29.

ISBN 978-1-64229-110-0 .

^ Sheen, Fulton John. "The Spirit of Contemporary Philosophy and the Finite God", Thèse de doctorat – Université catholique de Louvain, 1923.

^ Queen, Edward L.; Prothero, Stephen R.; Shattuck, Gardiner H. (2009).

Encyclopedia of American Religious History . Facts On File, Incorporated. p. 921.

ISBN 978-0816066605 . Retrieved March 3, 2013 .

^ "Archbishop Fulton Sheen dies" .

Catholic Post . Peoria. December 16, 1979 . Retrieved December 30, 2013 – via El Paso, Illinois, Community History Webpage.

^ Farney, Kirk D. (June 21, 2022).

Ministers of a New Medium: Broadcasting Theology in the Radio Ministries of Fulton J. Sheen and Walter A. Maier . InterVarsity Press.

ISBN 978-1-5140-0323-7 .

^ "Fulton J. Sheen, Catholic Champion" . Catholiceducation.org. Archived from the original on June 5, 2011 . Retrieved July 7, 2012 .

^ Hennesey, James (1981).

American Catholics , Oxford University Press, p. 255.

^ Willbanks, James H.

, Vietnam War Almanac , Facts on File, Inc. (2009), p. 215.

^ John T. McGreevy, Parish Boundaries: The Catholic Encounter with Race in the Twentieth-Century Urban North, University of Chicago Press, 1996, 242 ^ "Byzantine Mass  [ sic ] Offered by Sheen; Bishop, With Papal Sanction, Celebrates in Ancient Rite in Slavonic and English" .

The New York Times . June 18, 1956.

^ a b Sheen, Fulton J. (1993).

Treasure in Clay: The Autobiography of Fulton J. Sheen . Ignatius Press.

^ Hennesey, James (1981).

American Catholics , Oxford University Press, p. 280.

^ "Radio Religion" .

Time . January 21, 1946. Archived from the original on January 25, 2008 . Retrieved March 30, 2009 .

^ "First Television Broadcast Of Easter Services" .

The Gazette and Daily . Associated Press. March 24, 1940. p. 5 – via Newspapers.com.

^ Sheen, Fulton J., narrator (1941).

The Eternal Gift (Videotape). The Perpetual Novena.

^ Weiner, Ed (1992).

The 'TV Guide' TV Book . New York: Harper Collins. p.

216 .

ISBN 0-06-096914-8 .

^ a b Weinstein, David (2004).

The Forgotten Network: Dumont and the Birth of American Television . Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Temple University Press.

ISBN 1-59213-245-6 .

^ a b Watson, Mary Ann (1999). "And they said Uncle Fultie didn't have a prayer." Television Quarterly , 30 (2), 80–85.

^ a b c d Bearden, Michelle (January 24, 2009). "Mass Today Promotes Sheen For Sainthood".

The Tampa Tribune . p. 10.

^ a b "Bishop Fulton J. Sheen" .

Television Academy . Retrieved March 30, 2025 .

^ Mikkelson, Barbara and David P.

"Stalin for Time: Did Bishop Fulton Sheen foretell the death of Stalin?" Snopes , August 8, 2007.

^ Sheen, Fulton J. (1965).

"False Compassion" .

The Fulton Sheen Program . The Catholic World . Retrieved July 15, 2021 .

^ Keane, James T. (January 10, 2023).

"The secret to Archbishop Fulton Sheen's power: 'A thinking head and a feeling heart' " .

America . Retrieved September 22, 2023 .

^ a b "An Enduring Journey of Faith: St. Joseph's Parish, Pomfret, Maryland, 2012" by St. Joseph's Church, Pomfret, Maryland, Harambee Productions, White Plains, Maryland.

^ Briton Hadden; Henry Robinson Luce (1952).

Time . Time Incorporated. p. 52.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Sheen, Fulton J. (2008).

Treasure in Clay: The Autobiography of Fulton J. Sheen . Doubleday.

^ "The Cause for Canonization" . Catholic University of America . Retrieved December 4, 2020 .

^ a b "Venerable Archbishop Fulton Sheen remains transferred to Peoria" .

Heart of Illinois ABC . June 27, 2019. Archived from the original on June 27, 2019 . Retrieved June 27, 2019 .

^ The Archbishop Fulton J. Sheen Archives accessed August 15, 2007 Archived February 28, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Archbishop Fulton J. Sheen Museum" . Catholic Diocese of Peoria.

^ "Archbishop Sheen Museum" . Archbishop Fulton John Sheen Spiritual Centre . Retrieved September 13, 2022 .

^ "About | Sheen Center for Thought and Culture" .

www.sheencenter.org . Retrieved March 30, 2025 .

^ "Martin Sheen on Why He Changed His Name & Emilio Estevez on Why He Didn't Change His Name" . Hudson Union Society, 2012.

^ Haberman, Clyde; Krebs, Albin (April 12, 1979).

"Notes on People: Archbishop Sheen to Preach at St. Agnes's Tomorrow" .

The New York Times . Retrieved October 19, 2021 .

Sheen intends to continue tomorrow a tradition begun in 1927.

^ Lajoie, Ron (May 18, 2011).

"St. Agnes Exhibit Looks at Archbishop Sheen's On-air Ministry" .

Catholic New York . Retrieved October 19, 2021 .

For many years the church hosted his famous broadcasts. His last Good Friday homily was preached at the church in 1979.

^ "About Us" . Church of Saint Agnes . Retrieved October 19, 2021 .

It was at Saint Agnes Church that his sermons were carried throughout the world.

^ a b Gertner, Larry; Herrick, Michael.

"Archbishop Fulton J. Sheen Place Historical Marker" . The Historical Marker DataBase . Retrieved October 19, 2021 .

October 7, 1980: Mayor Edward Koch proclaimed East 43rd Street between Lexington & Third Aves. Archbishop Fulton J. Sheen Place ^ Decrees of the Congregation for the Causes of the Saints, June 28, 2012 . Vatican Information Service, June 28, 2012.

^ Dermody, Tom (December 13, 2011).

"Evidence of alleged miracle with Sheen link heads to Rome" .

The Catholic Post . Catholic Diocese of Peoria . Retrieved November 18, 2019 .

^ "Archbishop Fulton Sheen Foundation" . Fultonsheen.blogspot.com . Retrieved December 30, 2013 .

^ "Celebrate Sheen!" . Celebrate Sheen!

. Retrieved December 30, 2013 .

^ "World needs Archbishop Sheen's example of faith, virtue, says homilist" .

Catholic News Service . September 11, 2012. Archived from the original on January 18, 2013 . Retrieved December 30, 2013 .

^ "Sheen cause suspended, call for prayer" .

The Catholic Post . September 3–5, 2014. Archived from the original on September 9, 2014.

^ "Statement concerning the cause of Venerable Archbishop Fulton J. Sheen" (Press release). Archdiocese of New York. September 4, 2014.

^ "Family petitions court to move the body of Archbishop Fulton Sheen to Peoria" (Press release). Archbishop Fulton Sheen Foundation. June 14, 2016 . Retrieved June 30, 2016 .

^ "Cunningham v. Trustees of St. Patrick's Cathedral" . November 16, 2016.

^ "Matter of Cunningham v Trustees of St. Patrick's Cathedral" . New York State Law Reporting Bureau. February 6, 2018.

^ "Civil court rules Fulton Sheen's remains can go to Peoria" .

Catholic News Agency . June 9, 2018.

^ Lapin, Tamar (June 9, 2019).

"Archdiocese of New York gives up fight over Bishop Sheen's remains" .

New York Post . Retrieved June 10, 2019 .

^ Mares, Courtney (July 6, 2019).

"Archbishop Fulton Sheen to be beatified" .

Catholic News Agency .

^ "Venerable Fulton Sheen to be beatified in December" .

Catholic News Agency . November 18, 2019 . Retrieved September 22, 2023 .

^ "Postponement of Beatification" (Press release). Catholic Diocese of Peoria. December 3, 2019. Archived from the original on December 3, 2019 . Retrieved December 3, 2019 .

^ Flynn, J.D. (August 16, 2023).

"Will Fulton Sheen finally be beatified?" .

The Pillar . Retrieved September 22, 2023 .

^ Payne, Daniel (April 17, 2024).

"New York prosecutor, Brooklyn Diocese reach agreement over sex abuse mishandling" .

Catholic News Agency . Retrieved April 17, 2024 .

(New York State Attorney General) Letitia James on Tuesday noted that investigations into the Archdiocese of New York, as well as into the Dioceses of Albany, Ogdensburg, Rochester, Rockville Centre, and Syracuse, remain ongoing.

^ "Peoria diocese continues promoting Sheen's beatification cause" .

Catholic News Agency . May 10, 2021 . Retrieved September 22, 2023 .

^ This book was Sheen's response to Rabbi Joshua L. Liebman 's 1946 best-seller Peace of Mind .

Further reading [ edit ] Farney, Kirk D. (2022).

Ministers of a New Medium: Broadcasting Theology in the Radio Ministries of Fulton J. Sheen and Walter A. Maier.

IVP Academic Hughes, Cheryl (2024).

Archbishop Fulton J. Sheen Convert Maker.

Ignatius Press, San Francisco Reeves, Thomas C.

(2001).

America's Bishop: The Life and Times of Fulton J. Sheen .

Encounter Books , San Francisco.

Riley, Kathleen L. (2004).

Fulton J. Sheen: An American Catholic Response to the Twentieth Century . St. Paul's/Alba House, Staten Island.

Sherwood, Timothy H. (2010).

The Preaching of Archbishop Fulton J. Sheen: The Gospel Meets the Cold War . Lexington Books.

Sherwood, Timothy H. (2013).

The Rhetorical Leadership of Fulton J. Sheen, Norman Vincent Peale, and Billy Graham in the Age of Extremes . Lexington Books.

Winsboro, Irvin D. S. & Epple, Michael (Summer 2009). "Religion, Culture, and the Cold War: Bishop Fulton J. Sheen and America's Anti-Communist Crusade of the 1950s", Historian , 71 (2): 209–233.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Fulton J. Sheen .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Fulton J. Sheen .

Official website Fulton J. Sheen at IMDb The Archbishop Fulton John Sheen Foundation Library Catalog Record for Sheen's Ph.D. thesis FBI file on Bishop Sheen Venerable Fulton J. Sheen : 200 talks by Sheen available in MP3 format, along with streaming video of his Family Retreat Time cover, Fulton J. Sheen, April 14, 1952 Fulton J. Sheen Spiritual Centre – El Paso, IL Archived April 1, 2022, at the Wayback Machine Sheen Mass – Cause for Canonization on YouTube Catholic Church titles New title Titular see erected — TITULAR — Archbishop of Newport, Wales 1969–1979 Succeeded by Howard G. Tripp Preceded by James E. Kearney Archbishop-Bishop of Rochester 1966–1969 Succeeded by Joseph Lloyd Hogan Preceded by – Auxiliary Bishop of New York 1951–1966 Succeeded by – New title Titular see erected — TITULAR — Bishop of Caesariana 1951–1966 Succeeded by Angelo Felici v t e Roman Catholic Diocese of Rochester Ordinaries Bishops Bernard John McQuaid Thomas Francis Hickey John Francis O'Hern Edward Mooney James E. Kearney Fulton J. Sheen Joseph Lloyd Hogan Matthew H. Clark Salvatore Ronald Matano Coadjutor bishop Thomas Francis Hickey Auxiliary bishops Lawrence B. Casey John Edgar McCafferty Dennis Walter Hickey Churches Cathedral Sacred Heart Cathedral, Rochester Parishes Immaculate Conception Church, Rochester Our Lady of Victory Roman Catholic Church, Rochester St. Charles Borromeo Church, Greece St. Bridget's Roman Catholic Church Complex, Bloomfield Saint George Roman Catholic Lithuanian Church, Rochester St. Mary's Church, Rochester Saint Michael's Church, Rochester St. Rose Roman Catholic Church Complex, Lima Former parishes Our Mother of Sorrows Roman Catholic Church Complex, Greece St. Joseph's Church and Rectory, Rochester Education Seminary St. Bernard's School of Theology and Ministry, Pittsford Former seminary Saint Bernard's Seminary, Rochester High schools The Aquinas Institute of Rochester Bishop Kearney High School, Irondequoit McQuaid Jesuit High School, Brighton Notre Dame High School, Elmira Our Lady of Mercy School for Young Women, Brighton Former high schools Academy of the Sacred Heart, Rochester Cardinal Mooney High School, Greece DeSales High School, Geneva Holy Family High School, Auburn Mount Carmel High School, Auburn Nazareth Academy, Rochester St. Agnes High School, Rochester St. Anthony of Padua High School, Watkins Glen St. Joseph's Business High School, Rochester Catholicism portal v t e Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York v t e Ordinaries of the Archdiocese of New York Bishops of New York R. Luke Concanen John Connolly John Dubois John Joseph Hughes Archbishops of New York John Joseph Hughes John Cardinal McCloskey Michael Augustine Corrigan John Murphy Cardinal Farley Patrick Joseph Cardinal Hayes Francis Joseph Cardinal Spellman Terence James Cardinal Cooke John Joseph Cardinal O'Connor Edward Michael Cardinal Egan Timothy Michael Cardinal Dolan Auxiliary bishops, current Peter John Byrne Gerardo Joseph Colacicco Edmund James Whalen John Samuel Bonnici Joseph Armando Espaillat Auxiliary bishops, emeritus Josu Iriondo John Joseph Jenik Dominick John Lagonegro James Francis McCarthy John Joseph O'Hara Gerald Thomas Walsh Auxiliary bishops, former, currently living Henry J. Mansell Timothy A. McDonnell Edwin Frederick O'Brien Dennis Joseph Sullivan Auxiliary bishops, former, deceased Patrick Vincent Ahern Edwin Broderick Thomas Cusack Edward Vincent Dargin Joseph Patrick Donahue John Joseph Dunn John Michael Fearns Joseph Francis Flannelly Francisco Garmendia James Griffiths George Henry Guilfoyle Edward Dennis Head Walter P. Kellenberg John Joseph Maguire James Patrick Mahoney Theodore McCarrick William Jerome McCormack James Francis McIntyre Anthony Francis Mestice Emerson John Moore Joseph Thomas O'Keefe Joseph Maria Pernicone Fulton J. Sheen Patrick Joseph Thomas Sheridan Austin Bernard Vaughan Robert Anthony Brucato Bishops who served as priests in the archdiocese, living Charles Daniel Balvo Charles John Brown William Muhm Bishops who served as priests in the archdiocese, deceased St. John Nepomucene Neumann Patrick Aloysius O'Boyle Charles H. Colton John J. Conroy Philip Joseph Furlong Charles Edward McDonnell Francis Patrick McFarland Francis McNeirny Bernard John Joseph McQuaid Rrok Kola Mirdita John Joseph Mitty Joseph Thomas Dimino William Quarter Francis Frederick Reh Joseph Francis Rummel William Scully Catholicism portal v t e Churches in the Archdiocese of New York Archdiocese Cathedral St. Patrick's Cathedral, Manhattan Former cathedral Basilica of St. Patrick's Old Cathedral New York City Bronx Blessed Sacrament Church Church of the Sacred Heart Christ the King's Church Holy Cross Church Immaculate Conception Church Immaculate Conception of the Blessed Virgin Mary Church Our Lady of Mercy's Church Our Lady of Mount Carmel's Church Our Lady of the Nativity of Our Blessed Lady's Church Our Lady of Solace's Church St. Angela Merici's Church St. Anselm's Church St. Ann's Church St. Anthony's Church St. Anthony of Padua Church St. Athanasius's Church St. Augustine's Church St. Barnabas' Church St. Brendan's Church St. Clare of Assisi's Church St. Dominic's Church St. Frances de Chantal's Church St. Frances of Rome's Church St. Francis Xavier's Church St. Gabriel's Roman Catholic Church St. Helena's Church St. Jerome's Church St. Joan of Arc's Church St. John's Church St. John Chrysostom's Church St. Joseph's Church St. Lucy's Church St. Luke's Church St. Margaret Mary's Church St. Margaret of Cortona's Church St. Martin of Tours' Church St. Nicholas of Tolentine Church St. Pius V's Church St. Raymond's Church Church of St. Simon Stock St. Theresa of the Infant Jesus Church SS. Peter and Paul's Church Church of the Visitation of the Blessed Virgin Mary Manhattan All Saints Church Church of the Annunciation Chapel of the Resurrection Church of Notre Dame Church of Our Lady of Mount Carmel Church of Our Lady of Sorrows Church of Our Lady of the Scapular–St. Stephen Church of Sts. Cyril & Methodius and St. Raphael Church of St. Catherine of Genoa Church of St. Ignatius Loyola Church of St. Joseph Church of St. Michael Church of St. Vincent Ferrer Church of the Ascension, Roman Catholic Church of the Blessed Sacrament Church of the Epiphany Church of the Good Shepherd Church of the Holy Agony Church of the Holy Family Church of the Incarnation, Roman Catholic Church of the Most Precious Blood Church of the Nativity Chapel of the Resurrection Church of the Sacred Heart of Jesus Church of the Transfiguration, Roman Catholic Corpus Christi Church Holy Cross Church Holy Innocents Church Holy Name of Jesus Roman Catholic Church Holy Rosary Church Holy Trinity Church Immaculate Conception Church Our Lady of Esperanza Church Our Lady of Good Counsel Church Our Lady of Guadalupe at St. Bernard Church Our Lady of Lourdes Church Our Lady of the Holy Rosary's Church Our Lady of Pompeii Church Our Lady of Victory Church Our Lady Queen of Martyrs Church Our Saviour Church San Lorenzo Ruiz Chapel St. Agnes Church St. Aloysius Catholic Church St. Andrew Church St. Ann Church St. Anthony of Padua Church St. Benedict the Moor Church St. Catherine of Siena Church St. Cecilia Church and Convent St. Charles Borromeo Church St. Elizabeth Church St. Elizabeth of Hungary Church St. Emeric Church St. Francis of Assisi Church St. Francis Xavier Church St. Gregory the Great Church St. Jean Baptiste Roman Catholic Church St. John the Baptist Church St. John the Evangelist Church St. Joseph of the Holy Family Church St. Joseph Chapel St. Jude Church St. Lucy Church St. Malachy Roman Catholic Church St. Mark the Evangelist Church St. Mary Church St. Monica Church St. Patrick's Old Cathedral St. Paul Church St. Paul the Apostle Church St. Peter's Church St. Rose of Lima Church St. Stanislaus Bishop and Martyr Church St. Stephen of Hungary Church St. Teresa Church St. Thomas More Church St. Veronica Church Slovenian Church of St. Cyril Staten Island Church of Our Lady Help of Christians Church of Our Lady of Pity Church of Our Lady Queen of Peace Church of Our Lady Star of the Sea Church of the Blessed Sacrament Church of the Holy Family Our Lady of Good Counsel's Church Sacred Heart Church St. Adalbert's Church St. Charles's Church St. Clare's Church St. Mary's Church St. Patrick's Church St. Peter's Church St. Rita's Church St. Roch's Church St. Teresa of the Infant Jesus's Church Dutchess County Saint Kateri Tekakwitha Church (LaGrangeville) Church of Regina Coeli (Hyde Park) Church of St. Martin de Porres (Poughkeepsie) Church of St. Mary, Mother of the Church (Fishkill) St. Mary's Church (Poughkeepsie) St. Mary's Church (Wappingers Falls) Church of the Good Shepherd (Rhinebeck) Immaculate Conception Church (Amenia) Immaculate Conception Church (Bangall) Our Lady of Mount Carmel's Church (Poughkeepsie) St. Anthony's Church (Pine Plains) St. Charles Borromeo's Church (Dover Plains) St. Christopher's Church (Red Hook) St. Columba's Church (Hopewell Junction) St. Denis Church (Hopewell Junction) St. Joachim and St. John the Evangelist's Church (Beacon) St. John the Evangelist's Church (Pawling) St. Joseph's Chapel (Rhinecliff) St. Joseph's Church (Millbrook) St. Patrick's Chapel (Millerton) St. Paul's Chapel (Staatsburg) St. Peter's Church (Poughkeepsie) St. Sylvia's Church (Tivoli) Orange County Putnam County Rockland County Sullivan County Ulster County Westchester County Blessed Sacrament Church (New Rochelle) Church of the Holy Family (New Rochelle) Church of the Resurrection (Rye) Church of St. Augustine (Larchmont) Church of St. Joseph (Bronxville) Church of the Immaculate Heart of Mary (Scarsdale) Immaculate Conception Church (Tuckahoe) Immaculate Conception St. Mary's (Yonkers) Most Holy Trinity Church (Mamaroneck) Our Lady of Mercy Church (Port Chester) St. Gabriel's Church (New Rochelle) St. Vito's Church (Mamaroneck) St. Vito-Most Holy Trinity Parish (Mamaroneck) v t e Education in the Archdiocese of New York Archdiocese Seminaries Saint Joseph's Seminary Charities List of Catholic charities in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York Universities and colleges Fordham University Iona University Manhattan University University of Mount Saint Vincent New York City Bronx high schools Academy of Mount St. Ursula All Hallows High School Cardinal Hayes High School Cardinal Spellman High School Fordham Preparatory School Monsignor Scanlan High School Mount Saint Michael Academy Preston High School St. Barnabas High School St. Catharine Academy St. Raymond Academy St. Raymond High School for Boys Manhattan high schools Cathedral High School Convent of the Sacred Heart Cristo Rey New York High School Dominican Academy La Salle Academy Loyola School Marymount School of New York Notre Dame School Regis High School St. George Academy St. Jean Baptiste High School St. Vincent Ferrer High School Xavier High School Staten Island high schools Monsignor Farrell High School Moore Catholic High School Notre Dame Academy St. Joseph by the Sea High School St. Joseph Hill Academy St. Peter's Boys High School Dutchess County Our Lady of Lourdes High School Orange County John S. Burke Catholic High School Rockland County Albertus Magnus High School Westchester County Iona Preparatory School John F. Kennedy Catholic High School Maria Regina High School Sacred Heart High School Salesian High School School of the Holy Child Archbishop Stepinac High School The Montfort Academy The Ursuline School Closed John A. Coleman Catholic High School College of New Rochelle Catholicism portal New York (state) portal New York City portal v t e Roman Catholic Diocese of Peoria Bishops Ordinaries John Lancaster Spalding Edmund Michael Dunne Joseph Henry Leo Schlarman William Edward Cousins John Baptist Franz Edward William O'Rourke John J. Myers Daniel R. Jenky Louis Tylka Coadjutor Louis Tylka (2020-2022) Auxiliary Peter Joseph O'Reilly Churches Cathedral Cathedral of Saint Mary of the Immaculate Conception , Peoria Parishes Holy Trinity Church , Bloomington Shrine Queen of the Holy Rosary Memorial Shrine , LaSalle Education Newman centers St. John's Catholic Newman Center , Champaign High schools Alleman High School , Rock Island Central Catholic High School , Bloomington Marquette Academy , Ottawa Notre Dame High School , Peoria St. Bede Academy , Peru St. Thomas More High School , Champaign Schlarman Academy , Danville Former high schools Academy of Our Lady/Spalding Institute , Peoria Bergan High School , Peoria Villa de Chantal , Rock Island Priests Gerald Thomas Bergan James Ryan John George Alleman Fulton J. Sheen Catholic Church portal v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal Portals : Biography Catholicism New York Saints Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Korea Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists Discography of American Historical Recordings People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX v t e Carmelites A list of all the congregations, notable members, priories, churches, and convents of the Order of the Brothers of the Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel (Carmelites) General Attributes Elijah Elisha Saint Joseph Saint Joachim Saint Anne Albert of Jerusalem Rule of Saint Albert Book of the First Monks Scapular of Our Lady of Mount Carmel Our Lady of Mount Carmel Mount Carmel Flos Carmeli Sabbatine Privilege Orders and groups Discalced Carmelites (also known as Teresian Carmelites) Monks of the Most Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel Hermits of the Most Blessed Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel Carmelites of Mary Immaculate Carmelites of the Holy Face (Palmarian) Tertiary Third Order of Carmelites Secular Order of Discalced Carmelites Liturgy Rite of the Holy Sepulchre Spiritual classics The Interior Castle Way of Perfection Dark Night of the Soul Ascent of Mount Carmel The Living Flame of Love The Practice of the Presence of God Members of the Carmelite Order Beatified Carmelites Francesco Lippi John Soreth Jane of Toulouse Bartolomeo Fanti Baptist Spagnoli of Mantua Maria Crocifissa Curcio Anne of Saint Bartholomew Candelaria of San José Francisco Palau Giovanna Scopelli Kuriakose Elias Chavara Angelo Agostini Mazzinghi Françoise d'Amboise Teresa Maria Manetti Elia of Saint Clement María Guggiari Echeverría María López de Rivas Martínez Marie-Eugène de l'Enfant-Jésus Congregations of sisters Carmelite Sisters of Charity Carmelite Sisters for the Aged and Infirm Carmelite Sisters of the Most Sacred Heart of Los Angeles Sisters of the Apostolic Carmel Carmelite Daughters of the Divine Heart of Jesus Sisters of the Virgin Mary of Mount Carmel Carmelite Sister of the Divine Providence Carmelite Missionaries Sister of Saint Therese of Child Jesus Carmelite Sister of Mother Candelaria Corpus Christi Carmelites Institute of Our Lady of Carmel Congregation Of Our Lady Of Mount Carmel Carmelite Sisters of Our Lady Carmelite pope Pope Telesphorus Carmelite bishops Inácio de São Caetano Robert Mascall Pierre de Casa Filippo Iannone Carmelite cardinals Girolamo Maria Gotti Joaquín Lluch y Garriga Adeodato Giovanni Piazza Anders Arborelius Carmelite martyrs Angelus of Jerusalem Luigi Rabatà Teresa of St. Augustine & Companions Marie-Geneviève Meunier Redemptus of the Cross Denis of the Nativity Hilary Januszewski Teresa Benedicta of The Cross Isidore Bakanja Jacques Retouret Alfons Maria Mazurek Elvira Moragas Cantarero María Pilar de San Francisco de Borja María Ángeles de San José Teresa del Niño Jesús y de San Juan de la Cruz Angel Prat i Hostench and 16 companions Titus Brandsma Carmelite saints Pope Telesphorus Cyril of Constantinople Simon Stock Nuno Álvares Pereira Andrew Corsini Peter Thomas Albert of Trapani Euphrasia Eluvathingal George Preca Kuriakose Elias Chavara Carmelite mystics & doctors of the church John of the Cross Teresa of Ávila Thérèse of Lisieux Mary of Jesus Crucified Serafina of God Maria Petyt Mary Magdalene de' Pazzi Teresa of the Andes John of St. Samson Catalina de Balmaseda y San Martín Ana de Jesús Elizabeth of the Trinity Archangela Girlani Maria Candida of the Eucharist Marianna Fontanella Marie of St Peter Marie of the Incarnation Anna Maria Redi Venerable Carmelites Ana de Jesús Veronica of the Passion Thérèse of Saint Augustine Mariana of the Purification María Luisa Josefa Margaret of the Blessed Sacrament Fulton Sheen Teofilo Camomot Lúcia de Jesus Rosa dos Santos of Fátima Carmelite Servants of God Catalina de Balmaseda y San Martín Camille de Soyécourt Mary of Saint Peter Maria Francesca of the Holy Spirit Giovanni Antonio Guadagni Raffaele Rossi Anastasio Ballestrero Louise de La Vallière Anne Worsley Margaret Mostyn Agnes Mariam de la Croix Jessica Powers Ann Teresa Mathews Catharine Burton Natividad Zialcita Tadea de San Joaquín Josefina Constantino Carmelite brothers Lawrence of the Resurrection Brother John of Saint Samson Carmelite scholars Arnold Bostius Ludovicus a S. Carolo Robert Bale Guido Terrena William Beckley William Gregory Juan Bautista de Lezana John Baconthorpe Carmelite theologians Gerard of Bologna John Bamptomn Thomas Netter Henri de Saint-Ignace John Bate Thomas á Jesu Philip of the Blessed Trinity Franciscus Bonae Spei Pedro Cornejo de Pedrosa William Badby John Beston Carmelite tertiaries Maria Crocifissa Curcio Maria de Dominici Teresa of St. Rose of Lima Kuriakose Elias Chavara Filippo Lippi Carmelite churches, convents, and monasteries Carmelite churches Whitefriar Street Carmelite Church St. Joseph's Carmelite Church, Berkeley Road Church of Our Lady Victorious Santa Maria del Carmine, Florence Annunciation Church, Mdina Santa Maria del Carmine Monastery of The Holy Spirit, Sheffield Carmelite convents Aylesford Priory Carmelite basilica Santa Maria del Carmine, Naples San Martino ai Monti San Martino, Bologna Basilica-Sanctuary of Maria Santissima Annunziata Carmelite monasteries Convento de San José (Ávila) Berdychiv Carmelite Monastery Muhraqa Carmelite Monastery Stella Maris Monastery Carmelite Monastery Church of the Annunciation Monastery of Mary, Mother of Grace Marylake Carmelite Monastery Monastery of The Holy Spirit, Sheffield Döbling Carmelite Monastery Carmelite education Colleges and universities Whitefriars College Carmelite Institute of Britain and Ireland Pontifical universities Teresianum Institutum Carmelitanum Catholicism portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fulton_J._Sheen&oldid=1306379692 " Categories : 1895 births 1979 deaths 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century American Roman Catholic titular archbishops 20th-century Roman Catholic bishops in the United States 20th-century venerated Christians 20th-century American Roman Catholic theologians 20th-century American memoirists American anti-communists American male non-fiction writers American people of Irish descent American religious writers American Roman Catholic writers American television evangelists American venerated Catholics Burials at St. Patrick's Cathedral (Manhattan) Catholic television Catholic University of America alumni Catholic University of America faculty Catholic University of Leuven (1834–1968) alumni Catholics from Illinois Members of the Order of the Holy Sepulchre Participants in the Second Vatican Council People from El Paso, Illinois People from Peoria, Illinois Pontifical University of Saint Thomas Aquinas alumni Primetime Emmy Award winners Christian mass media in the United States Roman Catholic bishops in New York (state) Roman Catholic Diocese of Rochester Saint Paul Seminary alumni St. Viator College alumni Venerated Catholics by Pope Benedict XVI Writers from Illinois Writers from New York City Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2022 Pages with template ordination embedded Commons category link from Wikidata Pages using S-rel template with ca parameter This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 12:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fulton J. Sheen 24 languages Add topic

