Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Legend 3 Teachings 4 See also 5 References 6 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Wei Boyang 11 languages العربية Deutsch Italiano Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese alchemist and writer Wei Boyang as illustrated in the book《仙佛奇踪》in AD 1602 Part of a series on Taoism Outline History Concepts Taoist philosophy Tao De Wuji Taiji Yin and yang Bagua Wuxing (five phases) Bianhua Fan (reversal) Wu wei (non-action) Wu xin (no-mind) Ziran Xian (immortal) Zhenren True form Three Treasures Jing Qi Shen Hun and po Practices Three Treasures (virtues) Five Precepts Ten Precepts Meditation Alchemy Neidan Waidan Bugang Chu Diet ( Bigu ) Sexual practices Art Fulu Priesthood Texts I Ching Tao Te Ching Zhuangzi Huainanzi Taipingjing Xiang'er Liezi Sanhuangjing Huahujing Qingjing Jing Baopuzi Daozang Theology Hongjun Laozu Three Pure Ones Yuanshi Tianzun Lingbao Tianzun Daode Tianzun Four heavenly ministers Jade Emperor Ziwei Emperor Tianhuang Emperor Houtu Queen Mother of the West King Father of the East Three Great Emperor-Officials Eight Immortals Chang'e Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors Yellow Emperor Guan Yu Li Hong Body god People Laozi Zhuang Zhou Lie Yukou Heshang Gong Wei Boyang Zhang Daoling Gan Ji Zhang Jue Zhang Lu Ge Xuan He Yan Wang Bi Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove Guo Xiang Sun Hanhua Wei Huacun Ge Hong Bao Jingyan Kou Qianzhi Lu Xiujing Tao Hongjing Cheng Xuanying Chen Tuan Zhang Boduan Sun Bu'er Wang Chongyang Qiu Chuji Zhang Guoxiang Zhang Sanfeng Zhu Quan Fangshi Schools Huang–Lao Way of the Taiping Xuanxue Shangqing School Way of the Li Family Lingbao School Chongxuan School Quanzhen School Dragon Gate Wuliupai Way of the Celestial Masters Way of the Five Pecks of Rice The Southern Celestial Masters The Northern Celestial Masters Zhengyi Dao Chinese ritual mastery traditions Yao Taoism Sacred places Grotto-heavens Sacred Mountains of China Wudang Mountains Mount Penglai Mount Kunlun Taoist temple White Cloud Temple Louguantai Cebu Taoist Temple Taoist Temple (Hanford, California) Institutions and organizations Chinese Taoist Association Celestial Masters Taoist priests Category v t e Wei Boyang ( traditional Chinese : 魏伯陽 ; simplified Chinese : 魏伯阳 ; pinyin : Wèi bóyáng ) was a Chinese writer and Taoist alchemist of the Eastern Han dynasty . He is the author of The Kinship of the Three (also known as Cantong Qi ), and is noted as the first person to have documented something like the chemical composition of gunpowder in 142 AD .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] As someone or him, only mixed the chemical compound of Sulphur and Saltpetre .

[ 3 ] Wei Boyang is considered a semi-legendary figure who represented a "collective unity." His Cantong Qi was probably written in stages from the Han dynasty onward until it approached its current form, before 450 AD.

[ 4 ] Biography [ edit ] Wei Boyang was born in a prominent family. One theory claims that he was the son of a minister named Wei Lang ( 魏朗 ). In the second year of Jianning (169 AD), Wei Lang was killed due to political trouble. Wei Boyang was forced to hide in the mountains, there he focused on studying Taoism and refining elixirs .

[ 5 ] Wei Boyang died in the second year of Huangchu of Cao Pi (221 AD).

[ 6 ] Legend [ edit ] According to a hagiographical account in the Shenxian zhuan ( 神仙传 ; 'Biographies of the Divine Immortals'), a work attributed to Ge Hong (283–343), he and three disciples retired to a mountain and compounded an elixir for immortality : [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [...]
The hearts of his disciples were not settled. [They attempt to test the elixir on a dog to see its effects.] Wei Boyang then leaves and returns with a white dog. The white dog is then fed the pill and promptly dies. Despite this, Wei Boyang claims: "Fear has no place in practicing alchemy. The dog died because it did not have a clear mind, if one takes the pill while afraid like the dog, wouldn't that produce the same result?" The disciples then ask whether their master would take it or not, after which Wei Boyang says: "We went against society's customs and left our homes to practice in the mountains, without obtaining the way to immortality, we vow to never return. [...]" He swallows the pill and promptly dies.

The disciples discuss why practice alchemy for longevity when one dies after taking the elixir, whereas one would live for decades more without it. One of them then refuses to take the pill. The second disciple rebukes that Wei Boyang is no ordinary man, taking the elixir and dying must have been intentional. The second disciple then takes the pill and dies.

The remaining disciple leaves the mountain to purchase coffin wood. Afterwards, Wei Boyang sprangs ups and comes to life again. He gave the elixir into the mouths of the dead disciple and the dog, and they also revived. [...] Thus Wei Boyang and his faithful disciple attained immortality. Upon realizing this, the other disciple is full of regret.

Teachings [ edit ] Regarding Wei Boyang's writings, Ge Hong wrote in the Shenxian zhuan : "Boyang produced Cantong Qi ( 参同契 ) and Wuxianglei ( 五相类 ), of two volumes." Wei Boyang believed that cultivating elixirs and the creation of heaven and earth were based on the same principles.

Historical sites of Wei Boyang's work in chinese alchemy are located in the Fengming Mountains ( 凤鸣山 ) located 4 kilometers southeast of Fenghui ( 丰惠 ), and 17 kilometers away from Shangyu City .

See also [ edit ] Chinese alchemy History of gunpowder Taoism References [ edit ] ^ Peng, Yoke Ho.  [2000] (2000). Li, Qi and Shu: An Introduction to Science and Civilization in China.  Courier Dover Publications.

ISBN 0-486-41445-0 ^ Needham, Joseph.  Cullen, C.  [1976] (1976). Science and Civilisation in China.  Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-21028-3 ^ "The History of Gunpowder Is Steeped in Alchemy" .

ThoughtCo . Retrieved 2025-03-27 .

^ Pregadio 2011 , p. 27.

^ zh:南宋 zh:曾慥 《道枢》卷三十四《 Cantong qi 》下篇，记有关魏氏之事云：“魏翱，字伯阳，汉人，自号云牙子。”又“云牙子游于长白之山，而遇真人告以铅汞之理、龙虎之机焉，遂作书十有八章，言大道也。” ^ zh:後蜀 zh:彭曉 《周易參同契分章通真義》序說：“按《神仙傳》：真人魏伯陽者，會稽上虞人也。世襲簪裾，唯公不仕。……得《古文龍虎經》，盡獲妙旨，乃約《周易》撰《參同契》三篇。……密示青州徐從事，徐仍隱名而注之。至後漢孝桓帝時，公復傳授與同郡淳于叔通，遂行於世。” ^ Campany, Robert F. (2002-04-08).

To Live as Long as Heaven and Earth . Berkeley: Univ of California Press.

ISBN 0-520-92760-5 .

^ Sturgeon, Donald (2024-04-01).

神仙傳 : 卷二 : 魏伯陽 .

Chinese Text Project (in Chinese) . Retrieved 2024-04-01 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Pregadio, Fabrizio (2011), The Seal of the Unity of the Three v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Australia Netherlands Israel People Trove Other IdRef Yale LUX This biographical article about a Chinese scientist is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wei_Boyang&oldid=1290566188 " Categories : Ancient alchemists Chinese alchemists Han dynasty science writers Gunpowder Han dynasty Taoists Writers from Shaoxing Scientists from Shaoxing 2nd-century Taoists Chinese scientist stubs Hidden categories: Articles containing Chinese-language text CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text All stub articles This page was last edited on 15 May 2025, at 15:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wei Boyang 11 languages Add topic

