Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Analysis 3 Selected works 4 See also 5 References Toggle References subsection 5.1 Citations 5.2 Sources 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Uplift (science fiction) 5 languages Azərbaycanca Français Magyar Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Science fiction concept of transforming animals into more intelligent creatures This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Uplift" science fiction – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In science fiction , uplift is the intervention in the evolution of species of low- intelligence or even non sapient species in order to increase their intelligence.

[ 1 ] This is usually accomplished by cultural, technological, or evolutionary interventions such as genetic engineering . The earliest appearance of the concept is in H. G. Wells 's 1896 novel The Island of Doctor Moreau .

[ 2 ] The term was popularized by David Brin in his Uplift series in the 1980s.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] The concept of uplift can be traced to H. G. Wells 's 1896 novel The Island of Doctor Moreau , in which the titular scientist transforms animals into horrifying parodies of humans through surgery and psychological torment. The resulting animal-people obsessively recite the Law, a series of prohibitions against a reversion to animal behaviors, with the haunting refrain of "Are we not men?". Wells's novel reflects Victorian concerns about vivisection and of the power of unrestrained scientific experimentation to do terrible harm.

Other early literary examples can be found in the following works: Franz Kafka 's A Report to an Academy (1917) is a short story in which Red Peter, an ape , describes his capture by humans, adaptation and mimicry of their behavior, habits and speech (originally in order to escape), and subsequent integration into human society.

L. Sprague de Camp 's "Johnny Black" stories (beginning with " The Command ") about a black bear raised to human-level intelligence, published in Astounding Science-Fiction from 1938–1940.

In Cordwainer Smith 's Instrumentality of Mankind series "underpeople" are created from animals through unexplained technological means explicitly to be servants of humanity, and were often treated as less than slaves by the society that used them, until the laws were reformed in the story " The Ballad of Lost C'Mell " (1962). Smith's characterizations of underpeople are frequently quite sympathetic, and one of his most memorable characters is C'Mell, the cat-woman who appears in "The Ballad of Lost C'Mell" and in Norstrilia (1975).

David Brin has stated that his Uplift Universe was written at least in part in response to the common assumption in earlier science fiction such as Smith's work and Planet of the Apes that uplifted animals would, or even should, be treated as possessions rather than people.

[ 4 ] As a result, a significant part of the conflict in the series revolves around the differing policies of Galactics and humans toward their client races. Galactic races traditionally hold their uplifted "clients" in a hundred-millennium-long indenture , during which the "patrons" have extensive rights and claims over clients' lives and labor power. In contrast, humans have given their uplifted dolphins and chimpanzees near-equal civil rights , with a few legal and economic disabilities related to their unfinished state.  A key scene in Startide Rising is a discussion between a self-aware computer (the Niss) and a leading human (Gillian) about how the events during their venture (and hence the novel's plot) relate to the morality of the Galactics' system of uplift.

Analysis [ edit ] Some commentators, such as M. Keith Booker [ de ] , have argued that some pieces of literature have used uplift as an allegory for the white man's burden and colonialism . Booker singles out Robert Silverberg 's Downward to the Earth as a novel that mirrors Joseph Conrad 's Heart of Darkness in a science-fiction setting.

[ 5 ] Other authors, by contrast, have used uplift as a narrative foil to colonialism, presenting uplift not only as benevolent but as a virtuous reversal of colonial attitudes.

[ 5 ] Selected works [ edit ] Year Series Creator Media type Notes 1896 The Island of Doctor Moreau H. G. Wells Novel 1963 Planet of the Apes Pierre Boulle Novel The 1963 science fiction novel by French author Pierre Boulle was adapted into the 1968 film Planet of the Apes , launching the Planet of the Apes media franchise.

[ 6 ] The series also explores the opposite of uplift, the reduction of the human species to a regressed, atavistic, savage-like animal state.

1980–1998 Uplift Universe David Brin Novel series Starting with Sundiver in 1980, Brin's six novels (and several short stories) making up the Uplift War and Uplift Storm pair of trilogies describe a universe dominated by a society built around a process of uplift, where full sapience is deemed virtually impossible without the intervention of another species through uplift.

2007 Race for the Galaxy Thomas Lehmann Board game Uplift is a major theme. Some cards have "UPLIFT" highlighted in the title and can help score points and achieve goals. Designer Tom Lehmann attributes the inspiration for uplift to David Brin's Uplift series.

[ 7 ] 2007–2017 Mass Effect BioWare Video game series Before the events of the first game , the Salarians , a hyper-intelligent but physically weak alien race, uplifted the Krogan , a combative and rapidly-reproducing race, in order to defeat the Rachni, a hive-minded species, in an interstellar conflict.

[ 8 ] When the Rachni were defeated, the Krogan experienced a massive population boom and found themselves in conflict with other species in the galaxy. In response, the Salarians launched a biological weapon called the Genophage against them which only made 1 in 1,000 pregnancies viable, with the rest being stillbirths . The ethical ramifications of the uplift and bioweapon are used as plotlines throughout the series.

[ 9 ] 2015–2022 Children of Time Adrian Tchaikovsky Series of novels Three novels (also including Children of Ruin and Children of Memory ) explore how various earth animal species evolve and develop civilizations on terraformed exoplanets when uplifted by a human-developed nanovirus originally intended for monkeys.

Children of Time focuses on spiders , Children of Ruin octopi , and Children of Memory corvids , though the novels have connected narratives and also portray interactions between these uplifted species and spacefaring humans.

See also [ edit ] Animal cognition Eugenics Intelligence amplification Talking animal Transhumanism Heart of a Dog References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Langford, David (2022).

"Uplift" . In Clute, John ; Langford, David ; Sleight, Graham (eds.).

The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction (4th ed.) . Retrieved 2024-03-24 .

^ Booker 2015 , p. 311.

^ Langford, David (2005). "Uplift".

The Greenwood encyclopedia of science fiction and fantasy . Vol. 2. Greenwood Press.

ISBN 9780313329524 .

^ David Brin at www.scifi.com ^ a b Booker 2015 , p. 312.

^ David L. Ulin (July 14, 2014).

"The transformation of 'Planet of the Apes,' from book to movie legend" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved July 15, 2014 .

^ Lehmann, Tom.

"Designer Diary: Race for the Galaxy" . Retrieved 5 June 2011 .

^ Polo 2017 , § The Rachni War.

^ Polo 2017 , § The Genophage.

Sources [ edit ] Booker, M. Keith [in German] (2015).

Historical Dictionary of Science Fiction in Literature .

Lanham : Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 978-0-8108-7884-6 .

Polo, Susana (21 March 2017).

"The lore of Mass Effect: A complete guide" .

Polygon . Retrieved 7 November 2024 .

Further reading [ edit ] Pilkington, Ace G. (2017).

"Uplift" .

Science Fiction and Futurism: Their Terms and Ideas . Critical Explorations in Science Fiction and Fantasy. Vol. 58. McFarland. pp.

145– 149.

ISBN 978-0-7864-9856-7 .

Dvorsky, George (May 2008).

"All Together Now: Developmental and ethical considerations for biologically uplifting nonhuman animals" .

Journal of Evolution and Technology .

External links [ edit ] Fiction with "Uplifted" Animals: An Annotated Bibliography v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Uplift_(science_fiction)&oldid=1306564129 " Categories : Science fiction themes Biological engineering Animal intelligence Animals in popular culture Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2019 All articles needing additional references Articles that may contain original research from November 2024 All articles that may contain original research Articles with multiple maintenance issues CS1 interwiki-linked names This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 12:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Uplift (science fiction) 5 languages Add topic

