Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Relationship to the Miao Toggle Relationship to the Miao subsection 2.1 Historical Miao 2.2 Miao nationality 2.3 Hmong/Miao identity 3 Origins Toggle Origins subsection 3.1 Genetic origins 3.2 Homeland 4 History Toggle History subsection 4.1 China 4.2 Vietnam 4.3 Laos 4.3.1 The U.S. and the Laotian Civil War 4.3.2 Hmong Lao resistance 4.3.3 Controversy over repatriation 4.3.4 Alleged plot to overthrow the government of Laos 4.4 Thailand 4.5 In the United States 5 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 5.1 Vietnam and Laos 5.2 Hmong/Mong controversy 6 Diaspora Toggle Diaspora subsection 6.1 Vietnam 6.2 Laos 6.3 Thailand 6.4 Americas 7 Religious persecution 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Sources 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Hmong people 46 languages العربية تۆرکجه Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ລາວ Lietuvių مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Hmong Australians ) Ethnic group in southwest China and Southeast Asia Ethnic group Hmong people 𖬌𖬣𖬵 A choropleth map for countries with over 500 Hmong residents Total population 4–5 million [ 1 ] Regions with significant populations China 2,777,039 (2000, estimate) [ note 1 ] [ 1 ] Vietnam 1,393,547 (2019) [ 2 ] Laos 595,028 (2015) [ 3 ] United States 368,609 (2021) [ 4 ] Thailand 250,070 (2015) [ citation needed ] France 15,000 [ 5 ] Cambodia 3,700 (2004) [ citation needed ] Australia 3,438 (2011) [ 6 ] Myanmar 2,000–3,000 (2007) [ 7 ] France ( French Guiana ) 2,000 (2001) [ 8 ] Canada 600 (1999) [ 5 ] Argentina 600 (1999) [ 5 ] Germany 500 [ citation needed ] Languages Native: Hmong Regional: Chinese , Thai , Vietnamese , Lao , French , English , Burmese Religion Shamanism • Christianity • Buddhism This article contains Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong Unicode characters.

Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of Nyiakeng Puachue Hmong.

This article contains Pahawh Hmong Unicode characters.

Without proper rendering support , you may see question marks, boxes, or other symbols instead of the Pahawh Hmong characters.

The Hmong people ( RPA : Hmoob , CHV : Hmôngz , Nyiakeng Puachue : 𞄀𞄩𞄰 , Pahawh Hmong : 𖬌𖬣𖬵 , IPA: [m̥ɔ̃́] , Chinese : 苗族蒙人 ) are an indigenous group in East and Southeast Asia . In China, the Hmong people are classified as a sub-group of the Miao people . The modern Hmong reside mainly in Southwestern China and Mainland Southeast Asian countries such as Vietnam , Laos , Thailand , and Myanmar . There are also diaspora communities in the United States , Australia , France , and South America .

Etymology [ edit ] The term Hmong is the English pronunciation of the Hmong's native name. It is a singular and plural noun (e.g., Japanese, French, etc.). Very little is known about the native Hmong name as it is not mentioned in Chinese historical records, since the Han identified the Hmong as Miao. The meaning of it is debatable and no one is sure of its origin, although it can be traced back to several provinces in China. However, Hmong Americans and Hmong Laotians often associate it with "Free" and/or "Hmoov" (Fate); it serves as a reminder to them of their history of fighting oppression.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Before the 1970s, the term Miao or Meo (i.e. barbarians, wild, seedlings, and even "Sons of the Soil") was used in reference to the Hmong.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] In the 1970s, Dr. Yang Dao, a Hmong American scholar, who at the time was the head of the Human Resource Department of the Ministry of Planning in the Royal Lao Government of Laos, advocated for the term "Hmong" with the support of clan leaders and General Vang Pao .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Yang Dao insisted that the terms "Meo" and "Miao" were both unacceptable as his people had always called themselves by the name "Hmong," which he defined as "free men".

[ 13 ] Surrounding countries began to use the term "Hmong" after the U.S. Department of State used it during Immigration screening in Thailand's Ban Vinai Refugee Camp .

[ 16 ] In 1994, Pobzeb Vang registered the term "Hmong" with the United Nations , making it the proper term to identify the Hmong people internationally.

[ 17 ] Soon after, there was a political push from Hmong American politicians and activists to replace the term Miao with the term Hmong in China with little to no success.

[ 18 ] Relationship to the Miao [ edit ] See also: Miao people § Nomenclature: Miao or Hmong Hmong people at the Can Cau market, Si Ma Cai , Vietnam Historical Miao [ edit ] Historically, the term "Hmong" is not featured in any Chinese text, only the term "Miao". However it is uncertain if all mentions of Miao people referred to the Hmong people. According to Ruey (1962), the way in which Miao was used in Chinese can roughly be divided into three periods: a legendary period from 2300 BC to 200 BC, then a period when the term generally referred to southern barbarians until 1200 AD, and then a modern period during which the Hmong were probably included. Although the term appeared before the Qin dynasty (221 BCE), throughout history Miao was used as a loose and general term by the Han to refer to southern barbarians. Only since the Tang dynasty did more evidence of its association with the Hmong become more apparent.

[ 19 ] [ 11 ] [ 18 ] In the 20th century, Western missionaries called the Hmong and Hmao the "Big Flowery Miao" ( Da Hua Miao ) and the "Little Flowery Miao" ( Xiao Hua Miao ).

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Another source states that the Green and White Miao were the Hmong, the Flowery Miao were the Hmao, the Black Miao were the Hmu , and the Red Miao were the Xong .

[ 18 ] According to She Miaojun, the Miao only existed as an exonym in the imagination of outsiders all the way up to the Qing dynasty . It did not refer to any self-defined ethnic group united by either territory or language. Others believe that Miao identity emerged during the rebellions of the 18th and 19th centuries.

[ 11 ] Miao nationality [ edit ] Today, the Hmong in China are categorized under the umbrella term Miáo ( 苗 ) along with three other indigenous cultural groups, which include non-Hmong peoples such as the Hmu and the Xong of southeast Guizhou . The Chinese Miao minority was created in 1949 as part of the ethnic identification project in which members of the ethnic groups that now comprise the Miao umbrella group campaigned for identification under the name Miao – taking advantage of its familiarity and associations of historical political oppression. The push to appropriate Miao as the official name of their minzu nationality received significant contributions from three Miao intellectuals, however none of them were Hmong. The various Miao sub-groups freely identify as Miao or Chinese while reserving their specific ethnonyms for intra-ethnic communication.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] According to Jacques Lemoine, "Chinese Hmong have the Miao nationality but Hmong ethnicity" because the People's Republic of China doesn't recognize ethnicity.

[ 24 ] The Miao minority group has been described as extremely heterogeneous. The four main groups classified as Miao in China are the Hmong, Hmao, Hmu, and the Xong. Despite speaking related languages belonging to the Hmongic language group, these four ethnic groups have little in common and their languages are mutually unintelligible. Even the group closest to the Hmong, the Hmao, speak a language that is as different from Hmong as Italian is to French. They diverged significantly as early as a thousand years ago, after which they may have had no relation to each other at all. Without their official classification as the Miao minority after 1949, it is unlikely that they would be able to recognize any affinity with each other. However none of the four groups have obtained official status as distinct minorities in China. Their names are generally unrecognized by the Chinese and are only used as part of the local vernacular language. As a result, only a small portion of the modern Miao people initially identified as Hmong.

[ 25 ] [ 18 ] [ 26 ] The cumbersome umbrella term "Miao" refers to a number of disparate groups totaling 7.5 million people as of 1990, speaking three mutually unintelligible dialects and scattered over seven provinces in southwest China... These multiple sub-groups have been variously divided into large aggregates such as the Black, Red, Blue, White, and Flowery groups, or later the Eastern, Central or Western dialect groups. It was only in the Maoist period, with the national implementation of identification policies... that the diverse Miao in China came to recognize each other as co-ethnics and to identify  with and operate under the ethnonym "Miao." Only a portion of those identified as Miao—the ones distributed over western Guizhou and parts of Yunnan, particularly the border areas—call themselves "Hmong" in their own language.

[ 26 ] — Louisa Schein The non-equivalence between the Miao and the Hmong was acknowledged in interactions between Hmong refugees and the Miao. The Miao people that Hmong travelers from the West met were highly varied both in their language and cultural practices. When Hmong refugees from France and the US initially made contact with the Miao from China in officially sanctioned visits, they were introduced to the Xong Miao people who were neither Hmong nor spoke the Hmong language. An eyewitness recounts several occasions when a Hmong and a Hmao tried to understand each others' languages without success. They also met an assortment of Miao people who no longer spoke their native language and only knew Chinese.  Many of the Miao they met did not share the same traditional clothing, myths, and folktales. Some did not even play the lusheng , a traditional Hmong musical instrument. The visiting Hmong were themselves not from China but Southeast Asia, where their ancestors had migrated over a century ago due to conflicts in the Qing dynasty . Not understanding the differences between the Miao and Hmong, initially some Hmong-Americans did not believe that these were real Miao people, but other ethnic groups. Some thought that the different costumes were the result of lost traditions among the Southeast Asian Hmong.

[ 18 ] [ 26 ] Some Hmong went further to seek out "really Hmong" people through unofficial channels with whom they could speak Hmong to. However even after successfully finding them, they found that there were dialect variations that differed from the Hmong that they grew up speaking. As Hmong refugees discovered the differences between themselves and the Chinese Miao, some non-Hmong Miao people such as the Hmu started referring to themselves as Hmong to express nationalistic sentiments. Contributing to this trend is the tendency of professional linguists to use the names of smaller ethnic groups to refer to the broader categories such as Hmong–Mien languages rather than Miao-Yao languages. This is due to the outsized influence of groups outside of Asia such as the Hmong and Mien who are able to articulate their cause, thereby affecting some proto-nationalistic movements within the Miao to identify as Hmong despite not actually being Hmong.

[ 18 ] Hmong/Miao identity [ edit ] Miao or Meo carried strong pejorative connotations in both China and Southeast Asia. It was more so a stereotype such as uncivilized, uncooperative, uncultivated, harmful, and inhumane than a name of an ethnic group and was used in daily conversations as an expression for ugliness and primitiveness. Due to these negative connotations, the Hmong promote the use of Hmong as a replacement for Miao.

[ 11 ] [ 21 ] In modern times, however, Miao has lost such negative connotations in China and has since been officially recognized as an ethnicity, which includes the Hmong. The Hmong in China are often happy or proud to be known as Miao while most Hmong outside China find it offensive.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] According to Louisa Schein, Miao is a neutral ethnonym within China and the only term that encompasses all its subgroups.

[ 26 ] According to Gary Yia Lee writing in the Hmong Studies Journal , the choice to identify as Miao was a deliberate and strategic decision its members advocated for in recognition of its potential benefits. Rather than being split into multiple smaller groups with short and murky histories, the Miao chose to adopt one ethno-name representing 9.2 million people claiming a long history dating back to ancient China. Their larger population granted them the strength and support befitting of the fifth largest nationality in China. In addition, by claiming kinship to the San Miao referred to in ancient Chinese history, they positioned themselves as pre-existing inhabitants of China prior to the arrival of the Han, imparting a "legendary stature to the present-day Miao" that "bestows the dignity of great antiquity, authoritativeness and a firm standing in the documentary record".

[ 29 ] Contemporary transnational interactions between Hmong in the West and Miao groups in China, following the 1975 Hmong emigration, led to the development of a global Hmong identity that includes linguistically and culturally related minorities in China with no previous ethnic affiliation. In 1994, a Miao woman from China was chosen as the winner of the Miss Hmong Beauty Pageant in Fresno, California . Costume styles were imported from China and used in festivals.

[ 26 ] Scholarly and commercial exchanges, increasingly made over the internet, have also resulted in an exchange of terminology, including some Hmong people accepting the designation Miao after visiting China and some nationalist non-Hmong Miao peoples identifying as Hmong.

[ 21 ] In Southeast Asia, Hmong people are referred to by other names, including: Vietnamese Mèo , Mông or H'Mông ; Lao Maew ( ແມ້ວ ) or Mong ( ມົ້ງ ); Thai Maew ( แม้ว ) or Mong ( ม้ง ); and Burmese mun lu-myo ( မုံလူမျိုး ). With a slight change in accent, the word "Meo" in Lao and Thai can be pronounced to mean
"cat".

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] The term Maew and Meo derived from the term Miao.

[ 32 ] Origins [ edit ] Genetic origins [ edit ] Likely routes of early rice transfer, and possible language family homelands (archaeological sites in China and SE Asia shown) A DNA study in 2005 in Thailand found that Hmong paternal lineage is quite different from lu Mien and other Southeast Asian tribes. The Hmong–Mien and Sino-Tibetan speaking people are known as hill tribes in Thailand; they were the subject of the first studies to show an impact of patrilocality vs. matrilocality on patterns of mitochondrial (mt) DNA vs. the male-specific portion of the Y chromosome (MSY) variation.
According to linguist Martha Ratliff , there is linguistic evidence to suggest that they have occupied some of the same areas of southern China for over 8,000 years.

[ 33 ] Evidence from mitochondrial DNA in Hmong–Mien –speaking populations supports the existence of southern origins of maternal lineages even further back in time, although it has been shown that Hmong-speaking populations had comparatively more contact with northern East Asians than had the Mien.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] A 2020 study, however, states that Hmong in Thailand cluster with other Hmong groups only due to their practice of endogamy.

[ 37 ] In 2011, Hmong DNA was sampled and found to contain 7.84% D-M15 and 6%N(Tat) DNA.

[ 38 ] The research found a common ancestry between Hmong–Mien peoples and Mon-Khmer groups dating to the Last Glacial Maximum , approximately 15,000 to 18,000 years ago.

A rare haplogroup, O3d, was found at the Daxi culture in the middle reaches of the Yangtze River , indicating that the Daxi people might be the ancestors of modern Hmong–Mien populations, which show only small traces of O3d today.

[ 39 ] The most representative ancestral lineages of Hmong-Mien speakers come from ancient individuals from Guangxi (GaoHuaHua) and Guizhou (Songshan_o2), dating back to the Ming Dynasty.

[ 40 ] Other studies also confirm the significant role of Ancient Northern East Asians in shaping the Hmong genome.

[ 41 ] Overall, Hmong–Mien cluster with Tai-Kadai and Sino-Tibetan speakers compared to other Chinese populations.

[ 42 ] A 2020 study shows that the core Hmong-Mien population derives more ancestry from Neolithic Mekong (32.3%–35.3%) than Late Neolithic Fujian (23.7%–26.4%), suggesting stronger Austroasiatic affinities although Tai-Kadai ancestry peaks in groups that live in southeastern China.

[ 43 ] Genetic stratification exists within the Hmong-Mien population, with northern Hmong-Mien populations exhibiting more genetic similarities with Tibeto-Burman/Sinitic populations and southern Hmong-Mien populations sharing more alleles with Austronesian/Tai-Kadai populations.

[ 44 ] Hmong-Mien populations within the Miao cluster exhibit stronger genetic influence from neighboring populations like Han Chinese. Other Miao populations are more related to Hmong populations from Vietnam. Yao populations in Guangxi, in contrast, share more genetic drift with Tai-Kadai populations. Bunu-speaking Yao populations exhibit strong genetic affinities with the GaoHuaHua population due to their geographic isolation. She populations from Guizhou cluster with their Hmong-Mien neighbors and received significant input from Tai-Kadai populations whilst She populations from Fujian received more input from Han Chinese populations.

[ 40 ] In 2021, researchers found that the 'GaoHuaHua' population in Guangxi contributed to the ancestries of modern Hmong-Mien groups in Guangxi. The 'GaoHuaHua' population was modeled as having 66% Dushan-related ancestry and 34% Boshan-related ancestry. They also received Northeast Asian-related Shandong ancestry, which emerged 9,500–7,700 years ago.

[ 35 ] Homeland [ edit ] The most likely homeland of the Hmong–Mien languages is in southern China between the Yangtze and Mekong rivers.

[ 45 ] In particular, southwestern China was suggested to the original homeland of Hmong-Mien peoples.

[ 46 ] Migration of people speaking these languages from southern China to Southeast Asia took place ca. 1600–1700 CE. Ancient DNA evidence suggests that the ancestors of the speakers of the Hmong–Mien languages were a population genetically distinct from that of the Tai–Kadai and Austronesian language populations at a location on the Yangtze River .

[ 47 ] Recent Y-DNA phylogeny evidence supports the theory that people who speak the Hmong–Mien languages are descended from a population that is distantly related to those who now speak the Mon-Khmer languages.

[ 48 ] Another study shows that the core Hmong-Mien population in southern China derived most of their ancestry from Neolithic Mekong (32.3%–35.3%) than Late Neolithic Fujian (23.7%–26.4%).

[ 43 ] The time of Proto-Hmong–Mien was estimated to be about 2500 BP (500 BCE) by Sagart, Blench, and Sanchez-Mazas using traditional methods employing many lines of evidence, and about 4243 BP by the Automated Similarity Judgment Program (ASJP), an experimental algorithm for automatic generation of phonologically based phylogenies.

[ 49 ] History [ edit ] China [ edit ] The historical migration of the Hmong according to Hmong tradition Hmong traditions and legends indicate that they originated near the Yellow River region of northern China , but this is not substantiated by any scientific evidence.

[ 50 ] According to linguist Martha Ratliff , there is linguistic evidence to suggest that they have occupied some of the same areas of southern China for over 8,000 years.

[ 33 ] The author of Guoyu , written in the 4th to 5th century, considered Chi You's Jiu Li tribe to be related to the ancient ancestors of the Hmong, the San-Miao people.

[ 51 ] Chi You is the Hmong ancestral God of War. Today, a statue of Chi You has been erected in the town named Zhuolu .

[ 52 ] A scene depicting the Qing dynasty 's campaign against the Hmong people at Lancaoping in 1795 Conflict between the Hmong of southern China and newly arrived Han settlers increased during the 18th century under repressive economic and cultural reforms imposed by the Qing dynasty . This led to armed conflict and large-scale migrations well into the late 19th century, the period during which many Hmong people emigrated to Southeast Asia. However, the migration process had begun as early as the late 17th century, before the time of major social unrest, when small groups went in search of better agricultural opportunities.

[ 53 ] The Hmong people were subjected to persecution and genocide by the Qing dynasty government. Arthur A. Hansen wrote: "In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, while the Hmong lived in south-western China, their Manchu overlords had labeled them ' Miao ' and targeted them for genocide ." [ 54 ] [ better source needed ] Since 1949, the Miao people ( Chinese : 苗族 ; pinyin : miáo zú ) has been an official term for one of the 56 official minority groups recognized by the government of the People's Republic of China . The Miao live mainly in southern China, in the provinces of Guizhou , Hunan , Yunnan , Sichuan , Guangxi , Hainan , Guangdong , and Hubei . According to the 2000 census, the number of 'Miao' in China was estimated to be about 9.6 million. The Miao nationality includes Hmong people as well as other culturally and linguistically related ethnic groups who do not call themselves Hmong. These include the Hmu , Kho (Qho) Xiong, and A-Hmao . The settling region of the Hmong in China is further western than that of the other groups, mainly in Guizhou, Yunnan, Sichuan, Chongqing, and Guangxi.

Xijiang, a Hmong-majority township in Guizhou, China Vietnam [ edit ] The Hmong or Miao began to migrate to Tonkin (Northern Vietnam) in the 19th century, where they struggled to establish their community on the high mountains. They recognized the Tai-speaking overlords of valleys, who were vassals of the Vietnamese court in Hue. The Hue court of Tu Duc at the time was facing crisis after crisis, unable to retake control of Tonkin and the border regions. The Taiping rebellion and other Chinese rebels spilled over into Vietnam and had caused anarchy; the Hmong communities thrived on either sides of the Red River, harmonizing with other ethnic groups, and were largely ignored by all factions.

[ 55 ] During the colonization of ' Tonkin ' ( North Vietnam ) between 1883 and 1954, a number of Hmong decided to join the Vietnamese Nationalists and Communists , while many Christianized Hmong sided with the French. After the Viet Minh victory, numerous pro-French Hmong had to fall back to Laos and South Vietnam .

[ 56 ] Red Dao in Vietnam Laos [ edit ] After decades of distant relations with the Lao kingdoms, closer relations between the French military and some Hmong on the Xieng Khouang plateau arose after World War II . There, a rivalry between members of the Lo and Ly clans developed into open enmity, also affecting those connected with them by kinship. Clan leaders took opposite sides; as a consequence, several thousand Hmong participated in the fighting against the Pathet Lao Communists , while almost as many were enrolled in the communist Lao People's Revolutionary Army . In Laos, numerous Hmong genuinely tried to avoid getting involved in the conflict in spite of the extremely difficult material conditions under which they lived during wartime.

[ 57 ] The U.S. and the Laotian Civil War [ edit ] Main article: Laotian Civil War In the early 1960s, partially as a result of the North Vietnamese invasion of Laos , the U.S.

Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) Special Activities Division began to recruit, train and lead the indigenous Hmong people in Laos to fight against North Vietnamese Army divisions that were invading Laos during the Vietnam War . This "Secret Army" was organized into various mobile regiments and divisions, including Special Guerrilla Units, all of whom were led by General Vang Pao . An estimated sixty-percent (60%) of Hmong men in Laos joined up.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] [ better source needed ] While there were Hmong soldiers who fought with the communist Pathet Lao and the North Vietnamese, others were recognized for serving in combat against the NVA and the Pathet Lao , helping block Hanoi's Ho Chi Minh trail inside Laos and rescuing downed American pilots. Though their role was generally kept secret in the early stages of the conflict, they made great sacrifices to help the U.S.

[ 60 ] Thousands of economic and political refugees have resettled in Western countries in two separate waves. The first wave resettled in the late 1970s, mostly in the United States after the North Vietnamese and Pathet Lao takeovers of the pro-U.S. governments in South Vietnam and Laos respectively.

[ 61 ] The Lao Veterans of America , and Lao Veterans of America Institute, helped to assist in the resettlement of many Laotian and Hmong refugees and asylum seekers in the United States, especially former Hmong veterans and their family members who served in the "U.S. Secret Army" in Laos during the Vietnam War.

[ 62 ] [ failed verification ] Hmong Lao resistance [ edit ] Main articles: Conflict in Laos involving the Hmong and United League for Democracy in Laos Hmong girls meet possible suitors while playing a ball-throwing game in Laos .

For many years, the Neo Hom political movement played a key role in resistance to the Vietnam People's Army in Laos following the U.S. withdrawal in 1975; Vang Pao played a significant role in this movement. Additionally, a spiritual leader, Zong Zoua Her , as well as other Hmong leaders, including Pa Kao Her or Pa Khao Her, rallied some of their followers in a factionalized guerrilla resistance movement called ChaoFa ( RPA : Cob Fab, Pahawh Hmong : 𖬒𖬯 𖬖𖬜𖬵 ).

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] These events led to the yellow rain controversy when the United States accused the Soviet Union of supplying and using chemical weapons in this conflict.

[ 65 ] Small groups of Hmong people, many second or third generation descendants of former CIA soldiers, remain internally displaced in remote parts of Laos, in fear of government reprisals. Faced with continuing military operations against them by the government and a scarcity of food, some groups have begun coming out of hiding, while others have sought asylum in Thailand and other countries.

[ 66 ] Hmong in Laos, in particular, developed a stronger and deeper anti-Vietnamese sentiment than their Vietnamese Hmong cousins, due to historic persecution perpetrated by the Vietnamese against them.

Controversy over repatriation [ edit ] Main article: Human rights in Laos § Hmong refugees and forced repatriation The examples and perspective in this section may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( February 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In June 1991, after talks with the UNHCR and the Thai government, Laos agreed to the repatriation of over 60,000 Lao refugees living in Thailand, including tens of thousands of Hmong people. Very few of the Lao refugees, however, were willing to return voluntarily.

[ 67 ] Pressure to resettle the refugees grew as the Thai government worked to close its remaining refugee camps. While some Hmong people returned to Laos voluntarily, with development assistance from UNHCR, coercive measures and forced repatriation was used to send thousands of Hmong back to the places they had fled.

[ 68 ] [ 69 ] Of the Hmong who did return to Laos, some quickly escaped back to Thailand, describing discrimination and brutal treatment at the hands of Lao authorities.

[ 70 ] In the 1980s, 1990s, and early 2000s, The Center for Public Policy Analysis , a non-governmental public policy research organization, and its executive director, Philip Smith, played a key role in raising awareness in the U.S. Congress and policy-making circles in Washington, D.C. about the plight of the Hmong and Laotian refugees in Thailand and Laos. The CPPA, backed by a bipartisan coalition of members of the U.S. Congress and human rights organizations, conducted numerous research missions to the Hmong and Laotian refugee camps along the Mekong River in Thailand, as well as the Buddhist temple of Wat Tham Krabok .

[ 71 ] Amnesty International , the Lao Veterans of America , Inc., the United League for Democracy in Laos , Inc., Lao Human Rights Council , Inc. (led by Dr. Pobzeb Vang Vang Pobzeb , and later Vaughn Vang) and other non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and human rights organizations joined the opposition to forced repatriation.

[ 62 ] Although some accusations of forced repatriation were denied, [ 72 ] thousands of Hmong people refused to return to Laos. In 1996, as the deadline for the closure of Thai refugee camps approached, under mounting political pressure, the U.S. agreed to resettle Hmong refugees who passed a new screening process.

[ 73 ] Around 5,000 Hmong people who were not resettled at the time of the camp closures sought asylum at Wat Tham Krabok , a Buddhist monastery in central Thailand where more than 10,000 Hmong refugees were already living. The Thai government attempted to repatriate these refugees, but the Wat Tham Krabok Hmong refused to leave and the Lao government refused to accept them, claiming they were involved in the illegal drug trade and were of non-Lao origin.

[ 74 ] In 2003, following threats of forcible removal by the Thai government, the U.S., in a significant victory for the Hmong, agreed to accept 15,000 of the refugees.

[ 75 ] Several thousand Hmong people, fearing forced repatriation to Laos if they were not accepted for resettlement in the U.S., fled the camp to live elsewhere within Thailand where a sizable Hmong population has been present since the 19th century.

[ 76 ] In 2004 and 2005, thousands of Hmong fled from the jungles of Laos to a temporary refugee camp in the Thai province of Phetchabun .

[ 77 ] The European Union , [ 78 ] UNHCHR , and international groups have since spoken out about the forced repatriation.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] [ 81 ] Alleged plot to overthrow the government of Laos [ edit ] Main article: 2007 Laotian coup d'état conspiracy allegation On 4 June 2007, as part of an investigation labeled Operation Tarnished Eagle , U.S. federal courts ordered warrants issued for the arrest of Vang Pao and nine others for plotting to overthrow the government of Laos in violation of federal Neutrality Acts and for multiple weapons charges.

[ 82 ] The federal charges alleged that members of the group inspected weapons, including AK-47s , smoke grenades , and Stinger missiles , in order to buy and smuggle into Thailand in June 2007, where they were intended to be used by Hmong resistance forces in Laos. Out of the 9 arrested, one was an American, Harrison Jack, a 1968 West Point graduate and retired Army infantry officer who allegedly attempted to recruit Special Operations veterans to act as mercenaries .

To obtain the weapons, Jack allegedly met unknowingly with undercover U.S. federal agents posing as weapons dealers, prompting the warrants, part of a long-running investigation into the activities of the U.S.-based Hmong leadership and its supporters.

On 15 June, the defendants were indicted by a grand jury ; a warrant was also issued for the arrest of an 11th man allegedly involved in the plot. Simultaneous raids of the defendants' homes and work locations, involving over 200 federal, state and local law enforcement officials, were conducted in approximately 15 U.S. cities in Central and Southern California .

Multiple protest rallies in support of the suspects, designed to raise awareness of the treatment of Hmong peoples in the jungles of Laos, took place in California , Minnesota , Wisconsin , and Alaska . Several of Vang Pao 's high-level supporters in the U.S. criticized the California court that issued the arrest warrants, arguing that Vang was a historically important American ally and a valued leader of U.S. and foreign-based Hmong. Calls to Californian Republican governor Arnold Schwarzenegger and President George W. Bush to pardon the defendants went unanswered pending a conclusion to the large, ongoing federal investigation.

[ 83 ] On 18 September 2009, the U.S. federal government dropped all charges against Vang Pao, announcing that the federal government was permitted to consider "the probable sentence or other consequences if the person is convicted".

[ 84 ] On 10 January 2011, after Vang Pao's death, the federal government dropped all charges against the remaining defendants saying, "Based on the totality of the circumstances in the case, the government believes, as a discretionary matter, that continued prosecution of defendants is no longer warranted." [ 85 ] Thailand [ edit ] Hmong kids in Thailand The presence of Hmong settlements in Thailand is documented from the end of the 19th century on. Initially, the Siamese paid little attention to them. But in the early 1950s, the state suddenly took a number of initiatives aimed at establishing links. Decolonization and nationalism were gaining momentum in the peninsula and wars of independence were raging. Armed opposition to the state in northern Thailand, triggered by outside influence, started in 1967 while again many Hmong refused to take sides in the conflict. Communist guerrilla warfare stopped by 1982 as a result of an international concurrence of events that rendered it pointless. Priority has since been given by the Thai state to sedentarizing the mountain population, introducing commercially viable agricultural techniques and national education, with the aim of integrating these non-Tai animists within the national identity.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] In the United States [ edit ] Main article: Hmong American See also: List of Hmong Americans ; History of the Hmong in Merced, California ; Hmong archives ; Lao Veterans of America ; Laos Memorial ; and The Center for Public Policy Analysis Many Hmong refugees resettled in the United States after the Vietnam War . Beginning in December 1975, the first Hmong refugees arrived in the U.S., mainly from refugee camps in Thailand; however, only 3,466 were granted asylum at that time under the Indochina Migration and Refugee Assistance Act of 1975 . In May 1976, another 11,000 were allowed to enter the United States, and by 1978 some 30,000 Hmong people had emigrated. This first wave was made up predominantly of men directly associated with General Vang Pao 's secret army. It was not until the passage of the Refugee Act of 1980 that families were able to enter the U.S., becoming the second wave of Hmong immigrants. Hmong families were scattered across all 50 states but most found their way to each other, building large communities in California, Minnesota, Wisconsin, Washington State and Oregon. Smaller, but still sizeable communities also formed in Massachusetts ( Lowell ), Michigan ( Detroit ), Montana ( Missoula ) and Alaska ( Anchorage ).

Culture [ edit ] A pair of traditional Hmong fine silver earrings Hmong people have their own terms for their cultural divisions.

Hmong Der ( Hmoob Dawb ), and Hmong Leng ( Hmoob Leeg ) are the terms for two of the largest groups in the United States and Southeast Asia. These subgroups are also known as the White Hmong, and Blue or Green Hmong, respectively. These names originate from the color and designs of women's dresses in each respective group, with the White Hmong distinguished by the white dresses women wear on special occasions, and the Blue/Green Hmong by the blue batiked dresses.

[ 88 ] The name and pronunciation "Hmong" is exclusively used by the White Hmong to refer to themselves, and many dictionaries use only the White Hmong dialect.

[ 89 ] In the Romanized Popular Alphabet , developed in the 1950s in Laos, these terms are written Hmoob Dawb (White Hmong) and Hmoob Leeg (Green Hmong). The final consonants indicate with which of the eight lexical tones the word is pronounced.

[ 90 ] White Hmong and Green Hmong speak mutually intelligible dialects of the Hmong language , with some differences in pronunciation and vocabulary. One of the most characteristic differences is the use of the voiceless /m̥/ in White Hmong, indicated by a preceding "H" in the Romanized Popular Alphabet. Voiceless nasals are not found in the Green Hmong dialect. Hmong groups are often named after the dominant colors or patterns of their traditional clothing, style of head-dress , or the provinces from which they come.

[ 90 ] Vietnam and Laos [ edit ] The Hmong groups in Vietnam and Laos, from the 18th century to the present day, are known as Black Hmong ( Hmoob Dub ), Striped Hmong ( Hmoob Txaij ), White Hmong ( Hmoob Dawb ), Hmong Leng ( Hmoob Leeg ) and Green Hmong ( Hmoob Ntsuab ). In other places in Asia, groups are also known as Black Hmong ( Hmoob Dub or Hmong Dou ), Striped Hmong ( Hmoob Txaij or Hmoob Quas Npab ), Hmong Shi, Hmong Pe, Hmong Pua, and Hmong Xau, Hmong Xanh (Green Hmong), Hmong Do (Red Hmong), Na Mieo and various other subgroups.

[ 90 ] These include the Flower Hmong or the Variegated Hmong ( Hmong Lenh or Hmong Hoa ), so named because of their bright, colorful embroidery work (called pa ndau or paj ntaub , literally ' flower cloth ' ).

[ 91 ] Main article: Miao people Hmong folk costume in Sa Pa , Vietnam See also: Languages of China and Ethnic groups in Chinese history A Flower Hmong woman in Vietnam A typical rammed earth house –building technique of Flower Hmong in Vietnam Hmong/Mong controversy [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this section may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( February 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) When Western authors first came in contact with Hmong people in the 18th century, they referred to them by writing ethnonyms which were previously assigned to them by the Chinese (i.e., Miao , or variants).

[ citation needed ] This practice continued into the 20th century.

[ 92 ] Even ethnographers studying the Hmong people in Southeast Asia often referred to them as Meo , an alteration of Miao applied by Thai and Lao people to the Hmong. Although Meo was an official term, it was often used as an insult against the Hmong people, and it is considered to be derogatory.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] The issue came to a head during the passage of California State Assembly Bill (AB) 78, in the 2003–2004 season.

[ 95 ] [ better source needed ] Introduced by Doua Vu and Assembly Member Sarah Reyes , District 31 (Fresno), the bill encouraged changes in secondary education curriculum to include information about the Secret War and the role of Hmong people in the war. Furthermore, the bill called for the use of oral histories and first-hand accounts by Hmong people who had participated in the war and were caught up in its aftermath. Originally, the language of the bill mentioned only "Hmong" people, intending to include the entire community. Several Mong Leng activists, led by Dr.

Paoze Thao (Professor of Linguistics and Education at California State University, Monterey Bay ), drew attention to the problems associated with omitting Mong from the language of the bill. They noted that despite nearly equal numbers of Hmong Der and Mong Leng in the United States, resources are disproportionately allocated to the Hmong Der community. This not only includes scholarly research, but also the translation of materials, including the curriculum proposed by the bill.

[ 96 ] Despite these arguments, Mong was not added to the bill. In the version of the bill that was passed by the assembly, Hmong was replaced by Southeast Asians , a broader and more inclusive term.

Dr. Paoze Thao and some others strongly feel that Hmong can only be used in reference to Hmong Der people because it does not include "Mong" Leng people. He feels that the use of Hmong in reference to both groups perpetuates the marginalization of the Mong Leng language and culture. Thus, he advocates the use of Hmong and Mong in reference to the entire ethnic group.

[ 97 ] Other scholars, including anthropologist Dr.

Gary Yia Lee (a Hmong Der person), suggests that for the past 30 years, [ as of?

] Hmong has been used in reference to the entire community and as a result, the inclusion of Mong Leng people is understandable.

[ 98 ] [ better source needed ] Some argue that such distinctions create unnecessary divisions within the global community, arguing that the use of these distinctions will only confuse non-Hmong and Mong people who are both trying to learn more about Hmong and Mong history and culture.

[ 99 ] As a compromise alternative, multiple iterations of Hmong have been proposed. A Hmong theologian, Rev. Dr. Paul Joseph T. Khamdy Yang has proposed the use of the term HMong in reference to the Hmong and the Mong communities by capitalizing the H and the M . The ethnologist Jacques Lemoine has also begun to use the term (H)mong in reference to the entirety of the Hmong and Mong communities.

[ 1 ] Diaspora [ edit ] Further information: Integration of Hmong people into urban society Linguistic data shows that the Hmong of the peninsula stem from the Miao of southern China as one among a set of ethnic groups belonging to the Hmong–Mien language family.

[ 100 ] Linguistically and culturally speaking, the Hmong and the other sub-groups of the Miao have little in common.

[ 101 ] Vietnam , where their presence is attested from the late 18th century onwards and characterized with both assimilation, cooperation and hostility, is likely to be the first Southeastern Eurasian country into which the Hmong migrated.

[ 102 ] At the 2019 national census, there were 1,393,547 Hmong living in Vietnam, the vast majority of them in the north of the country. The traditional trade in coffin wood with China and cultivation of the opium poppy – not prohibited in Vietnam until 1993 – long guaranteed a regular cash income. Today, cash cropping is the main economic activity. As in China and Laos, Hmong participate to a certain degree in local and regional administration.

[ 103 ] In the late 1990s, several thousands of Hmong started moving to the Central Highlands and some crossed the border into Cambodia , constituting the first attested presence of Hmong settlers in that country.

[ citation needed ] In 2015, the Hmong in Laos numbered 595,028.

[ 104 ] Hmong settlement there is nearly as ancient as in Vietnam.

After the 1975 Communist victory, thousands of Hmong from Laos had to seek refuge abroad (see Laos below). Approximately 30 percent of the Hmong have left, although the only concrete figure we have is that of 116,000 Hmong from Laos and Vietnam together seeking refuge in Thailand up to 1990.

[ 105 ] In 2002 the Hmong in Thailand numbered 151,080.

Myanmar most likely includes a modest number of Hmong (perhaps around 2,500) but no reliable census has been conducted there recently.

[ 106 ] As result of refugee movements in the wake of the Indochina Wars (1946–1975), in particular, in Laos, the largest Hmong community to settle outside Asia went to the United States where approximately 100,000 individuals had already arrived by 1990. By the same date, 10,000 Hmong had migrated to France, including 1,400 in French Guiana ; Canada admitted 900 individuals, while another 360 went to Australia , 260 to China , and 250 to Argentina . Over the following years and until the definitive closure of the last refugee camps in Thailand in 1998, additional numbers of Hmong have left Asia, but the definitive figures are still to be produced.

[ 107 ] Hmong girl (aged 15) preparing wedding dress, Phố Cáo commune, Hà Giang province, Vietnam Approximately 5% of the Hmong population currently lives outside of Asia, with the United States home to the largest Hmong diaspora community. The 2008 census counted 171,316 people solely of Hmong ancestry, and 221,948 persons of at least partial Hmong ancestry.

[ 108 ] Other countries with significant populations include: [ 109 ] France : 15,000 Australia : 2,000 French Guiana : 1,500 Canada : 835 Argentina : 600 The Hmong population within the United States is centered in the Upper Midwest ( Wisconsin , Minnesota ) and California .

[ 110 ] Vietnam [ edit ] Hmong people in Vietnam have been perceived differently by various modern political organizations and in different historical periods. Since the Hmong are an ethnic minority in Vietnam, their loyalty toward the Vietnamese state has been frequently questioned by the state. However, many Hmong in Vietnam are fiercely loyal, regardless of the current ideologies of the government; [ 111 ] the Hmong in Laos and Cambodia are the most supportive of active resistance. These tend to be Hmong Christians that have been targeted by all three Vietnamese governments.

[ 112 ] The Hmong in Vietnam also receive cultural and political incentives from the government.

[ 113 ] which led to the Vietnamese Hmong further diverging from the Laotian Hmong, since the latter are strongly anti-Vietnamese due to the Secret War and Communism.

Laos [ edit ] There are 595,028 Hmong people in Laos. They mainly live in northern regions.

Thailand [ edit ] Hmong girls in Thoeng District , Thailand See also: Wat Tham Krabok The Hmong presence in Thailand dates back to the turn of the 20th century when families migrated from China through Laos and Burma, according to most authors. A relatively small population, they still formed dozens of villages and hamlets throughout the northern provinces. The Hmong were registered by the state as the Meo hill tribe. Then, more Hmong migrated from Laos to Thailand following the victory of the Pathet Lao in 1975. While some ended up in refugee camps, others settled in mountainous areas among more ancient Hill Tribes .

[ 114 ] Americas [ edit ] Main article: Hmong Americans See also: List of Hmong Americans ; History of the Hmong in Merced, California ; Hmong archives ; Lao Veterans of America ; Laos Memorial ; and The Center for Public Policy Analysis Many Hmong refugees resettled in the United States after the Vietnam War . Beginning in December 1975, the first Hmong refugees arrived in the U.S., mainly from refugee camps in Thailand; however, only 3,466 were granted asylum under the Indochina Migration and Refugee Assistance Act of 1975 . In May 1976, another 11,000 were allowed to enter the United States, and by 1978 some 30,000 Hmong people had emigrated. This first wave was made up predominantly of men directly associated with General Vang Pao's secret army. It was not until the passage of the Refugee Act of 1980 that families were able to enter the U.S., becoming the second wave of Hmong immigrants. Hmong families scattered across all 50 states but most found their way to each other, building large communities in California, Minnesota and Wisconsin. As of the 2010 census, 260,073 Hmong people reside in the United States, [ 115 ] the majority of whom live in California (91,224), then Minnesota (66,181), and Wisconsin (49,240), an increase from 186,310 in 2000.

[ 116 ] 247,595 or 95.2% are Hmong alone, and the remaining 12,478 are mixed Hmong with some other ethnicity. The vast majority of part-Hmong are under 10 years old.

In terms of cities and towns, the largest Hmong-American community is in St. Paul (29,662), followed by Fresno (24,328), Sacramento (16,676), Milwaukee (10,245), and Minneapolis (7,512).

[ 115 ] There are smaller Hmong communities scattered across the United States, including those in Minnesota ( Rochester , Mankato , Duluth ); Michigan ( Detroit and Warren ); Anchorage, Alaska ; Denver, Colorado ; Portland, Oregon ; Washington; North Carolina ( Charlotte , Morganton ); South Carolina ( Spartanburg ); Georgia ( Auburn , Duluth , Monroe , Atlanta , and Winder ); Florida ( Tampa Bay ); California ( Merced ); Wisconsin ( Madison , Eau Claire , Appleton , Green Bay , Milwaukee , Oshkosh , La Crosse , Sheboygan , Manitowoc , and Wausau ); Aurora, Illinois ; Kansas City, Kansas ; Tulsa, Oklahoma ; Missoula, Montana ; Des Moines, Iowa ; Springfield, Missouri ; Arkansas , Fitchburg, Massachusetts , [ 115 ] and Providence, Rhode Island .

[ 117 ] Sunisa "Suni" Lee of Saint Paul, Minnesota is a notable Hmong-American; she is a three time Olympic medalist in artistic gymnastics. In the 2020 Summer Olympics , Lee won silver in the women's artistic team all-around, followed by gold in the women's artistic individual all-around and bronze in the women's uneven bars. With these results, Sunisa made history as both the first Hmong-American to compete in the Olympics in any sport and the first Hmong-American to win an Olympic medal.

[ 118 ] Canada's small Hmong population is mostly concentrated within the province of Ontario .

Kitchener, Ontario has 515 residents of Hmong descent, and has a Hmong church.

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] There is also a small community of several thousand Hmong who migrated to French Guiana in the late 1970s and early 1980s, [ 121 ] that can be mainly found in the Hmong villages of Javouhey (1200 individuals) and Cacao (950 individuals).

The Hmong immigrant population of Detroit is a central focus of the 2008 film Gran Torino , though that city does not have a significant Hmong population.

Religious persecution [ edit ] Hmong Catholics , Protestants , and animists have been subjected to military attacks, police arrest, imprisonment, forced disappearances , extrajudicial killings , and torture in Laos and Vietnam on anti-religious grounds.

[ 122 ] A significant example was the deportation of Zoua Yang and her 27 children from Thailand on 19 December 2005, after the group was arrested attending a church in Ban Kho Noi, Phetchabun Province , Thailand . Ms. Yang and her children were detained upon their return to Laos, after which the whereabouts of much of the family is unknown.

[ 123 ] In 2011, Vietnam People's Army troops were used to crush a peaceful demonstration by Hmong Catholic, Protestant and Evangelical Christians who gathered in Dien Bien Province and the Dien Bien Phu area of northwestern Vietnam, according to Philip Smith of the Center for Public Policy Analysis , independent journalists and others.

[ 124 ] In 2013, Vam Ngaij Vaj , a Christian pastor of Hmong ancestry, was beaten to death by Vietnamese police and security forces.

[ 125 ] In Hanoi , Vietnamese government officials refused to allow medical treatment for a Hmong Christian leader, Duong Van Minh, who was suffering from a serious kidney illness, in February 2014.

[ 126 ] The U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom has documented official and ongoing religious persecution, religious-freedom violations against the Laotian and Hmong people in both Laos and Vietnam by the governments. In April 2011, the Center for Public Policy Analysis also researched and documented cases of Hmong Christians being attacked and summarily executed, including four Lao Hmong Christians.

[ 127 ] See also [ edit ] Asia portal Chi You , (Huab Tais Txiv Yawg) a noted ancestor of the Hmong People Hmong churches Hmong cuisine Hmong customs and culture Hmong funeral Hmong music Hmong textile art Indochina refugee crisis Ban Phou Pheung Noi Wangyee Vang Vang Pobzeb Vang Pao List of Hmong people Long Tieng Sheboygan Hmong Memorial The Art of Not Being Governed Bhutanese people Khmu people Nepalis Nyaw people Tai Dam people Tibetans Burmese people Notes [ edit ] ^ There is no official census of the Hmong people in China, as they are classified as a subgroup of the Miao people there.

References [ edit ] ^ a b c Lemoine, Jacques (2005).

"What is the actual number of (H)mong in the world?" (PDF) .

Hmong Studies Journal .

6 . Archived from the original on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 1 March 2009 .

^ "Report on Results of the 2019 Census" . General Statistics Office of Vietnam . Retrieved 1 May 2020 .

^ "Results of Population and Housing Census 2015" (PDF) . Lao Statistics Bureau . Retrieved 1 May 2020 .

^ "B02018 Asian Alone Or in Any Combination by Selected Groups – 2021: 1-year estimates Detailed Tables – United States" .

United States Census Bureau .

^ a b c Jacques Lemoine (2005).

"What is the actual number of the (H)mong in the world" (PDF) . Hmong Studies Journal. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 1 March 2009 .

^ "ABS Census – ethnicity" . Archived from the original on 18 May 2020 . Retrieved 7 June 2012 .

^ Lee, G.Y.

"Diaspora and the Predicament of Origins: Interrogating Hmong Postcolonial History and Identity" (PDF) . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ "Hmong's new lives in Caribbean" . 10 March 2004 . Retrieved 11 March 2014 .

^ Sucheng Chan, ed. (1994).

Hmong means free: life in Laos and America . Philadelphia: Temple University Press.

ISBN 978-1-4399-0139-7 .

OCLC 318215953 .

^ Being Hmong Means Being Free . PBS . Retrieved 28 January 2023 .

^ a b c d "Constructing an Ethnicity: Miao in the Chinese Narratives during the Qing Era" (PDF) . Archived from the original on 15 June 2024.

^ Mottin, Jean (1980).

History of the Hmong . Bangkok Thailand: Odeon Store. p. 3.

^ a b "Dr. Yang Dao (Yaj Daus)" . Retrieved 10 December 2022 .

^ Lee 1996 ^ Yang 2009 ^ "Hmong not Meo" , 18 August 2016 , retrieved 27 January 2023 ^ "2005 Senate Joint Resolution 37" (PDF) .

docs.legis.wisconsin.gov . 22 September 2005. Archived from the original (PDF) on 26 February 2017 . Retrieved 20 April 2023 .

^ a b c d e f Tapp, Nicholas (2002).

Cultural Accommodations in Southwest China: The "Han Miao" and Problems in the Ethnography of the Hmong . Nanzan University. pp.

77– 104.

^ Tapp 2003 , p. 9.

^ Cheung 2003 , p. 88.

^ a b c Tapp, Nicholas (2002).

"Cultural Accommodations in Southwest China: The "Han Miao" and Problems in the Ethnography of the Hmong" (PDF) .

Asian Folklore Studies .

61 (1): 77– 104.

doi : 10.2307/1178678 .

JSTOR 1178678 .

ProQuest 224529908 .

^ Cheung Siu-Woo "Miao Identity in Western Guizhou: Indigenism and the politics of appropriation in the southwest china during the republican period" in Hmong or Miao in Asia. 237–40.

^ Tapp 2003 , p. xx, 198.

^ Lemoine, Jacques (October 2005) Review Article: Hmong/Miao in Asia ^ Tapp 2003 , p. xx, 9, 143.

^ a b c d e Schein, Louisa. "Hmong/Miao Transnationality: Identity Beyond Culture." in Hmong or Miao in Asia. 274–75.

^ Lee, Tapp, Gary Yia, Nicolas (2010).

Culture and Customs of the Hmong . Greenwood. p. 4.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Who are the Hmong? – Hmong American Center" . 4 October 2018 . Retrieved 5 February 2023 .

^ https://www.garyyialee.com/history-diaspora-predicament ^ "The origins of the Hmong" (PDF) . Retrieved 4 March 2022 .

^ "The Mong American Families".

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.513.2976 .

^ Lee, G. Y. (2010).

Culture and customs of the Hmong . Nicholas Tapp. Santa Barbara, Calif.: Greenwood.

ISBN 978-0-313-34527-2 .

OCLC 693776855 .

^ a b Ratliff, Martha. "Vocabulary of Environment and Subsistence in Proto-language," p. 160.

^ Wen, Bo; Li, Hui; Gao, Song; Mao, Xianyun; Gao, Yang; Li, Feng; Zhang, Feng; He, Yungang; Dong, Yongli; Zhang, Youjun; Huang, Wenju; Jin, Jianzhong; Xiao, Chunjie; Lu, Daru; Chakraborty, Ranajit; Su, Bing; Deka, Ranjan; Jin, Li (March 2005). "Genetic Structure of Hmong-Mien Speaking Populations in East Asia as Revealed by mtDNA Lineages".

Molecular Biology and Evolution .

22 (3): 725– 734.

doi : 10.1093/molbev/msi055 .

PMID 15548747 .

^ a b Wang, Tianyi; Wang, Wei; Xie, Guangmao; Li, Zhen; Fan, Xuechun; Yang, Qingping; Wu, Xichao; Cao, Peng; Liu, Yichen; Yang, Ruowei; Liu, Feng; Dai, Qingyan; Feng, Xiaotian; Wu, Xiaohong; Qin, Ling; Li, Fajun; Ping, Wanjing; Zhang, Lizhao; Zhang, Ming; Liu, Yalin; Chen, Xiaoshan; Zhang, Dongju; Zhou, Zhenyu; Wu, Yun; Shafiey, Hassan; Gao, Xing; Curnoe, Darren; Mao, Xiaowei; Bennett, E. Andrew; Ji, Xueping; Yang, Melinda A.; Fu, Qiaomei (July 2021).

"Human population history at the crossroads of East and Southeast Asia since 11,000 years ago" .

Cell .

184 (14): 3829–3841.e21.

doi : 10.1016/j.cell.2021.05.018 .

PMID 34171307 .

^ He, Guanglin; Wang, Peixin; Chen, Jing; Liu, Yan; Sun, Yuntao; Hu, Rong; Duan, Shuhan; Sun, Qiuxia; Tang, Renkuan; Yang, Junbao; Wang, Zhiyong; Yun, Libing; Hu, Liping; Yan, Jiangwei; Nie, Shengjie; Wei, Lanhai; Liu, Chao; Wang, Mengge (25 January 2024).

"Differentiated genomic footprints suggest isolation and long-distance migration of Hmong-Mien populations" .

BMC Biology .

22 (1): 18.

doi : 10.1186/s12915-024-01828-x .

PMC 10809681 .

PMID 38273256 .

^ Kutanan, Wibhu; Shoocongdej, Rasmi; Srikummool, Metawee; et al. (2020).

"Cultural variation impacts paternal and maternal genetic lineages of the Hmong- Mien and Sino-Tibetan groups from Thailand" .

European Journal of Human Genetics .

28 : 1563– 1579 – via Nature.

^ Cai, Xiaoyun; Qin, Zhendong; Wen, Bo; Xu, Shuhua; Wang, Yi; Lu, Yan; Wei, Lanhai; Wang, Chuanchao; Li, Shilin; Huang, Xingqiu; Jin, Li; Li, Hui; Consortium, the Genographic (31 August 2011).

"Human Migration through Bottlenecks from Southeast Asia into East Asia during Last Glacial Maximum Revealed by Y Chromosomes" .

PLOS ONE .

6 (8): e24282.

Bibcode : 2011PLoSO...624282C .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0024282 .

PMC 3164178 .

PMID 21904623 .

^ Li, Hui; Huang, Ying; Mustavich, Laura F.; Zhang, Fan; Tan, Jing-Ze; Wang, Ling-E; Qian, Ji; Gao, Meng-He; Jin, Li (November 2007).

"Y chromosomes of prehistoric people along the Yangtze River" .

Human Genetics .

122 ( 3– 4): 383– 388.

doi : 10.1007/s00439-007-0407-2 .

PMID 17657509 .

^ a b Yang, Meiqing; Huang, Huangzhen; Zhang, Han; et al. (2025).

"Refining the genetic structure and admixture history of Hmong-Mien populations" .

BMC Biology .

23 (192) – via NCBI.

^ He, Guanglin; Wang, Peixin; Chen, Jing; et al. (2024).

"Differentiated genomic footprints suggest isolation and long-distance migration of Hmong-Mien populations" .

BMC Biology .

22 (18) 18.

doi : 10.1186/s12915-024-01828-x .

PMC 10809681 .

^ Gao, Yang; Zhang, Xiaoxi; Chen, Hao; Lu, Yan; Ma, Sen; Yang, Yajun; Zhang, Menghan; Xu, Shuhua (13 March 2024).

"Reconstructing the ancestral gene pool to uncover the origins and genetic links of Hmong–Mien speakers" .

BMC Biology .

22 (1): 59.

doi : 10.1186/s12915-024-01838-9 .

PMC 10935854 .

PMID 38475771 .

^ a b Huang, Xiufeng; Xia, Zi-Yang; Bin, Xiaoyun; et al. (2020).

"Genomic Insights into the Demographic History of Southern Chinese" .

bioRxiv .

doi : 10.1101/2020.11.08.373225 .

^ Wang, Yicheng; Zou, Xing; Wang, Mengge; Yuan, Didi (2022).

"The genomic history of southwestern Chinese populations demonstrated massive population migration and admixture among proto-Hmong-Mien speakers and incoming migrants" .

Molecular Genetics and Genomics – via ResearchGate.

^ Blench, Roger . 2004.

Stratification in the peopling of China: how far does the linguistic evidence match genetics and archaeology?

Paper for the Symposium "Human migrations in continental East Asia and Taiwan: genetic, linguistic and archaeological evidence". Geneva June 10–13, 2004. Université de Genève.

^ Huang, Xiufeng; Xia, Zi-Yang; Bin, Xiaoyun; et al. (2020).

"Genomic Insights into the Demographic History of Southern Chinese" .

bioRxiv .

doi : 10.1101/2020.11.08.373225 .

^ Li, Hui; Huang, Ying; Mustavich, Laura F.; Zhang, Fan; Tan, Jing-Ze; Wang, Ling-E; Qian, Ji; Gao, Meng-He; Jin, Li (2007).

"Y chromosomes of prehistoric people along the Yangtze River" .

Human Genetics .

122 ( 3– 4): 383– 8.

doi : 10.1007/s00439-007-0407-2 .

PMID 17657509 .

^ Cai, X; Qin, Z; Wen, B; Xu, S; Wang, Y; Lu, Y; Wei, L; Wang, C; Li, S; Huang, X; Jin, L; Li, H; Genographic, Consortium (2011).

"Human Migration through Bottlenecks from Southeast Asia into East Asia during Last Glacial Maximum Revealed by Y Chromosomes" .

PLOS ONE .

6 (8): e24282.

Bibcode : 2011PLoSO...624282C .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0024282 .

PMC 3164178 .

PMID 21904623 .

^ "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 27 November 2013 . Retrieved 30 December 2013 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Bomar, Julie. "Hmong History and Culture." Kinship networks among Hmong-American refugees. New York: LFB Scholarly Pub., 2004. 33–39. Print.

^ "國語•楚語下" . Retrieved 23 April 2018 .

^ De la Cadena, Marisol. Starn, Orin. Wenner-Gren Foundation for Anthropological Research. [2007] (2007). Indigenous experience today. Berg Publishers, 2007.

ISBN 978-1-84520-519-5 . p. 239.

^ Culas and Michaud, 68–74.

^ Rogers, 2004 p. 225.

^ Lee, Mai Na M.

(2015).

Dreams of the Hmong Kingdom: The Quest for Legitimation in French Indochina, 1850–1960 . University of Wisconsin Press. pp.

78– 79.

ISBN 978-0-299-29884-5 .

^ Michaud, J. (1 April 2000). "The Montagnards and the State in Northern Vietnam from 1802 to 1975: A Historical Overview".

Ethnohistory .

47 (2): 333– 68.

doi : 10.1215/00141801-47-2-333 .

ProQuest 209752840 .

^ Michaud, J. et al. 2016 The Historical Dictionary of the Peoples of the Southeast Asian Massif. Rowman & Littlefield, pp. 177–80.

^ Grant Evans "Laos is getting a bad rap from the world's media" The Bangkok Post 8 July 2003 ^ "Being Hmong Means Being Free" .

PBS Wisconsin Documentaries .

^ Warner, Roger, Shooting at the Moon , (1996), p. 366.

^ Hmong National Development, Inc.

"The State of the Hmong American Community 2013" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 October 2013 . Retrieved 7 July 2016 .

^ a b "www.laoveteransofamerica.org" .

www.laoveteransofamerica.org . Archived from the original on 27 December 2016.

^ Smalley, William Allen, Chia Koua Vang ( Txiaj Kuam Vaj ), and Gnia Yee Yang ( Nyiaj Yig Yaj ).

Mother of Writing: The Origin and Development of a Hmong Messianic Script .

University of Chicago Press , 23 March 1990. 10. Retrieved from Google Books on 23 March 2012 ISBN 978-0-226-76286-9 .

^ Not to be confused with the Thai royal title Chao Fa .

^ Jonathan Tucker (Spring 2001).

"The Yellow Rain Controversy: Lessons for Arms Control Compliance" (PDF) .

The Nonproliferation Review .

^ Kinchen, David (17 November 2006).

"438 former 'Cob Fab' removed by helicopter after they came out of hiding" .

Hmong Today . Archived from the original on 22 February 2007 . Retrieved 22 March 2007 .

^ "Laos agrees to voluntary repatriation of refugees in Thailand". U.P.I. 5 June 1991.

^ "Lao Refugees Return Home Under European Union Repatriation Program". Associated Press Worldstream. 22 November 1994.

^ Karen J. (26 April 1994). "House Panel Hears Concerns About Hmong".

States News Service .

^ Hamilton-Merritt, Jane.

Tragic Mountains . pp.

xix– xxi.

^ "centerforpublicpolicyanalysis.org" . 6 April 2008. Archived from the original on 6 April 2008.

^ "Reports on results of investigations of allegations concerning the welfare of Hmong refugees and asylum seekers in Thailand and Laos" . United States Embassy (Thailand). Refugee and Migration Affairs Unit. 1992 . Retrieved 27 July 2007 .

^ Gunderson, Steve (18 May 1996). "State Department Outlines Resettlement Guidelines for Hmong Refugees". Congressional Press Releases.

^ "Laos refuses to take back Thai-based Hmong refugees".

Deutsche Presse-Agentur . 20 August 1998.

^ Bureau of Population, Refugees, and Migration, 16 January 2004, archived 17 January 2009 from the original ^ History of the Hmong Resettlement Task Force at the Wayback Machine (archived 21 October 2008) Hmong Resettlement Task Force, archived 21 October 2008 from the original ^ Morris, Kylie (28 July 2005).

"Hmong refugees pleading to stay" .

BBC News . Retrieved 4 May 2010 .

^ a b Thailand: EU Presidency Declaration on the situation of Hmong refugees Archived 12 March 2010 at the Wayback Machine EU@UN, 1 February 2007 ^ Hmong refugees facing removal from Thailand at the Wayback Machine (archived 13 October 2007) The Wire – Amnesty International's monthly magazine, March 2007, archived 13 October 2007 from the original ^ Deportation of Hmong Lao refugees stopped in last minute Archived 24 February 2012 at the Wayback Machine Gesellschaft für bedrohte Völker, 30 January 2007 ^ Hmong: UNHCR Protests Refugee Deportation Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization, 5 February 2007 ^ Walsh, Denny.

Ten accused of conspiring to oust government of Laos at the Wayback Machine (archived 27 April 2008) The Sacramento Bee , 5 June 2007, archived 27 April 2008 from the original ^ Magagnini, Stephen and Walsh, Denny.

Hmong Rally for 'The General' at the Wayback Machine (archived 13 December 2007) The Sacramento Bee, 19 June 2007, archived 13 December 2007 from the original ^ U.S. Drops Case Against Exiled Hmong Leader The New York Times , 18 September 2009 ^ "Charges dropped against 12 Hmong men accused in plot to overthrow Laotian government" .

Los Angeles Times . 10 January 2011 . Retrieved 15 January 2011 .

^ Tapp, Nicholas, 1989 Sovereignty and Rebellion . Oxford.

[ page needed ] ^ Cooper, Robert G. 1984 Resource scarcity and the Hmong response . Singapore University Press, Singapore.

[ page needed ] ^ Cohen, Eric (2000).

The Commercialized Crafts of Thailand . University of Hawai'i Press. p. 54.

ISBN 0-8248-2297-8 .

^ Vang, Xee.

"The Hmong Language" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 25 February 2021 . Retrieved 30 November 2019 .

^ a b c Tapp, Nicholas (2002).

"Cultural Accommodations in Southwest China: The "Han Miao" and Problems in the Ethnography of the Hmong" (PDF) .

Asian Folklore Studies .

61 (1): 78.

doi : 10.2307/1178678 .

JSTOR 1178678 .

^ "Flower Hmong: Preserving Traditional Culture in Vietnam" . Ten Thousand Villages. 2010. Archived from the original on 21 July 2011 . Retrieved 21 January 2011 .

^ Graham , David Crockett (1954).

Songs and Stories of the Ch'uan Miao . Smithsonian Miscellaneous Collections. Vol. 123, 1. Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution.

^ Lee, Mai Na (1998).

"The Thousand-Year Myth: Construction and Characterization of Hmong" .

Hmong Studies Journal .

2 (2). Archived from the original on 26 May 2005 . Retrieved 10 September 2008 .

^ Hmong Daw at Ethnologue (25th ed., 2022) ^ History of the Assembly Bill AB78 by Kao-Ly Yang Archived 27 October 2009 at the Wayback Machine ^ Romney, Lee. " Bill spurs bitter debate over Hmong identity ." L.A. Times, 24 May 2003.

^ Thao, Paoze and Chimeng Yang. " The Mong and the Hmong ". Mong Journal, vol. 1 (June 2004).

Archived 4 February 2016 at the Wayback Machine ^ Lee, Gary and Nicholas Tapp. " Current Hmong Issues: 12-point Statement Archived 21 March 2007 at the Wayback Machine ".

^ Duffy, John, Roger Harmon, Donald A. Ranard, Bo Thao, and Kou Yang . " People Archived 2012-09-16 at the Wayback Machine ". In The Hmong: An Introduction to their history and culture. The Center for Applied Linguistics, Culture Profile No. 18 (June 2004): 3.

^ Ratliff and Niederer, in Tapp, Michaud, Culas and Lee, Hmong/Miao in Asia, Silkworm Press, 2004 ^ Tapp, N. 2001, Hmong in China. Brill [ page needed ] ^ Culas and Michaud, 2004, in Tapp, Michaud, Culas and Lee, Hmong/Miao in Asia. SIlkworm.

^ Bonnin, Christine.

Markets in the mountains: upland trade-scapes, trader livelihoods, and state development agendas in northern Vietnam (Thesis).

^ "Results of Population and Housing Census 2015" (PDF) . Lao Statistics Bureau . Retrieved 1 May 2020 .

^ Culas and Michaud 2004 ^ Michaud et al. 2016 ^ Culas and Michaud 2004.

^ 2008 Southeast Asian American Data from the American Community Survey (Released Fall 2009) ^ Lemoine. "What is the number of the (H)mong in the world." ^ Pfeifer, Mark (compiler).

"Hmong Population Research Project – Population" (PDF) . University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire.

^ Pike, Matthew (29 April 2018).

"The History of Vietnam's Hmong Community" .

Culture Trip . Retrieved 20 January 2020 .

^ "Hmong Catholics keep faith in Vietnam despite hardship - UCA News" .

ucanews.com .

^ "Một số vấn đề cơ bản trong phát triển bền vững dân tộc Mông ở Việt Nam" . Ủy ban Dân tộc.

^ Baird, Ian G. (2013).

The monks and the Hmong: The special relationship between the Chao Fa and the Tham Krabok Buddhist Temple in Saraburi Province, Thailand. In Vladimir Tikhonov and Torkel Brekke (eds.), Violent Buddhism – Buddhism and Militarism in Asia in the Twentieth Century . London: Routledge. pp.

120– 151.

^ a b c "Census.gov" .

Census.gov .

^ "Census Bureau Homepage" . Census.gov. 25 May 2012 . Retrieved 8 June 2012 .

^ "Rhode Island's Hmong-Lao community to mark 40 years of resettlement" .

The Providence Journal . 8 May 2016 . Retrieved 19 September 2017 .

^ Rob Mentzer (29 July 2021).

"Hmong Community Rejoices As Sunisa Lee Becomes First Hmong American Gold Medalist" .

Wisconsin Public Radio .

^ "2011 National Household Survey Profile – Census subdivision" .

Statistics Canada . 8 May 2013.

^ The Hmong, 1987–1995: A Selected and Annotated Bibliography , Diane Publishing ^ "Info about the Hmong in French Guyana – KaYing Yang, Hmong Cultural Center, 1994" . 1 September 2007. Archived from the original on 1 September 2007 . Retrieved 8 June 2012 .

^ "Laos, Vietnam Troops Execute 4 Hmong Christians" (Press release). Center for Public Policy Analysis. 16 April 2011 – via Scoop News.

Laotian and Hmong minority Christian and Animist believers continue to be hunted, brutally tortured, and killed by the Lao military in significant numbers in key provinces in Laos.

^ "H.Res. 992 (115th): Condemning the actions taken by the Lao People's Democratic Republic against the Hmong ChaoFa Indigenous people, and for other purposes" – via GovTrack.

^ "Agence France Press (AFP), (6 May 2011) "Vietnam troops 'use force' at rare Hmong protest" " . Archived from the original on 2 December 2014.

^ Correspondent, Our Vietnam (28 March 2013).

"Hmong Christian Leader in Vietnam Beaten to Death in Police Custody, Sources Say" .

Morningstar News .

{{ cite web }} : |last= has generic name ( help ) ^ "Hanoi Hospitals Refuse Treatment to Ailing Hmong Christian Leader" .

Radio Free Asia . 15 February 2014.

^ " Agence France Press (AFP), (15 April 2011) "Laos, Vietnam troops kill four Hmong Christians: NGO" " . Archived from the original on 13 December 2014 . Retrieved 11 December 2014 .

Sources [ edit ] Cheung, Siu-woo (2003), Miao Identities, Indigenism and the Politics of Appropriation in Southwest China during the Republican Period , Asian Ethnicity Fadiman, Anne (1997).

The Spirit Catches You and You Fall Down : A Hmong Child, Her American Doctors, and the Collision of Two Cultures . Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

ISBN 0-374-26781-2 .

Forbes, Andrew, and Henley, David, 'Chiang Mai's Hill Peoples' in: Ancient Chiang Mai Volume 3. Chiang Mai: Cognoscenti Books, 2012.

ASIN B006IN1RNW .

Hillmer, Paul.

A People's History of the Hmong (Minnesota Historical Society Press, 2010). 327 pages.

ISBN 978-0-87351-726-3 .

[TYPN 1992] The section on nomenclature draws heavily on Thai-Yunnan Project Newsletter , Number 17, June 1992, Department of Anthropology, Australian National University . Material from that newsletter may be freely reproduced with due acknowledgment.

W.R. Geddes.

Migrants of the Mountains: The Cultural Ecology of the Blue Miao (Hmong Njua) of Thailand . Oxford, England: The Clarendon Press , 1976.

Tapp, Nicholas (2003), The Hmong of China: Context, Agency, and the Imaginary , Brill Academic Publishers, Inc.

Tapp, N., J.Michaud, C.Culasc, G.Y.Lee (Eds.) (2004).

Hmong/Miao in Asia . Chiang Mai (Thailand): Silkworm. 500 pages.

Chia Youyee Vang .

Hmong America: Reconstructing Community in Diaspora ( University of Illinois Press; 2011) 200 pages; Combines scholarly and personal perspectives in an ethnographic history of the Hmong refugee experience in the United States.

" Hmong in Minnesota ".

Minnesota Historical Society , Explore Minnesota.

Further reading [ edit ] Bourne, Journey in Southwest China . London: 1888.

Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Miaotsze" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

Edkins, The Miau-tsi Tribes . Foochow: 1870.

Hamilton-Merritt, Jane (1999).

Tragic Mountains: The Hmong, the Americans, and the Secret Wars for Laos, 1942–1992 . Bloomington, Indiana: Indiana University Press.

Henry, Lingnam . London: 1886.

Hookaway, James. " Thai Army Forces Out Refugees ." The Wall Street Journal . 28 December 2009.

Johnson, Charles.

Dab Neeg Hmoob: Myths, Legends and Folk Tales from the Hmong of Laos .

St. Paul, Minnesota : Macalester College , 1983. – bilingual oral literature anthology, includes introduction and explanatory notes from a language professor who had sponsored the first Hmong family to arrive in Minnesota Keaw, A. H.

Man: Past and Present . Cambridge: 1900.

Lloyd George, William (24 July 2010). " Hmong Refugees Live in Fear in Laos and Thailand ." TIME .

Lee, Mai Na M . " The Thousand-Year Myth: Construction and Characterization of Hmong ." Hmong Studies Journal , Vol. 2, No. 1, Spring 1998.

Meneses, Rashaan. " Hmong: An Endangered People ." UCLA International Institute.

Mottin, Father Jean.

History of the Hmong .

Bangkok : Odeon Store, 1980. Written in Khek Noi, a Hmong village in northern Thailand, and translated into English by an Irish nun.

Quincy, Keith.

Hmong: History of a People .

Cheney, Wash.

: Eastern Washington University Press , 1988.

Savina, F. M.

Histoire des Miao . 2nd edition.

Hong Kong : Impremerie de la Société des Missions-Etrangères de Paris, 1930. Written by a French missionary who worked in Laos and Tonkin .

External links [ edit ] Hmong people at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Laotian and Hmong veterans and refugee families of the Lao Veterans of America, Inc.

Center for Public Policy Analysis (CPPA) in Washington, D.C. Hmong human rights, religious persecution/ religious freedom violations and refugee issues Hmong-related web sites Archived 17 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine edited by Mark Pfeifer of the Hmong Cultural Center.

Laos & Hmong Refugee Crisis & human rights violations against Hmong people in Southeast Asia, Centre for Public Policy Analysis, Washington, D.C.

Publications list Archived 27 May 2012 at the Wayback Machine Hmong Studies Internet Resource Center [ usurped ] Hmong culture studies [ usurped ] multimedia educational content Hmong history and culture articles by Hmong Australian anthropologist, Dr. Gary Yia Lee Hmong Contemporary Issues by Hmong French anthropologist and linguist, Dr. Kao-Ly Yang (English, French, and Hmong languages) Being Hmong Means Being Free Wisconsin Public Television Learn about Hmong People & Culture Archived 28 June 2023 at the Wayback Machine Hmong Culture v t e Ethnic groups of China Sino-Tibetan Sinitic Han Chinese subgroups Hui Bai Caijia Chuanqing Longjia Waxiang Lolo-Burmese Yi Hani Lisu Lahu Nakhi Achang Nu Jino Akha Bisu Kucong Laomian Laopin Mosuo Qixingmin Qiangic Qiang Pumi Baima Gyalrong Tibetic Tibetans Monpa Sherpa Others Tujia Jingpo Derung Lhoba Deng Austroasiatic Wa Blang Vietnamese ( Gin ) Ta'ang Bolyu Kunge Khmu Lai Mang Pakan Austronesian Gaoshan Filipino Utsuls Hmong-Mien Miao Hmong Yao She Gejia Mongolic Mongols subgroups Dongxiang Monguor Daur Bonan Yugurs Eastern Hamnigan Kangjia Khatso Sogwo Arig Kra–Dai Zhuang Bouyei Dong Li Dai Tai Lue Tai Nua Gelao Sui Mulao Maonan Buyang Nùng Qabiao Rau Shan Yang Tungusic Manchus Sibes Evenks Solon Oroqen Nanai Turkic Uyghurs Kazakhs Kyrgyz Salars Yugurs Western Uzbeks Tatars Altaians Äynu Dolan Fuyu Kyrgyz Ili Turks Tuvans Indo-European Pamiris ( Tajiks ) Wakhis Russians Armenians Iranians Nepalis Daman Others Koreans ( Chaoxian ) African Chinese Indians Japanese Jews Kaifeng Jews Macanese Nivkhs Pakistanis Naturalised citizens Related Unrecognized ethnic groups in China Historic ethnic groups Han Chinese nationalism Chinese nationalism Local ethnic nationalism Minzu Chinese people Zhonghua minzu v t e Immigration to China From Asia Armenians Burmese Filipinos Indians Israelis Iranians Japanese Shanghai Koreans Shanghai Nepalis Pakistanis Vietnamese From elsewhere Africans Guangzhou Hong Kong Americans Australians Britons Hong Kong Canadians Nigerians Poles Portuguese Macau Russians Albazinians Harbin Shanghai Ukrainians See also Demographics of China Immigration to Hong Kong Immigration to Macau History of the Jews in China Hong Kong Kaifeng Underoccupied developments in China Illegal immigration Underlined : the 56 officially recognised ethnic groups ranked by population in their language families according to 2020 census Category China portal v t e Ethnic and linguistic groups in Thailand by language family Kra–Dai Southwestern Tai Isan Khün Lao Lao Ga Lao Krang Lao Lom Lao Loum Lao Ngaew Lao Song Lao Ti Lao Wiang Tai Lu Tai Yuan Nyong Phu Thai Phuan Tai Bueng Tai Daeng Tai Dam Tai Gapong Kaleun Tai Nüa Tai Wang Thai Noi Khorat Thai Thai Yai Northern Tai Saek Nyaw Yoy Austronesian Malayo-Polynesian Cham Malay Bangkok Malays Patani Malays Satun Malays Moken Moklen Urak Lawoi’ Austroasiatic Khmuic Khmu Lua Mlabri Phai Pray Tin Bru Palaungic Blang Lamet Lawa Mok Palaung Khmer Khmer Northern Western Monic Mon Nyah Kur Katuic Kuy Pearic Pear Chong Sa'och Aslian Maniq Kintaq Kensiu Vietic Aheu Vietnamese Sino-Tibetan Sinitic Chinese Chin Haw Peranakan Teochew Hokkien Hakka Hainanese Cantonese Hokchew Tibeto-Burman Akha Bisu Karen Kayah Lahu Lisu Lolo Mpi Pa'O Phrae Pwo Phunoi Pwo S'gaw Ugong Indo-European Indo-Iranian Indians Persians Pathans Roman Portuguese Hmong–Mien Hmong Yao Iu Mien Immigrants and expatriates Australians Burmese Farang Filipino Japanese Koreans Luk khrueng Nepalis Swedish v t e Ethnic groups of Vietnam Austroasiatic ( Vietic ) Việt (Kinh) Mường Thổ Chứt Nguồn Austroasiatic (non-Vietic) Khmer Ba Na Xơ Đăng Cơ Ho Hrê M'Nông Xtiêng Bru-Vân Kiều Khơ Mú Cơ Tu Giẻ Triêng Tà Ôi Mạ Co Chơ Ro Xinh Mun Kháng Mảng Rơ Măm Brâu Ơ Đu Hmong–Dao H'Mông Dao Pà Thẻn Tai–Kadai Tày Thái Thái Đen Thái Đỏ Thái Trắng Phu Thái Tày Thanh Thái Hàng Tổng Nùng Sán Chay Giáy Lào Lự Bố Y La Chí La Ha Cơ Lao Pu Péo Thủy Sino-Tibetan ( Chinese ) Hoa Sán Dìu Ngái Sino-Tibetan ( Tibeto-Burman ) Hà Nhì Phù Lá La Hủ Lô Lô Cống Si La Malayo-Polynesian Chăm Chu Ru Gia Rai H'roi Ê Đê Raglai Immigrants and expatriate Indian Japanese Korean Jewish Nigerian Taiwanese The 54 officially recognised ethnic groups are ranked by population in their language families according to 2019 census Italic – Not officially recognised Vietnam portal Category v t e Ethnic groups in Laos by language family Lao-Tai Lao Lu Phuan Phu Thai Saek Tai Daeng (Red Tai) Tai Dam (Black Tai) Tai Khao (White Tai) Tai Maen Tai Nüa Vietic Atel Bo Chut (May) Kinh/Vietnamese Krih Liha people [ vi ] ( Đan Lai ) Maleng Phong Phon Sung (Aheu) Thavung Tum Khmeric Khmer Katuic Bru Ca Tu Kuy Makong Pacoh Sou Ta Oi Bahnaric Alak Brau (Lavae) Kataang Jeng Oy Laven Nyaheun Sedang Talieng Yae (Jeh) Khmu - Palaungic Bit Khang Htin (Lua) Khamu Keu Mlabri Lamet O Du Xinh Mun (Puoc) Samtao (Kiorr) Hmong–Mien Hmong Lanten Yao Tibeto-Burman Akha Hani Kado Kaduo Lahu Phana' Phunoi Si La Austronesian Cham Laotian Cham Other Chinese Doi Kaleung Lavy (Lawi) General grouping Lao Loum (Lowland) Lao Theung (Midland) Lao Sung (Highland) Laos portal v t e Ethnic groups in Cambodia by language family Khmer Central Khmer Khmer Krom Khmer Surin Sino-Tibetan Sinitic Chinese Cantonese Hakka Hokkien Teochew Tibeto-Burman Bamar Austronesian Chams Jarai Rade Javanese Austroasiatic Bahnaric Central Kachok Tampuan South Khaonh Kraol Mel Bunong Ra'ong Stieng Thmaun West Brao Kavet Klueng Kreung Lun Katuic Kuy Pearic Por Samrai Samre Sa'och Suoy Other Kchruk Vietic Vietnamese Tai–Kadai Shan Lao Phuan Tai Nyaw Thai Expatriate Indians v t e Members of the Unrepresented Nations and Peoples Organization Africa Afrikaners Barotseland Bellah people Biafra Haratin Kabylia Ogaden Ogoni Oromo Rehoboth Basters Somaliland Western Togoland Yoruba Zambesia Asia Aceh Assyria Balochistan Chittagong Hill Tracts East Turkestan Gilgit Baltistan Hmong Iranian Kurdistan Khmer Krom Khuzestani Madhesh Nagaland Southern Azerbaijan South Moluccas Southern Mongolia Sindh Sulu Taiwan Tibet West Balochistan Europe Abkhazia Brittany Catalonia Crimean Tatars Lezghin Savoy North America District of Columbia (Washington, D.C.) Oceania Guam West Papuans Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8425k
Cached time: 20250817043548
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.656 seconds
Real time usage: 1.935 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14554/1000000
Revision size: 96476/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 426388/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 20439/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 32/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 416265/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.967/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19591679/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1554.455      1 -total
 41.79%  649.670      2 Template:Reflist
 15.49%  240.769     20 Template:Cite_journal
 11.96%  185.960     16 Template:Navbox
  9.39%  145.897     34 Template:Cite_web
  8.19%  127.239      1 Template:Infobox_ethnic_group
  8.04%  124.998     16 Template:Fix
  5.49%   85.358      1 Template:Ethnic_groups_in_China
  4.83%   75.098      1 Template:Tlit
  4.49%   69.800      2 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:58294:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043548 and revision id 1305806595. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hmong_people&oldid=1305806595 " Categories : Hmong people Hmong diaspora Hmong Ethnic groups in China Ethnic groups in Laos Ethnic groups in Thailand Ethnic groups in Vietnam Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: archived copy as title Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2016 CS1: long volume value Language articles citing Ethnologue 25 CS1 errors: generic name Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2021 Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles using infobox ethnic group with image parameters Articles containing Hmong-language text Pages with Hmong IPA Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing Vietnamese-language text Articles containing Lao-language text Articles containing Thai-language text Articles containing Burmese-language text All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from July 2024 Articles lacking reliable references from January 2016 All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from January 2016 Articles with limited geographic scope from February 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2010 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from May 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 05:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Hmong people 46 languages Add topic

