Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History of genres Toggle History of genres subsection 1.1 Aristotle 1.2 Further development of genre 1.3 Romantic genre theory 1.4 Northrop Frye 1.5 Genre in the twenty-first century 2 Genres 3 Common genres in Western literature 4 Related methods of categorization of literature 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Literary genre 64 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն অসমীয়া Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latina Lëtzebuergesch Limburgs Nederlands Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Occitan Patois Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Category of literary composition This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Literary genre" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Literature Oral literature Folklore fable fairy tale folk play folksong heroic epic legend myth proverb Oration Performance audiobook spoken word Saying Major written forms Book Drama closet drama Poetry lyric narrative Prose Nonsense verse Ergodic Electronic Long prose fiction Anthology Serial Novel / romance Short prose fiction Novella Novelette Short story Drabble Sketch Flash fiction Parable Religious Wisdom Prose genres Fiction Children's Encyclopedic Genre action adventure coming-of-age crime erotic fantasy horror military paranormal romance science fiction supernatural western Historical Realist Speculative Non-fiction Academic history philosophy Anecdote Epistle Essay Journalism Letter Life Nature Persuasive Travelogue Poetry genres Narrative Children Epic Dramatic Verse novel National Lyric Ballad Elegy Epigram Ghazal Haiku Hymn Limerick Ode Qasida Sonnet Villanelle Lists Epic Groups and movements Poets Dramatic genres Comedy Libretto Play historical moral Satire Script Tragedy Tragicomedy History Ancient Classical Medieval Modernist Postmodern Lists and outlines Outline Glossary Books Writers Movements Cycles Literary awards poetry Short story collection Lost literary work Lacuna Theory and criticism Sociology Magazines Composition Language Narrative Feud Estate Literature portal v t e A literary genre is a category of literature . Genres may be determined by literary technique , tone , content , or length (especially for fiction). They generally move from more abstract, encompassing classes, which are then further sub-divided into more concrete distinctions.

[ 1 ] The distinctions between genres and categories are flexible and loosely defined, and even the rules designating genres change over time and are fairly unstable.

[ 2 ] Genres can all be in the form of prose or poetry . Additionally, a genre such as satire , allegory or pastoral might appear in any of the above, not only as a subgenre (see below), but as a mixture of genres. They are defined by the general cultural movement of the historical period in which they were composed.

History of genres [ edit ] "Allegories of literary genre" by Constant Montald (1899) Aristotle [ edit ] The concept of genre began in the works of Aristotle , who applied biological concepts to the classification of literary genres, or, as he called them, "species" (eidē).

[ 3 ] These classifications are mainly discussed in his treatises Rhetoric and Poetics .

Genres are categories into which kinds of literary material are organized. The genres Aristotle discusses include the epic, the tragedy, the comedy, dithyrambic poetry, and phallic songs. Genres are often divided into complex sub-categories. For example, the novel is a large genre of narrative fiction; within the category of the novel, the detective novel is a sub-genre, while the "hard-boiled" detective novel is a sub-genre of the detective novel.

[ 4 ] In the Rhetoric , Aristotle proposed three literary genres of rhetorical oratory: deliberative , forensic , and epideictic . These are divided based on the purpose of the orator: to argue for future policy or action (deliberative), discuss past action (forensic), or offer praise or blame during a ceremony (epideictic).

In the Poetics , Aristotle similarly divided poetry into three main genres: the epic , tragedy , and comedy . In the case of poetry, these distinctions are based not on rhetorical purpose, but on a combination of structure, content and narrative form. For each type, he proposed a definition as well as the rules for its construction.

Further development of genre [ edit ] After the time of Aristotle, literary criticism continued to develop. The first-century Greek treatise " On the Sublime ", for example, discussed the works of more than 50 literary writers and the methods they used to influence their audiences' emotions and feelings.

[ 5 ] Romantic genre theory [ edit ] The origins of modern Western genre theory can be traced to the European Romantic movement in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, during which the concept of genre was scrutinized heavily.

[ 6 ] The idea that it was possible to ignore genre constraints and the idea that each literary work was a "genre unto itself" [ 6 ] gained popularity. Genre definitions were thought to be "primitive and childish." [ 6 ] At the same time, the Romantic period saw the emergence of a new genre, the 'imaginative' genre.

[ 7 ] The reason for this shift is often attributed to the social events that were taking place in the Western world in terms of wars, infighting and overthrown leadership.

[ 7 ] People felt the need for "escapism" to remove themselves from their respective situations.

[ 7 ] Northrop Frye [ edit ] In 1957 Canadian scholar Northrop Frye published "Anatomy of Criticism," in which he proposes a system of genres and a set of rules to describe the constraints of each genre.

[ 1 ] In this work, he defines methodological classifications of the genres of myth , legend , high mimetic genre, low mimetic genre, irony , the comic , and the tragic through the constitution of "the relation between the hero of the work and ourselves or the laws of nature." [ 1 ] He also uses the juxtaposition of the "real" and the "ideal" to categorize the genres of romance (the ideal), irony (the real), comedy (transition from real to ideal), and tragedy (transition from ideal to real). Lastly, he divides genres by the audience they are intended for into: drama (performed works), lyric poetry (sung works), and epic poetry (recited works).

[ 1 ] Genre in the twenty-first century [ edit ] Since the Romantic period, modern genre theory often sought to dispense with the conventions that have marked the categorization of genres for centuries. However, the twenty-first century has brought a new era in which genre has lost much of the negative connotations associating it with loss of individuality or excess conformity.

[ 6 ] Genres [ edit ] Further information: List of writing genres Genre categorizes literary works based on specific shared conventions, including style, mood, length, and organizational features.

[ 8 ] These genres are in turn divided into subgenres .

Western literature is typically subdivided into the classic three forms of Ancient Greece, poetry , drama , and prose . Poetry may then be subdivided into the genres of lyric , epic , and dramatic . The lyric includes all the shorter forms of poetry e.g., song , ode, ballad, elegy, sonnet.

[ 9 ] Dramatic poetry might include comedy , tragedy , melodrama , and mixtures like tragicomedy .

The standard division of drama into tragedy and comedy derives from Greek drama.

[ 9 ] This division into subgenres can continue: comedy has its own subgenres, including, for example, comedy of manners , sentimental comedy, burlesque comedy , and satirical comedy.

The genre of semi-fiction includes works that mix elements of both fiction and nonfiction. A semi-fictional work may be the retelling of a true story with only the names changed; at the other end of the spectrum, it may present fictional events with a semi-fictional protagonist, as in Jerry Seinfeld .

Often, the criteria used to divide up works into genres are not consistent, and can be subject to debate, change and challenge by both authors and critics.

[ 2 ] However, some basic distinctions are widely accepted. For example, it is commonly accepted that the genre of fiction ("literature created from the imagination, not presented as fact, though it may be based on a true story or situation") is not applied to all fictitious literature, but instead encompasses only prose texts (novels, novellas, short stories) and not fables.

Common genres in Western literature [ edit ] The genre of Poetry includes the subgenres of sonnets , haiku , and limerick , among others.

The genre of Prose includes the notebook , novel , novella , and short story .

Related methods of categorization of literature [ edit ] There are other ways of categorizing books that are not usually considered "genre".  Notably, this can include age categories, by which literature may be classified as adult, young adult , or children's literature .  There is also classification by format, where the structure of the work is used: graphic novels , picture books , radio plays , and so on.

See also [ edit ] Literature portal List of writing genres Genre criticism Genre studies Genre fiction References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Todorov, Tzvetan; Howard, Richard (1976). "The Fantastic: A Structural Approach to a Literary Genre".

The Slavic and East European Journal .

20 (2): 186– 189.

doi : 10.2307/305826 .

JSTOR 305826 .

^ a b Pavel, Thomas (2003). "Literary Genres as Norms and Good Habits".

New Literary History .

34 (2).

The Johns Hopkins University Press : 201– 210.

doi : 10.1353/nlh.2003.0021 .

JSTOR 20057776 .

S2CID 144429849 .

^ Fishelov, David (1999). "The Birth of a genre".

European Journal of English Studies .

3 (1): 51– 63.

doi : 10.1080/13825579908574429 .

ISSN 1382-5577 .

^ "Aristotle: Poetics" .

^ Weinberg, Bernard (February 1950). "Translations and Commentaries of Longinus, "On the Sublime", to 1600: A Bibliography".

Modern Philology .

47 (3): 145– 151.

doi : 10.1086/388836 .

ISSN 0026-8232 .

S2CID 161109504 .

^ a b c d Duff, David (2000).

Modern Genre Theory . London: Routledge .

doi : 10.4324/9781315839257 .

ISBN 9781315839257 .

^ a b c Corrigan, Philip (July 1, 1986). "Book Review: Literary Theory: An Introduction".

Insurgent Sociologist .

13 (4): 75– 77.

doi : 10.1177/089692058601300410 .

S2CID 144848160 .

^ David, Mikics (2010).

A New Handbook of Literary Term .

Yale University Press . pp.

132– 133.

ISBN 9780300164312 .

^ a b "Genres" .

academic.brooklyn.cuny.edu . Retrieved April 17, 2021 .

v t e Narrative Character Antagonist Archenemy Character arc Character flaw Characterization Confidant Deuteragonist False protagonist Focal character Foil Gothic double Hamartia Hero Anti Byronic Tragic Narrator Protagonist Stock character Straight man Supporting character Title character Tritagonist Villain Plot Ab ovo Action Backstory Origin story Chekhov's gun Cliché Cliffhanger Conflict Deus ex machina Dialogue Dramatic structure Eucatastrophe Foreshadowing Flashback Flashforward Frame story In medias res Kishōtenketsu MacGuffin Pace Plot device Plot twist Poetic justice Red herring Reveal Self-insertion Shaggy dog story Stereotype Story arc Story within a story Subplot Suspense Trope Setting Alternate history Backstory Crossover Dreamworld Dystopia Fictional location city country universe parallel Utopia Worldbuilding Theme Irony Leitmotif Metaphor Moral Moral development Motif Deal with the Devil Conflict between good and evil Self-fulfilling prophecy Time travel Style Allegory Bathos Comic relief Diction Figure of speech Imagery Mode Mood Narration Narrative techniques Hook Show, don't tell Stylistic device Suspension of disbelief Symbolism Tone Structure Act Act structure Three-act structure Freytag's Pyramid Exposition / Protasis Rising action/Epitasis Climax / Peripeteia Falling action/Catastasis Denouement/Catastrophe Linear narrative Nonlinear narrative films television series Premise Types of fiction with multiple endings Form Drama Fabliau Flash fiction Folklore Fable Fairy tale Legend Myth Tall tale Gamebook Narrative art Narrative poetry Epic poetry Novel Novella Parable Short story Vignette Genre ( List ) Fiction Action fiction Adventure Comic Crime Docu Epistolary Ergodic Erotic Historical Western Mystery Nautical Paranoid Philosophical Picaresque Political Pop culture Psychological Religious Rogue Romance Chivalric Prose Saga Satire Speculative fiction Fantasy Gothic Southern Horror Magic realism Science Hard Utopian and dystopian Underwater Superhero Theological Thriller Urban Nonfiction Autobiography Biography Novel Creative Narration Diegesis First-person Second-person Third-person Third-person omniscient narrative Subjectivity Unreliable narrator Multiple narrators Stream of consciousness Stream of unconsciousness Tense Past Present Future Related Dominant narrative Fiction writing Continuity Canon Reboot Retcon Parallel novel Prequel / Sequel Genre List Literary science Literary theory Narrative identity Narrative paradigm Narrative therapy Narratology Metafiction Political narrative Rhetoric Glossary Screenwriting Series of works Storytelling Tellability Verisimilitude Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Spain Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Literary_genre&oldid=1290536005 " Categories : Literary genres Literary theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2022 All articles needing additional references Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 15 May 2025, at 11:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Literary genre 64 languages Add topic

