Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contents 2 Authorship and date 3 Textual history 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources 7 External links Toggle the table of contents On the Universe 12 languages Deutsch Español فارسی हिन्दी Íslenska Italiano 日本語 Polski Português Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Treatise in the Corpus Aristotelicum On the Universe ( Ancient Greek : Περὶ Κόσμου , romanized : Perì Kósmou ; Latin : De Mundo ) is a theological and scientific treatise included in the Corpus Aristotelicum but usually regarded as spurious . It was likely published between the 3rd century BCE and the 2nd century CE . The work discusses cosmological , geological , and meteorological subjects, alongside a consideration of the role an independent god plays in maintaining the universe.

Contents [ edit ] According to Johan C. Thom, De Mundo "attempts to provide an explanation of the role of god in preserving and maintaining the cosmos while at the same time upholding the notion of his transcendence and independence." [ 1 ] While the work is mostly in the Peripatetic style established by Aristotle, [ 1 ] elements of Platonic , Stoic , and Neopythagorean philosophy permeates it (which Thom argues is indicative of its post-Aristotlean authorship).

[ 2 ] Alongside its theological considerations, it also discusses cosmological , geological , and meteorological subjects.

[ 3 ] Authorship and date [ edit ] Doubts about the authorship of De Mundo were already expressed in antiquity: when Proclus mentioned the work in one of his commentaries he added "if the book De Mundo is by him." [ 4 ] In the Middle Ages, it was widely believed that De Mundo was a genuine product of Aristotle .

[ 1 ] The notable exception was the 12th-century philosopher Maimonides who rejected it outright.

[ 4 ] Doubts were expressed again in the 15th and 16th centuries, [ 5 ] and it became common to reject the work in the 17th century.

[ 6 ] General agreement to deny Aristotle's authorship was reached in the 19th century, with only a few voices dissenting since then.

[ 7 ] The main reasons to reject the work are: [ 8 ] Differences in language and style, including the use of words unrecorded until the 3rd-century BCE Many minor points of philosophical doctrine which differ from Aristotle (such as the idea that air is moist and cold in book 2) A theological position which diverges in certain respects from that of Aristotle — in particular an emphasis on a trascendent god, who, although outside of the universe, is nevertheless present and active everywhere in it.

Attempts have sometimes been made to identify the author of the work. In the 19th century, when the Stoic philosopher Posidonius was thought to be in the background of many treatises on natural philosophy, it was common to regard the book as based on his writings, and the work itself was sometimes ascribed to him.

[ 9 ] As late as 1905 Wilhelm Capelle [ de ] ( Neue Jahrbücher , 1905), traced most of the doctrines to Posidonius.

[ 10 ] Another name occasionally proposed as author but now rejected was Nicolaus of Damascus .

[ 9 ] Today the general position is simply to assume it was written by an anonymous eclectic philosopher, [ 9 ] and as such the author is referred to now as Pseudo-Aristotle .

[ 11 ] The writer "knew a great deal about philosophy, yet cherished Aristotelian philosophy above all others", but there are "no grounds even to speculate" who the author was.

[ 12 ] As for the date of the treatise, the earliest possible dates ( terminus post quem ) are set by: [ 13 ] The account of the British Isles [ 14 ] which draws on the discoveries by Pytheas , who probably published them shortly after Aristotle's death.

The idea that the Hyrcanian (Caspian) Sea is connected to the ocean which probably descends from a misleading report by Patrocles (early 3rd-century BCE).

It is commonly thought that the work was written in the 1st centuries BCE/CE, [ 9 ] but the range of possible dates extend from the 3rd century BCE to the 2nd century CE.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 15 ] Textual history [ edit ] After its original publication in Greek , the work was translated to Latin by Apuleius , into Syriac by Sergius of Reshaina and three distinct Arabic versions.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Hypostasis (philosophy and religion) Meteorology References [ edit ] ^ a b c Thom, Johan C., ed. (2014). "Introduction".

Cosmic Order and Divine Power: Pseudo-Aristotle, On the Cosmos .

Tübingen, Germany : Mohr Siebeck . p. 3.

ISBN 978-3161528095 .

^ Thom, Johan C., ed. (2014). "Introduction".

Cosmic Order and Divine Power: Pseudo-Aristotle, On the Cosmos .

Tübingen, Germany : Mohr Siebeck . p. 5.

ISBN 978-3161528095 .

^ Thom, Johan C., ed. (2014). "Introduction".

Cosmic Order and Divine Power: Pseudo-Aristotle, On the Cosmos .

Tübingen, Germany : Mohr Siebeck . pp.

10– 13.

ISBN 978-3161528095 .

^ a b Kraye 2014 , p. 182 ^ Kraye 2014 , pp. 183–84 ^ Kraye 2014 , pp. 185–86 ^ Kraye 2014 , p. 187. Kraye identifies Giovanni Reale and Abraham Bos as two recent scholars who have continued to argue for Aristotle's authorship.

^ Gregorić & Karamanlis 2020 , pp. 6–8 ^ a b c d Kraye 2014 , p. 196 ^ Aristotle; Forster, E.S. (Edward Seymour); Dobson, J.F. (John Frederic) (1914).

De Mundo . p.

1 .

^ a b Bos, A. P.

(2003).

The soul and its instrumental Body: A Reinterpretation of Aristotle's Philosophy of Living Nature . Brill's Studies in Intellectual History. Vol. 112.

Leiden, Netherlands : Brill . p. 210.

ISBN 978-9004130166 .

^ a b Gregorić & Karamanlis 2020 , p. 8 ^ Pajón Leyra & Bartoš 2020 , pp. 119–20 ^ Aristotle; Forster, E. S. (Edward Seymour); Furley, David J. (1955).

On sophistical refutations [and] On coming-to-be and passing away [translated] by E.S. Forster. On the cosmos [translated] by D.J. Furley . Robarts - University of Toronto. London Heinemann. p. 360.

^ Pajón Leyra & Bartoš 2020 , p. 120 ^ McCollum, Adam (2011). "Sergius of Reshaina as Translator: The Case of the De Mundo". In Lössl, Josef; Watt, John W. (eds.).

Interpreting the Bible and Aristotle in Late Antiquity: The Alexandrian Commentary Tradition Between Rome and Baghdad .

Farnham, UK : Ashgate Publishing . p. 165.

ISBN 978-1409410072 .

Sources [ edit ] Kraye, Jill (2014). "Disputes over the authorship of De Mundo". In Thom, Johan C. (ed.).

Cosmic Order and Divine Power: Pseudo-Aristotle, On the Cosmos . Mohr Siebeck.

ISBN 978-3161528095 .

Pajón Leyra, Irene; Bartoš, Hynek (2020). "Geography (Chapter 3, 393a9–394a6)". In Gregorić, Pavel; Karamanlis, George (eds.).

Pseudo-Aristotle: De Mundo (On the Cosmos). A commentary . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1108834780 .

Gregorić, Pavel; Karamanlis, George (2020). "Introduction".

Pseudo-Aristotle: De Mundo (On the Cosmos). A commentary . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1108834780 .

Furley, D. J (1955).

Pseudo Aristotle: De Mundo (in Ancient Greek). Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univserity Press.

External links [ edit ] De Mundo , translated by E. S. Forster On the Universe public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 4 National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Spain Poland Vatican Israel Other IdRef 2 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=On_the_Universe&oldid=1298892447 " Categories : Philosophy books Works by Aristotle Works of unknown authorship Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text CS1 foreign language sources (ISO 639-2) Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 5 July 2025, at 11:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents On the Universe 12 languages Add topic

