Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life 1.2 Involvement with the Lettrists 1.3 Founding of the Situationist International 1.4 Political phase of the Situationist International 1.5 After the Situationist International 1.6 Death 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Written works 2.2 Films 3 Legacy 4 Bibliography 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Guy Debord 39 languages Afrikaans العربية Беларуская Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego گیلکی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lietuvių Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French philosopher and Marxist theorist "Debord" redirects here. For the town in Kentucky, see Debord, Kentucky . For the American football coach, see Mike DeBord . For the American football player, see Clay DeBord .

You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French .

(January 2025) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:Guy Debord]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|fr|Guy Debord}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Guy Debord Born Guy Ernest Debord ( 1931-12-28 ) 28 December 1931 Paris , France Died 30 November 1994 (1994-11-30) (aged 62) Bellevue-la-Montagne , Haute-Loire , France Education Education University of Paris (no degree) Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy Letterist International Situationist Western Marxism / Ultra-left Main interests Class struggle Commodity fetishism Reification Social alienation Social theory Notable ideas Dérive Détournement Psychogeography Recuperation Spectacle Signature Part of the Politics series on the Situationist International " It is forbidden to forbid " Concepts Anti-art Class consciousness Class struggle Communism Dérive Détournement General strike Internationalism Psychogeography Recuperation Situation (Sartre) Situationist prank Spectacle Unitary urbanism Workers' council World revolution People Michèle Bernstein Ivan Chtcheglov Guy Debord Jacqueline de Jong Asger Jorn Attila Kotányi Jørgen Nash Constant Nieuwenhuys Charles Radcliffe Ralph Rumney Gianfranco Sanguinetti Alexander Trocchi Raoul Vaneigem René Viénet Works Can Dialectics Break Bricks?

Mémoires On the Poverty of Student Life Report on the Construction of Situations The Revolution of Everyday Life The Society of the Spectacle Organizations Letterist International Golden Fleet Gruppe SPUR International Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus (IMIB) Situationist International Council for Maintaining the Occupations Second Situationist International Related articles Anarchist communism Autonomism Constructivism Council communism Left communism Libertarian Marxism Libertarian socialism Ultra-leftism Youth International Party Anarchism portal Socialism portal Communism portal Politics portal v t e Guy-Ernest Debord ( / d ə ˈ b ɔːr / ; French: [gi dəbɔʁ] ; 28 December 1931 – 30 November 1994) was a French Marxist theorist , philosopher , filmmaker , critic of work , member of the Letterist International , founder of a Letterist faction, and founding member of the Situationist International .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] He was also briefly a member of Socialisme ou Barbarie .

Debord is best known for his 1967 work, The Society of the Spectacle , alongside his direction to the Letterist and Situationist Magazines.

Biography [ edit ] Early life [ edit ] Guy Debord was born in Paris in 1931. Debord's father, Martial, was a pharmacist who died when Debord was young. Debord's mother, Paulette Rossi, sent Debord to live with his grandmother in her family villa in Italy. During World War II , the Rossis left the villa and began to travel from town to town. As a result, Debord attended high school in Cannes , where he began his interest in film and vandalism.

[ 3 ] As a young man, Debord actively opposed the French war in Algeria and joined in demonstrations in Paris against it.

[ 4 ] Debord studied law at the University of Paris , but left early and did not complete his university education. After ending his stint at the University of Paris, he began his career as a writer.

[ 5 ] Involvement with the Lettrists [ edit ] Debord joined the Lettrists when he was 18. The Lettrists were led dictatorially by Isidore Isou until a widely agreed upon schism ended Isou's authority. This schism gave rise to several factions. One of them, the Letterist International, was decidedly led by Debord upon Gil Wolman 's unequivocal recommendation.

[ 3 ] In the 1960s, Debord led the Situationist International group, which influenced the Paris Uprising of 1968, during which he took part in the occupation of the Sorbonne . Some consider his book The Society of the Spectacle (1967) to be a catalyst for the uprising.

[ 6 ] Founding of the Situationist International [ edit ] In 1957, the Letterist International, the International Movement for an Imaginist Bauhaus , and the London Psychogeographical Association gathered in Cosio d'Arroscia (Imperia), Italy, to found the Situationist International, with Debord having been the leading representative of the Letterist delegation. Initially made up of a number of well-known artists such as Asger Jorn and Pinot Gallizio , the early days of the SI were heavily focused on the formulation of a critique of art, which would serve as a foundation for the group's future entrance into further political critiques. The SI was known for a number of its interventions in the art world , which included one raid against an international art conference in Belgium during 1958 [ 7 ] that included a large pamphlet drop and significant media coverage, all of which culminated in the arrest of various situationists and sympathizers associated with the scandal. In addition to this action, the SI endeavored to formulate industrial painting , or, painting prepared en masse with the intent of defaming the original value largely associated with the art of the period. In the course of these actions, Debord was heavily involved in the planning and logistical work associated with preparing these interventions, as well as the work for Internationale Situationniste associated with theoretical defense of the Situationist International's actions.

[ 8 ] Political phase of the Situationist International [ edit ] With Debord's 1967 The Society of the Spectacle and excerpts from the group's journal, Internationale Situationniste , the Situationists began to formulate their theory of the spectacle, which explained the nature of late capitalism's historical decay. In Debord's terms, situationists defined the spectacle as an assemblage of social relations transmitted via the imagery of class power, and as a period of capitalist development wherein "all that was once lived has moved into representation".

[ 9 ] With this theory, Debord and the SI would go on to play an influential role in the revolts of May 1968 in France , with many of the protesters drawing their slogans from Situationist tracts penned or influenced by Debord.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] After the Situationist International [ edit ] Published by Éditions Gérard Lebovici (1990) In 1972, Debord disbanded the Situationist International after its original members, including Asger Jorn and Raoul Vaneigem , quit or were expelled. (Vaneigem wrote a biting criticism of Debord and the International.

[ 12 ] ) Debord then focused on filmmaking with financial backing from the movie mogul and publisher Gérard Lebovici (éditions Champ Libre ), until Lebovici's mysterious death. Debord was suspected of Lebovici's murder. He had agreed to have his films released posthumously at the request of the American researcher Thomas Y. Levin .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] After dissolving the Situationist International, Debord spent his time reading, and occasionally writing, in relative isolation in a cottage at Champot with Alice Becker-Ho , his second wife. He continued to correspond on political and other issues, notably with Lebovici and the Italian situationist Gianfranco Sanguinetti .

[ 15 ] He focused on reading material relating to war strategies, e.g.

Clausewitz and Sun Tzu , and he designed a war game with Alice Becker-Ho .

[ 16 ] Death [ edit ] Just before his death, Debord filmed (although did not release) the documentary Son art et son temps ( His Art and His Times ), an autobiography of sorts that focused primarily on social issues in Paris in the 1990s. It has been suggested that his dark depiction of this period was a suicide note of sorts. Both Debord's depression and alcohol consumption had become problematic, resulting in a form of polyneuritis . Perhaps to end the suffering caused by these conditions, Debord died by suicide on 30 November 1994, shooting himself through the heart. This was not the first time he attempted to end his life.

[ 17 ] Debord's suicide is as controversial as it is unclear.

[ 18 ] Some assert that it was a revolutionary act related to his career. Due to his involvement with the radical Situationist International (SI), as well as his sadness at 'the society as a spectacle' being considered a cliché in later life, many think that Debord felt hopeless about the very society he was trying to shed light on. Debord was said to be "victim of the Spectacle he fought".

[ 19 ] Among the many commentaries on Debord's demise, one scholar noted: "Guy Debord did not kill himself. He was murdered by the thoughtlessness and selfishness of so-called scholars (primarily trendy lit-criters) who colonized his brilliant ideas and transformed his radical politics into an academic status symbol not worth the pulp it's printed on..." [ 20 ] Works [ edit ] Written works [ edit ] Part of a series on Anti-consumerism Theories and ideas Asceticism Affluenza Alternative culture Anti-capitalism Autonomous building Billboard hacking Buyer's remorse Bioeconomics Buddhist economics Buy Nothing Day Collaborative consumption Collapsology Commodification Commodity fetishism Commune Compulsive buying disorder Conspicuous consumption Consumer capitalism Consumerism Conviviality Criticism of advertising Culture jamming Degrowth Do it yourself Downshifting Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological economics Ecovillage Ethical consumerism Feminist political ecology Food loss and waste Freeganism Gift economy Green consumption Hyperconsumerism Laconophilia Local food Microgeneration Non-possession Overconsumption Planned obsolescence Right to repair Political ecology Post-consumerism Simple living Slow Food Steady-state economy Subvertising Sustainable consumer behaviour Sustainable consumption Notable works Walden The Theory of the Leisure Class Brave New World The Affluent Society One-Dimensional Man The Society of the Spectacle ( book , film ) The Consumer Society: Myths and Structures [ fr ] Steal This Book Small Is Beautiful To Have or to Be?

Future Primitive and Other Essays Fight Club ( novel , film ) Escape from Affluenza No Logo Profit over People: Neoliberalism and Global Order The Cultural Creatives Affluenza: The All-Consuming Epidemic Evasion The Corporation Surplus: Terrorized into Being Consumers So, What's Your Price?

What Would Jesus Buy?

Organizations and groups Adbusters Crass CrimethInc.

Deep Green Resistance Democracy Now!

Earth Liberation Front Fifth Estate Freecycle Green Anarchy Institute for Social Ecology Monthly Review Rage Against the Machine Reverend Billy The Venus Project The Yes Men 350.org People Mauro Bonaiuti Noam Chomsky Erich Fromm Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen Edward Goldsmith Paul Goodman André Gorz Ivan Illich Serge Latouche Donella Meadows Pierre Rabhi John Ruskin E. F. Schumacher Bernard Stiegler Henry David Thoreau Related social movements Alter-globalization Amateurism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-punk Anti-capitalism Anti-corporate activism Anti-globalization movement Communism Diggers (theater) Ecofeminism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Food Not Bombs Fossil fuel phase-out Green anarchism Green left Green politics Hippie Libertarian socialism Neo-Luddism New Left Occupy Wall Street Postmodernism Punk Situationists Slow movement Social anarchism Social ecology See also Advanced capitalism Advertising Barter Consumer behaviour Consumption (economics) Consumption (sociology) Cooperative Counterculture Disneyfication Ecological economics Economic materialism Economic problems Frugality Green economy Gross National Happiness Heterodox economics HospEx Illth Influence of mass media Informal sector Intentional community Left-wing politics McDonaldization Mutual aid Natural resource economics Non-monetary economy Permaculture Post-materialism Productivism Shopping Subsistence economy Sustainability Sweatshops Veblen good Workaholic v t e Part of a series on Left communism Concepts Anti-Leninism Anti-Stalinist left Class consciousness Class struggle Communism Mass strike Organic centralism Proletarian internationalism Workers' council World revolution Movements Bordigism In China Communization Council communism Situationist International People Jan Appel Amadeo Bordiga Arrigo Cervetto Marc Chirik Onorato Damen Bruno Fortichiari Herman Gorter Paul Mattick Grandizo Munis Gavril Myasnikov Sylvia Pankhurst Anton Pannekoek Lorenzo Parodi Otto Rühle Karl Schröder Julien Coupat Organizations Extant Communist Struggle Communist Workers' Organisation International Communist Current International Communist Party Internationalist Communist Party The Invisible Committee Defunct Anti-Parliamentary Communist Federation Communist Bulletin Group Communist League Communist Workers' International Communist Workers' Party of Germany Forward Hunan Provincial Proletarian Revolutionary Great Alliance Committee International Socialists of Germany League for Proletarian Culture Left Communists Marxist Working Group Revolutionary Socialist Party Revolutionary Workers Ferment Socialism or Barbarism Solidarity Workers' Group Workers' Opposition Workers' Socialist Federation Workers' Truth Tiqqun Related topics Autonomism Classical Marxism Impossibilism Industrial unionism Ultra-leftism Workerism Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Guy Debord's best known works are The Society of the Spectacle [ 11 ] and Comments on the Society of the Spectacle .

[ 21 ] In addition to these works he wrote a number of autobiographical books including Mémoires , Panégyrique , Cette Mauvaise Réputation...

, and Considérations sur l'assassinat de Gérard Lebovici . He was also the author of numerous short pieces, sometimes anonymous, for the journals Potlatch , Les Lèvres Nues , Les Chats Sont Verts , and Internationale Situationniste .

The Society of the Spectacle was written in an "interesting prose", [ clarification needed ] unlike most writings in that time or of that nature.

[ citation needed ] For Debord, the Spectacle is viewed as false representations in our real lives. The spectacle is a materialized worldview. The spectacle 'subjects human beings to itself'.

[ 22 ] Debord was deeply distressed by the hegemony of governments and media over everyday life through mass production and consumption . He criticized both the capitalism of the West and the dictatorial communism of the Eastern Bloc for the lack of autonomy allowed to individuals by both types of governmental structure. Debord postulated that Alienation had gained a new relevance through the invasive forces of the ' spectacle ' – "a social relation between people that is mediated by images" consisting of mass media, advertisement , and popular culture.

[ 5 ] The spectacle is a self-fulfilling control mechanism for society. Debord's analysis developed the notions of " reification " and " commodity fetishism " pioneered by Karl Marx and Georg Lukács .

[ 23 ] Semiotics was also a major influence, particularly the work of his contemporary Roland Barthes , who was the first to envisage bourgeois society as a spectacle and to study in detail the political function of fashion within that spectacle.

[ 24 ] Debord's analysis of "the spectaclist society" probed the historical, economic, and psychological roots of the media and popular culture.

[ 11 ] Debord's first book, Mémoires , was bound with a sandpaper cover so that it would damage other books placed next to it.

[ 25 ] Films [ edit ] Debord began an interest in film early in his life when he lived in Cannes in the late 1940s. Debord recounted that, during his youth, he was allowed to do very little other than attend films. He said that he frequently would leave in the middle of a film screening to go home because films often bored him. Debord joined the Lettrists just as Isidore Isou was producing films and the Lettrists attempted to sabotage Charlie Chaplin 's trip to Paris through negative criticism.

Overall, Debord challenged the conventions of filmmaking, prompting his audience to interact with the medium instead of being passive receivers of information. Debord directed his first film, Hurlements en faveur de Sade , in 1952 with the voices of Michèle Bernstein and Gil Wolman . The film has no images; instead, it shows bright white when there is speaking and black when there is not. Long silences separate speaking parts. The film ends with 24 minutes of black silence. People were reported to have become angry and left screenings of this film. The script is composed of quotes appropriated from various sources and made into a montage with a sort of non-linear narrative.

[ 26 ] Later, through the financial support of Michèle Bernstein and Asger Jorn , Debord produced a second film, Sur le passage de quelques personnes à travers une assez courte unité de temps , which combined scenes with his friends and scenes from mass media culture. This integration of Debord's world with mass media culture became a running motif climaxing with "The Society of the Spectacle". Debord wrote the book The Society of the Spectacle before writing the movie. When asked why he made the book into a movie, Debord said, "I don't understand why this surprised people. The book was already written like a script". Debord's last film, "Son Art et Son Temps", was not produced during his lifetime. It worked [ clarification needed ] as a final statement where Debord recounted his works and a cultural documentary of "his time".

Hurlements en faveur de Sade (Howls for Sade) 1952 Sur le passage de quelques personnes à travers une assez courte unité de temps (On the Passage of a Few Persons Through a Rather Brief Unity of Time) 1959 (short film, Dansk-Fransk Experimentalfilmskompagni ) Critique de la séparation (Critique of Separation) 1961 (short film, Dansk-Fransk Experimentalfilmskompagni) La Société du spectacle ( Society of the Spectacle ) 1973 (Simar Films) Réfutation de tous les judgements, tant élogieux qu'hostiles, qui ont été jusqu'ici portés sur le film " La Société du spectacle " (Refutation of All the Judgements, Pro or Con, Thus Far Rendered on the Film "The Society of the Spectacle") 1975 (short film, Simar Films) In girum imus nocte et consumimur igni [ fr ] (a Latin palindrome meaning "We Go Round and Round in the Night, and Are Consumed by Fire") (Simar Films) 1978 – This film was meant to be Debord's last and is largely autobiographical. The script was reprinted in 2007 in No: A Journal of the Arts.

Guy Debord, son art, son temps (Guy Debord – His Art and His Time) 1994 (a "sabotage television film" by Guy Debord and Brigitte Cornand , Canal Plus ) Complete Cinematic Works (AK Press, 2003, translated and edited by Ken Knabb ) includes the scripts for all six of Debord's films, along with related documents and extensive annotations.

Legacy [ edit ] On 29 January 2009, fifteen years after his death, Christine Albanel , Minister of Culture , classified the archive of his works as a " national treasure " in response to a sale request by Yale University .

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] The Ministry declared that "he has been one of the most important contemporary thinkers, with a capital place in history of ideas from the second half of the twentieth century." [ 29 ] Similarly, Debord once called The Society of the Spectacle "the most important book of the twentieth century".

[ citation needed ] He continues to be a canonical and controversial figure particularly among European scholars of radical politics and modern art.

[ citation needed ] In a critical appraisal written after Debord's death, Régis Debray characterized his work as derivative of Ludwig Feuerbach (asking, for example, "Had nothing, then, taken place in history and philosophy between 1841 and 1967?") and essentialist, "rest[ing] on the idea of a generic nature, of man's pre-existent essence." [ 30 ] For Debray, Debord's emancipatory vision is abstract and ahistorical: "It disclaims political mediation as a structuring instantiation of collective existence, along with technical mediation as a structuring instantiation of the hominization process. Nor does our author ever speak the language of technology or politics: such silence is typical of the moralist in all ages and climes. He fulminates from afar without taking a look up close." [ 31 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Debord, Guy (1957).

Report on the Construction of Situations .

Mémoires , 1959 (co-authored by Asger Jorn ), reprinted by Allia (2004), ISBN 2-84485-143-6 .

La société du spectacle , 1967, numerous editions; in English: The Society of the Spectacle , Zone Books 1995, ISBN 0-942299-79-5 .

Society of the Spectacle , Rebel Press 2004, ISBN 0-946061-12-2 .

The Society of the Spectacle: Annotated Edition , Bureau of Public Secrets, 2014, ISBN 978-0-939682-06-5 .

La Véritable Scission dans L'Internationale , Champ Libre , 1972 (co-authored by Gianfranco Sanguinetti ); in English: The Real Split in the International , Pluto Press 2003, ISBN 0-7453-2128-3 .

Œuvres cinématographiques complètes , Champ Libre, 1978, new edition in 1994; in English: Complete Cinematic Works: Scripts, Stills, and Documents , AK Press 2003, ISBN 1-902593-73-1 .

Considérations sur l'assassinat de Gérard Lebovici , éditions Gérard Lebovici , 1985; in English: Considerations on the Assassination of Gérard Lebovici , TamTam 2001, ISBN 2-85184-156-4 .

Le Jeu de la Guerre , 1987; in English A Game of War , Atlas Press 2008, ISBN 978-1-900565-38-7 Commentaires sur la société du spectacle , éditions Gérard Lebovici, 1988; in English: Comments on the Society of the Spectacle , Verso 1990, ISBN 0-86091-302-3 .

Panégyrique volume 1 , 1989; in English: Panegyric , Verso 2004, reprinted 2009, ISBN 1-85984-665-3 ; in Portuguese: "Panegírico" [2002], ISBN 85-87193-77-5 .

All of Guy Debord's books and films as well as unpublished texts were gathered in a volume of Œuvres , éditions Gallimard, collection Quarto, Paris, 2006.

"The Proletariat as Subject and as Representation" [ 32 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Dead Bored: Debord's Dead! Andrew Hussey on the death of a turbulent thinker" .

Philosophynow.org . Retrieved 14 July 2017 .

^ "Never Work by Guy Debord 1963" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 1 March 2022 .

^ a b Bourseiller, Christophe. "Vie et Mort de Guy Debord". Agora.

^ "Pierre Guillaume Remembers Guy Debord" .

Notbored.org . Retrieved 27 December 2014 .

^ a b Jappe, A (1999).

Guy Debord, Concept of the Spectacle . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

^ Andreotti, L. "Review: Leaving the twentieth century: The Situationist International." Journal of Architectural Education, 49 (3), p. 197.

^ Internationale Situationniste No. 1, June 1958, pages 29–30, ^ Debord, Guy.

Correspondence: The Founding of the Situationist International.

Semiotext(e). 2008.

^ Guy Debord (1967).

"Society of the Spectacle" .

marxists.org .

^ Knabb, Ken.

Situationist International Anthology . Bureau of Public Secrets, 2007.

^ a b c Debord, Guy.

The Society of the Spectacle . Zone Books, 1995.

^ "The Veritable Split in the SI", 1972 ^ Accessed 18 July 2024 ^ Guy Debord, "Reflections of the Death of Gérard Lebovici" ^ "Guy Debord" .

Notbored.org . Retrieved 27 December 2014 .

^ Le Jeu de la Guerre: RelevÃ© des positions successives de toutes les forces au cours d'une partie – Guy Debord, Alice Becker-Ho – Livres .

ASIN 2070776514 .

^ McDonough (2002).

Guy Debord and the Situationist International .

^ Andrew Hussey.

"The suicide of Guy Debord | Books" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 14 July 2017 .

^ Baker (August 2001).

"The Game of War: The Life and Death of Guy Debord" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 14 July 2017 .

^ "Transgressions: A Journal of Urban Exploration [1995–2001]" .

Situationnisteblog.wordpress.com . 11 October 2014 . Retrieved 14 July 2017 .

^ Debord, Guy (1998) [originally 1988 in French].

Comments on the Society of the Spectacle . Translated by Imrie, Malcolm. London: Verso.

ISBN 978-1-84467-672-9 .

^ Debord, Guy (2002).

The Society of the Spectacle . Canberra : Hobgoblin Press.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ "Imbeciles Guide" (PDF) .

ia800506.us.archive.org .

^ Philippe Sollers "L'antifascisme de Barthes", Le Monde // Hors-Série Roland Barthes, Juillet-Août, 2015 ^ "the new shelton wet/dry" .

Newshelton.com . 10 January 2013 . Retrieved 14 July 2017 .

^ Winestine, Zack (2009). "Howls for Guy Debord".

Film Quarterly .

62 (4): 14– 15.

doi : 10.1525/fq.2009.62.4.14 .

^ "Sur les archives de Guy Debord" .

Le Jura Libertaire (in French). 26 February 2009. Archived from the original on 2 October 2009 . Retrieved 19 May 2009 .

^ Gallix, Andrew (18 March 2009).

"The resurrection of Guy Debord" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 4 May 2010 .

^ Journal Officiel de la Republique Francaise du 12 fevrier 2009 (texte 120) ^ Régis Debray, "Remarks on the Spectacle," New Left Review I.214, Nov.–Dec. 1995, pp. 135 and 136.

^ Régis Debray, "Remarks on the Spectacle," New Left Review I.214, Nov.–Dec. 1995, pp. 136-137 ^ "Prole.info" . Archived from the original on 7 September 2007 . Retrieved 24 May 2007 .

Further reading [ edit ] Mario Perniola , An Aesthetic of the Grand Style: Guy Debord , in "Substance", 1999, n.90.

Internationale situationniste, Paris, 1958–1969 . Réédition intégrale chez Van Gennep, Amsterdam 1972, chez Champ Libre 1975, et chez Fayard 1997, ISBN 2-213-59912-2 ; complete translations are available in German: Situationistische Internationale, Gesammelte Ausgabe des Organs der Situationistischen Internationale , Hamburg: MaD Verlag 1976–1977, ISBN 3-921523-10-9 ; and in Spanish: Internacional situacionista: textos completos en castellano de la revista Internationale situationniste (1958–1969) , Madrid: Literatura Gris [1999–2001], ISBN 84-605-9961-2 .

The Situationist International by Simon Ford, Black Dog Publishing, 2004, illustrated.

Debord: Le naufrageur , Jean-Marie Apostolidès , Flammarion, 2016.

Lipstick Traces: A Secret History of the Twentieth Century , Greil Marcus , Harvard University Press , 1990, ISBN 0-674-53581-2 .

Situationist International Anthology , translated and edited by Ken Knabb, Bureau of Public Secrets 1981; Revised and Expanded Edition 2006, ISBN 978-0-939682-04-1 .

Guy Debord , Anselm Jappe, University of California Press 1999, ISBN 0-520-21204-5 .

Guy Debord – Revolutionary , Len Bracken, Feral House 1997, ISBN 0-922915-44-X .

I situazionisti , Mario Perniola , Roma, Castelvecchi 2005, ISBN 88-7615-068-4 .

Della critica radicale – bibliografia ragionata sull Internazionale situazionista – con documenti inediti in italiano, Gianluigi Balsebre, Bologna, Grafton 9, 1995.

The Game of War: The Life and Death of Guy Debord.

, Andrew Hussey , Cape 2001, ISBN 0-224-04348-X .

Guy Debord and the Situationist International , edited by Tom McDonough, MIT Press 2002, ISBN 0-262-13404-7 .

"The Beautiful Language of my Century": Reinventing the Language of Contestation in Postwar France, 1945–1968 , Tom McDonough, MIT Press 2007, ISBN 0-262-13477-2 .

Guy Debord , Andy Merrifield, Reaktion 2005, ISBN 1-86189-261-6 .

50 Years of Recuperation of the Situationist International , McKenzie Wark , Princeton Architectural Press, New York, 2008 ISBN 1-56898-789-7 .

Los Situacionistas y la Anarquía , Miguel Amorós , Bilbao, Muturreko burutazioak, 2008, ISBN 978-84-88455-98-7 .

Debord ou la Diffraction du temps , Stéphane Zagdanski , Gallimard, 2008.

Fabien Danesi , Le Cinéma de Guy Debord ou la Négativité à l'œuvre : 1952–1994 , Paris, Paris expérimental, 2011 ISBN 978-2-912-53942-7 .

Fabien Danesi, Fabrice Flahutez et Emmanuel Guy, La Fabrique du cinéma de Guy Debord , Arles (Bouches-du-Rhône), Actes sud, 2013 ISBN 978-2-330-01756-9 .

Fabien Danesi, Fabrice Flahutez, Emmanuel Guy, Undercover Guy Debord , (English-French), Paris, Artvenir, 2012 ISBN 978-2953940619 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Guy Debord .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: Guy Debord Wikimedia Commons has media related to Guy Debord .

Guy Debord at IMDb Situationist international online Archived 5 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine Letters 1957–1994 v t e Guy Debord Written works Report on the Construction of Situations (1957) Mémoires (1959) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) A Game of War (1987) Films directed Hurlements en faveur de Sade (1952) The Society of the Spectacle (1974) Songs written La Java des Bons-Enfants (1974) Chant des journées de mai (1974) Miscellaneous Letterist International Spectacle v t e Critique of work Historical persons Abbie Hoffman Edward Bellamy Alfredo M. Bonanno André Gorz Bob Black Günther Anders Guy Debord Heinrich Böll Ivan Illich Mikhail Bakunin Paul Lafargue Walter Benjamin Antonio Negri Bertrand Russell Friedrich Nietzsche Henry David Thoreau Herbert Marcuse Jerry Rubin Josef Pieper Karl Marx Max Stirner Max Weber Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Raoul Vaneigem Renzo Novatore Zo d'Axa Contemporary persons Franco Berardi L. Susan Brown Madeleine Bunting David Graeber Michael Hardt Maurizio Lazzarato Claus Peter Ortlieb Roland Paulsen Jeremy Rifkin Penelope Rosemont Mark Slouka Nick Srnicek Claire Wolfe John Zerzan Terminology and related topics 996 working hour system Absenteeism Abusive supervision Aktion Arbeitsscheu Reich All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy Autonomism Bare minimum Monday Bullshit job Career catfishing Coffee badging Corporatocracy Conscious quitting Cycle of poverty Dolce far niente Effects of overtime Eight-hour day Employee ghosting Extermination through labour Career cushioning Careerism Flextime Forced labour Four-day workweek Funemployment Ghost job Uberisation / Gig worker Glass cliff Happiness economics Honeymoon-hangover effect Hush trip Infinite workday Job crafting Job cuffing Jobless employed Karoshi Loud quitting Neijuan Microretirement Occupational burnout Occupational safety and health Occupational stress Orange S.A. suicides Overwork Performance punishment Post-work society Precariat Presenteeism Digital presenteeism Productivity theater Professional abuse Protestant work ethic Psychological safety Quick quitting Quiet hiring Quiet promotion Quiet quitting Quiet thriving Lazy girl job Rage applying Refusal of work Resenteeism Right to rest and leisure Sampo generation Sunday scaries Six-hour day Tang ping Technological unemployment Toxic workplace Narcissism Psychopathy Wage slavery Work ethic Workaholic Working poor Work–life interface Theater, movies, music and art À Nous la Liberté Office Space Swedish Public Freedom Service " Take This Job and Shove It " The Future of Work and Death The Main Thing Is Work!

The Working Class Goes to Heaven Yama—Attack to Attack Literature Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral Bartleby, the Scrivener Bonjour paresse Bullshit Jobs The Conquest of Bread Critique of Economic Reason Fight Club Future Primitive and Other Essays In Praise of Idleness and Other Essays Inventing the Future Manifesto Against Work New Escapologist On the Poverty of Student Life The Society of the Spectacle Steal This Book The Abolition of Work The End of Work The Human Use of Human Beings The Idler The Revolution of Everyday Life The Right to Be Lazy The Soul at Work: From Alienation to Autonomy Communities R/antiwork CrimethInc.

Situationist International See also Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Job strain v t e Critique of political economy 18th–19th-century Friedrich Engels Karl Marx Thomas Carlyle John Ruskin Paul Lafargue Erik Johan Stagnelius 20th–21st-century Jean Baudrillard Guy Debord Mahatma Gandhi André Gorz Moishe Postone Étienne Balibar Neue Marx-Lektüre Helmut Reichelt Hans-Georg Backhaus Robert Kurz Michael Heinrich Mark Fisher Roman Rosdolsky Claus Peter Ortlieb Georges Bataille Katrine Marçal Concepts Abstract labour and concrete labour Capitalist mode of production Commodity Chrematistics Dismal Science Illth Law of value Socially necessary labour time Valorisation Value-form Written works Unto This Last Sarvodaya The Right to Be Lazy Das Kapital Grundrisse Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Mirror of Production A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Critique of Economic Reason Discourse on Inequality The Accursed Share Who Cooked Adam Smith's Dinner?

Related Assume a can opener Classical economics Chrematistics Criticism of capitalism Critique of work Economic anthropology Economics Mainstream economics Occam's razor v t e Media culture Media 24-hour news cycle Alternative media Digital media Electronic media Independent media Lost media Mass media Mainstream media Media economics Mobile media New media News broadcasting News media Old media Physical media Social media Influencers State media Streaming media Principles Media development Media policy Media independence Freedom of information Freedom of speech Media pluralism Media transparency Marketplace of ideas Ideology Advanced capitalism American Dream Bipartisanship Consumerism Pensée unique Deception Forms Advertising Propaganda Fake news Public relations Spin Tabloid journalism Techniques Cult of personality Dumbing down Framing Media circus Media event Narcotizing dysfunction Recuperation Sensationalism Viral phenomenon Others Catch and kill Crowd manipulation Managing the news Media manipulation Philosophers Theodor W. Adorno Jean Baudrillard Edward Bernays Noam Chomsky Guy Debord Walter Lippmann Marshall McLuhan Jacques Rancière Counterculture Boycott Call-out culture Cancel culture Civil disobedience Culture jamming Demonstration Graffiti Occupation Political satire Protest Punk Review bomb Strike action In academia Influence of mass media Media studies Mediatization Semiotic democracy The Lonely Crowd Issues Agenda-setting theory Anonymity Concentration of media ownership Exploitation of women Freedom of speech Media bias Privacy Social influence Transparency Violence Synonyms Advanced capitalism Culture industry Mass society Media franchise Post-Fordism Society of the Spectacle v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz RKD Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Guy_Debord&oldid=1301522292 " Categories : 1931 births 1994 suicides 1994 deaths 20th-century French essayists 20th-century French male writers 20th-century French philosophers 20th-century French screenwriters Anti-consumerists Board game designers Collage filmmakers Critics of work and the work ethic Critical theorists Film theorists Direct democracy activists French anti-capitalists French anti-war activists French communist writers French communists French film directors French graphic designers French political philosophers French male essayists French male non-fiction writers French male screenwriters French Marxist writers French Marxists French people of Italian descent Lettrism Marxist theorists Mass media theorists Media critics French philosophers of art French philosophers of culture French philosophers of history Philosophers of literature Philosophers of psychology Philosophers of social science French philosophers of technology Philosophers of war French philosophy writers Psychogeographers Revolution theorists Situationists Suicides by firearm in France Theorists on Western civilization Urban theorists Writers about activism and social change Writers about globalization Writers from Paris Writers who illustrated their own writing Hidden categories: Articles using Template:ASIN with an all-numeric value CS1 maint: publisher location CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Biography articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Use dmy dates from January 2021 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2012 Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 08:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Guy Debord 39 languages Add topic

