Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Historical background 2 Biography 3 Historiography Toggle Historiography subsection 3.1 Chinese sources 3.1.1 Book of Later Han; 5th century AD 3.1.2 Records of Jiao Province's Outer Territories, 4th century AD 3.2 Differences 3.3 Vietnamese chronicles 3.3.1 Excerpts from Complete Annals of Đại Việt , 1479 4 Cultural significance Toggle Cultural significance subsection 4.1 Nationalism 4.2 Temples 4.3 Women's status 4.4 Music 4.5 Portrayal in video games 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Trưng sisters 28 languages 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Bikol Central Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia עברית ქართული Қазақша Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Português Română Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1st century AD Vietnamese queens and military leaders For the rebellion led by them, see Trung sisters' rebellion .

"Hai Ba Trung" redirects here. For the district in Hanoi named after them, see Hai Bà Trưng District .

Trưng Nữ Vương 徵女王 The Trung sisters chase away the enemy ( Dong Ho folk painting ) Queen of Lingnam Reign 40–43 Predecessor Established First Era of Northern Domination Successor Disestablished Second Era of Northern Domination Born c. 14 CE [ citation needed ] Died c. 43 CE (aged 29–30) Lingnan Spouse Thi Sách Names Trưng Trắc (徵側) Posthumous name Trưng Thánh vương [ 1 ] (徵聖王) Linh Trinh Nhị phu nhân [ 2 ] (靈貞二夫人) Kính Thắng phu nhân [ 3 ] (敬勝夫人) Kính Thắng Bảo Thuận phu nhân [ 4 ] (敬勝保順夫人) Trưng Nữ Vương Chinese name Chinese 徵女王 Literal meaning Trưng Queen Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Zhēng Nǚwáng Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Jīng Néuih Wòhng Jyutping Zing 1 neoi 5 wong 4 Vietnamese name Vietnamese alphabet Trưng Nữ Vương Chữ Hán 徵女王 Trưng sisters Vietnamese Hai Bà Trưng Hán-Nôm 𠄩 婆 徵 Literal meaning Two ladies Trưng Part of a series on the History of Vietnam Prehistoric Paleolithic Sơn Vi culture 20,000 BC–12,000 BC Mesolithic Hoabinhian 12,000 BC–10,000 BC Neolithic Bắc Sơn culture 10,000 BC–8,000 BC Quỳnh Văn culture 8,000 BC–6,000 BC Đa Bút culture 4,000 BC–3,000 BC Bronze and Iron Ages Phùng Nguyên culture 2,000 BC–1,500 BC Đồng Đậu culture 1,500 BC–1,000 BC Gò Mun culture 1,000–800 BC Dong Son culture (1,000 BC–100 AD) Sa Huỳnh culture (1,000 BC–200 AD) Óc Eo culture (1–630 AD) Ancient Hồng Bàng dynasty myth –258 BC Thục dynasty 257 BC–179 BC Triệu dynasty 204 BC–111 BC Dominated 1st Chinese domination 111 BC–40 AD Trung sisters' rebellion 40–43 2nd Chinese domination 43–544 Early Lý dynasty 544–602 3rd Chinese domination 602–939 Dynastic Ngô dynasty 939–965 Anarchy of the 12 Warlords 965–968 Đinh dynasty 968–980 Anterior Lê dynasty 980–1009 Later Lý dynasty 1009–1225 Trần dynasty 1225–1400 Hồ dynasty 1400–1407 4th Chinese domination 1407–1428 Later Lê dynasty 1428–1527 Mạc dynasty 1527–1592 Later Lê Restoration 1533–1789 Đàng Ngoài Đàng Trong Tây Sơn dynasty 1778–1802 Nguyễn dynasty 1802–1945 Colonial French Cochinchina 1862–1949 French Annam 1883–1949 French Tonkin 1883–1949 French Indochina 1887–1945 Japanese occupation 1940–1945 Empire of Vietnam 1945 Modern Democratic Republic of Vietnam 1945–1976 State of Vietnam 1949–1955 Republic of Vietnam 1955–1975 Republic of South Vietnam 1975–1976 Socialist Republic of Vietnam 1976–now Peripheral Funan 68–627 Champa 192–1832 Cát Tiên archaeological site 300–800 Chenla 550–781 Nanzhao 738–902 Khmer Empire 802–1431 Dali Kingdom 937–1253 Nung-Zhuang kingdom 1042–1052 Ngưu Hống 1061–1432 Jarai kingdoms 1100–1904 Sip Song Chau Tai 1600–1954 Principality of Hà Tiên 1707–1832 By topic Agriculture Dynasties Economy Historical capitals Immigration Military Monarchs Names Naval Women Indochina Wars Vietnam portal v t e The Trưng sisters ( Vietnamese : Hai Bà Trưng ( Vietnamese pronunciation: [haj 1 ɓa 2 t͡ɕɯŋ 1 ] ), 𠄩婆徵, literally "Two Ladies [named] Trưng", c.

14 – c. 43) were Luoyue military leaders who ruled for three years after commanding a rebellion of Luoyue tribes and other tribes in AD 40 against the first Chinese domination of Vietnam . They are regarded as national heroines of Vietnam. Their names were Trưng Trắc [ Note 1 ] [ 5 ] and Trưng Nhị .

[ Note 2 ] [ 5 ] Trưng Trắc was the first female monarch in Vietnam, as well as the first queen in the history of Vietnam ( Lý Chiêu Hoàng was the last woman to take the reign and is the only empress regnant ), and she was accorded the title Queen Trưng [ Note 3 ] in the Đại Việt sử ký toàn thư .

The sisters were born in Jiaozhi (Giao Chỉ), a commandery of the Chinese Han dynasty in modern-day northern Vietnam . The dates of their births are unknown, but Trưng Trắc was older than Trưng Nhị. The exact dates of their deaths are also unknown but both died around 43 AD after battling against the punitive expedition force led by Eastern Han general Ma Yuan .

Historical background [ edit ] Main articles: Nanyue , Southward expansion of the Han dynasty , and First Era of Northern Domination The former Qin commander Zhao Tuo ( Trieu Da in Vietnamese) established the state of Nanyue in 204 BC and had conquered Âu Lạc in 180 BC, incorporating the Vietnamese realm into his own.

[ 6 ] In 112 BC, Emperor Wu of Han dispatched soldiers against Nanyue and the kingdom was annexed in 111 BC during the ensuing Han conquest of Nanyue . Nine commanderies were established to administer the region, [ 7 ] three of which were located in what is now northern Vietnam. Revolts of local tribes against the Han began in 40 AD led by the Trưng sisters.

[ 8 ] Biography [ edit ] Further information: Trưng sisters' rebellion The Trưng sisters were daughters of a wealthy aristocratic family of Lạc ethnicity (The Lac were sorts of a confederation of multi-ethnic peoples).

[ 9 ] Their father had been a Lạc lord in Mê Linh district (modern-day Mê Linh District , Hanoi ). Trưng Trắc's husband was Thi Sách (Shi Suo), was also the Lạc lord of Chu Diên (modern-day Khoái Châu District , Hưng Yên Province ).

[ 10 ] Su Ding, the Chinese governor of Jiaozhi province at the time, is remembered by his cruelty and tyranny.

[ 11 ] According to the Book of the Later Han , Thi Sách was "of a fierce temperament", and Su Ding attempted to restrain him with legal procedures, literally to behead him without trial.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Trưng Trắc stirred her husband to action and became the central figure in mobilizing the Lạc lords against the Chinese.

[ 14 ] In March [ 15 ] of 40 AD, Trưng Trắc and her younger sister Trưng Nhị, led the Lạc Việt to rise up in rebellion against the Han.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] The Book of the Later Han recorded that Trưng Trắc launched the rebellion to avenge the killing of her husband.

[ 10 ] It began at the Red River Delta , but soon spread to other Lạc and non-Han peoples from an area stretching from Hepu Commandery to Rinan .

[ 9 ] Chinese settlements were overrun, and Su Ding fled.

[ 14 ] The uprising gained the support of about sixty-five towns and settlements.

[ 16 ] Trưng Trắc was proclaimed as queen regnant .

[ 15 ] The status of Trưng Nhị was not mentioned in Đại Việt sử ký toàn thư . According to Việt Nam sử lược , Trưng Nhị jointly reigned as co-king/queen [ 18 ] but according to folk literature , Trưng Nhị became a vice-king/queen .

[ 19 ] In 42 AD, the Emperor Guangwu of Han commissioned general Ma Yuan to suppress the rebellion with 20,000 troops. The rebellion of the two sisters was defeated in the next year as Ma Yuan captured and decapitated Trưng Trắc and Trưng Nhị, then sent their heads to the Han court in Luoyang .

[ 20 ] The Song dynasty poet and calligrapher Huang Tingjian (1045–1105) compared the Trưng sisters to Lü Jia , the prime minister of Nanyue who resisted Emperor Wu 's army in 112 BCE: Lü Jia refused treasonous bribe; Trưng Trắc raised her shield to resist oppression [ 21 ] Historiography [ edit ] This section contains too many or overly lengthy quotations .

Please help summarise the quotations . Consider transferring direct quotations to Wikiquote or excerpts to Wikisource .

( June 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The primary historical source for the sisters is the 5th century Book of the Later Han compiled by historian Fan Ye , which covers the history of the Eastern Han dynasty from 6 to CE 189. Other Chinese sources are the Shui Jing Zhu (6th cen), Book of Sui (7th century), Tongdian (8th century), Book of the Southern Barbarians (written in 862 by Fan Chuo ),... The secondary source, but the primary popular source, is the Đại Việt sử ký toàn thư (Complete Annals of Dai Viet ) compiled by Ngô Sĩ Liên under the order of the Emperor Lê Thánh Tông and finished in 1479.

Chinese sources [ edit ] The Chinese traditional historical accounts on the Trưng sisters are remarkably brief. They are found in several different chapters of the Book of the Later Han , the history for the Eastern Han dynasty , against which the Trưng sisters had carried out their uprising.

Book of Later Han; 5th century AD [ edit ] Chapter eighty-six of the Book of the Later Han , entitled Biographies of the Southern and the Southwestern Barbarians, [ Note 4 ] has this short passage: [ 22 ] [ 23 ] In the 16th year of the Jianwu era (40 AD), Jiaozhi (交阯; WD : Chiao-chih) woman Zheng Ce (徵側; SV : Trưng Trắc) and her younger sister Zheng Er (徵貳; SV: Trưng Nhị) rebelled and attacked the commandery['s strongholds]. As for Zheng Ce, she was the daughter of the Luo general of Miling prefecture (麊泠; SV: Mê Linh). She was married as wife to Shi Suo (詩索; SV: Thi Sách), a man in Zhouyuan (朱鳶; SV: Chu Diên). She/he(?) was/They were(?) remarkably heroic and courageous. Su Ding (蘇定; WD: Su Ting), the administrator of Jiaozhi restrained her (them?) with law; Ce became infuriated, rebelled, and attacked. Thus, the barbarians in Jiuzhen (九眞; WD Chiu-chen), Rinan (日南; WD:Jih-nan), Hepu (合浦; WD: Hop'u) all supported her. All in all, she took sixty-five strongholds and established herself as queen .

Jiaozhi 's governor and administrators could but defend themselves.

(Emperor) Guangwu thus decreed that Changsha (長沙; WD: Ch'ang-sha), Hepu, and Jiaozhi, all must furnish chariots and boats, repair roads and bridges, dredge obstructed waterways, and store foods and provisions. In the 18th year (42 CE), he dispatched Wave-Subduing General Ma Yuan (馬援; WD: Ma Yüan), Tower-ship General Duan Zhi (段志; WD: Tuan Chih) [and Household General Liu Long (劉隆; WD: Liu Long)], [ Note 5 ] who led over 10,000 troops from Ch'ang-sha, Guiyang (桂陽; SV: Quế Dương); Lingling (零陵; SV: Linh Lăng); Cangwu (蒼梧; SV: Thương Ngô) on a punitive expedition. Summer next year (43 CE), in the fourth month, Ma Yuan devastated Jiaozhi, beheaded Zheng Ce, Zheng Er, and others; the rest all surrendered or scattered. He advanced and attacked the Jiuzhen's rebel Du Yang (都陽; SV: Đô Dương) and others, routing and subduing them. He exiled over 300 rebel leaders to Lingling. Thus the regions beyond the Ridge were entirely pacified.

Chapter twenty-four, the biographies of Ma and some of his notable male descendants, had this parallel description: [ 24 ] Then Jiaozhi woman Zheng Ce and [her] younger sister Zheng Er rebelled; [they] attacked and the commandery was lost. The barbarians in Jiuzhen, Rinan, Hepu all supported [the Zheng sisters]. The rebels captured over sixty strongholds beyond the Ridge; Ce established herself as queen. Then a sealed decree honored Yuan as Wave-Subduing General, assigned Fule Marquis Liu Long as his assistant, dispatched Tower-ship general Duan Zhi, etc. southwards to attack Jiaozhi. When the army reached Hepu, Zhi fell ill and died; [the Emperor] decreed that Yuan command his [Zhi's] soldiers also. Then [Yuan's army] advanced along the coastline and the mountains, opening a path over thousands of li long. In the spring of the 18th [Jianwu] year (40 CE), [Yuan's] army reached up to Langbo (浪泊; SV: Lãng Bạc), fought with the rebels, routed them, decapitated thousands, [and] over tens of thousands surrendered. Yuan chased Zheng Ce to the Forbidden Gorge (禁谿; SV: Cấm Khê); defeated many times, the rebels then scattered and fled. The first month of next year (43 CE), Zheng Ce and Zheng Er were beheaded, their heads sent to Luoyang . Yuan was enfeoffed as Marquis of Xinsi, [his] fief [containing] three-thousand households. Yuan then slaughtered oxen, and distilled wines, and rewarded the soldiers [and] officers [for their] hard work...

Yuan commanded over 2,000 tower-ships big and small, over 20,000 soldiers, advanced and attacked the bandit Zheng Ce's remnants Du Yang (都羊, SV: Đô Dương) et al., from Wugong (無功; SV: Vô Công) to Jufeng (居風, SV: Cư Phong), beheading [or] capturing over 5,000; south of the mountains everywhere [was] pacified. Yuan reported that Xiyu prefecture (西於; SV: Tây Ư) had 32,000 households, its boundaries [were] over thousands of li from the court; he requested that [Xiyu prefecture] be divided into two prefectures: Fengxi (封溪, SV: Phong Khê) and Wanghai (望海; SV: Vọng Hải); [the request] was granted. Yuan immediately seized the momentum, established commanderies and prefectures, repaired the strongholds and ramparts, dredged the irrigation canals, and benefited the people. [Yuan] reported [to the Emperor] Yue law and Han law differed in more than ten rules; towards the Yue people, the old rules were clarified in order to restrain them. Henceforth, the Luoyue (駱越) obeyed General Ma's laws.

Autumn of the 20th year (44 CE), [Ma Yuan] brought the troops back to the capital; the troops had been suffering from miasma and epidemic, four to five died out of ten. Yuan was bestowed a military carriage; in court-meetings, [he] ranked among the Nine Ministers .

Records of Jiao Province's Outer Territories, 4th century AD [ edit ] An older, yet less-known account, from the now-lost Records of Jiao Province's Outer Territories (交州外域記) was quoted in the 6th-century word Commentary on the Water Classic (水經注) by Northern Wei geographer Li Daoyuan : [ 25 ] Later, the son of Zhouyuan's Luo general, named Shi (詩; SV: Thi), asked [ Note 6 ] the daughter of Ming [ Note 7 ] ling's Luo general, named Zheng Ce (徵側; SV: Trưng Trắc), to be his wife. Ce, as a human being, possessed mettle and courage. Alongsides Shi, she uprose and rebelled, attacking and devastating Jiao Province, as well as reducing the Luo generals into subordination. Zheng Ce made [herself] queen . Starting from Miling prefecture, she occupied two divisions Jiaozhi and Jiuzhen, and for two years taxed the people. Later on, the Han (court) dispatched Wave-Subduing General to lead troops on a punitive expedition. Ce and Shi fled into the Golden Gorge (金溪 SV; Kim Khê). Ma Yuan hunted them down and captured them after three years. Now [from] Western Shu [there were] also troops dispatched on punitive expedition against Ce and Shi and others and all those commanderies and prefectures were pacified; then magistrates were instituted there.

In the 9th month of 19th year of the Jianwu era [43 CE], Ma Yuan reported to the Emperor that: 'I prudently added 12,000 crack-troops in Jiaozhi to the main army for a total of 20,000 men; as well as 2,000 vessels and vehicles, ever since entering Jiaozhi; now [our army] has become [even] stronger.' In the 10th month, Yuan [went] southwards and entered Jiuzhen ; when he reached Vô Thiết prefecture (無切縣), the rebels' leader surrendered. He advanced and entered Dư Phát (餘發), rebels' leader Chu Bá (朱伯) abandoned the commandery and escaped into the deep jungles and great marshes where rhinoceroses and elephants gathered and goats and buffaloes numbered in the thousands; then, elephants were seen as in herds of several hundreds. Yuan again divided his troops, [and dispatched them] into Vô Biên prefecture (無編縣) – which was the Jiuzhending 九真亭 [prefecture] during Wang Mang ['s era]. When [Ma Yuan] reached Cư Phong (風縣), the [rebels'] leader did not surrender; [Ma Yuan] then beheaded several tens to hundreds. Jiuzhen was then pacified.

Differences [ edit ] The traditional Chinese accounts differed from Vietnamese traditional accounts in many places: Chinese accounts do not indicate oppression of the Vietnamese population by the Chinese officials and Su Ding's killing of Trưng Trắc's husband; though Ma Yuan himself confirmed that Su Ding was greedy and cowardly.

[ 26 ] In the Chinese account, the Trưng sisters did not commit suicide. Chinese sources also contradicted accounts in Vietnamese folk history that the Trưng sisters' retainers followed their examples and also committed suicide.

Vietnamese chronicles [ edit ] Excerpts from Complete Annals of Đại Việt , 1479 [ edit ] Trưng Sisters, national heroines of Viet Nam are honoured with a parade of elephants and floats in Saigon, 1961 The third book of Đại Việt sử ký toàn thư ( Complete Annals of Dai Viet ), [ 27 ] [ 28 ] published in editions between 1272 and 1697, has the following to say about the Trưng Sisters: In the year Kỉ Hợi [ Ji Hai , 39 AD] (It was the 15th year of the era of Emperor Guang Wu of Han, Liu Xiu), the administrator of Jiaozhi, Su Ding, governed with greed and violence. Queen Trưng raised troops and attacked.

[...] Queen Trưng reigned for three years. The queen was remarkably strong and courageous. She expelled Su Ding and established a nation as queen, but as a female ruler, she could not accomplish the rebuilding [of the nation]. Her taboo name was Trắc, and her family name was Trưng, but was originally Lạc (雒).

[ Note 8 ] She was the daughter of a Lạc general from Mê Linh from Phong Châu , and she was the wife of Thi Sách from Chu Diên County. Thi Sách was the son of another Lạc general, and the child of each of both houses married each other. ([Wang Youxue's] Collected Overview of the Outlines and Details (of the Comprehensive Mirror in Aid of Governance ) ([資治通鑒]綱目集覽) erroneously indicated that his family name was Lạc.)  Her capital was Mê Linh. [...] Her first year was Canh Tí [ Gengzi , 40 AD].  (It was the 16th year of Han dynasty 's Jianwu era).  In the spring, the second month, the queen was bitter because the governor, Su Ding, used the law to restrain her and also harbored a grudge against him for having killed her husband.  She, therefore, along with her younger sister Nhị, rose and captured the commandery capital. Ding was forced to flee. Nam Hải, Cửu Chân, Nhật Nam, and Hợp Phố all rose in response to her.  She was able to take over 65 cities and declare herself Queen.  Thereafter, she began to use the family name of Trưng.

Her second year was Tân Sửu [ Xinchou , 41 AD].  (It was the 17th year of Han dynasty's Jianwu era).  In the spring, the second month, there was a solar eclipse on the last day of the (lunar) month. The Han court, witnessing that as Lady Trưng had declared herself queen, captured cities, caused much distress in the border commanderies, thus ordered Trường Sa, Hợp Phố, and Giao Châu ([now] ours) to prepare wagons and boats, repair the bridges and the roads, dredge the waterways, and store foods and provisions, and also commissioned Wave-Subduing General Ma Yuan and Fule marquis Liu Long as his assistant in order to invade.

Her third year was Nhâm Dần [ Renyin , 42 AD]. (It was the 18th year of Han dynasty's Jianwu era).  In the spring, the first month, Ma advanced, following the coastline and the mountain(paths). He went for over a thousand li and reached Lãng Bạc (west of Tây Nhai in La Thành was (a place) named Lãng Bạc). He battled with the queen, who saw that the enemy's army was large. She herself considered her army to be disorderly [ Note 9 ] and feared that it could not stand.  Therefore, she withdrew to Forbidden (禁 Jìn) Gorge.  (The Forbidden Gorge was referred to in history as Golden (金 Jīn) Gorge.)  The army also thought that the queen was a woman and could not win, and therefore scattered. The national continuation again ended.

[...] [ Note 10 ] Her fourth year was Quý Mão [ Guimao 43 AD]. (It was the 19th year of Han dynasty's Jianwu era). In the spring, the first moth, Queen Trưng and her younger sister warred against Han army; they were abandoned and both were defeated and perished. Ma Yuan chased down the remaining multitude, Đô Dương and others. When chased to Cư Phong prefecture, [ Note 11 ] [Đô Dương and others] surrendered.

[...] The locals admired and mourned the Trưng Queens; they erected a temple for worshipping. The temple is located at in Hát River commune, Phúc Lộc Prefecture; there is also (another temple?) in the old territory of Phiên Ngung .

Procession of elephants in the Trưng Sisters' Parade in Saigon, 1957 Lê Văn Hưu ( Trần dynasty 's historian) wrote: Trưng Trắc, Trưng Nhị are women; with one single cry [they rallied] the commanderies of Cửu Chân, Nhật Nam, Hợp Phố; and sixty-five strongholds beyond the ridge heeded their call. They established a nation and proclaimed themselves as queens as easily as their turning over their hands. We can see that we Viets have the potentials to achieve the status of hegemons and monarchs. Regrettably, since after the Triệu dynasty until before Ngô Quyền , in the span of more than one thousand years, the men themselves merely hung their heads, wrung their hands, and became vassals and servants to Northerners (Chinese). Don't they men feel ashamed considering that the two Trưng were women? Alas! They may say they have thrown themselves away. The reign of Trưng Queens started in the year of Canh Tý and ended in Nhâm Dần, for a total of 3 years (40–42).

Ngô Sĩ Liên (the Complete Annals chief compiler) wrote: Lady Trưng was infuriated by the oppressive Han administrator. With her raised arm and one single yell, she almost rebuilt our Viet national continuation. Her heroic mettle during her lifetime not only prompted her nation-building and proclamation of queenship but also, even after she perished, hamper disaster and hinder peril. Whenever disasters, like flood or drought, happen, no prayers go unanswered. The same for the younger Trưng sister. For she, a woman, possessed the gentleman 's virtue, and her heroic and courageous spirit, between heaven and earth, does not deteriorate even though her body alrealdy perished. Couldn't men have nourished that upright and honest spirit?

Cultural significance [ edit ] A statue of the Trưng Sisters in Ho Chi Minh City The statue of the Trưng Sisters at Suối Tiên park Nationalism [ edit ] The Trưng Sisters are highly revered in Vietnam, as they led the first resistance movement against the occupying Chinese after 247 years of domination. Many temples are dedicated to them, and a yearly holiday in February to commemorate their deaths is observed by many Vietnamese. A central district in Hanoi called the Hai Bà Trưng District is named after them, as are numerous large streets in major cities [ 29 ] and many schools. Their biographies are mentioned in children's school books.

[ 30 ] The stories of the Trưng Sisters and of another famous woman warrior, Lady Triệu , are cited by some historians [ by whom?

] as hints that Vietnamese society before sinicization was a matriarchal one, where there are no obstacles for women in assuming leadership roles.

Even though the Trưng Sisters' revolt against the Chinese was almost 2000 years ago, its legacy in Vietnam remains.

[ 31 ] The two sisters are considered to be a national symbol in Vietnam, representing Vietnam's independence.  They are often depicted as two women riding two giant war elephants .  Many times, they are seen leading their followers into battle against the Chinese.  The Trưng sisters were more than two sisters that gave their lives up for their country; they are powerful symbols of Vietnamese resistance and freedom.

In 1962 during the Vietnam War , Trần Lệ Xuân (aka Madame Nhu), sister-in-law of South Vietnamese president Ngô Đình Diệm had a costly statue erected in the capital of Saigon in memory of the Trưng sisters, with the facial features modeled on herself, and also established the Women's Solidarity Movement , a female paramilitary organization, [ 32 ] using the sisters as a rallying symbol.  In the aftermath of the 1963 overthrow of Ngô Đình Diệm , the statues of the sisters were demolished by jubilant anti-Ngô Đình Diệm rioters.

[ 33 ] Temples [ edit ] Temples to the Trưng Sisters or Hai Bà Trưng Temples were found from as early as the end of the Third Era of Northern Domination .

[ 34 ] The best known Hai Bà Trưng Temple is in Hanoi near Hoàn Kiếm Lake .

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] [ 37 ] The temple was constructed by king Lý Anh Tông (r. 1138–1176) in 1158. According to tradition, in that year a devastating drought occurred in the Red River Delta, and the king ordered a Buddhist monk named Cam Thin to conduct a sacrifices rite and pray for rain at the Trung sisters temple. It rained the following day that saved his kingdom from famine. During one night the king dreamed and saw the two sisters appeared and were riding together on an iron horse. When the king awoke, he ordered the temple to be gloriously decorated and performed a sacrifice ritual to the sisters. Later he directed two other temples to worship the sisters, one of which was destroyed by river landslide and one temple which survives today.

[ 38 ] Other Hai Bà Trưng temples are found in Mê Linh District ( Vĩnh Phúc Province ), Phúc Thọ District ( Hà Tây Province ) and Hoàng Hoa Thám Street, Bình Thạnh District , Ho Chi Minh City.

Women's status [ edit ] According to Keith Taylor , one reason for the defeat is desertion by rebels because they did not believe they could win under a woman's leadership.

[ 39 ] The fact that women were in charge was blamed as a reason for the defeat by historical Vietnamese texts in which the historians ridiculed and mocked men because they did nothing while "mere girls", whom they viewed with revulsion, took up the banner of revolt.

[ 40 ] The historical poem containing the phrase "mere girls", which related the revolt of the Trưng Sisters while the men did nothing, was not intended to praise women nor view war as women's work, as it has been wrongly interpreted.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Music [ edit ] Lưu Hữu Phước wrote the patriotic song Hát Giang trường hận (Long Hatred on Hát River ) between 1942–1943 to dedicate to the Trưng sisters. Later, Phước revised the lyrics in 1946 to create another song Hồn tử sĩ [ vi ] (Soul of the Martyred Soldier), which is often used as lament for state funerals, and the lyrics still mentioned the Trưng sisters' rebellion.

Portrayal in video games [ edit ] In Sid Meier's Civilization VII , Trung Trac is a playable leader.

See also [ edit ] Lady Triệu Phùng Thị Chính Copper columns of Ma Yuan Bùi Thị Xuân Matriarchy Feminism Vietnam History of Vietnam Notes [ edit ] ^ Vietnamese pronunciation: [t͡ɕɯŋ 1 t͡ɕǎk 5 ] ; chữ Hán : 徵 側 ; Chinese pinyin : Zhēng Cè ; Wade–Giles : Cheng 1 Ts'e 4 ; Old Chinese : *trəŋ-[ts]rək ^ Vietnamese pronunciation: [t͡ɕɯŋ 1 ɲiː 6 ] ; chữ Hán : {{vi-nom| 徵 貳 ; Chinese pinyin : Zhēng Èr ; Wade–Giles : Cheng 1 Erh 4 ; Old Chinese : *trəŋni[j]-s ^ chữ Quốc ngữ : Trưng Nữ vương , chữ Hán : 徵女王 ^ The use of the word barbarians is historical, and is translated as used in the original Chinese texts.

^ Liu Long was not mentioned here, yet Hou Hanshu's Account of Liu Long recorded that he also participated in this campaign against Trưng Trắc, and that he caught Trưng Nhị at the Forbidden Gorge (禁谿), beheaded over 1,000, and subdued over 20,000 rebels ^ The two characters "詩索", to be read as 'Shi/Thi asked', were instead misread as the name Shi Suo / Thi Sách ; 索 "to ask" is the main verb of this sentence "後朱䳒雒將子名詩 索 𥹆泠雒將女名徵側爲妻" ^ 𥹆 míng is possibly a clerical error for 麊 mí ^ or Hùng 雄(?) ^ 自度烏合之衆, lit. "[the queen] [her]self considered [her] multitude to be like a murder of crows " ^ Lê Văn Hưu's remark is entered here ^ Possibly at Hải Vân Pass , see Lê Thành Khôi's Histoire du Viet Nam des origines a 1858 (Paris: Sudestasie, 1981) References [ edit ] ^ Việt điện u linh tập ^ Theo Việt điện u linh tập , Lý Anh Tông dâng lên.

^ Trần Nhân Tông dâng tôn.

^ Trần Anh Tông dâng tôn.

^ a b Baxter, William; Sagart, Laurent (2014).

Old Chinese: A New Reconstruction . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-994537-5 .

^ Holcombe 2001 , pp. 149–150.

^ Yü 1986 , p. 453.

^ Gernet 1996 , p. 126.

^ a b Brindley 2015 , p. 235.

^ a b Lai 2015 , p. 253.

^ Scott 1918 , p. 312.

^ Hou Hanshu, vol. 86 "Account of the Southern Man and Southwestern Yi" text: "徵側者，麊泠縣雒將之女也。嫁爲硃珪人詩索妻， 甚雄勇 。" ^ Scott 1918 , p. 313.

^ a b Taylor 1983 , p. 38.

^ a b c Bielestein 1986 , p. 271.

^ a b Yü 1986 , p. 454.

^ Kiernan 2019 , p. 78.

^ Việt Nam sử lược, Chương II: Trưng Vương ^ Tổng tập văn học dân gian người Việt (in Vietnamese). Vol. 4. Nhà xuất bản Khoa học xã hội. 2004. p. 424.

Trăm quan đón xa giả Trưng Nữ Vương vào thành Chu Diên, bà lên ngôi vua, xưng là Trưng Vương, phong em là Phó Vương.

^ Kiernan 2019 , p. 80.

^ Taylor 1983 , p. 335.

^ Hou Hanshu , Vol. 86 ^ As quoted in Gujin Tushu Jicheng Vol. 421 ^ Hou Hanshu, Ch. 24 "Account of Ma Yuan" ^ Li Daoyuan Commentary on the Water Classic , Vol. 37 ^ Dongguan Hanji 東觀漢記 Han Records of the Eastern Institute "Accounts Part 7 – Ma Yuan"; Siku Quanshu version, Vol. 8–12 p. 105 of 127 ; quote: "馬援平交阯，上言太守蘇定張眼視錢，䁋目討賊，怯於戰功，宜加切敕。後定果下獄。" rough translation: "Ma Yuan, having levelled Jiaozhi, reported to the Emperor that: "Governor Su Ding's eyes opened wide when seeing money and closed shut at punishing rebels; he feared fighting and attacking. [Your Majesty] should impose a strict punishment!" Afterwards, Ding was finally imprisoned." ^ "Đại Việt Sử Ký Toàn Thư – Ngoại Kỷ Quyển III" (in Vietnamese). Institute of Social Studies Vietnam. 1993 . Retrieved October 19, 2011 .

^ "Complete Historical Annals of Đại Việt – Outer Annals, Third Volume" (in Chinese).

^ Vietnam Country Map . Periplus Travel Maps. 2002–2003.

ISBN 0-7946-0070-0 .

^ O'Harrow, Stephen (1979).

"From Co-loa to the Trung Sisters' Revolt: Viet-nam as the Chinese Found It" .

Asian Perspectives .

22 (2): 140– 164.

ISSN 0066-8435 .

JSTOR 42928006 .

^ Forbes, Andrew, and Henley, David: Vietnam Past and Present: The North (History and culture of Hanoi and Tonkin). Chiang Mai. Cognoscenti Books, 2012.

ASIN B006DCCM9Q ^ Langguth, A. J.

(2000).

Our Vietnam: the war, 1954–1975 . New York City: Simon & Schuster. pp.

169– 171.

ISBN 0-684-81202-9 .

^ Jones, Howard (2003).

Death of a Generation: how the assassinations of Diem and JFK prolonged the Vietnam War . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 424.

ISBN 0-19-505286-2 .

^ Taylor 1983 , p. 336.

^ Stewart 2018 , pp. 88–89.

^ Stewart 2018 , p. 97.

^ Taylor 2007 , p. 163.

^ Scott 1918 , p. 314.

^ Taylor 1983 , p. 41.

^ John P. McKay; Bennett D. Hill; John Buckler; Clare Haru Crowston; Merry E. Wiesner-Hanks; Patricia Buckley Ebrey; Roger B. Beck (2012).

Understanding World Societies, Combined Volume: A Brief History . Bedford/St. Martin's. p. 134.

ISBN 978-1-4576-2268-7 .

^ Gilbert, Marc Jason (June 25, 2007).

"When Heroism is Not Enough: Three Women Warriors of Vietnam, Their Historians and World History" .

World History Connected .

4 (3).

^ Taylor 1983 , p. 334.

Bibliography [ edit ] Bielestein, Hans (1986), "Wang Mang, the restoration of the Han dynasty, and Later Han", in Twitchett, Denis C.; Fairbank, John King (eds.), The Cambridge History of China: Volume 1, The Ch'in and Han Empires, 221 BC–AD 220 , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.

223– 290 Brindley, Erica (2015).

Ancient China and the Yue: Perceptions and Identities on the Southern Frontier, c. 400 BCE–50 CE . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-107-08478-0 .

Gernet, Jacques (1996).

A History of Chinese Civilization . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-49781-7 .

Holcombe, Charles (2001).

The Genesis of East Asia: 221 B.C. – A.D. 907 . University of Hawaii Press.

ISBN 978-0-8248-2465-5 .

Kiernan, Ben (2019).

Việt Nam: a history from earliest time to the present .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-190-05379-6 .

Lai, Mingchiu (2015), "The Zheng sisters", in Lee, Lily Xiao Hong; Stefanowska, A. D.; Wiles, Sue (eds.), Biographical Dictionary of Chinese Women: Antiquity Through Sui, 1600 B.C.E. – 618 C.E , Taylor & Francis, pp.

253– 254, ISBN 978-1-317-47591-0 Li, Tana (2011), "A Geopolitical Overview", in Li, Tana; Anderson, James A. (eds.), The Tongking Gulf Through History , Pennsylvania: University of Pennsylvania Press, pp.

1– 25, ISBN 978-0-81220-502-2 Scott, James George (1918).

The Mythology of all Races: Indo-Chinese Mythology . University of Michigan.

Stewart, Iain (2018).

Lonely Planet Vietnam . Lonely Planet.

ISBN 978-1-787-01931-7 .

Taylor, Keith Weller (1983).

The Birth of Vietnam . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-07417-0 .

Taylor, Philip (2007).

Modernity and Re-Enchantment: Religion in Post-Revolutionary Vietnam . Institute of Southeast Asian Studies.

ISBN 978-9-812-30438-4 .

Yü, Ying-shih (1986), "Han foreign relations", in Twitchett, Denis C.; Fairbank, John King (eds.), The Cambridge History of China: Volume 1, The Ch'in and Han Empires, 221 BC–AD 220 , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, pp.

377– 463 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Trưng Sisters .

Trưng sisters Tuyet A. Tran & Chu V. Nguyen Preceded by First Chinese domination of Vietnam Rulers of Vietnam 40–43 Succeeded by Second Chinese domination of Vietnam v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trưng_sisters&oldid=1300205107 " Categories : Trưng sisters 1st-century Vietnamese people 1st-century women monarchs Deified female monarchs Deified Vietnamese people Han dynasty rebels Monarchs taken prisoner in wartime People executed by Vietnam by decapitation Queens regnant in Asia Sister duos Vietnamese goddesses Vietnamese monarchs Vietnamese rebels Women in 1st-century warfare Women in ancient Chinese warfare Women in war in Vietnam People from Hanoi Hidden categories: Pages with Vietnamese IPA Articles containing Vietnamese-language text CS1 Vietnamese-language sources (vi) CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles containing Chinese-language text Wikipedia articles with style issues from June 2024 All articles with style issues Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2015 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 22:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trưng sisters 28 languages Add topic

