Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Cultural influence 2 See also 3 References 4 Sources Toggle the table of contents Aglaonice 37 languages العربية Արեւմտահայերէն Asturianu Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français Fulfulde Galego Hausa Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Thessalian witch For the genus of moths, see Aglaonice (moth) .

Greek vase from the collection of William Hamilton , apparently showing two women drawing down the moon.

Aglaonice ( Ancient Greek : Ἀγλαονίκη , Aglaoníkē , compound of αγλαὸς ( aglaòs ) "luminous" and νίκη ( nikē ) "victory") was an ancient Thessalian witch, [ 1 ] known from a scholion on the Argonautica and two references in Plutarch 's Moralia .

[ 2 ] She was the daughter of Hegetor [ 3 ] or Hegemon.

[ 4 ] Her date is uncertain, but she may have been active some time between the mid-third century BC and the late-first century AD.

[ 5 ] However, Richard Stothers suggests that Aglaonice might have been mythical, or a pre-fifth century figure about whom legends had developed by the time of Plutarch.

[ 6 ] Thessalian witches were famous for their ability to draw down the moon from the sky.

[ 7 ] Both Plutarch and the scholiast on the Argonautica claim that Aglaonice was able to predict lunar eclipses , and planned her drawing down of the moon to coincide with them.

[ 8 ] As during a normal lunar eclipse the moon remains visible, Peter Bicknell proposed that during Aglaonice's lifetime there were particularly dark eclipses, which would explain how her ability to predict eclipses would help make the illusion of drawing down the moon convincing.

[ 9 ] However, Bicknell's theory has been criticised both on the grounds of its astronomical implausibility, [ 10 ] and for over-literally interpreting ancient literary evidence.

[ 11 ] According to the scholiast on the Argonautica , Aglaonice's drawing down of the moon was the source of the proverb "pull the moon against yourself", meaning to bring misfortune upon yourself.

[ 12 ] Cultural influence [ edit ] One of the craters on Venus is named after Aglaonice.

[ 13 ] She is one of the 999 mythical or historical figures featured on Judy Chicago 's Heritage Floor , associated with the place-setting for Aspasia in The Dinner Party .

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Timeline of women in science References [ edit ] ^ Graf, Fritz (2006). "Aglaonice".

Brill's New Pauly .

^ Villagra, Nereida (2017). "Plato on the Thessalian Trick: A New Interpretation of Gorgias 513A".

Greek, Roman and Byzantine Studies : 287– 288.

^ Plutarch, "De defectu oraculum" 416F ff.

^ Scholion on Argonautica 4.59–4.61a ^ Villagra, Nereida (2017). "Plato on the Thessalian Trick: A New Interpretation of Gorgias 513A".

Greek, Roman and Byzantine Studies . n. 13.

^ Stothers, Richard B. (1986). "Dark Lunar Eclipses in Classical Antiquity".

Journal of the British Astronomical Association .

96 (2): 95.

^ ní Mheallaigh, Karen (2020).

The Moon in the Greek and Roman Imagination . Cambridge University Press. p. 37.

ISBN 9781108685726 .

^ ní Mheallaigh, Karen (2020).

The Moon in the Greek and Roman Imagination . Cambridge University Press. pp.

37– 38.

ISBN 9781108685726 .

^ Bicknell, Peter (1983). "The witch Aglaonice and dark lunar eclipses in the second and first centuries BC".

Journal of the British Astronomical Association .

93 (4): 160– 163.

^ Stothers, Richard B. (1986). "Dark Lunar Eclipses in Classical Antiquity".

Journal of the British Astronomical Association .

96 (2): 96– 97.

^ ní Mheallaigh, Karen (2020).

The Moon in the Greek and Roman Imagination . Cambridge University Press. p.37 n.116.

ISBN 9781108685726 .

^ Villagra, Nereida (2017). "Plato on the Thessalian Trick: A New Interpretation of Gorgias 513A".

Greek, Roman and Byzantine Studies : 285– 287.

^ "Aglaonice" .

Venus Crater Database . Retrieved 17 May 2024 .

^ "Aglaonice" .

Elizabeth A. Sackler Center for Feminist Art: The Dinner Party: Heritage Floor: Aglaonice .

Brooklyn Museum . 2007. Archived from the original on 2 December 2024 . Retrieved 17 December 2011 .

Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870). "Aganice".

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .

v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aglaonice&oldid=1294928604 " Categories : Ancient occultists Ancient Thessalian women 2nd-century BC Greek people 2nd-century BC Greek women Hellenistic Thessalians Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 17:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aglaonice 37 languages Add topic

