Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Activities 3 Membership 4 Committee 5 Past members 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Cambridge University Amateur Dramatic Club Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Amateur Theatre Club of The University of Cambridge This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( October 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article may rely excessively on sources too closely associated with the subject , potentially preventing the article from being verifiable and neutral .

Please help improve it by replacing them with more appropriate citations to reliable, independent sources .

( October 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Cambridge University Amateur Dramatic Club Cambridge University Amateur Dramatic Club Logo Abbreviation CUADC Formation 1855 Type Amateur Theatre Group Location Park Street, Cambridge, UK President Gemma Stapleton [ 1 ] Senior Treasurer Dr. Richard Barnes Website cuadc.org The Cambridge University Amateur Dramatic Club (CUADC) is the oldest university dramatic society in England , [ 2 ] the largest dramatic society in Cambridge , and the resident society of the ADC Theatre .

The club stages a diverse range of productions every term, many of them at the fully equipped ADC Theatre and The Corpus Playroom in Cambridge, and annually at the Edinburgh Fringe and occasionally on tour abroad.

History [ edit ] The Cambridge University Amateur Dramatic Club was officially founded during the Easter Vacation of 1855 by F.C. Burnand and a group of his friends, who had acquired back rooms in the Hoop Hotel on Jesus Lane during the course of the previous year.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The university's response to the project was reported to have been ‘unfavourable’, but this did nothing to dampen the enthusiasm of those involved.

[ 3 ] The club's first presentation was a series of short one act plays, of which the club's first minute book reports that ‘the receipts were scanty, but a start was effected’.

[ 3 ] Over the course of the next five years, the society grew slowly but steadily.

[ 3 ] A contribution of £5 from each of the club's members allowed the club to pay for the renovation of their cramped and bare rooms, and in 1860 the new stage at the Hoop Hotel, roughly on the site of the current building, was opened.

[ 3 ] Though the university's approval was initially begrudging, attitudes towards the club changed over the course of the next 40 years, and by the beginning of the 20th century the club was a nationally renowned and respected group.
The Hoop Hotel stage was destroyed in a fire in 1939.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Support flooded in, including messages of goodwill from the King, and 18 months later a new building was opened by the club.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The club continued to run the theatre until it ran into financial difficulties in 1974 when the university took over the running of the theatre, as a department of the university leasing the building from the club for a nominal annual fee.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Activities [ edit ] The CUADC puts on around 20 shows every year. Many are performed at the 228-seater ADC Theatre , where the club is the resident performing company.

[ 5 ] Constitutionally, the club also has an obligation to spread interest in the theory and practice of theatre, in all its aspects, by every possible means amongst those qualified to be Members of the Club; to encourage the active involvement of the same regardless of previous experience; and to maintain interest in the participation of activities at the ADC Theatre.

[ 6 ] To this end, the club puts on a programme of professional and student-run workshops for actors, directors and technicians as well as a series of late-night experimental pieces known as Lateshows and stand-alone performances known as One Night Stands.

Membership [ edit ] Anybody aged 17 or over, studying for a qualification at the University of Cambridge , or who is engaged in full-time study at any other educational institution within Cambridge is eligible for ordinary membership.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Committee [ edit ] The club is run on behalf of its members by a committee of students of the university. The committee is in charge of show selection and support, as well as organisation of one-off events such as the annual garden party , annual club dinner, and freshers' fair.

[ 6 ] There is also a senior treasurer, who, by university statutes, must be a senior member of the university.

[ 8 ] [ 1 ] Past members [ edit ] Alumni include: Peter Hall Richard Eyre Trevor Nunn Ian McKellen Derek Jacobi Michael Redgrave David Hare – club hiring manager 1968 [ 9 ] Corin Redgrave Emma Thompson Nicholas Hytner Simon Russell Beale Eleanor Bron Sam Mendes Tom Hollander Miriam Margolyes Griff Rhys Jones Rachel Weisz Sacha Baron Cohen Clive Swift Terrence Hardiman Eddie Redmayne Tom Hiddleston Lucy Moss Toby Marlow Emma Corrin See also [ edit ] ADC Theatre Pembroke Players The Marlowe Society Footlights References [ edit ] ^ a b CUADC Committee ^ Prahl, Amanda (1 September 2020).

"Everything You Need to Know About Emma Corrin, The Crown's Princess Diana" .

Popsugar . Retrieved 5 June 2025 .

^ a b c d e f g h A History of the ADC Theatre ^ a b c d History of CUADC ^ a b Care, Adam (13 October 2017).

"Theatre that launched career of Stephen Fry to close - for now" .

Cambridgeshire Live . Retrieved 5 June 2025 .

^ a b c CUADC Constitution ^ "Approach Women in the Club" .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Statutes and Ordinances of the University of Cambridge: Chapter Ii :  Matriculation, Residence, Admission to Degrees, Discipline  –  Discipline ^ ADC Theatre Archives External links [ edit ] CUADC website CUADC Wiki v t e University of Cambridge People Chancellor David Sainsbury, Baron Sainsbury of Turville Vice-Chancellor Deborah Prentice List of University of Cambridge people Colleges Christ's Churchill Clare Clare Hall Corpus Christi Darwin Downing Emmanuel Fitzwilliam Girton Gonville and Caius Homerton Hughes Hall Jesus King’s Lucy Cavendish Magdalene Murray Edwards Newnham Pembroke Peterhouse Queens’ Robinson St Catharine’s St Edmund’s St John’s Selwyn Sidney Sussex Trinity Trinity Hall Wolfson Faculties and departments, by school Arts and Humanities English Anglo-Saxon Norse and Celtic Architecture CRASSH Existential Risk Classics Divinity Music Philosophy Biological sciences Genetics Gurdon Institute Pathology Physiology, Development and Neuroscience Plant Sciences Botanic Garden Sainsbury Laboratory Stem Cell Institute Clinical Medicine Autism Research Centre Cancer Unit Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit Mitochondrial Biology Unit Oncology Wolfson Brain Imaging Centre Humanities and Social sciences Economics Education History History and Philosophy of Science Human, Social, and Political Science Archaeological Research Politics and International Studies Law Criminology Physical sciences Astronomy Chemistry Earth Sciences Palaeoclimate Research Geography Scott Polar Research Institute Mathematical Sciences Mathematics Theoretical Cosmology Materials Science and Metallurgy Physics Technology Business School Alternative Finance Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology Computer Science and Technology Engineering Manufacturing Others ADC Theatre Institute of Continuing Education Library Press ( journals ) Student life Students' Union Graduate Union Air Squadron Amateur Dramatic Club Apostles BlueSci Cam FM Christian Union Conservatives Footlights May Week May Ball Labour Club Liberal Democrats Light Entertainment Society Moral Sciences Club Musical Society Philosophical Society Railway Club SCA Spaceflight Union Society Cambridge University Wine Society Varsity (student newspaper) The Mays Sport Association football Rules Aussie Rules Boxing Cricket Cross Country Dancing Golf Handball Ice Hockey Real Tennis Rifle shooting Rowing Openweight Men (CUBC) Lightweight Men (CULRC) Women (CUWBC) Rugby union Tennis Competitions Cuppers The Boat Race Women's Boat Race Henley Boat Races The Varsity Polo Match Rugby League Varsity Match Rugby Union Varsity Match University Cricket Match University Golf Match Affiliates Alan Turing Institute Cambridge Theological Federation Cambridge University Health Partners Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust Royal Papworth Hospital NHS Foundation Trust Partner institutions Animal Health Trust Babraham Institute British Antarctic Survey CCDC EMBL-EBI Laboratory of Molecular Biology NIAB Wellcome Sanger Institute Museums Fitzwilliam Museum Hamilton Kerr Institute Kettle's Yard Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology Museum of Classical Archaeology Museum of Zoology Sedgwick Museum of Earth Sciences Polar Museum Whipple Museum of the History of Science Related Awards and prizes Cambridge Zero Regent House Senate House Cambridge University Council Fictional Cambridge colleges Cambridge University Reporter Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cambridge_University_Amateur_Dramatic_Club&oldid=1305915174 " Categories : Clubs and societies of the University of Cambridge Amateur theatre companies in England Student theatre in the United Kingdom Arts organizations established in 1855 Theatre in Cambridge 1855 establishments in England Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles lacking in-text citations from October 2013 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles lacking reliable references from October 2013 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 21:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cambridge University Amateur Dramatic Club Add languages Add topic

