Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Goals 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Presidents of the EMS 3 Structure and Governance 4 Prizes Toggle Prizes subsection 4.1 1992 prizes 4.2 1996 prizes 4.3 2000 prizes 4.4 2004 prizes 4.5 2008 prizes 4.6 2012 prizes 4.7 2016 prizes 4.8 2020 prizes 4.9 2024 prizes 5 National societies holding full membership in EMS 6 Publications 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents European Mathematical Society 19 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Euskara Français Galego 한국어 Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mathematical society This article may contain an excessive amount of intricate detail that may only interest a particular audience .

Please help by spinning off or relocating any relevant information, and removing excessive detail that may be against Wikipedia's inclusion policy .

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) European Mathematical Society Formation 28 October 1990 ; 34 years ago ( 28 October 1990 ) Founder Friedrich Hirzebruch Headquarters Helsinki , Finland , Europe Fields Mathematics Membership EMS has as its members around 60 national mathematical societies in Europe, 50 mathematical research centres and departments, and 3000 individuals.

President Jan Philip Solovej Affiliations International Mathematical Union Website euromathsoc .org The European Mathematical Society ( EMS ) is a European organization dedicated to the development of mathematics in Europe . Its members are different mathematical societies in Europe, academic institutions and individual mathematicians. The current president is Jan Philip Solovej , [ 1 ] professor at the Department of Mathematics at the University of Copenhagen .

Goals [ edit ] The Society seeks to serve all kinds of mathematicians in universities, research institutes and other forms of higher education.  Its aims are to Promote mathematical research, both pure and applied, Assist and advise on problems of mathematical education, Concern itself with the broader relations of mathematics to society, Foster interaction between mathematicians of different countries, Establish a sense of identity amongst European mathematicians, Represent the mathematical community in supra-national institutions.

The EMS is itself an Affiliate Member [ 2 ] of the International Mathematical Union and an Associate Member [ 3 ] of the International Council for Industrial and Applied Mathematics .

History [ edit ] Four EMS Presidents: Volker Mehrmann (2019–2023), Jean-Pierre Bourguignon (1995-1998), Marta Sanz-Solé (2011–2014), and Pavel Exner (2015–2018) at EMS 30th anniversary celebration at International Centre for Mathematical Sciences in Edinburgh The precursor to the EMS, the European Mathematical Council was founded in 1978 [ 4 ] at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Helsinki . This informal federation of mathematical societies was chaired by Sir Michael Atiyah . The European Mathematical Society was founded on 28 October 1990 in Mądralin near Warsaw , Poland , with Friedrich Hirzebruch as founding President. Initially, the EMS had 27 member societies. The first European Congress of Mathematics (ECM) was held at the Sorbonne and Panthéon-Sorbonne universities in Paris in 1992, and is now held every 4 years at different locations around Europe, organised by the EMS.  ECM 2020 was postponed for a year due to the covid pandemic took place in 2021 in Portorož in Slovenia. The next ECM (2028) will be held in Bologna .

Presidents of the EMS [ edit ] Source: [ 5 ] Friedrich Hirzebruch , 1990–1994 Jean-Pierre Bourguignon , 1995–1998 Rolf Jeltsch, 1999–2002 John Kingman , 2003–2006 Ari Laptev , 2007–2010 Marta Sanz-Solé , 2011–2014 Pavel Exner , 2015–2018 Volker Mehrmann , 2019–2022 Jan Philip Solovej , 2023–present Structure and Governance [ edit ] The governing body [ 6 ] of the EMS is its Council, which comprises delegates representing all of the societies which are themselves members of the EMS, along with delegates representing the institutional and individual EMS members. The Council meets every 2 years, and appoints the President and Executive Committee who are responsible for the running of the society.

Besides the Executive Committee, the EMS has standing committees on: [ 7 ] Applications and Interdisciplinary Relations, Developing Countries, Mathematical Education, ERCOM (Directors of European Research Centres in the Mathematical Sciences), Ethics, European Solidarity, Meetings, Publications and Electronic Dissemination, Raising Public Awareness of Mathematics, [ 8 ] Women in Mathematics.

The EMS's rules are set down in its Statutes [ 9 ] and Bylaws.

[ 10 ] The EMS is headquartered at the University of Helsinki .

Prizes [ edit ] The European Congress of Mathematics (ECM) is held every four years under the Society's auspices, at which ten EMS Prizes are awarded to "recognize excellent contributions in Mathematics by young researchers not older than 35 years".

[ 11 ] Since 2000, the Felix Klein Prize (endowed by the Institute for Industrial Mathematics in Kaiserslautern) has been awarded to "a young scientist or a small group of young scientists (normally under the age of 38) for using sophisticated methods to give an outstanding solution, which meets with the complete satisfaction of industry, to a concrete and difficult industrial problem." Since 2012, the Otto Neugebauer Prize (endowed by Springer Verlag ) has been awarded to a researcher or group of researchers '"for highly original and influential work in the field of history of mathematics that enhances our understanding of either the development of mathematics or a particular mathematical subject in any period and in any geographical region".

Since 2024, the Simon Norton Prize [ 12 ] for Mathematics Outreach has been awarded to individuals, teams or partnerships whose work in any area of mathematics engagement has had an outstanding and demonstrable impact or influence on its audience.

The following are the awardees so far, [ 13 ] (a F symbol denotes mathematicians who later earned a Fields Medal ).

1992 prizes [ edit ] EMS Prizes: Richard Borcherds (UK) F – Jens Franke (Germany) – Alexander Goncharov (Russia) – Maxim Kontsevich (Russia) F – François Labourie (France) – Tomasz Łuczak (Poland) – Stefan Müller (Germany) – Vladimír Šverák (Czechoslovakia) – Gábor Tardos (Hungary) – Claire Voisin (France) 1996 prizes [ edit ] EMS Prizes: Alexis Bonnet (France) – Timothy Gowers (UK) F – Annette Huber-Klawitter (Germany) – Aise Johan de Jong (Netherlands) – Dmitry Kramkov (Russia) – Jiří Matoušek (Czech Republic) – Loïc Merel (France) – Grigori Perelman (Russia) F , declined – Ricardo Pérez-Marco (Spain/France) – Leonid Polterovich (Russia/Israel) 2000 prizes [ edit ] EMS Prizes: Semyon Alesker (Israel) – Raphaël Cerf (France) – Dennis Gaitsgory (Moldova) – Emmanuel Grenier (France) – Dominic Joyce (UK) – Vincent Lafforgue (France) – Michael McQuillan (UK) – Stefan Nemirovski (Russia) – Paul Seidel (UK/Italy) – Wendelin Werner (France) F Felix Klein Prize: David C. Dobson (USA) 2004 prizes [ edit ] EMS Prizes: Franck Barthe (France) – Stefano Bianchini (Italy) – Paul Biran (Israel) – Elon Lindenstrauss (Israel) F – Andrei Okounkov (Russia) F – Sylvia Serfaty (France) – Stanislav Smirnov (Russia) F – Xavier Tolsa (Spain) – Warwick Tucker (Australia/Sweden) – Otmar Venjakob [ de ] (Germany) Felix Klein Prize: Not Awarded 2008 prizes [ edit ] EMS Prizes: Artur Avila (Brazil) F – Alexei Borodin (Russia) – Ben J. Green (UK) – Olga Holtz (Russia) – Boáz Klartag (Israel) – Alexander Kuznetsov (Russia) – Assaf Naor (USA/Israel) – Laure Saint-Raymond (France) – Agata Smoktunowicz (Poland) – Cédric Villani (France) F Felix Klein Prize: Josselin Garnier (France) 2012 prizes [ edit ] EMS Prizes: Simon Brendle (Germany) - Emmanuel Breuillard (France) - Alessio Figalli (Italy) F - Adrian Ioana (Romania) - Mathieu Lewin (France) - Ciprian Manolescu (Romania) - Grégory Miermont (France) - Sophie Morel (France) - Tom Sanders (UK) - Corinna Ulcigrai (Italy) - Felix Klein Prize: Emmanuel Trélat (France) Otto Neugebauer Prize: Jan P. Hogendijk (Netherlands) 2016 prizes [ edit ] EMS Prizes: Sara Zahedi (Iran-Sweden) - Mark Braverman (Israel) - Vincent Calvez (France) - Guido de Philippis (Italy) - Peter Scholze (Germany) F - Péter Varjú (Hungary) - Thomas Willwacher (Germany) - James Maynard (UK) F - Hugo Duminil-Copin (France) F - Geordie Williamson (Australia) Felix Klein Prize: Patrice Hauret (France) Otto Neugebauer Prize: Jeremy Gray (UK) 2020 prizes [ edit ] EMS Prizes: Karim Adiprasito (Germany) - Ana Caraiani (Romania) - Alexander Efimov (Russia) - Simion Filip (Moldova) - Aleksandr Logunov (Russia) - Kaisa Matomäki (Finland) - Phan Thành Nam (Vietnam) - Joaquim Serra (Spain) - Jack Thorne (UK) - Maryna Viazovska (Ukraine) F Felix Klein Prize: Arnulf Jentzen (Germany) Otto Neugebauer Prize: Karine Chemla (France) 2024 prizes [ edit ] EMS Prizes: Maria Colombo (Italy/Switzerland) - Cristiana De Filippis (Italy) - Jessica Fintzen (Germany) - Nina Holden (Norway/USA) - Tom Hutchcroft (UK/USA) - Jacek Jendrej (Poland/France) - Adam Kanigowski (Poland/USA) - Frederick Manners (UK/USA) - Richard Montgomery (UK) - Danylo Radchenko (Ukraine/France) Felix Klein Prize: Fabien Casenave (France) Otto Neugebauer Prize: Reinhard Siegmund-Schultze (Germany/Norway) Paul Lévy Prize in Probability Theory: Jeremy Quastel (Canada) Simon Norton Prize: Nina Gasking (Maison des Mathématiques et de l'Informatique, France) National societies holding full membership in EMS [ edit ] Armenian Mathematical Union Austrian Mathematical Society Belgian Mathematical Society Belgian Statistical Society Bosnian Mathematical Society Union of Bulgarian Mathematicians Croatian Mathematical Society Cyprus Mathematical Society Czech Mathematical Society Danish Mathematical Society Edinburgh Mathematical Society Estonian Mathematical Society Finnish Mathematical Society Société Mathématique de France Society of Applied & Industrial Mathematicians (GAMM) Georgian Mathematical Union German Mathematical Society Hellenic Mathematical Society Icelandic Mathematical Society Institute of Mathematics and its Applications Irish Mathematical Society Israel Mathematical Union Italian Association of Mathematics Applied to Economic and Social Sciences (AMASES) Società Italiana di Matematica Applicata e Industriale (SIMAI) Italian Mathematical Union János Bolyai Mathematical Society Kosovar Mathematical Society Latvian Mathematical Society Lithuanian Mathematical Society London Mathematical Society Luxembourg Mathematical Society Moscow Mathematical Society Norwegian Mathematical Society Norwegian Statistical Association Polish Mathematical Society Portuguese Mathematical Society Real Sociedad Matemática Española (Royal Spanish Math. Society) Romanian Mathematical Society Royal Dutch Mathematical Society Slovak Mathematical Society Slovenian Discrete and Applied Mathematics Society Société de Mathématiques Appliquées et Industrielles (SMAI) Sociedad Española de Matemática Aplicada (Spanish Soc. of Appl. Math.) Societat Catalana de Matemàtiques (Catalan Society of Mathematics) Society of Mathematicians and Physicists of Montenegro Spanish Society of Statistics and Operations Research St. Petersburg Mathematical Society Svenska Matematikersamfundet (Swedish Mathematical Society) Swiss Mathematical Society Society of Mathematicians, Physicists and Astronomers of Slovenia Turkish Mathematical Society Ukrainian Mathematical Society Publications [ edit ] The EMS is the sole shareholder of the publisher EMS Press that publishes over 25 academic journals , including: [ 14 ] Algebraic Geometry Annales de l'Institut Henri Poincaré C Annales de l'Institut Henri Poincaré D Commentarii Mathematici Helvetici Documenta Mathematica Elemente der Mathematik EMS Surveys in Mathematical Sciences Groups, Geometry, and Dynamics Interfaces and Free Boundaries Journal of Combinatorial Algebra Journal of Fractal Geometry Journal of Noncommutative Geometry Journal of Spectral Theory Journal of the European Mathematical Society L’Enseignement Mathématique Mathematical Statistics and Learning Memoirs of the European Mathematical Society Oberwolfach Reports Portugaliae Mathematica Publications of the Research Institute for Mathematical Sciences Quantum Topology Rendiconti del Seminario Matematico della Università di Padova Rendiconti Lincei - Matematica e Applicazioni Revista Matemática Iberoamericana Zeitschrift für Analysis und ihre Anwendungen EMS Press has also published over 200 books in mathematics since 2003, in both print and digital formats.

[ 15 ] In addition, since 2021 it publishes the Magazine of the European Mathematical Society, often called EMS Magazine (ISSN 2747-7894, eISSN 2747-7908), formerly known as the Newsletter of the European Mathematical Society (ISSN 1027-488X), which was established in 1991. It features news and expositions of recent developments in mathematical research.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] It is quarterly and open access.

[ 18 ] The current editor-in-chief is 
Donatella Donatelli (succeeding Fernando da Costa).

[ 19 ] The Encyclopedia of Mathematics is also sponsored by the EMS.

See also [ edit ] Europe portal Mathematics portal List of mathematical societies References [ edit ] ^ "Executive Committee" . Retrieved 10 Jan 2023 .

^ "IMU Affiliate Members" . Archived from the original on 1 December 2017 . Retrieved 26 November 2017 .

^ "ICIAM Members" . Retrieved 26 November 2017 .

^ David A R Wallace (October 1999).

"History of the European Mathematical Society: 1990–98" . Retrieved 2023-01-10 .

^ "Past Presidents of the European Mathematical Society" . Retrieved 2023-01-10 .

^ "Governance of the European Mathematical Society" . Retrieved 10 Jan 2023 .

^ "Committees of the European Mathematical Society" . Retrieved 10 Jan 2023 .

^ "Mathematics In Europe" . Retrieved 22 Nov 2017 .

^ "Statutes of the European Mathematical Society" . Retrieved 10 Jan 2023 .

^ "Bylaws of the European Mathematical Society" . Retrieved 10 Jan 2023 .

^ "Prizes of the European Mathematical Society" . Retrieved 2023-01-10 .

^ "The EMS Simon Norton Prize for Mathematics Outreach" . Retrieved 2025-03-25 .

^ "History of Prizes of the European Mathematical Society" . Retrieved 2023-01-10 .

^ List of the journals published by EMS Press ^ "Books published by EMS Press" . Retrieved 2023-01-10 .

^ Lars Madsen (11 April 2014).

"Article about EMS Newsletter from Vicente Muñoz" .

Mathematics.dk . Retrieved 2016-03-09 .

^ "European Mathematical Society" .

History.mcs.st-and.ac.uk . Retrieved 2016-03-09 .

^ Sanz-Solé, Marta (2013).

"The European Mathematical Society: the home for Mathematics in Europe" (PDF) .

Europhysics News .

44 (4): 19– 21.

Bibcode : 2013ENews..44d..19S .

doi : 10.1051/epn/2013402 .

^ "European Mathematical Society Publishing Magazine" . Retrieved 2023-01-10 .

External links [ edit ] The European Mathematical Society Homepage EMS Press Mathematics in Europe portal by the EMS committee for Raising Public Awareness of Mathematics History of the EMS 8th European Congress of Mathematics v t e The European Mathematical Society International member societies European Society for Mathematical and Theoretical Biology National member societies Armenia Austria Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Mathematical Society of France SMAI SFdS Georgia Germany German Mathematical Society GAMM Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Israel Italy Italian Mathematical Union SIMAI AMASES Kosovo Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Montenegro Netherlands Norway Norwegian Mathematical Society NSF Poland Portugal Romania Russia Moscow Mathematical Society St. Petersburg Mathematical Society Serbia Slovakia Slovenia DMFA SDAMS Spain Catalan Mathematical Society RSMS SEIO SEMA Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Edinburgh Mathematical Society IMA London Mathematical Society Institutional Members Abdus Salam International Centre for Theoretical Physics Centre de Recerca Matemàtica Centre International de Rencontres Mathématiques Centrum voor Wiskunde en Informatica Erwin Schrödinger International Institute for Mathematical Physics EURANDOM Faculty of Mathematics at the University of Barcelona Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques Institut Henri Poincaré Institut Mittag-Leffler Institute for Mathematical Research International Centre for Mathematical Sciences Isaac Newton Institute for Mathematical Sciences Mathematisches Forschungsinstitut Oberwolfach Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences Stefan Banach International Mathematical Center Thomas Stieltjes Institute for Mathematics Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Norway Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=European_Mathematical_Society&oldid=1302083911 " Categories : 1990 establishments in Europe Mathematical societies Organizations established in 1990 Pan-European learned societies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles that are excessively detailed from November 2024 All articles that are excessively detailed Wikipedia articles with style issues from November 2024 All articles with style issues This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 07:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents European Mathematical Society 19 languages Add topic

