Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Major authors 3 See also Toggle See also subsection 3.1 Literature by century 3.2 Poetry by century 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Renaissance literature 32 languages Afrikaans العربية Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Қазақша Latviešu Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Polski Română Русский Shqip Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia European literature influenced by the Renaissance See also: Renaissance This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Renaissance literature" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Renaissance The Birth of Venus (c. 1484–1486) by Botticelli Aspects Architecture Dance Fine arts Greek scholars Humanism Literature Magic Music Philosophy Science Technology Warfare Regions England France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Spain Scotland Northern Europe Low Countries History and study Age of Discovery Continuity thesis High Renaissance v t e Renaissance literature refers to European literature which was influenced by the intellectual and cultural tendencies associated with the Renaissance . The literature of the Renaissance was written within the general movement of the Renaissance, which arose in 14th-century Italy and continued until the mid-17th century in England while being diffused into the rest of the western world.

[ 1 ] It is characterized by the adoption of a humanist philosophy and the recovery of the classical Antiquity. It benefited from the spread of printing in the latter part of the 15th century.

Overview [ edit ] For the writers of the Renaissance, Greco-Roman inspiration was shown both in the themes of their writing and in the literary forms they used. The world was considered from an anthropocentric perspective. Platonic ideas were revived and put to the service of Christianity . The search for pleasures of the senses and a critical and rational spirit completed the ideological panorama of the period. New literary genres such as the essay ( Montaigne ) and new metrical forms such as the Spenserian stanza made their appearance.

The impact of the Renaissance varied across the continent; countries that were predominantly Catholic or Protestant experienced the Renaissance differently. Areas where the Eastern Orthodox Church was culturally dominant, as well as those areas of Europe under Islamic rule, were more or less outside its influence. The period focused on self-actualization and one's ability to accept what is going on in one's life.

[ citation needed ] The earliest Renaissance literature appeared in Italy in the 14th century; Petrarch , Machiavelli , and Ariosto are notable examples of Italian Renaissance writers. From Italy, the influence of the Renaissance spread at different times to other countries and continued to spread around Europe through the 17th century. The English Renaissance and the Renaissance in Scotland date from the late 15th century to the early 17th century.

[ 1 ] In northern Europe, the scholarly writings of Erasmus , the plays of William Shakespeare, the poems of Edmund Spenser, and the writings of Sir Philip Sidney may be considered Renaissance in character.

The development of the printing press (using movable type) by Johannes Gutenberg in the 1440s encouraged authors to write in their local vernacular instead of Greek or Latin classical languages , thus widening the reading audience and promoting the spread of Renaissance ideas.

Major authors [ edit ] Significant writers and poets associated with the Renaissance literature are: Italian: Petrarch , Giovanni Boccaccio , Jacopo Sannazaro , Niccolò Machiavelli , Ludovico Ariosto , Michelangelo Portuguese: Jorge de Montemor , Luís de Camões Spanish: Baptista Mantuanus , Miguel de Cervantes French: François Rabelais Dutch: Erasmus English: Thomas Wyatt , Edmund Spenser , Philip Sidney , William Shakespeare German: Georg Rudolf Weckherlin See also [ edit ] Allegory in Renaissance literature British literature#The Renaissance Elizabethan literature English Renaissance theatre Renaissance in Croatia Dutch Renaissance and Golden Age literature French Renaissance literature German literature#German Renaissance and Reformation Italian Renaissance literature Polish Renaissance literature Portuguese Renaissance and Portuguese literature#First classical phase: The Renaissance Scottish Renaissance literature Spanish Renaissance literature Swedish Renaissance literature Literature by century [ edit ] 15th century in literature 16th century in literature Poetry by century [ edit ] 15th century in poetry 16th century in poetry References [ edit ] ^ a b Baldick, Chris (2015).

"Renaissance (Renascence)" .

The Oxford Dictionary of Literary Terms (Online Version) (4th ed.). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780191783234 .

Further reading [ edit ] Sypher, Wylie (1955).

Four Stages of Renaissance Style: Transformations in Art and Literature, 1400–1700 . Garden City, NY: Doubleday.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Renaissance literature at Wikimedia Commons General Resources in the Renaissance & 17th Century v t e Renaissance General Renaissance Greek scholars in the Renaissance High Renaissance Mannerism Northern Mannerism Outline of the Renaissance Renaissance studies By field Architecture Brick Central and Eastern Europe French Italian domes Palladian Plateresque Portuguese Purism Spanish Venetian Art Early Netherlandish painting Dutch and Flemish painting Italian painting Sculpture Italian sculpture Dance Humanism France Northern Europe Latin Literature Dutch French Spanish Magic Medicine Music Philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Science Scientific Revolution Technology Theatre Warfare By region Italian Renaissance Bergamo and Brescia Ferrara Florence Lombardy Rome Papacy Sicily Urbino Venice Northern Renaissance England France Germany Saxony Weser Low Countries Poland Scotland Iberian peninsula Portugal Spain Spanish Golden Age Lists Composers Figures Humanists Structures Related Cloak and dagger Medieval renaissances Carolingian Ottonian 12th century Reenactment Authority control databases National United States Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Renaissance_literature&oldid=1272485811 " Category : Renaissance literature Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from July 2013 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2013 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 January 2025, at 21:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Renaissance literature 32 languages Add topic

