Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 "Black legend" 1.2 Nazi Germany 2 In Europe Toggle In Europe subsection 2.1 England 3 Americas Toggle Americas subsection 3.1 Mexico 3.2 United States 4 References 5 Sources Toggle the table of contents Anti-Spanish sentiment 8 languages العربية Català Español Euskara Français Հայերեն Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fear or hatred of Spanish people or culture The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Anti-Spanish sentiment is the fear , distrust , hatred of, aversion to, or discrimination against Spanish people , culture , or nationhood .

Instances of anti-Spanish prejudice, often embedded within anti-Catholic prejudice and propaganda, were stoked in Europe in the early modern period, pursuant to the Spanish Crown 's status as a power siding with the Counter-Reformation . The Spanish colonization of the Americas was also singled out as uniquely barbarous by some commentators. 20th-century Spanish historiography shaped the construct of " Black Legend " to denote such manifestations of prejudice, generally overplaying their reach and pervasiveness. The justification of the civil wars from which new republics emerged independent from Spanish rule in the Americas also partially relied on a hispanophobic discourse.

Within Spain , elements of stateless nationalist movements (such as Catalan , Basque , and Galician ) competing with Spanish nationalism embrace anti-Spanish views and discourse.

History [ edit ] "Black legend" [ edit ] Main article: Black legend (Spain) Early instances of hispanophobia arose as the influence of the Spanish Empire and the Spanish Inquisition spread throughout Europe during the Late Middle Ages . Hispanophobia then materialized in folklore that is sometimes referred to as the " black legend ": The legend first arose amid the religious strife and imperial rivalries of 16th-century Europe.

Northern Europeans , who loathed Catholic Spain and envied its American empire , published books and gory engravings which depicted Spanish colonization as uniquely barbarous: an orgy of greed, slaughter and papist depravity, the Inquisition writ large.

[ 1 ] La leyenda negra , as Spanish historians first named it, entailed a view of Spaniards as "unusually cruel, avaricious, treacherous, fanatical, superstitious, hot-blooded, corrupt, decadent, indolent, and authoritarian". During the European colonization of the Americas , "[t]he Black Legend informed Anglo Americans' judgments about the political, economic, religious, and social forces that had shaped the Spanish provinces from Florida to California, as well as throughout the hemisphere".

[ 2 ] These judgments were handed down from Europeans who saw the Spaniards as inferior to other European cultures.

[ 3 ] In North America , hispanophobia thus preceded the United States Declaration of Independence by almost 200 years. Historians theorize that North European nations promoted hispanophobia in order to justify attacks on Spain's colonies in the Americas .

New Englanders engaged in hispanophobic efforts to assimilate Spanish colonies: [I]n North America a deep current of Hispanophobia pervades Anglo-Saxon culture. ... As early as the late seventeenth century, we find Puritan divines like Cotton Mather and Samuel Sewell studying Spanish—with a view to winning converts to their version of Protestantism . Sewell spoke of "bombing [sic] Santo Domingo , Havana , Puerto Rico , and Mexico itself" with the Spanish Bible , and Cotton Mather even wrote a book on Protestant doctrine in Spanish, published in Boston in 1699, intended for—as he might say—the darker regions of Spanish America.

[ 4 ] [ better source needed ] Nazi Germany [ edit ] Main article: Nazi racial theories For the Nazis, the psychology of the Spaniards deemed incompatible with the ideal Nazi Germans, particularly regarding their Catholicism.

[ 5 ] Also, Ottavio de Peppo noted that Spaniards' religious sentiments were useful to weaken Germany's position because of that contempt of the Nazis to the Spanish psychology.

[ 6 ] Hitler himself said that "All of Spain is contained in Don Quixote —-a decrepit society unaware the world has passed it by", because Spain was a stagnant nation dominated by three elements that Nazis detested; the Church , the aristocracy , and the monarchy , since Franco had promised a royal restoration. Hitler praised the Arab occupation of Iberia as "cultivated," while referring to the Spaniards themselves as "lazy" and of "moorish blood;" he also slandered the Catholic Queen Isabel , calling her "the greatest whore in history." [ 7 ] [ 8 ] The German writer Wilhelm Pferdekamp, published many hispanophobic articles, including one titled Afrika beginnt hinter den Pyrenäen ("Africa begins behind the Pyrenees").

[ 9 ] In Europe [ edit ] England [ edit ] Further information: Spain–United Kingdom relations Anti-Spanish sentiment in England is rooted in the historical rivalry and resulting mutual antipathy between British and Spanish empires.

Relations between England and Spain were not significantly hostile until the Age of Discovery and the rise of European colonialism in the 16th century, in which both countries' interests came into conflict following the European discovery of the Americas. Spain was the first European power to secure control over vast areas of the New World, and an outright antagonism soon developed with England as the latter pursued its own colonial enterprises in the Americas once economic benefits became apparent. The English Reformation encountered resistance from Catholics within the broader Counter-Reformation movement; Spain's status as a Catholic power as well as its opposition to the Protestantism led to anti-Spanish and anti-Catholic sentiments in England to go hand-in-hand for centuries to come. Conflicting religions and imperial ambitions, along other factors contributed in prompting both countires to seek leadership of opposing sides during major geopolitical conflicts in Europe and the Americas which led to multiple wars between England and Spain until the 19th century.

England employed corsairs like Francis Drake and John Hawkins to destabilize Spanish presence in the Americas by plundering coastal settlements. One of the main driving forces behind the Golden Age of Piracy was a deliberate attempt by England to undermine Spain's control over its possesions in the Caribbean, as well as to sabotage lucrative Spanish trade routes passing through the region. Spain intervened in favour of the United States during the American Revolutionary War , while Britain provided varying degrees of financial and logistical support to insurgents in the Spanish American wars of independence .

Despite a warming in relations from the 20th century onwards, issues such as disputes over the status of Gibraltar (which was annexed by Britain after the War of the Spanish Succession ) still cause tensions between the two countires. A 2013 poll revealed that, regardless of the dispute over Gibraltar, 17,9% of British responents rated the relations between UK and the Spain as "bad", with 1,9% rating them as "very bad".

[ 10 ] Americas [ edit ] Depiction of Simón Bolívar signing the Decree of War to the Death against Spaniards in 1813 In the 19th century, the justification of the Spanish American wars of independence relied on blaming Spain and its legacy for all of the ills of the New World, with the remaining insignificant Peninsular and Canarian population in the new republics being subsequently harassed, extorted and eventually expelled.

[ 11 ] Various independence leaders had studied in Europe, coming into contact with Enlightment ideals that made them favour aspects of French Republicanism and British parliamentarism ranging from incompatible to directly hostile towards Spain's monarchy, which they saw as oppressive, backwards and corrupt.

Mexico [ edit ] According to historian Marco Antonio Landavazo, anti-Spanish sentiment in Mexico is underpinned by basic ideas that are synthesized in the interpretation of the conquest as genocide, the identification of an intrinsically perverse character in the Spaniards and, therefore, the need for the extermination and expulsion of the " gachupín ".

[ 12 ] This sentiment, already extant in the 17th century, gained notoriety in the wake of the Mexican War of Independence (1810-1821), [ 13 ] and was articulated from then on as one of the tenets of the Mexican national building, urgently pushed by elements of the political class of the young country, with the result of the hardening of the borders of its political community.

[ 14 ] Thus, already towards the heights of 1810, an independence hero like the priest Miguel Hidalgo decried the Spaniards as "denaturalized men" moved by "sordid greed" and whose only god was money.

[ 15 ] Throughout the 1820s, Spaniards were quantitatively insignificant (estimated by Harold Sims at 6500 people out of a population of about 6.5 million) but many of them―despite a certain heterogeneous social extraction shown in recent research―held an important influence in the economic, military and political elites of the First Mexican Republic.

[ 16 ] Anti-Spanish sentiment gained momentum in the Mexican public sphere towards by the late 1820s, with decrees in 1827 and 1829 calling for the expulsion of all peninsulares residing in Mexico.

[ 17 ] In the context of a growth of Mexican nationalism, the preponderance of Spanish landowners and merchants in Guerrero led mulatto militias to murder several Spanish merchants in 1827 and 1828.

[ 18 ] Anti-Spanish sentiment was one of the causes behind the sacking of the Parián market in Mexico City in 1828.

[ 19 ] Anti-Spanish sentiment motivated twelve state expulsion laws published in 1827, three federal laws of December 1827, March 1829 and January 1833, and two decrees, in January 1833 and 1834.

[ 16 ] Two years later, the definitive Treaty of Peace and Friendship between Mexico and Spain was signed.

[ 20 ] This process resulted in the effective expulsion of almost half of the Spanish population from Mexico.

[ 16 ] The murder of Spaniards—sometimes amidst cries of "death to whites", to "Spaniards" or to "gachupines"—lingered during the 1840s and 1850s in the countryside of the states of Guerrero , Morelos and Yucatán , spurred by the tension between Spanish hacienda owners and the impoverished indigenous peasantry, even though the behavior of the former did not differ substantially from that of the Criollo hacienda owners.

[ 21 ] Although lesser in terms of casualties than xenophobic outbursts of anti-American and Sinophobic sign, anti-Spanish sentiment manifested itself during the Mexican Revolution of 1910 , with slightly more than 200 Spaniards killed.

[ 22 ] United States [ edit ] Anti-Spanish propaganda depicting a dehumanized personification of Spain ('the Spanish Brute') in satirical magazine Judge (July 1898) Upon independence, American Anglo-Protestant elites inherited a suspicion against Spain owing to their British colonial past. However, relations between the US and Spain were cordial, and Spain was initially well-regarded due to its support during the American Revolutionary War.

In the 1890s anti-Spanish propaganda was disseminated by outlets published by the likes of Joseph Pulitzer and William Randolph Hearst , aiming to set the mood of the public opinion in favour of War against Spain .

[ 23 ] References [ edit ] ^ Horwitz, Tony (9 July 2006).

"Immigration — and the Curse of the Black Legend" .

New York Times . p. WK13 . Retrieved 6 August 2019 .

^ Weber, David J.

(February 1992).

"The Spanish Legacy in North America and the Historical Imagination" .

The Western Historical Quarterly .

23 (1).

Utah State University : 5– 24.

doi : 10.2307/970249 .

JSTOR 970249 .

Archived from the original on 2 June 2008 . Retrieved 15 November 2018 .

Alt URL ^ Amago, Samuel (2005). "Why Spaniards Make Good Bad Guys: Sergi López and the Persistence of the Black Legend in Contemporary European Cinema".

Film Criticism .

30 (1).

Allegheny College : 41– 63.

JSTOR 24777304 .

^ Falcoff, Mark (1 January 2000).

"Beyond Bilingualism" .

American Enterprise Institute . Archived from the original on 11 July 2007 . Retrieved 6 August 2019 .

^ The ambassador in Salamanca , Viola, to Ciano, minister of Foreign Affairs, 3 July 1938, Document 280, M.d.A. Esteri, I Documenti Diplomatici Italiani. Ottava Serie: 1935–1939 (Rome 2001), vol IX, 376–8.

^ The head of the cabinet, De Peppo, to the Minister of Foreign Affairs, Ciano, 3 July 1938, Document 281, ibid. vol IX, 378. On the Austrian situation, R. V. Luza, The Resistance in Austria, 1938–1945 (Minneapolis 1984), 66–72.

^ "Hitler's Table Talk 1941–1944: His Private Conversations". Hugh Trevor-Roper ^ "La opinión de Hitler sobre los españoles: "moros y vagos" que adoran a una reina "ramera" " .

abc (in Spanish). 2018-07-16 . Retrieved 2023-04-30 .

^ Oliver Gliech, Ein Institut und sein General : Wilhelm Faupel und das Iberoamerikanische Institut in der Zeit des Nationalsozialismus.  Francfort, Bibliotheca Ibero-Americana / Vervuert, 2003, 615 p. «Wilhelm Faupel. Generalstabsoffizier, Militärberater, Präsident des Ibero-Amerikanischen Instituts», p. 131-279.

^ Noya, Javier (1 September 2013).

"Gibraltar and public opinion in the UK and Spain" .

Elcano Royal Institute . Madrid . Retrieved 17 July 2025 .

^ Cano Borrego, Pedro Damián (2022).

"Hispanofobia, extorsión y expulsión de los peninsulares y canarios en las nuevas repúblicas hispanoamericanas" .

Revista de la Inquisición. Intolerancia y Derechos Humanos .

26 .

Universidad Rey Juan Carlos. Servicio de Publicaciones .

ISSN 1131-5571 .

^ Landavazo 2005 , p. 33.

^ Landavazo 2005 , pp. 33–34.

^ Pani 2003 , pp. 358–359.

^ Landavazo 2005 , p. 34.

^ a b c Pani 2003 , p. 357.

^ Jackson & Castillo 1995 , p. 88.

^ Aviña 2014 , p. 24.

^ Lomnitz 2001 , p. 131.

^ Valadés, José C. (1994).

Orígenes de la República Mexicana: la aurora constitucional . UNAM.

ISBN 978-968-36-3320-0 .

^ Landavazo 2005 , pp. 36–37.

^ Landavazo 2005 , p. 39.

^ Head, Michael; Boehringer, Kristian (2019).

The Legal Power to Launch War. Who Decides?

. Milton Park: Routledge . p. 76.

ISBN 978-1-138-29208-6 .

Sources [ edit ] William D. Carrigan and Clive Webb, "The Lynching of Persons of Mexican Origin or Descent in the United States, 1848 to 1928," Journal of Social History, vol. 37, no. 2 (Winter 2003), pp. 411–438.

In JSTOR .

Juan Francisco Maura, "La hispanofobia a través de algunos textos de la conquista de América: de la propaganda política a la frivolidad académica," Bulletin of Spanish Studies, vol. 83, no. 2 (2006), pp. 213–240.

Aviña, Alexander (2014).

Specters of Revolution: Peasant Guerrillas in the Cold War Mexican Countryside . Oxford: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-19-993657-1 .

Jackson, Robert Howard; Castillo, Edward D. (1995).

Indians, Franciscans, and Spanish Colonization: The Impact of the Mission System on California Indians . Albuquerque: The University of New Mexico Press .

ISBN 0-8263-1753-7 .

Landavazo, Marco Antonio (2005).

"Imaginarios encontrados. El antiespañolismo en México en los siglos XIX y XX" (PDF) .

Tzintzun. Revista de Estudios Históricos (42). Morelia: Universidad Michoacana de San Nicolás de Hidalgo : 33– 48.

ISSN 1870-719X .

Lomnitz, Claudio (2001).

Deep Mexico, Silent Mexico: An Anthropology of Nationalism . Minneapolis: The University of Minnesota Press .

ISBN 0-8166-3289-8 .

Pani, Erika (2003).

"De coyotes y gallinas: Hispanidad, identidad nacional y comunidad política durante la expulsión de españoles" .

Revista de Indias .

63 (228). Madrid: Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas : 355– 374.

ISSN 0034-8341 .

v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Spanish_sentiment&oldid=1304153714 " Categories : Anti-national sentiment Anti-Spanish sentiment Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from February 2021 Articles with excerpts All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from December 2019 This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 08:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Spanish sentiment 8 languages Add topic

