Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Early life and studies 1.2 Priesthood, episcopate and cardinalate 1.3 Death and legacy 2 Bibliography 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Jean Daniélou 22 languages Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara Français Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kiswahili Latina مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French Jesuit theologian and cardinal (1905–1974) His Eminence Jean Daniélou S.J.

Cardinal-Deacon of San Saba Daniélou in Florence with the mayor, Giorgio La Pira (left) in 1953.

Church Catholic Church Appointed 30 April 1969 Predecessor Augustin Bea Successor Joseph Schröffer Previous post(s) Titular Archbishop of Taormina (1969) Orders Ordination 20 August 1938 Consecration 19 April 1969 by François Marty Created cardinal 28 April 1969 by Pope Paul VI Personal details Born Jean-Guenolé-Marie Daniélou ( 1905-05-14 ) 14 May 1905 Neuilly-sur-Seine , France Died 20 May 1974 (1974-05-20) (aged 69) Paris , France Motto Fluvium aquæ vitæ ("The stream of the water of life") Coat of arms Part of a series on the Society of Jesus History Regimini militantis Congregatio de Auxiliis Suppression Ratio Studiorum Hierarchy General Congregation Superior General Spirituality Spiritual Exercises Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Training Magis Works Educational institutions List of sites Jesuit Refugee Service Bollandists Notable Jesuits Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Peter Faber Pedro Arrupe John Berchmans Francisco Suárez Robert Bellarmine Peter Canisius Edmund Campion Pierre-Jean De Smet Augustin Barruel Aloysius Gonzaga Frederick Copleston Karl Rahner Pope Francis Jesuit saints Jesuit theologians Jesuit philosophers v t e Jean-Guenolé-Marie Daniélou S.J.

( French: [danjelu] ; 14 May 1905 – 20 May 1974) was a French Jesuit and cardinal , an internationally well known patrologist , theologian and historian and a member of the Académie française .

Biography [ edit ] Early life and studies [ edit ] Jean-Guenolé-Marie Daniélou was born on 14 May 1905 in Neuilly-sur-Seine . He was the son of Charles Daniélou and Madeleine Clamorgan. His father was an anticlerical politician who several times as a minister served in the French government, while his mother was a Catholic educator and the founder of institutions for women's education. His brother Alain (1907–1994) was a noted Indologist and historian.

Daniélou studied at the Sorbonne and passed his agrégation in grammar in 1927. He joined the Society of Jesus in 1929 and during his regency taught at a boys' school in Poitiers , from 1934 to 1936. He then studied theology at Fourvière in Lyon under Henri de Lubac , who introduced him to the specialized study of the Fathers of the Church . He was ordained a priest on 19 August 1938.

[ 1 ] Priesthood, episcopate and cardinalate [ edit ] During World War II , Daniélou served with the Air Force in 1939–1940. With the fall of France to Nazi Germany he was returned to civilian life and began doctoral studies, completing in 1942 his thesis on the spiritual doctrine of Gregory of Nyssa . He was then appointed chaplain to the female section of the École Normale Supérieure , at Sèvres . He spent most of his time on research in patristics , and he became, together with Henri de Lubac , one of the founders of the Sources Chrétiennes book series. In 1944 he was named Professor of Early Christian History at the Institut Catholique de Paris , later becoming dean there. Beginning in the 1950s he produced several historical studies which included The Bible and the Liturgy , The Lord of History , and From Shadows to Reality that furnished background for the development of Covenantal Theology .

[ 2 ] Thoroughly grounded in the Fathers of the Church , who worked from Scripture, Daniélou generally avoided the neo-Thomistic terminology and approach and used a more relational vocabulary, emphasizing our self-gift in response to God's gift in Jesus Christ, with the gradual unveiling of the Trinitarian life in history.

[ 3 ] Pope John XXIII appointed Daniélou a peritus of the Second Vatican Council .

[ 4 ] In 1969 Pope Paul VI made him a cardinal . As a result, he was ordained to the episcopal titular see of Taormina , and assigned the title of Cardinal-Deacon of San Saba , a Jesuit-run parish in Rome.

[ 5 ] Rather like his theology professor Henri de Lubac , Daniélou twice refused the cardinalate but eventually accepted at the insistence of Paul VI.

[ 1 ] He was elected to the Académie Française on 9 November 1972 to succeed Cardinal Eugène Tisserant .

[ 4 ] Death and legacy [ edit ] He died unexpectedly in 1974 in the home of a woman who was alleged to be a prostitute. The Society of Jesus , after an investigation, stated that Daniélou was bringing a gift of money to pay for the bail of the woman's husband. Like a number of other prominent public figures, Daniélou's brother defended him strongly, pointing out that he had always gone out of his way to serve those in most need.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Bibliography [ edit ] A number of Daniélou's works on the early Church, often abridged for a popular audience, remain in print.

French works, with English translations Platonisme et théologie mystique: Doctrine spirituelle de saint Grégoire de Nysse , (Paris: Aubier, 1944) 'Les orientations preésentes de la pensée religieuse', Études 249, (1946), 5-21 Origène , Table ronde, Paris, 1948 [ET: Origen , trans. Walter Mitchell, (New York: Sheed & Ward , 1955)] Sacramentum futuri: Études sur les origines de la typologie biblique , (Paris: Beauchesne, 1950) Bible et liturgie, la théologie biblique des sacrements et des fêtes d'après les Pères de l'Église , Cerf, Paris, 1951 [ET: The Bible and the Liturgy , Liturgical Studies, 3 (Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 1956)] Les anges et leur mission, d'après les Pères de l'Église , Desclée, Paris, 1952 [ET: The Angels and their Mission: According to the Fathers of the Church , trans David Heimann, (1957)] Essai sur le mystère de l'histoire , (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1953) Dieu et nous , Bernard Grasset, Paris, 1956. [ET: God and the Ways of Knowing , trans. Walter Roberts, (1956; repr San Francisco, CA: Ignatius Press, 2023)] Les manuscrits de la Mer Morte et les origines du Christianisme , L'Orante, Paris, 1957 [ET: The Dead Sea Scrolls and Primitive Christianity, (Greenwood Publishing Group, 1979)] Histoire des doctrines chrétiennes avant Nicée , 3 vols, (Paris: Desclée, Éditions du Cerf , 1958–1978) Théologie du Judéo-Christianisme , Histoire des doctrines chrétiennes avant Nicée vol 1, (Tournai: Desclée, 1958) [ET: The Theology of Jewish Christianity , trans. and ed. by John Austin Baker, (London: Darton, Longman and Todd, 1964) Message évangélique et culture hellénistique aux IIe et IIIe siècles , Histoire des doctrines chrétiennes avant Nicée vol 2, (Tournai: Desclée, 1961) [ET: Gospel Message and Hellenistic Culture , trans. and ed. John Austin Baker, (London: Darton, Longman and Todd, 1973)] Les origines du christianisme latin , Histoire des doctrines chrétiennes avant Nicée vol 3, (Paris: Cerf, 1978) [ET: The Origins of Latin Christianity, (Philadelphia: Westminster Press, 1977)] Philon d'Alexandrie , Fayard, Paris, 1958 Approches du Christ , (Paris: B. Grasset, 1960) [ET: Christ and Us , trans. Walter Robert, (New York: Sheed & Ward, 1961)] Les Symboles chrétiens primitifs , Seuil, Paris, 1961 L'Église des premiers temps : Des origines à la fin du IIIe siècle , Seuil, Paris, 1963 (with Henri Marrou), Des origines a saint Grégoire le Grand , (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1963) Les Évangiles de l'enfance , (Paris: Seuil, 1967) [ET: The infancy narratives , trans Rosemary Sheed, (London: Burns & Oates, 1968)] La Trinité et le mystère de l'existence , (Desclée de Brouwer, Paris, 1968) 'Saint Hilaire et son temps', in Hilaire de Poitiers : Évêque et docteur; cinq conférences données à Poitiersà l'occasion du XVIe centenaire de sa mort (368-1968) , (Paris: Études Augustiniennes, 1968) La Foi de toujours et l'homme d'aujourd'hui , (Paris: Beauchesne, 1969) La Résurrection, (Paris: Éditions du Seuil, 1969) L'être et le temps chez Grégoire de Nysse , (Leiden: Brill, 1970) Other works Libretto for Stravinsky 's Oedipus Rex : A Latin translation of Jean Cocteau 's arrangement of Sophocles ' original Oedipus Rex .

Other English translations The Salvation of the Nations , trans. Angeline Bouchard, (New York: Sheed and Ward, 1950) Advent , trans. Rosemary Sheed, (1950) Holy Pagans of the Old Testament , trans. Felix Faber, (London: Longmans, Green and Co, 1957) The Lord of History: Reflections on the Inner Meaning of History , trans. Nigel Abercrombie, (1958; repr Cleveland, OH: Meridian, 1968) The Presence of God , trans. Walter Roberts, (Baltimore, MD: Helicon, 1959) From Shadows to Reality: Studies in the Biblical Typology of the Fathers , trans. Wulstan Hibberd, (London: Burns & Oates, 1960) The Ministry of Women in the Early Church, (Leighton Buzzard: Faith Press, 1961) The Advent of Salvation: A Comparative Study of Non-Christian Religions and Christianity , trans. Rosemary Sheed, (New York: Paulist, 1962) The Scandal of Truth , trans. W. J. Kerrigan, (London: Burns & Oates, 1963) Primitive Christian Symbols , trans.

Donald Attwater , (London: Burns & Oates, 1964) Prayer as a Political Problem , trans. and ed. J. R. Kirwan, (New York: Sheed and Ward, 1967) Dialogue with Israel , (Baltimore: Helicon, 1968) Myth and Mystery, (New York: Hawthorn Books, 1968) God's Life in Us , (Dimension Books, 1969) Historical Theology , Viking Press, 1970 Why the Church?

Franciscan Press, 1975 Prayer: The Mission of the Church , (Grand Rapids, MI: WB Eerdmans, 1996) References [ edit ] ^ a b "Jean Guénolé Louis Marie Cardinal Daniélou, S.J." Catholic-Hierarchy.org . David M. Cheney . Retrieved 23 January 2015 .

^ "Jean Daniélou" .

goodreads.com . Retrieved 15 December 2017 .

^ "Jean Daniélou and the "Master-Key to Christian Theology" | Carl E. Olson | 21 August 2007" .

ignatiusinsight.com . Archived from the original on 2 August 2011 . Retrieved 15 December 2017 .

^ a b "Academie-francaise bio" . Archived from the original on 20 July 2006 . Retrieved 15 December 2017 .

^ Salvador Miranda.

"Daniélou, S.J., Jean" .

The Cardinals of the Holy Roman Church . Retrieved 23 January 2011 .

^ "Jean had always dedicated himself to disregarded people. For a certain period he had celebrated a Mass for homosexuals. He tried to help prisoners, criminals, troubled young people, prostitutes." Alain Daniélou .

^ "Despising Jean Danielou | Matthew Schmitz" . 14 March 2015.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jean Daniélou .

09 August 1973 Jean Daniélou meets A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Srila Prabhupada (Founder and Spiritual Master of the Hare Krishna Movement in Paris File on Cardinal Daniélou on the Académie française website v t e Jesuits History Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Spiritual Exercises of Ignatius of Loyola Ad maiorem Dei gloriam Magis Regimini militantis Ecclesiae Exposcit debitum Ratio Studiorum Suppression of the Society of Jesus List of Jesuits Saints José de Anchieta Modeste Andlauer Edmund Arrowsmith Inácio de Azevedo Robert Bellarmine John Berchmans Jacques Berthieu Andrew Bobola Francis Borgia Jean de Brébeuf Alexander Briant John de Britto Edmund Campion Peter Canisius Juan del Castillo Noël Chabanel Peter Claver Claude de la Colombière Antoine Daniel Paul Denn Philip Evans Peter Faber Thomas Garnet Charles Garnier Aloysius Gonzaga Roque González de Santa Cruz John Soan de Goto René Goupil Melchior Grodziecki Alberto Hurtado Rémy Isoré Ignatius of Loyola Francis de Geronimo Isaac Jogues James Kisai Stanislaus Kostka Jean de Lalande Gabriel Lalemant David Lewis Lèon-Ignance Mangin Paul Miki Henry Morse John Ogilvie Nicholas Owen Joseph Pignatelli Stephen Pongracz Bernardino Realino John Francis Regis Alphonsus Rodriguez José María Rubio Robert Southwell André de Soveral Henry Walpole Francis Xavier Alfonso Rodríguez Olmedo Popes Francis Theology Diego Laynez Luis de Molina Francisco Suárez Jean Daniélou Karl Rahner Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Henri de Lubac John Courtney Murray Joseph Fitzmyer Alonso Rodriguez List of Jesuit theologians General Bollandist La Civiltà Cattolica General Congregation Superior General of the Society of Jesus Pontifical Gregorian University Pontifical Biblical Institute Pontifical Oriental Institute Jesuit China missions Jesuit missions in North America List of Jesuit educational institutions International Association of Jesuit Universities Ignatian Pedagogical Paradigm Related Church of the Gesù Madonna Della Strada Saint-Pierre de Montmartre Claudio Acquaviva Category Catholicism portal v t e Académie française seat 37 Daniel Hay du Chastelet de Chambon (1635) Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet (1671) Melchior de Polignac (1704) Odet-Joseph Giry (1741) Charles Batteux (1761) Antoine-Marin Lemierre (1780) Félix-Julien-Jean Bigot de Préameneu (1803) Mathieu de Montmorency (1825) Alexandre Guiraud (1826) Jean-Jacques Ampère (1847) Lucien-Anatole Prévost-Paradol (1865) Camille Rousset (1871) Paul Thureau-Dangin (1893) Pierre de La Gorce (1914) Maurice de Broglie (1934) Eugène Tisserant (1961) Jean Daniélou (1972) Ambroise-Marie Carré (1975) René Girard (2005) Michel Zink (2017) v t e Catholic Church Index Outline Glossary Lists of Catholics History Timeline Ecclesiastical Legal Early Church Jesus Christ Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Apostles Succession Petrine primacy Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers History of the papacy Primacy Great Church Ante-Nicene period Constantine First seven ecumenical councils Nicaea I Chalcedon Late antiquity Biblical canon Monasticism Middle Ages Islamic conquests Pope Gregory I Papal States Schism (1054) Investiture Controversy Crusades Schism (1378) Inquisition Universities Scholasticism Age of Discovery Modern era Protestantism Protestant Reformation Catholic Reformation Trent Thirty Years' War Enlightenment French Revolution Nazism Vatican II Communism Sexual abuse scandal Islam COVID-19 pandemic Theology Bible Tradition Catechism General God Trinity Kingdom Body Divine grace Dogma Nicene Creed Original sin Saints Salvation Sermon on the Mount Ten Commandments Vulgate Official Bible Sixtine Vulgate Sixto-Clementine Vulgate Nova Vulgata Worship Ecclesiology Communitas perfecta Councils Ecumenism Four marks One true church Catholic Infallibility Mystici Corporis Christi People of God Three states Subsistit in In canon law Sacraments Baptism Confirmation Eucharist Penance Anointing of the Sick Last rites Holy orders Matrimony Mariology Assumption History Immaculate Conception Mariology of the popes Mariology of the saints Mother of God Perpetual virginity Veneration See also: Josephology Philosophy Natural law Moral theology Personalism Social teaching Philosophers Philosophy of canon law See also: Science Evolution Separation of church and state Relations Politics Saints Holy Family Mary Joseph Patriarchs Prophets Archangels Martyrs Doctors of the Church Evangelists Confessors Disciples Virgins Organisation Hierarchy Canon law Laity Precedence By country Holy See ( List of popes ) Pope Leo XIV Ecumenical councils College of Cardinals List Advisers Roman Curia Dicasteries Synod of Bishops Properties Vatican City Index Outline Apostolic Palace Lateran Treaty Roman Rota St. Peter's Basilica Swiss Guard Vatican Museums Polity ( Holy orders ) Diocese Episcopal conference Eparchy Bishop Patriarch Major Primate Metropolitan Archbishop Diocesan Coadjutor Auxiliary Titular Emeritus Parish Priest Deacon Consecrated life Religious : Superior Abbot , Abbess General Provincial Prior, Prioress Grand master Brother Friar Monk Sister Nun Hermit Novice Master Oblate Postulant Particular churches sui iuris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Albanian Armenian Belarusian Bulgarian Chaldean Coptic Croatian and Serbian Eritrean Ethiopian Georgian Greek Hungarian Italo-Albanian Macedonian Maronite Melkite Romanian Russian Ruthenian Slovak Syriac Syro-Malabar Syro-Malankara Ukrainian Catholic liturgy Eastern Catholic liturgy Alexandrian Antiochian Armenian Byzantine East Syriac West Syriac Malankara Latin Ambrosian Braga Mozarabic Roman Paul VI Tridentine Anglican Zaire Culture Art Marian Artists Writers Church buildings Altarpieces Folk Library Museums Music Distinctions Role in civilisation See also: Criticism of the Catholic Church Anti-Catholicism Media Holy See Press Office Vatican Media Vatican News Vatican Television Center Vatican Radio Vatican Press [ it ] L'Osservatore Romano Acta Apostolicae Sedis Annuario Pontificio Religious orders , institutes , societies Assumptionists Annonciades Augustinians Basilians Benedictines Bethlehemites Blue nuns Camaldoleses Camillians Carmelites Carthusians Cistercians Clarisses Conceptionists Crosiers Dominicans Franciscans Good Shepherd Sisters Hieronymites Jesuits Legionaries Mercedarians Minims Olivetans Oratorians Piarists Premonstratensians Redemptoristines Servites Theatines Trappists Trinitarians Visitandines Associations of the faithful Confraternities Lay Marian Youth Workers Third orders Saint Dominic Lay Carmelites Discalced Saint Francis Secular Military orders Fimcap Catholic Action Charismatic Renewal Communion and Liberation Sant'Egidio Focolare International Alliance of Catholic Knights Scouting Legion of Mary Neocatechumenal Way Opus Dei Schoenstatt Charities Aid to the Church in Need Caritas Catholic Charities USA Home Missions Relief Services CIDSE Pax Christi Society of Saint Vincent de Paul See also: Health care Schools Universities Catholic Church portal Category v t e History of the Catholic Church General History of the Catholic Church By country or region Ecclesiastical history Timeline Papacy Papal primacy Catholic ecumenical councils First seven Catholic Bible Biblical canon Vulgate Crusading movement History of the Roman Curia Religious institutes Christian monasticism Catholic culture Art Role in civilization Vatican City Papal States Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Early Church (30–325/476) Origins and Apostolic Age (30–100) Jesus Ministry Crucifixion Resurrection Great Commission Holy Spirit Mary John the Baptist Apostles in the New Testament Commissioning Peter John Paul Stephen Council of Jerusalem Split with Judaism New Testament Background Gospels Acts Pauline epistles General epistles Revelation Ante-Nicene period (100–325) Persecution Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Pope Clement I Polycarp Ignatius Irenaeus Justin Martyr Canon Tertullian Origen Late antiquity (313–476) Great Church (180–451) Roman state church (380–451) Constantine the Great Christianity Arian controversy Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran Old St. Peter's Basilica First Council of Nicaea Pope Sylvester I First Council of Constantinople Biblical canon Jerome Vulgate Council of Ephesus Council of Chalcedon Early Middle Ages Benedict of Nursia Monasticism Second Council of Constantinople Pope Gregory I Gregorian chant Third Council of Constantinople Saint Boniface Byzantine Iconoclasm Second Council of Nicaea Charlemagne Pope Leo III Fourth Council of Constantinople East–West Schism High Middle Ages Pope Urban II Investiture Controversy Clash against the empire Crusades Universities Scholasticism First Council of the Lateran Second Council of the Lateran Third Council of the Lateran Pope Innocent III Latin Empire Francis of Assisi Fourth Council of the Lateran Inquisition First Council of Lyon Second Council of Lyon Bernard of Clairvaux Late Middle Ages Thomas Aquinas Pope Boniface VIII Western Schism Avignon Papacy Pope Clement V Council of Vienne Knights Templar Catherine of Siena Pope Alexander VI Age of Discovery Protestant Reformation Counter-Reformation Protestant Reformation Catholic Counter-Reformation Exsurge Domine Dissolution of the monasteries Council of Trent Thomas More Pope Leo X Society of Jesus Ignatius of Loyola Francis Xavier Pope Pius V Tridentine Mass Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Peter Canisius Philip Neri Robert Bellarmine European wars of religion Thirty Years' War Baroque period to the French Revolution Pope Innocent XI Pope Benedict XIV Suppression of the Society of Jesus Age of Enlightenment Anti-clericalism Pope Pius VI Shimabara Rebellion Edict of Nantes Dechristianization of France during the French Revolution 19th century Pope Pius VII Pope Pius IX United States Dogma of the Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary Our Lady of La Salette Our Lady of Lourdes First Vatican Council Papal infallibility Pope Leo XIII Mary of the Divine Heart Prayer of Consecration to the Sacred Heart Rerum novarum 20th century Pope Pius X Our Lady of Fátima Persecutions of the Catholic Church and Pius XII Pope Pius XII Pope Pius XII 1942 consecration to the Immaculate Heart of Mary Dogma of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary Lateran Treaty Nazi Germany Mit brennender Sorge Pope John XXIII Pacem in terris Second Vatican Council Ecumenism Judaism Pope Paul VI ( coronation ) Pope John Paul I Mother Teresa USSR Pope John Paul II HIV/AIDS World Youth Day 1995 21st century Sexual abuse scandal Islam World Youth Day 2000 2002 2005 2008 2011 2013 2016 2019 2023 Pope Benedict XVI Pope Francis Laudato si' Patriarch Kirill COVID-19 pandemic Pope Leo XIV Vatican City portal Catholicism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jean_Daniélou&oldid=1264537706 " Categories : 1905 births 1974 deaths People from Neuilly-sur-Seine Jesuit cardinals University of Paris alumni French Air Force personnel of World War II French Roman Catholic titular bishops Jesuit archbishops 20th-century French cardinals 20th-century French Jesuits Jesuit theologians French historians of religion Patristic scholars 20th-century French Catholic theologians Participants in the Second Vatican Council Cardinals created by Pope Paul VI Members of the Académie Française 20th-century French historians French opera librettists 20th-century French translators Translators from French Translators to Latin 20th-century writers in Latin French writers in Latin Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2022 Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking Pages with French IPA Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 December 2024, at 09:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jean Daniélou 22 languages Add topic

