Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Deities Toggle Deities subsection 1.1 Major deities 1.1.1 Ukko 1.1.2 Tapio 1.1.3 Ilmarinen 1.1.4 Agricola's list of deities 1.2 Haltija 1.2.1 Maan haltija 1.2.2 Väki 2 The Universe Toggle The Universe subsection 2.1 Birth of the Universe 2.2 End of the World 3 Soul, death, and the afterlife Toggle Soul, death, and the afterlife subsection 3.1 Soul 3.2 Burial 3.3 Ancestor veneration 3.4 Afterlife 4 Mythology 5 Sanctuaries Toggle Sanctuaries subsection 5.1 Rock paintings 5.2 Hiisi 5.3 Wetlands 6 Sacred animals Toggle Sacred animals subsection 6.1 Bears 6.2 Other animals 7 Shamanism 8 Christianisation Toggle Christianisation subsection 8.1 In Finland 8.2 In Karelia 9 Songs and incantations 10 Baltic Finnic Neopagan movements 11 Holidays 12 See also 13 Notes 14 References 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Baltic Finnic paganism 12 languages Eesti Français Bahasa Indonesia Livvinkarjala Magyar Novial Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Finnish paganism ) Polytheistic religion practiced by the Finnic peoples "Finnish paganism" redirects here. For the modern religion, see Modern Finnish paganism .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Baltic Finnic paganism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The elk is a common image in many Baltic Finnic petroglyphs .

[ note 1 ] [ note 2 ] Baltic Finnic paganism , or Baltic Finnic polytheism was the indigenous religion of the various Baltic Finnic peoples , specifically the Finns , Estonians , Võros , Setos , Karelians , Veps , Izhorians , Votes and Livonians , prior to Christianisation .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It was a polytheistic religion, worshipping a number of different deities .

[ 3 ] The chief deity was the god of thunder and the sky , Ukko ; other important deities included Jumala , Ahti , and Tapio .

[ 3 ] Jumala was a sky god ; today, the word "Jumala" refers to a monotheistic God . Ahti was a god of the sea , waters and fish. Tapio was the god of the forest and hunting .

Baltic Finnic paganism included necrolatry (worship of the dead) and shamanism ( tietäjä(t) , literally "one who knows"), and the religion was not always uniform across the areas it was practiced, as customs and beliefs varied during different periods of time and regions.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Baltic Finnic paganism shares some features with its neighbouring Baltic , Norse and Germanic pagan beliefs.

The organic tradition was sidelined due to Christianisation starting from ca. 12th century and finally broken by the early 20th century, when folk Magic and oral traditions went extinct. Baltic Finnic paganism provided the inspiration for a contemporary pagan movement Suomenusko ( Finnish : Belief of Finland ), which is an attempt to reconstruct the old religion of the Finns. It is nevertheless based on secondary sources.

Deities [ edit ] Baltic Finnic pagans were polytheistic , believing in a number of different deities. Most of the deities ruled over a specific aspect of nature; for instance, Ukko was the god of the sky and thunder ( ukkonen and ukonilma ["Ukko's air"] are still used in modern Finnish as terms for thunderstorms ). These deities were often pan-Finnic, being worshipped by many different tribes in different regions. The Baltic Finnic pagans were also animists , worshipping local nature deities at site-specific shrines to that particular deity. These shrines are thought to be mainly "tree-gods": wooden statues or carvings done in trees or treestumps, depicting human figures, and have been scarcely preserved. One confirmed Stone Age wooden statue has been found in Pohjankuru, and folklore about worshipping tree-gods has been documented.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Another kind of shrine are "cup-stones" (Finnish: fi:kuppikivi ), large natural stones into which cup-sized recesses have been drilled.

Votive offerings of food or drink were left in these cups. Despite Christianization, offerings on these cup-stones continued up to the early 20th century.

[ 9 ] Major deities [ edit ] Several key deities were venerated by all the Baltic Finnic peoples and some other Finnic peoples , these pan-Finnic deities controlled many aspects of nature.

[ 2 ] The chief deity was Ukko (also [thought to be] known as Perkele ), who was the ruler over the sky and thunder. A corresponding figure is known in countless other cultures of the world.

Another deity that appeared very significant to the Baltic Finnic pagans, but about whom modern scholars know very little, was Jumi , whose name is related to " Jumala ", the modern Finnish language word for a monotheist God.

There were many other important deities who ruled over a specific aspect of the natural world. Such as the deity of water was often called Ahti , and the deity of the forest was Tapio .

Other major deities included Äkräs , the god of fertility; Mielikki , the goddess of the forests and the hunt; Kuu , the goddess of the moon; and Lempo , the god of wilderness and archery.

Deities, who turned into Great heroes, who had, in mythology, once been human, such as Väinämöinen and Ilmarinen , were also objects of worship, in a way similar to the Greek pagans ' worship of mythical human heroes like Herakles .

Ilmarinen was previously a sky god, being replaced by Ukko.

[ 2 ] Ukko [ edit ] Main article: Ukko Ukko is the chief deity in Baltic Finnic paganism, he is the god of the sky , weather (mostly thunder , rain and clouds), a god of harvest and fertility .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] He is also given the epithet Ylijumala ('Supreme God' or 'Highest God' [ note 3 ] [ 12 ] ) in at least the Finnish , Karelian and Ingrian regional variants of the pagan faith.

[ 13 ] He was associated with the sowing season during springtime according to Mikael Agricola .

[ 14 ] Ukko also had characteristics of a war god , and would be prayed to help in battle.

[ 15 ] Ukko was sometimes given the epithet Isäinen ylinen Luoja ('Fatherly Supreme Creator'), and Salo notes that this could also be related to the sky-god *Dyēus of Proto-Indo-European religion .

[ 16 ] Ukko ylijumala (on the left) in RW Ekman's Kalevala painting Lemminkäinen on the fiery lake .

Ukko is perhaps to a significant extent derived from the various Baltic peoples . The Latvian ( Pērkons) and Lithuanian ( Perkūnas) , which are the same thunder deity , are known to be the origins for the Finnish word Perkele (which is also [thought to be] another cognomen for Ukko).

[ 15 ] Ukko is thought to have entered Baltic Finnic paganism in the first millennium BC, replacing other chief deities who were more unique per region, such as Taara in Estonia.

[ 17 ] Before the influences of the Balts, the various Finnic people [most likely] had an earlier, original sky-god.

Ilmarinen , who is known as the blacksmith in the Kalevala , is the earliest known to be sky-god of the various Uralic peoples .

[ 2 ] The Udmurt sky god Inmar [ fi ] corresponds to the Finnish Ilmarinen . Memories of Ilmarinen's status as the sky deity have been preserved in Kalevala myths , such as the belief that he forged the firmament and the Sampo .

Tapio [ edit ] Tapio is a major deity in Baltic Finnic paganism (in its most recent form), he is the king and god of the forest and hunting . Tapio was prayed to for luck in hunting , because of his control over game . Tapio would often be sacrificed to, by sacrificing of animals , such as birds . Tapionpöytä (( Picea abies ), literally 'Tapio's table') are spruce trees where sacrifices were made to Tapio.

[ 18 ] Tapio was extremely significant due to the tribal nature of the Baltic Finnic peoples during the time when Tapio was worshipped, as hunting and game was extremely important for survival, making Tapio one of the most important deities.

Tapio possessed over various spirits and was himself also a spirit, possessing Tapion väki [ fi ] ('Tapio's spirits/elves'), the spirit beings were central to the hunter's catch, and Tapio's spirits were thought to live in the deepest ravines of the forest and took care of plants and animals, [ 19 ] in the darkness of the deep forest, which was called Tapiola [ fi ] . Tapiola was a kingdom which Tapio ruled over, and was sometimes used as the name for Finland by the Baltic Finnic pagan believers during the Early Middle Ages .

[ 20 ] Ilmarinen [ edit ] Ilmarinen , a major deity in Finnic paganism.

Ilmarinen is a major deity [ 2 ] and former chief deity, in the form of a sky deity in Baltic Finnic paganism, [ 21 ] alongside the Proto-Uralic religion until his replacement as the chief deity. Ilmarinen may have [possibly] also been a thunder deity under the name Ilmaričče.

[ 22 ] Other names for Ilmarinen are Ilmorinen and Ilmollini , as found from runes.

[ 23 ] Ilmarinen is also described in the pagan faith as the forger of the firmament , aurora borealis and the colors of the morning and evening . Ilmarinen was said to have the achievements of inventing iron and " striking the first fire [ fi ] " according to folklore.

[ 2 ] [ 24 ] He is also described as a blacksmith and is thought to have gained his smith status through Proto-Finnic contact with iron-working cultures such as the Balts or Germanic people .

[ 25 ] [ 21 ] Agricola's list of deities [ edit ] In 1551, Mikael Agricola published a list of deities [ fi ] present across Tavastia and Karelia , [ 14 ] most of the deities were also widespread and known to those who practiced the pagan faith outside of those regions.

[ 24 ] Modern Finnish translation English translation Epäjumalia monia tässä, / muinoin palveltiin kaukana ja läsnä.

Näitä kumarsivat hämäläiset  / sekä miehet että naiset.

TAPIO metsästä pyydykset soi / ja AHTI vedestä kaloja toi.

VÄINÄMÖINEN virret takoi, / RAHKO [ fi ] kuun mustaksi jakoi.

LIEKKIÖ [ fi ] ruohot, juuret ja puut / hallitsi ja senkaltaiset muut.

ILMARINEN rauhan ja ilman teki / ja matkamiehet edesvei.

TURSAS antoi voiton sodasta, / KRATTI [ fi ] murheen piti tavarasta.

TONTTU huoneen menon hallitsi, / kuin PIRU monta villitsi.

KAPEET [ fi ] myös heiltä kuun söivät. / KALEVANPOJAT [ fi ] niityt ja muut löivät.

Many idols here, / were once worshipped far and near.

These were revered by the Tavastians / both men and women.

TAPIO gave game from the forest / and AHTI brought fish from the water.

VÄINÄMÖINEN forged songs, / RAHKO [ fi ] darkened the moon.

LIEKKIÖ [ fi ] controlled herbs, roots, and trees / and others of that kind.

ILMARINEN made peace and weather / and guided travelers.

TURSAS gave victory in war, / KRATTI [ fi ] guarded treasures.

TONTTU managed the household, / like PIRU who misled many.

KAPEET [ fi ] also devoured the moon. / KALEVANPOJAT [ fi ] struck down meadows and more.

Vaan karjalaisten nämä olivat / epäjumalat, joita he rukoilivat.

RONGOTEUS [ fi ] ruista antoi, / PELLONPEKKO [ fi ] ohran kasvun soi.

VIRANKANNOS [ fi ] kauran kaitsi, / muutoin oltiin kaurasta paitsi.

ÄKRÄS herneet, pavut, nauriit loi, / kaalit, liinat ja hamput edestoi.

KÖNDÖS [ fi ] huhdat ja pellot teki, / kuin heidän epäuskonsa näki.

Ja kun kevätkylvö kylvettiin, / silloin UKON malja juotiin.

Siihen haettiin UKON vakka , / niin juopui piika ja akka.

Sitten paljon häpeää siellä tehtiin, / kuin sekä kuultiin että nähtiin.

Kun RAUNI UKON nainen härskyi, / jalosti UKKO pohjasta pärskyi.

Se siis antoi ilman ja vedentulon. / KEKRI se lisäsi karjan kasvun.

HIISI metsäläisistä soi voiton, / VEDENEMÄ [ fi ] vei kalat verkkoon.

NYYRIKKI [ fi ] oravat antoi metsästä, / HITTAVAINEN [ fi ] toi jänikset pensaasta.

But these were the idols of the Karelians / whom they prayed to.

RONGOTEUS [ fi ] gave rye, / PELLONPEKKO [ fi ] granted the growth of barley.

VIRANKANNOS [ fi ] took care of oats, / otherwise there would be no oats.

ÄKRÄS created peas, beans, and turnips, / brought forth cabbages, flax, and hemp.

KÖNDÖS [ fi ] made the slash-and-burn fields and meadows, / as he saw their unbelief.

And when the spring sowing was sown, / then UKKO'S toast was drunk.

For this, they fetched UKKO'S festival , / so the maid and the old woman got drunk.

Then much shame was done there, / as was heard and seen.

When RAUNI , UKKO'S woman, was aroused, / nobly UKKO splashed from the bottom.

He thus gave the weather and rainfall. / KEKRI increased the growth of the cattle.

HIISI granted victory over the forest folk, / VEDENEMÄ [ fi ] brought the fish to the net.

NYYRIKKI [ fi ] gave squirrels from the forest, / HITTAVAINEN [ fi ] brought hares from the bush.

Eikö se kansa vimmattu ole, / joka näitä uskoo ja rukoilee?

Siihen PIRU ja synti veti heitä, / että he kumarsivat ja uskoivat näitä.

Kuolleiden hautoihin ruokaa vietiin, / joissa valitettiin, paruttiin ja itkettiin.

MENNINKÄISET [ fi ] myös heidän uhrinsa saivat, / koska lesket huolivat ja naivat.

Palveltiin myös paljon muuta, / KIVIÄ [ fi ] , kantoja, tähtiä ja kuuta.

Isn't that a furious people, / who believe and pray to these?

To this PIRU and sin drew them, / that they bowed to and believed in these.

Food was taken to the graves of the dead, / where they lamented, mourned, and wept.

MENNINKÄISET [ fi ] also received their sacrifices, / because widows grieved and remarried.

They also served many other things, / HOLY STONES [ fi ] , stumps, stars, and the moon.

Haltija [ edit ] Main article: Haltija Local animistic deities, known as haltijas or haltias, were also worshipped. Haltijas would act as spirits, gnome , or elf -like creatures in that guard, help, own, or protects somethin or somebody.

[ 26 ] These haltijas could be male or female, and could take a human or another animal's form. Haltijas could be found everywhere in nature, both in the biotic and abiotic parts. Every human has a haltija, usually called haltijasielu (haltija soul) or luontohaltija (nature haltija), which is one of the three parts of a person's soul. The tradition blends with the Swedish tomte : the Finnish tonttu was a being analogous to haltija, but which lives in a building, like a home ( kotitonttu ) or a sauna ( saunatonttu ).

[ citation needed ] Maan haltija [ edit ] Certain "haltiat", known as "maan haltija" (literally "tutelary of land"), guarded the property of an individual, including their house and livestock.

Votive offerings would be given to these haltijas at a shrine, as thanks for the help given and also to prevent the haltija from causing harm.

Sometimes haltijas of certain families and farms acted against other families and their farms by stealing their wealth or making the animals infertile, for instance. Many local haltijas were believed to have originally been the sacred spirits of ancestors. In some cases a haltija was the first inhabitant of a house. Sometimes while making a new house a local spirit of nature could be "employed" to work as a maan haltija.

Väki [ edit ] Different elements and environments had their own haltijas. Haltijas were grouped into types or races called väki . "Väki" has multiple connected meanings of "strength", "force", "throng", "military troop"; in the magical context, it referred ambiguously to magical strength and numbers. There were, for instance, different väki of water, forests, and graveyards.

Väkis could become angry if people acted in a disrespectful manner in their area. For example, cursing close to water made the väki of water angry. When angry, väkis could cause diseases and other misfortune to befall the human victim. Some väkis were always angry, like the väki of fire, explaining why every time you touch fire it burns, no matter how respectful you are around it.

[ citation needed ] Each tribe of väkis belonged to specific environments and if they were misplaced, problems occurred. For example, most väkis were misplaced if they attached to a human being, and they made the human being ill because they were in the wrong place. Illnesses were removed by sending väkis back to their right places. Shamans who cured diseases were returning the cosmic balance. For example, it was believed that on contact with the ground, as in falling on one's face, diseases could spread to the human, caused by the "väki" of the earth. Similarly, löyly ( sauna steam) was believed to contain a väki spirit (löylyn henki), which could cause open wounds to get infected.

[ citation needed ] According to the concept of väki being divided in two (into power and folk of haltijas) the ancient Finns believed that the world was totally animistic in that no force of nature or intelligent life existed without väkis or haltijas. In other words, nothing happened in the universe without it being caused by a group of spirits. Even a person's soul consisted of many spirits.

[ citation needed ] The Universe [ edit ] The Universe labelled as according to Finnic mythology.

A.

Firmament B. Celestial pole C.

World pillar D. Kinahmi E.

Pohjola F. The known world G.

Lintukoto H.

Tuonela Birth of the Universe [ edit ] In Finnic mythology, there are two different theories on the creation of the universe and the earth. This includes the Sukeltajamyytti [ fi ] , in which the god sent a Black-throated loon into the Alkumeri ( Finnish : Primeval sea ) to collect mud and sand to build the earth. This myth is common in various Siberian ( Chukchi , Yugaghir and Ainu ), Tatar and North American native folklore.

Another creation theory is that the world was born from the egg of a waterfowl . This myth which is thought to be of origin from the Indian Subcontinent , is possibly to have come from Uralic interaction with Indo-Iranians . This myth however was only well known among the Sámi , Finns , Komi and Mordvins .

[ 4 ] [ 27 ] End of the World [ edit ] There is said to be no eschatology (the end of the world) in Finnic mythology. However based on similarities in other Uralic beliefs, it can be assumed that Finnic paganism included the idea that the world is in cyclicity and that it will be recurring at regular intervals.

Soul, death, and the afterlife [ edit ] Soul [ edit ] See also: Soul dualism The Finnic pagan  belief about the soul dictated that the human soul is composed of three different parts: henki , luonto and itse . Each of the three were autonomous beings on their own. Similar beliefs about multiple autonomous souls are found amongst other peoples speaking Uralic languages , such as the Khanty and Mansi , who believe in two souls: the shadow and the lili (löyly).

[ 28 ] Henki (translated as "life", "breath" or "spirit", sometimes also referred to as löyly ) was a person's life force, which presented itself as breathing, the beating of one's heart and the warmth of their body.

Henki was received prior to birth and it left at the moment of death. The word hengetön (lit. "one without henki") can be used as a synonym for dead in the Finnish language even now.

Henki share several similarities with the Norse idea of Andi which carry almost identical basic meaning.

Luonto (translated as "nature") was a guardian spirit or protector.

Luonto has also been referred to as the haltija of a person. A strong willed, artistic or otherwise talented person was believed to have a strong haltija who granted them good luck and skills to complete their tasks well. A weak luonto could be strengthened by various spells and rituals.

Luonto could leave a person's body without the person dying, but its lengthened absence would cause problems, such as alcoholism and other addictions. Unlike henki , luonto was not received prior to birth but instead either at the time of getting the first teeth or being given a name. A newborn child was thus considered to be particularly vulnerable.

Luonto share several similarities with the overlapping ideas of Hamingja (luck), Fylgja (follower, companion guardian spirit), Vörðr (warden, a protection spirit) and individual norn (a person's fate goddess) in Norse belief.

Itse was a spirit received at the time of birth or a few days after. It was believed to define one's personality and receiving itse made one a person. In modern-day Finnish the word itse means "self", but in old days itse was different from one's self, minuus . Like luonto , itse could leave one's body without the person dying but long absence would cause illnesses and misery. Depressions, for instance, was seen as a result of having lost one's itse . If a person was diagnosed to be itsetön or luonnoton (without one's itse or without one's luonto ), a shaman or a sage could try locating the missing part of the soul and bring it back. Although itse and luonto were usually lost after a traumatising event, it was possible to purposefully separate one's itse from their body. This was required if a missing part of the soul needed to be found.

Itse could also leave the body to appear as an etiäinen (a sort of false arrival apparition). At the time of a person's death their itse joined the other deceased of the family or, in some cases, stayed among the living as a ghost.

Itse share many similarities with the Norse concept of Hugr (mind, thought, willpower, courage), and to some extent also Vörðr (especially the false arrival apparition).

Burial [ edit ] In some traditions, it was a habit to pause at a half-way point while transporting the dead body, from the dwelling to the graveyard. Here, a karsikko -marking was made on a big pine tree. The marking was for people to remember the person; and in the event that the spirit were to awaken and try to make its way back home from the graveyard, it would see its own karsikko-marking, then realize that it is dead and instead try to find the path to the spirit realm. A forest with karsikko-marked trees was a kind of supernatural barrier between dwellings of the living and the burial grounds.

After a person died there was a transitional period of thirty to forty days while their soul searched Tuonela, the land of dead, and tried to find their place there. During this period, the soul could visit its living relatives either as a ghost or in the form of an animal.

The soul visited relatives especially if it was unhappy. To please an unhappy soul, one would show respect by not speaking ill of the deceased or by having a sacrifice in 
the spirit's name.

After this transitional period, the soul moved permanently into Tuonela. However, the soul could still come back if it were unhappy, or if it were asked to return by its relatives who needed help.

Some souls were not able to settle down or were not welcomed in Tuonela, and they continued haunting, i.e. bastard children who were killed and buried outside a cemetery usually ended up as permanent haunters of some place, typically screaming in terror, until someone digs up their bodies, blesses them, and buries them in a graveyard.

Ancestor veneration [ edit ] People were afraid of ghosts, but spirits of ancestors could also help their living relatives, and they were asked to help. A shaman could be sent to Tuonela to ask for knowledge of spirits or even to take a spirit to the world of living as luonto . A Spirit of the dead had to be honoured by giving him/her sacrifices. Places where sacrifices were given to ancestors were called Hiisi ( = sacred forest , also a kind of open air temple, often included the Offering-stone, uhrikivi , collective monument for the dead of the family). Christianity held hiisi to be evil creatures and places. The old sacred places were often desecrated by being used as the building sites for the churches of the new religion, and the old sacred trees were hacked down.

Lemminkäisen äiti by Akseli Gallen-Kallela . A depiction of the underworld, Tuonela, from a myth found in the Kalevala .

Afterlife [ edit ] Main article: Tuonela The Finns believed in a place of afterlife called Tuonela , or sometimes also called Manala. In most traditions, it was situated underground or at the bottom of a lake, though sometimes it was said to exist on the other side of a dark river. Tuonela was ruled over by the god Tuoni , and his wife, the goddess Tuonetar .

[ 29 ] Tuonela was a dark and lifeless place, where the dead were in a state of eternal sleep.

[ 29 ] Shamans were sometimes able to reach the spirits of their dead ancestors by traveling to Tuonela in a state of trance created by rituals. He had to make his way over the Tuonela river by tricking the ferryman. While in Tuonela, the shaman had to be careful not to get caught: the living were not welcome there.

[ 29 ] Shamans who were caught could end up decaying in the stomach of a giant pike fish with no hope of returning to normal life. If the shaman died during the trance ritual, it was believed that he had been caught by the guards at Tuonela.

An illustration of the hero Väinämöinen from Finnic mythology.

Mythology [ edit ] Main article: Finnish mythology The pagan Finns had many myths about their gods and their great heroes. Because they lived in a non-literate society, the stories were taught orally as folklore , and they were not written down. Finnic mythology survived Christianisation by being told as myths. Many of these myths were later written down in the 19th century as the Kalevala , which was created to be a national epic of Finland by Elias Lönnrot .

Sanctuaries [ edit ] Rock painting at Astuvansalmi, showing elk, [ note 1 ] humans and a boat.

Rock paintings [ edit ] Main article: Finnish rock art Rock paintings were common in Baltic Finnic paganism, and were often done with red clay during the Stone Age .

[ 24 ] These paintings would often symbolize common animals such as deer and fish, along with humans and palm prints.

[ 30 ] Folk poetry may have also been preserved on these rocks, however they have not survived on these rock paintings, and instead have been carried through generations via oral tradition.

[ 4 ] It is believed that most of these rock paintings were done by the Comb Ceramic culture .

Hiisi [ edit ] Main article: Hiisi Hiisi or sacred woods were places where people often went to during pilgrimages or served as a burial site to take sacrifices . Within these sacred woods, there would often be a special enclosed area for sacrifices, in which it was forbidden to enter, except for those who were doing the sacrificing to the deities.

[ 31 ] In Baltic Finnic folklore, hiisi sites were also likened to be the creation of the Hiidet ( giants ), and through oral tradition, jotuni or giants were said to dwell in hiisi sites.

[ 32 ] Wetlands [ edit ] Wetlands , such as bogs , swamps , springs and streams were holy places, especially for the use of sacrificing. The archeological findings of flint and tinderbox has shown that they have been used for the execution and disposal of those unwanted people in the tribe. Children who were born out of wedlock or those who had disabilities would also be killed in the wetlands.

[ 4 ] The word "Suomi" ( Finnish : Finland ) is also thought to come from the word "Suo" ( Finnish : Swamp/bog ).

[ 33 ] Sacred animals [ edit ] Bears [ edit ] The bear, Otso , was a sacred animal to the Finnic pagans.

Finns heavily relied on hunting for survival before and during the Middle Ages . As such the animals that they hunted became vital to their survival, and they were treated with respect.

The bear was considered sacred and was venerated in the pagan beliefs of the Finns.

[ 34 ] Peijaiset , which was a memorial feast held to honour a slain animal, the most common animal to hold peijaiset to was the bear, [ 35 ] and during the peijaiset, the bear was eaten and the bones were buried, and the skull placed on a venerated pine tree known as kallohonka [ fi ] , kallohonkas were sacred places and it may have been a metaphor for the world tree .

[ 36 ] Peijaiset are also an important part of other Finno-Ugrics ( Khanty and Mansi ) and Siberians ( Yugurs ).

[ 37 ] [ 36 ] According to a pagan folk belief, the first bear came to people's dwellings to do evil, however a Giant slapped the bear on the ear, and the bear had to beg for mercy. A deal was made: the bear promised to stay in the forest from then on, eat berries , and dig up common ants ; the bear also promised to sleep all winter soundly in his nest. However, if it came back, people would then shoot and spear it. It kept its promise otherwise, which now sometimes ate cattle from the forest, from its own area. The story also follows a belief about why domestic animals came to the attention of people: to escape from the bear.

[ 38 ] Other animals [ edit ] In Karelia and Eastern Finland, before going hunting, hunters would pray to the emuu , the ancestral mother of the animal species being hunted, for help.

[ citation needed ] The word emuu is Karelian and is related to the word emo "animal mother". Each species had its own emuu.

From ancient drawings, petroglyphs , it is clear that the elk [ note 1 ] was a very important animal. Elk is also very important to other peoples of the region, such as the Komis , who depict their sky god Jenmar as half-human and half-elk. It appears much more than bears do, and it is theorised that the bear was such a holy animal that it was forbidden to depict it. Also, the bear's name was almost forbidden to say, so many euphemisms were developed. The most usual Baltic Finnic word for bear in modern language, karhu , is just one of the many euphemisms, and it means "rough fur." Among the many names of bear otso is probably the original "real" name, as suggested by the wide spread of the word otso and related words among many of the Uralic languages . Many euphemisms for bear are local.

Swan and egg, based on petroglyphs of Karelia Many water birds were holy for Finns and other Baltic Finns . They were often depicted on petroglyphs. It was believed that if you killed a water bird, you would die soon after. The holiest water bird was the swan. With its long neck, it could look to all the levels of the world, including Tuonela , the land of the dead. Birds are found often in Uralic mythology. For example, there are many stories about a bird creating the world. A very common Uralic myth is where a hunter (Finnish: Lemminkäinen , Mari Salij) travels to the underworld to marry a woman and comes across the primordial waterbird on the river of the underworld, the hunter shoots the waterbird with his bow, but the waterbird escapes and terrible things happen to the hunter. In many traditions it was believed that the world was created by the egg of a bird . In other traditions it was believed that the world was created on mud that bird took in its beak while diving.

In Karelia it was believed that a bird brings the soul to a newborn baby, and that the same bird takes the soul with it when that person dies. This soul-carrying bird was called sielulintu [ fi ] , "soul-bird". In some traditions people carried artifacts depicting their sielulintu. Sielulintu was believed to guard their souls while they slept. After the person died, the artifact-bird was inserted to sit on the cross at the person's grave. Such crosses with soul birds still exist in graveyards in Karelia. This is one example how Christian and Pagan beliefs still existed side by side hundreds of years after the Christianisation of the Finnish and Karelian people.

Shamanism [ edit ] Finns selling wind Shamanism played a big part in Baltic Finnic paganism, as it did (and still does) in Siberian ( Chukchi , Yugaghir and Ainu ) as well as in other Finno-Ugric pagan faiths.

[ 4 ] A tietäjä ( shaman , literally "one who knows") is a wise and respected person in the community, believed to have a special relationship with the spirit world. Shamans go into a trance to commune with spirits and ancestors or to take a journey into the spirit realm, the shaman would go into these trances via aid, such as witch drums, bear teeth and paws, and dancing.

[ 39 ] During trances shamans may ask their ancestors or various nature spirits for guidance.

[ 39 ] They believe that nature has the answers to all questions. Shamans were typically men of high standing in the local society, often landed peasants; it was thought that wealth was evidence of magic powers.

Shamans would most often play the roles of medical doctors , and would receive their medical information through their trances by visiting spirits and deities. Shamans would also have important religious influence, as tietäjä were fortunetellers , prophets and priests .

[ 39 ] Among the Finns' western neighbours, the Norse of Scandinavia , it was a common belief that the Finns were wizards .

[ citation needed ] In the Norse sagas , inclusion of a Finnish element almost always signifies a supernatural aspect to the story.

[ citation needed ] According to tales, foreign seafarers bought ropes tied with three knots from Finns. By opening one knot, a seaman could raise a wind to make his ship go faster. However, opening all three knots would raise a storm. Finnish wizards were known and feared by neighbouring peoples around the Baltic Sea .

[ 40 ] Christianisation [ edit ] Further information: Northern Crusade The Christianisation of Finland, Estonia and Karelia began in Finland with Christian missionaries to entering Finland in around the 1000s.

In Finland [ edit ] Swedish Crusaders entered Finland in c.

1157 and with the conquests by Sweden of Finland, Christianity began to have influence across Finland, however the native pagan religion persisted.

Christianity began to gain more influence and power to convert with the establishment of the Bishopric of Turku in 1276, [ 41 ] and with the Protestant Reformation , when Mikael Agricola translated the New Testament (" Se Wsi Testamenti ") into the Finnish language.

In Karelia [ edit ] With the conquests of East-Karelia by the Novgorod Republic and various Finnish-Novgorodian wars , Eastern Orthodoxy began to have influence over much of Karelia.

Written information about Baltic Finnic paganism began to be collected in the 1800s, especially in Karelia, when Christianity was already the main religion across much of the Finno-Ugric community. Despite this, especially in Orthodox Karelia , many old beliefs and myths survived. The stories about Jesus and Väinämöinen , as well as the stories about Ukko and the God of Christianity , lived side by side and sometimes even got mixed up. Much information about the pagan faith has been preserved as part of folk tales , which, especially in Karelia .

[ 4 ] Songs and incantations [ edit ] Main article: Finnic incantations In the seventeenth to nineteenth centuries, Baltic Finnic folk magic often incorporated chanted or sung incantations. These incantations might bring healing or presage a tietäjä's ( shaman , literally "one who knows") ecstatic trance.

[ 42 ] In the twentieth century, an American researcher in Minnesota reported sung charms for summoning cattle, avoiding hiccups, and avoiding cold based on interviews with a Finnish immigrant.

[ 43 ] Baltic Finnic Neopagan movements [ edit ] Main article: Modern Finnish paganism In the 20th century, with the rise of the neopagan movement across the world, Finnish neopaganism arose as a reconstructed form of the old religion. It is mainly practiced in Finland where it has had an official minority religion status since 2013.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] Finnish neopaganism accounts for a relatively small percentage of the population. In 2020, the registered religious community of Finnish neopaganism, Karhun kansa ( The Folk of the Bear ), had approximately 80 members.

[ 46 ] The Jumiõis , symbol of Taaraism and Maausk In Estonia, Estonian neopaganism was also founded in the early 20th century, Estonian neopaganism adapted many beliefs and myths of the ancient faith.

[ 47 ] There are two major sects of Estonian neopaganism, which includes Maausk and Taaraism. Maausk is considered an 'umbrella' of native faith movements, encompassing deities, nature worship and earth religion, while Taaraism is a monistic faith centered around Tharapita , who is a pagan deity similar to Ukko .

[ 48 ] There were 3,860 self-declared adherents of Maausk and 1,770 adherents of Taarausk in 2021, in Estonia.

[ 49 ] Holidays [ edit ] In Finland under Swedish rule , the practice of Baltic Finnic paganism was forbidden from the 1600s onwards, however there were still sacred groves where the pagan faith was practiced during the 1700s, which churchmen and authorities tried to eradicate.

[ 50 ] Among the current official mainstream holidays in Finland, Juhannus (known as Ukon juhla before Christianisation) and Kekri were originally celebrations that belonged to the pagan faith.

[ 51 ] Many ancient holiday practices have gone extinct over the years, however holidays such as Talvennapa [ fi ] , Vakkajuhlat , Helavalkeat [ fi ] and Karhunpäivä [ fi ] are still sometimes celebrated by smaller communities such as village associates or pagans.

[ 52 ] See also [ edit ] Estonian mythology Finnic deities Uralic neopaganism Norse Paganism Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c The animal called "elk" here (in Finnish, hirvi ) is what North Americans call " moose " ( Alces alces ). European settlers in North America later applied the word " elk " to the species Cervus canadensis (also known by its Shawnee & Cree name wapiti ) — a separate species.

^ Despite the image being featured on the cover of the article, it isn’t a real petroglyph, but a drawing inspired by it. See the original file description at File:Venesarvinen_hirvi.jpg .

^ The epithet Ylijumala ("Supreme God" or "Highest God"), can be interpreted in two ways; either that he really was the greatest, "highest," of the gods, or simply that he lived up in the sky.

References [ edit ] ^ Leeming, David (17 July 2003), "Finnic and Other Non-Indo-European Mythologies" , From Olympus to Camelot , Oxford University PressNew York, NY, pp.

133– 138, doi : 10.1093/oso/9780195143614.003.0008 , ISBN 978-0-19-514361-4 , retrieved 27 June 2024 ^ a b c d e f Siikala, Anna-Leena (2012).

Itämerensuomalaisten mytologia (in Finnish). Suomalaisen Kirjallisuuden Seura.

ISBN 978-952-222-393-7 .

^ a b "Finnish Paganism" .

www.lehto-ry.org . Retrieved 4 June 2024 .

^ a b c d e f Pentikäinen, Juha (1987).

Kalevalan mytologia . Helsinki: Gaudeamus.

ISBN 978-951-662-403-0 .

^ "Suomalainen muinaisusko" .

Peda.net (in Finnish) . Retrieved 2 June 2024 .

^ "Stone Age human images, figurines and sculptures in Finland" . 10 December 2017.

^ "Offerberget – Pohjan Uhrivuori" . 29 April 2016. Archived from the original on 26 August 2018 . Retrieved 11 May 2019 .

^ "Puiset patsaat suomalaisessa taikuudessa" .

^ "Yrj Knuutinen – Kirjoituksia" .

^ Haavio, Martti (1967).

Suomalainen mytologia . Porvoo Helsinki, FI: WSOY.

^ "» Unto Salo Ukosta – Osa I" (in Finnish) . Retrieved 3 June 2024 .

^ Haavio, Martti (2020).

Suomalainen mytologia . Alkuperäinen painos on vuodelta 1967. Tämä on 4. tarkistettu laitos. Suomalaisen Kirjallisuuden Seura. pp.

160– 161.

^ Valtonen, Taarna (18 June 2020).

"Ukon jälkiä seuraamassa: uutta ja perinteistä paikannimistöntutkimuksen saralta" .

Virittäjä .

124 (2).

doi : 10.23982/vir.88948 .

ISSN 2242-8828 .

^ a b "Agricolan jumalluettelo" .

www.narvasoft.fi . Retrieved 3 June 2024 .

^ a b Ganander, Christfried (1789).

Mythologica Fennica . Salakirjat (2016), toimittanut Juha Pentikäinen.

^ Salo, Unto (2005).

"Ukko, the Finnish God of Thunder: Separating Pagan Roots from Christian Accretions - Part One" .

Mankind Quarterly .

46 (2): 165– 146.

doi : 10.46469/mq.2005.46.2.2 .

^ "ON SUPREME SKY GOD FROM THE ASPECT OF RELIGIOUS HISTORY AND IN PREHISTORIC ESTONIAN MATERIAL" (PDF) . 2005 . Retrieved 10 November 2024 .

^ Kovalainen, Ritva; Seppo, Sanni (2006).

Puiden kansa (Uud. laitos ed.). Kemiö: (Helsinki): Hiilinielu tuotanto ; Miellotar.

ISBN 978-952-99113-1-8 .

^ "Suomalaisia jumalia ja haltioita osa 1 – Tapio, metsien kuningas" .

Verkkolehti Nauhalainen (in Finnish). 18 June 2021 . Retrieved 4 June 2024 .

^ Wilkinson, Philip; Ketola, Veli-Pekka (2010).

Myytit ja legendat: ensyklopedia . Helsinki: Readme.fi.

ISBN 978-952-220-252-9 .

^ a b Frog, Mr (1 January 2012).

"Confluence, Continuity and Change in the Evolution of Mythology: The Case of the Finno-Karelian Sampo-Cycle" .

Mythic Discourses: Studies in Uralic Traditions. Ed. Frog, Anna-Leena Siikala & Eila Stepanova. Studia Fennica Folkloristica 20. Helsinki: Finnish Literature Society. Pp. 205–254 .

^ Lesell, Kreetta; Meriluoto, Marjo; Raninen, Sami; Jones, Petri; Kuusela, Sallamari, eds. (2017).

Tursiannotko: tutkimuksia hämäläiskylästä viikinkiajalta keskiajalle . Tampereen museoiden julkaisuja. Tampere: Tampereen museot.

ISBN 978-951-609-878-7 .

^ Kuusi, Matti; Bosley, Keith; Branch, Michael, eds. (1977).

Finnish folk poetry: epic: an anthology in Finnish and English . Publications of the Finnish Literature Society ; 329 (in English and Finnish). Helsinki: Finnish literature society.

ISBN 978-951-717-087-1 .

^ a b c Pulkkinen, Risto (2014).

Suomalainen kansanusko: samaaneista saunatonttuihin (in Finnish). Gaudeamus.

ISBN 978-952-495-340-5 .

^ Bäcker, Jörg (1 January 2005).

"Siikala, Anna-Leena: Mythic Images and Shamanism. A Perspective on Kalevala Poetry. Helsinki 2002. (Review)" .

Fabula .

46 (1/2): 182.

doi : 10.1515/fabl.2005.46.1-2.145 .

^ "Luonnonhenget ja haltijat" . 4 June 2024. Archived from the original on 9 October 2007 . Retrieved 4 June 2024 .

^ Pentikainen, Juha Y. (22 September 1999).

Kalevala Mythology, Revised Edition . Indiana University Press.

ISBN 978-0-253-21352-5 .

^ "Khanty and Mansi Religion – Dictionary definition of Khanty and Mansi Religion | Encyclopedia.com: FREE online dictionary" .

www.encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 21 April 2018 .

^ a b c Kuula, Kari (2006).

Helvetin historia: pohjalta pohjalle Homeroksesta Manaajaan (in Finnish). Kirjapaja.

ISBN 978-951-607-350-0 .

^ Grönhagen, Juhani.

"Kalliomaalaukset" . Archived from the original on 18 August 2009.

^ "Suomalaisessa kansanuskossa vilisee jumalia ja haltijoita, pyhyys löytyy metsästä" .

yle.fi (in Finnish). 9 February 2020 . Retrieved 15 October 2023 .

^ Wessman, Anna (2009).

"Iron Age Cemeteries and Hiisi Sites: Is There a Connection?" .

Folklore: Electronic Journal of Folklore .

42 : 7– 22.

doi : 10.7592/fejf2009.42.wessman .

ISSN 1406-0957 .

^ "Suomi – tuhansien soiden maa?" .

Kotimaisten kielten keskus (in Finnish) . Retrieved 16 October 2023 .

^ DuBois, Thomas Andrew (1999).

Nordic religions in the Viking Age . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 48.

ISBN 0-8122-3511-8 .

OCLC 40925957 .

^ Länsimäki, Maija (30 October 2001).

"Pidetäänkö peijaiset?" .

Helsingin Sanomat (in Finnish). Archived from the original on 17 March 2012 . Retrieved 14 January 2013 .

^ a b Kalmistopiiri, Tekijä (7 March 2020).

"Myyttinen karhu Suomen historiassa kivikaudelta nykypäivään" .

Kalmistopiiri (in Finnish) . Retrieved 31 May 2024 .

^ "Toorumi pojad | ERR | Digihoidla" .

arhiiv.err.ee (in Estonian) . Retrieved 21 April 2018 .

^ "SKVR-tietokanta" .

skvr.fi (in Finnish) . Retrieved 31 May 2024 .

^ a b c "Suomalainen muinaisusko" .

Peda.net (in Finnish) . Retrieved 2 June 2024 .

^ Archibald, Malcolm (30 September 1998).

Sixpence for the Wind: A Knot of Nautical Folklore . Dundurn.

ISBN 978-1-870325-57-8 .

^ "Tietoa hiippakunnasta" .

Turun arkkihiippakunta (in Finnish) . Retrieved 31 May 2024 .

^ Siikala, A.-L. (1990).

"Singing of incantations in Nordic tradition" .

Scripta Instituti Donneriani Aboensis .

13 : 191– 205.

doi : 10.30674/scripta.67176 .

^ Edgar, Marjorie (1936). "Finnish Charms and Folk Songs in Minnesota".

Minnesota History .

17 (4): 406– 410.

JSTOR 20162133 .

^ "Karhun kansa – Usein kysytyt kysymykset" (in Finnish) . Retrieved 13 November 2019 .

^ "Karhun kansa saa vihkiä pariskuntia omilla rituaaleillaan – Katso, millaisia uskonnollisia yhdyskuntia Suomessa on" .

Yle Uutiset (in Finnish). 5 February 2014 . Retrieved 13 November 2019 .

^ "Karhun kansasta virallinen uskonnollinen yhdyskunta" .

Yle Uutiset (in Finnish). 12 February 2014 . Retrieved 13 November 2019 .

^ Jüri Toomepuu.

Maausk, the belief system of indigenous Estonians . Presentation at KLENK 2011, published on January 7, 2012. St. Petersburg, Florida.

^ Barry, Ellen (9 November 2008).

"Some Estonians return to pre-Christian animist traditions" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 9 February 2024 .

^ "RL21454: Vähemalt 15-Aastased Usu, Soo, Vanuserühma, Rahvuse Ja Elukoha (Asustuspiirkond) Järgi, 31. Detsember 2021" .

PxWeb (in Estonian) . Retrieved 9 February 2024 .

^ Kovalainen, Ritva (2006).

Puiden kansa (in Finnish). Hiilinielu tuotanto.

ISBN 978-952-99113-1-8 .

^ "Traditional Finnish celebrations and parties | Visit Finland" .

www.visitfinland.com . Retrieved 12 February 2025 .

^ Kekki, Hanna.

"Haralan talo" . Yleisradio / Kodin kääntöpiiri – unelmia ja ikuisuutta. Archived from the original on 26 April 2005 . Retrieved 5 June 2009 .

External links [ edit ] v t e Paganism (and modern paganism ) Animism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Historical ethnic religions ( list ) (existing and extinct) Asian Ainu Altaic Manchu Mongolian Tengrism Turkic Austroasiatic Sarnaism Vietnamese Indonesia Parmalim Kaharingan Momolianism Kejawèn Malay Philippine Tagalog Marapu Sunda Wiwitan Chinese Hinduism Hindu mythology Dravidian Tamil Kalash Punjabi Vedic Shinto Ryukyuan Korean Miao Tai Ahom Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bathouism Benzhuism Bimoism Bon Bongthingism Burmese Donyi-Polo Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism European Albanian Anatolian Hittite Lydian Phrygian Armenian Baltic Old Prussian Latvian Lithuanian Basque Caucasian Circassian Georgian Ossetian Vainakh Celtic Irish Etruscan Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Norse Greek Hellenistic religion Hero cult Sacred mysteries Eleusinian Orphic Samothracian Iberian Cantabrian Castro Gallaecian Lusitanian Italic Camunnian Ligurian Umbrian Minoan Nuragic Paleo-Balkan Dacian Illyrian Thracian Roman Cybele Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Scythian Slavic Uralic Baltic Finnic Hungarian Mari Sami Middle-Eastern and North African Ancient Near Eastern Hurrian Egyptian Nubian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Semitic Arabian Canaanite Iranian Persian Berber Punic Oceanian and Pacific Islander Australian Melanesian Micronesian Nauruan Papuan Polynesian Cook Islander Hawaiian Māori Rapa Nui Tahitian Tongan Sub-Saharan African Akan Bantu Bushongo Kongo Lozi Zulu Dahomean Dinka Efik Hausa Lugbara Maasai Malagasy Mbuti Odinani San Serer Somali Modern paganism ( movements ) Ethnic African Ausar Auset Godianism American Mexicayotl Native American Church Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Adyghe Habze Uatsdin Celtic Canarian Heathenry Hellenism Hindu Italo-Roman Kemetism Zalmoxianism Romani Semitic Slavic Turko-Mongolic Burkhanism Vattisen Yaly Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mordvin Udmurt Vos Other Neopagan witchcraft Cochrane's Craft Feri Tradition Stregheria Wicca Druidry European Congress of Ethnic Religions Goddess movement Neoshamanism Polytheistic reconstructionism Secular paganism Myth and ritual Veneration of the dead Bear worship Blót Tumulus Dying and rising deity Ethos Folklore Idolatry Magic and religion Megalith Dolmen Menhir Stone row Myth Myth and ritual Mythology Orthopraxy Reincarnation Religion and mythology Ritual Sacred grove Holy well Sacrifice animal human Supernatural magic Trees in mythology Tree of life World tree Totem Virtue Witchcraft Animal worship Christianization Christianity and paganism Christianization of saints and feasts Constantinian shift Neoplatonism Religio licita Virtuous pagan v t e Religion Religious groups and denominations Western and Middle Eastern Abrahamic Judaism Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Zionist Conservative Reform Karaite Haymanot Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic list Christianity Catholicism Latin Eastern Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Nestorianism Ancient Assyrian Proto-Protestantism Hussites / Moravians Waldensians Protestantism Adventism Anabaptism Amish Brethren Hutterites Mennonites Schwenkfelder Church Anglicanism Baptists Calvinism Congregationalism Presbyterianism Reformed Charismatic Christianity Pentecostal Charismatic Neo-charismatic Evangelicalism Irvingism Lutheran Methodist Holiness Non-denominational Plymouth Brethren Quakerism Restorationism Esoteric The Christian Community Independent Catholicism Old Catholic Judaizers Nontrinitarianism Bible Students Associated Bible Students Free Bible Students Friends of Man Jehovah's Witnesses Kitawala Laymen's Home Missionary Movement Christadelphians Mormonism Oneness Pentecostalism Spiritual Swedenborgianism Tolstoyan Unitarianism list Islam Sunnism Ash'arism Maturidism Atharism Salafism Wahhabism Modernist Salafism Shi'ism Alawism Ali-Illahism Ismailism Twelver Shi'ism Zaydism Sufism Khawarij Ibadism Alevism Ishikism Kurdish Alevism Ahmadi Mahdavism Quranism Milah Abraham Non-denominational list Other Bábism Azalism Baháʼí Faith Druze Mandaeism Rastafari Samaritanism Iranian Zoroastrian Blagovery Ilm-e-Khshnoom Mazdaznan Zurvanism Kurdish Shabakism Yarsanism Other Assianism/Uatsdin Roshani Manichaeism Chinese Manichaeism Yazdânism Yazidism Eastern East Asian Chinese Chinese folk religion Confucianism Luoism Nuo Salvationist Xiantiandao Yiguandao Falun Gong Taoism Folk Taoism Yao Taoism Japonic Shinto list Shugendō New religions Tenrikyo Ryukyuan Korean Korean shamanism Cheondoism Jeungsanism Vietnamese Vietnamese folk religion Đạo Mẫu Caodaism Hoahaoism Đạo Bửu Sơn Kỳ Hương Indian Hinduism Vaishnavism Krishnaism Sri Vaishnavism Brahma Sampradaya Nimbarka Sampradaya Pushtimarg Mahanubhava Ramanandi Warkari Swaminarayan Shaivism Shaiva Siddhanta Ganapatya Kashmiri Kapalika Kaumaram Lingayatism Nath Balinese Shaktism Smartism Śrauta Sant Mat Neo-Hinduism list Buddhism Theravada Mahayana Chan / Zen / Thiền Amidism Nichiren Vajrayana Tibetan Neo-Buddhism list Other Ayyavazhi Kalash Jainism Digambara Śvetāmbara Sarnaism Kirat Mundhum Vedda religions Ravidassia Sikhism Khalsa Sects Ethnic Altaic Turko - Mongolic Burkhanism Tengrism Vattisen Yaly Tungusic Evenki Manchu Austroasiatic Sarnaism Austronesian Batak Parmalim Dayak Kaharingan Indonesian Aliran Kepercayaan Kejawèn Kapitayan Karo Pemena Malaysian Traditional Sabahan religions Philippine Dayawism Tagalog Polynesian Hawaiian Māori Sumbese Marapu Sundanese Wiwitan Native American Abenaki Alaskan Anishinaabe Ojibwe Midewiwin Wabunowin Apache Blackfoot Californian Kuksu Miwok Ohlone Pomo Chilote Choctaw Crow Ghost Dance / Sun Dance Guarani Haida Ho-Chunk Iroquois Cherokee Four Mothers Society Keetoowah Society Longhouse Mohawk Muscogee Creek Seneca Wyandot Jivaroan Kwakwakaʼwakw Lenape Mapuche Mesoamerican Aztec Maya Purépecha Muisca Native American Church Navajo Nuu-chah-nulth Pawnee Pueblo Acoma Pueblo Hopi Zuni Sioux Lakota Wocekiye Tsimshian Ute Washat Dreamers Yaqui Tai and Miao Ahom Hmongism Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bon Burmese Benzhuism Bimoism Bathouism Bongthingism Dongba Donyi-Polo Gurung Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism Traditional African North African Berber Guanche church Sub-Saharan African Akamba Akan Baluba Bantu Kongo Zulu Bushongo Dinka Dogon Efik Fon and Ewe Ik Lotuko Lozi Lugbara Maasai Mbuti Odinala San Serer Tumbuka Urhobo Waaqeffanna Yoruba Ifá Diasporic : Candomblé Bantu Jejé Ketu Comfa Convince Espiritismo Kumina Obeah Palo Quimbanda Santería Tambor de Mina Trinidad Orisha Umbanda Vodou Voodoo Winti Other ethnic Aboriginal Australian Inuit Papuan Siberian New religious movements Syncretic Blagovery Brahmoism Chinese Falun Gong Coconut Religion Japanese Meivazhi Modekngei New Acropolis New Age New Thought Rajneesh Rastafari Sant Mat Radha Soami Spiritualism Subud Tensegrity Thelema Theosophy Neo-Theosophy Agni Yoga and Roerichism Transcendental Meditation Unitarian Universalism White Brotherhood Modern paganism African Godianism Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Circassian Celtic Druidry Germanic Hellenism (modern religion) Neoshamanism Ossetian Polytheistic reconstructionism Italo-Roman Kemetism Romanian Slavic Authentism Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mari Erzya Sámi Udmurt Wicca Zalmoxianism list De novo Anthroposophy The Christian Community Discordianism Eckankar Fourth Way Goddess Jediism Satanism Scientology UFO religion Raëlism Historical religions Prehistoric Paleolithic Ainu Armenian Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Old Prussian Basque Celtic Druidism Irish Cook Islands Dravidian Egyptian Atenism Etruscan Finnish Fuegian Selkʼnam Georgian Germanic Anglo-Saxon Continental Frankish Norse Greek Gnosticism Greco-Buddhism Hermeticism Mysteries Orphism Guanche Harappan Hittite Hungarian Hurrian Illinois Inca Jamaican Maroon Manichaeism Mazdakism Melanesian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Micronesian Nauruan indigenous religion Olmec Paleo-Balkan Albanian Dacian Illyrian Thracian Proto-Indo-Iranian Iranian Vedic Ancestral Pueblo Pueblo II Pueblo III Pueblo IV Rapa Nui Roman Cult of Magna Mater Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Semitic Arabian Nabataean Babylonian Canaanite Punic Yahwism Scythian Slavic Somali Tongan Turkic Tengrism Urartu Vainakh Zapotec Topics Aspects Apostasy / Disaffiliation Behaviour Beliefs Call to prayer Laicism / Laity Covenant Conversion Deities Denomination Entheogens Faith God Goddess Meditation Monasticism Monk Novice Nun Mysticism Mythology Ordination Orthodoxy Orthopraxy Paganism Prayer Prophecy Religious experience Ritual Liturgy Purification Sacrifice Sacred space Bodies of water Groves Mountains Trees Soul Spirituality Supernatural Symbols Text Truth Water Worship Astral Fire Nature Place Theism Animism Deism Dualism Henotheism Monotheism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Religious studies Anthropology Cognitive science Comparative Demographics Ethnic Folk Indigenous Major World Evolutionary origin of religion Evolutionary psychology History Neurotheology Philosophy Psychology Sociology Soteriology Salvation Theology Theories about religion Women Religion and society Agriculture Business Clericalism / Clergy Monasticism Ordination Priest Conversion Assimilation Missionary Proselytism Disability Education Fanaticism Freedom Pluralism Syncretism Toleration Universalism Fundamentalism Growth Gender Happiness LGBTQ people Homosexuality Intersex people Transgender people Minorities National church National religiosity levels Politics Populations Religiocentrism Schism School Science Sexuality State Suicide Theocracy Vegetarianism Video games Violence Persecution Terrorism War Sectarian Wealth Secularism and irreligion Agnosticism Antireligion Atheism Criticism Deconstruction Objectivism Secular humanism Secular religion Secular theology Secularization Separation of church and state Unaffiliated Overviews and lists Abrahamic prophets Deification Deities Founders Index Mass gatherings Names of God New religious movements Organizations Outline Religions and spiritual traditions Scholars Timeline Religion by country Africa Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Asia Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Georgia Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan Korea North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Macau Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Palestine Philippines Qatar Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Taiwan Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen Europe Albania Andorra Austria Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Czechia Denmark Estonia Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kosovo Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom England Northern Ireland Scotland Wales North America Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Oceania Australia Fiji Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu South America Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Category Portal v t e Finland articles History Prehistory Finland under Swedish rule Cudgel War Great Northern War The Great Wrath Finnish War Grand Duchy Golden Age of Finnish Art Independence of Finland Civil War Finland in World War II Winter War Continuation War Lapland War Finlandization History of independent Finland Military history Geography Cities and towns Extreme points Geology Islands Lakes Municipalities National parks Provinces Regions Åland Rivers Urban areas Helsinki Tampere Turku Oulu Jyväskylä Wildlife Politics Administrative divisions Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights Judiciary Law Law enforcement Military NATO Parliament Political parties President Prime Minister Economy Agriculture Central bank Energy Government-owned companies Industry National income agreement Nordic model Ship-building Startups Stock exchange Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Transport Rail Society Abortion Crime Climate change Demographics Education Finns Healthcare Languages Finnish Swedish Religion Welfare system Culture Anthem Architecture Art Cinema Coat of arms Cuisine Flag Folklore Literature The Kalevala Media Music Mythology National symbols Public holidays Independence Day Sauna Sport World Heritage Sites Outline Index Bibliography Category Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐fx57x
Cached time: 20250818000542
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.290 seconds
Real time usage: 1.607 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11108/1000000
Revision size: 55047/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 449475/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 16586/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 63/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 223717/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.705/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21777568/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1220.427      1 -total
 32.69%  399.001      2 Template:Reflist
 10.90%  133.071      3 Template:Langx
 10.68%  130.291     27 Template:Cite_web
  9.01%  109.928     39 Template:Ill
  8.48%  103.475      3 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.36%  102.016      8 Template:Navbox
  8.10%   98.809     15 Template:Cite_book
  7.88%   96.119      1 Template:Paganism
  7.60%   92.768      1 Template:Finland_topics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1152323:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818000542 and revision id 1296399765. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Baltic_Finnic_paganism&oldid=1296399765 " Categories : Finnish paganism Karelian-Finnish folklore Hidden categories: CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) CS1 Estonian-language sources (et) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from July 2015 Use dmy dates from July 2015 Articles needing additional references from January 2009 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Finnish-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 This page was last edited on 19 June 2025, at 19:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Baltic Finnic paganism 12 languages Add topic

