Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Types Toggle Types subsection 2.1 Soft and hard 2.2 Pure and impure forms 2.3 Moral and welfare 3 Criteria for effective paternalism 4 Opponents 5 In society 6 Paternalism and slavery 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Paternalism 44 languages Alemannisch العربية Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Lombard മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sociological behaviour For the process of promoting and supporting the development of a child, see Parenting .

Child wearing a child harness Paternalism is action that limits a person's or group's liberty or autonomy against their will and is intended to promote their own good. It has  been defended in a variety of contexts as a means of protecting individuals from significant harm, supporting long-term autonomy, or promoting moral or psychological well-being. Such justifications are commonly found in public health policy, legal theory, medical ethics, and behavioral economics, where limited intervention is viewed as compatible with or even supportive of personal agency.

[ 1 ] Some, such as John Stuart Mill , think paternalism can be appropriate towards children, saying: "It is, perhaps, hardly necessary to say that this doctrine [i.e. that individual liberty should only be restricted to protect a person or to protect others] is meant to apply only to human beings in the maturity of their faculties. We are not speaking of children, or of young persons below the age which the law may fix as that of manhood or womanhood." [ 2 ] Paternalism towards adults is sometimes characterized as treating them as if they were children.

[ 3 ] Some critics argue that such interventions can infringe upon autonomy and reflect insufficient respect for an individual’s capacity for self-determination.

[ 4 ] The terms 'paternalism,' 'paternalistic,' and 'paternalist' are sometimes used pejoratively, particularly in political or social discourse.

[ 1 ] Etymology [ edit ] The word paternalism derives from the adjective paternal , which entered the English language in the fifteenth century from Old French paternel (cf.

Old Occitan paternal , as in Catalan , Spanish and Portuguese ), itself from Medieval Latin paternalis .

[ 5 ] The classical Latin equivalent was paternus ' fatherly ' , from pater ' father ' .

[ 6 ] Types [ edit ] Part of a series on Nudge theory Social scientists Richard Thaler Shlomo Benartzi Cass Sunstein Maya Shankar Government programs Race to the Top Affordable Care Act tax provisions Social Credit System Vision Zero Government agencies Behavioural Insights Team (UK) Social and Behavioral Sciences Team (US) Nudge theory in business Loyalty program Safety culture Related concepts Behavioral economics Choice architecture Default effect Design for behaviour change Libertarian paternalism Paternalism Social engineering Social proof IT-backed authoritarianism v t e Soft and hard [ edit ] Soft paternalism is the view that paternalism is justified only if an action to be committed is involuntary.

John Stuart Mill gives the example of a person about to walk across a damaged bridge. Because the person does not know the bridge is damaged and there is no time to warn him, seizing him and turning him back is not an infringement on his liberty. According to soft paternalism, one would be justified in forcing him to not cross the bridge so one could find out whether he knows about the damage. If he knows and wants to jump off the bridge and commit suicide, then one should allow him to. Soft paternalism is the intervention due to a person not having the rationality or ability to make decisions. If a patient in an emergency room is intoxicated or unconscious, they do not possess the rationality or ability to make decisions for themselves and any decisions made on their behalf would be soft paternalism.

[ 1 ] Hard paternalists say that at least sometimes one is entitled to prevent him from crossing the bridge and committing suicide.

[ 1 ] Hard paternalism does not rely on the absence of rationality or ability. In the emergency room example, the patient is sober or conscious and possesses the rationality and ability to make decisions about their care. Any decision that is made on their behalf would be hard paternalism.

[ 1 ] There is also the question of if the length of incompetence plays a hand in the permissibility of paternalism. It seems obvious that if a person is permanently incompetent to make their own decisions paternalism is permissible, but if the incompetence is only temporary, the answer is not as clear.

[ 7 ] Pure and impure forms [ edit ] Pure paternalism is paternalism where the people having their liberty or autonomy taken away are those being protected. Impure paternalism occurs when the class of people whose liberty or autonomy is violated by some measure is wider than the group of persons thereby protected.

[ 1 ] Moral and welfare [ edit ] Moral paternalism is where paternalism is justified to promote the moral well-being of a person(s) even if their welfare would not improve. For example, it could be argued that someone should be prevented from prostitution even if they make a decent living off it and their health is protected. A moral paternalist would argue that it is ethical, considering they believe prostitution to be morally corrupting.

[ 1 ] Criteria for effective paternalism [ edit ] Thomas Pogge argues that there are a number of criteria for paternalism.

[ 8 ] The concept should work within human flourishing . Generally accepted items such as nutrition, clothing, shelter, certain basic freedoms may be acceptable by a range of religious and social backgrounds.

The criteria should be minimally intrusive.

The requirements of the criteria should not be understood as exhaustive, leaving societies the ability to modify the criteria based on their own needs.

The supplementary considerations introduced by such more ambitious criteria of justice must not be allowed to outweigh the modest considerations.

[ further explanation needed ] Opponents [ edit ] See also: Social engineering (political science) and Nanny state In his Two Treatises of Government , John Locke argues (against Robert Filmer ) that political and paternal power are not the same.

John Stuart Mill opposes state paternalism on the grounds that individuals know their own good better than the state does, that the moral equality of persons demands respect for others' liberty, and that paternalism disrupts the development of an independent character. In On Liberty , he writes: [T]he only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilized community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others. His own good, either physical or moral, is not a sufficient warrant. He cannot rightfully be compelled to do or forbear because it will be better for him to do so, because it will make him happier, because, in the opinion of others, to do so would be wise, or even right.

[ 2 ] : 14 Mill, however, disregards his own analysis when it comes to colonial subjects.  In On Liberty , he writes: Those who are still in a state to require being taken care of by others, must be protected against their own actions as well as against external injury. For the same reason, we may leave out of consideration those backward states of society in which the race itself may be considered as in its nonage. The early difficulties in the way of spontaneous progress are so great, that there is seldom any choice of means for overcoming them; and a ruler full of the spirit of improvement is warranted in the use of any expedients that will attain an end, perhaps otherwise unattainable. Despotism is a legitimate mode of government in dealing with barbarians, provided the end be their improvement, and the means justified by actually effecting that end.

Mill above declares barbarians to be in need of paternalism. But he narrowly defines barbarism historically, geographically, and economically insofar as to declare it fit to describe the people he intends to describe as such.

Contemporary opponents of paternalism often appeal to the ideal of personal autonomy .

[ citation needed ] In society [ edit ] Mandatory seatbelt laws override individual choice to not wear a seatbelt in order to protect individuals from serious injury or death. Such laws are supported on the grounds that individuals often irrationally discount future harm, and state intervention can serve to preserve both welfare and long-term autonomy.

[ 1 ] In the Southern United States before the Civil War , paternalism was a concept used to justify the legitimacy of slavery . Women would present themselves as mothers for the slaves, or protectors that provided benefits the slaves would not get on their own. Plantation mistresses would attempt to civilize their workers by providing food, shelter, and affection. These women would justify that the conditions for freed blacks were poorer than those who were under the mistresses' protection. Paternalism was used as an argument against the emancipation of slavery due to these mistresses providing better living conditions than the enslaved's counterpart in the factory-based north.

[ 9 ] As a result of this conclusion, the whites would often manage basic rights of the enslaved, such as child-rearing and property.

[ 10 ] Medical paternalism is perhaps the most common type of paternalism in society. Parents make decisions for their children because they do not possess the rationality or ability to make their own medical decisions. If a person is unconscious, their power of attorney would make their medical decisions for them. Both are examples of soft paternalism, but an example of hard paternalism in medicine is therapeutic privilege , especially when the patient has been previously deemed competent.

Anti-suicide interventions override an individual’s decision to end their life in order to prevent irreversible harm. These interventions are defended on the basis that individuals experiencing suicidal ideation may be acting under impaired judgment or temporary mental distress, and that intervention can preserve life and enable the restoration of rational autonomy.

[ 1 ] Bans on swimming at public beaches without lifeguards restrict individuals from engaging in risky behavior even when they are aware of the dangers and willing to accept them. Such policies are justified on the grounds of preventing serious harm.

[ 1 ] Paternalism and slavery [ edit ] A concept of paternalism functioned as a tool of justification during the slavery era, and the concept promoted the institution of the slavery. Masters, who were the owners of slaves, believed themselves that the concept of paternalism can justify their wrongdoings such as trading of slaves and punishment of their slaves. The masters believed that they are helping and rescuing slaves from poor conditions; therefore, the masters believed themselves as parent or savior of their slaves. Masters used the concept of paternalism to show that their behavior is not wrong or unethical. Not only by the masters, but slaves also exploited the concept of paternalism for their own benefit. For instance, slaves believed that enslavement would be better than the freedom. Slaves believed that they would be treated better as long as they build good relationship with their masters. Slaves also believed that they could get basic human needs such as food from their masters. Thus, the concept of paternalism for slaves was the tool that made slaves feel more comfortable and free.

[ citation needed ] Walter Johnson introduces a concept of paternalism in Soul by Soul: Life Inside the Antebellum Slave Market that mentions "Slave-market paternalism thus replayed the plots of proslavery propaganda and fiction: the good hearted slave at the side of the dying master; the slave who could be trusted to master himself; the slaveholder's saving interventions in the life of the unfortunate slave".

[ 11 ] Even though slaves could benefit from the concept of paternalism by receiving abundant food and medical care, the concept can never justify the institution of slavery. Some libertarians [ who?

] consider paternalism, especially when imposed by the state, to be a form of modern slavery.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Adultism Authoritarianism Caciquism Cryptofascism Libertarian paternalism Noble lie Nudge theory Obscurantism Paternalistic conservatism Rule according to higher law Social conservatism References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j Dworkin, Gerald (2020). Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

Paternalism .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ a b Mill, J.S. [1859]/(1991) "On Liberty", published in Gray, John (ed), John Stuart Mill: On Liberty and Other Essays , Chapter1, Oxford: Oxford University Press .

^ Feinberg, Joel. 1986.

Harm to Self . Oxford: Oxford University Press . p. 4 ISBN 9780195059236 ^ Shiffrin, Seana. 2000. "Paternalism, Unconscionability Doctrine, and Accommodation".

Philosophy and Public Affairs 29(3): 205–250.

^ "Paternal - Adjective" .

Oxford English Dictionary Online .

Oxford University Press . March 2021 . Retrieved 28 April 2021 .

^ "Paternal (adjective)" .

Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved 21 December 2023 .

^ Hanna, Jason (2018-11-29), Hanna, Jason (ed.), "Soft Paternalism II: The Impairment Exception" , In Our Best Interest: A Defense of Paternalism , Oxford University Press, p. 0, doi : 10.1093/oso/9780190877132.003.0007 , ISBN 978-0-19-087713-2 , retrieved 2025-04-04 ^ Pogge, Thomas (2008).

World poverty and human rights (2nd ed.). Cambridge: Polity.

ISBN 978-0745641430 . Retrieved 9 March 2015 .

^ Mulligan, Erin R. (August 2012).

"Paternalism and the Southern Hierarchy: How Slavery Defined Antebellum Southern Women" .

Armstrong Undergraduate Journal of History .

2 (2). Archived from the original on 2020-03-04.

^ Cole, Josh (2006).

"The Excuse of Paternalism in the Antebellum South: Ideology or Practice?" (PDF) .

Historia .

15 .

Eastern Illinois University .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2025-02-23.

^ Johnson, Walter (February 2000).

Soul by Soul: Life Inside the Antebellum Slave Market . Harvard University Press. p. 18.

ISBN 978-0674005396 .

Further reading [ edit ] Mill and Paternalism , by Gregory Claeys. Cambridge University Press, ISBN 9781139028011 Counting the Dragon's Teeth and Claws: The Definition of Hard Paternalism by Thaddeus Mason Pope.  From 20 Georgia State University Law Review 659–722 (2004) Monstrous Impersonation: A Critique of Consent-Based Justifications for Hard Paternalism by Thaddeus Mason Pope.  From 73 UMKC Law Review 681–713 (2005) Is Public Health Paternalism Really Never Justified? A Response to Joel Feinberg by Thaddeus Mason Pope.  From 30 Oklahoma City University Law Review 121–207 (2005) Paternalism , by Peter Suber. From Philosophy of Law: An Encyclopedia , edited by Christopher Berry Gray , Garland Pub. Co., 1999, vol. II, pp. 632–635 Wilkinson, Will (2008).

"Paternalism" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, California: Sage ; Cato Institute . pp.

370– 372.

doi : 10.4135/9781412965811.n227 .

ISBN 978-1412965804 .

OCLC 750831024 .

v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐4rrvd
Cached time: 20250814215029
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.633 seconds
Real time usage: 0.775 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2939/1000000
Revision size: 17203/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 76842/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9305/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 61754/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.436/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 25942605/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  693.341      1 -total
 19.96%  138.360      1 Template:Reflist
 19.92%  138.101      5 Template:Lang
 12.37%   85.762      3 Template:Cite_book
 12.34%   85.585      1 Template:Nudge_Theory
 12.09%   83.823      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  9.56%   66.274      1 Template:Jurisprudence
  8.98%   62.286      1 Template:Navbox
  8.94%   62.010      1 Template:Short_description
  8.04%   55.728      4 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:306053:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215029 and revision id 1292239843. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paternalism&oldid=1292239843 " Categories : Family Ageism Virtue ethics Political theories Theories of law Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Old French (842-ca. 1400)-language text Articles containing Old Provençal (to 1500)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2015 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2024 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from April 2024 This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 23:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paternalism 44 languages Add topic

