Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Bibliography 3 Translations 4 References Toggle the table of contents David Nieto 4 languages Deutsch Español עברית Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sephardi rabbi Rabbi David Nieto Grave of David Nieto David Nieto (1654 – 10 January 1728) was the Hakham of the Spanish and Portuguese Jewish community in London, later succeeded in this capacity by his son, Isaac Nieto .

Life [ edit ] Nieto was born in Venice .  He first practised as a physician and officiated as a Jewish preacher at Livorno , Italy. There he wrote in Italian a work entitled "Paschologia" (Cologne, 1702), in which he dealt with the differences of calculation in the calendars of the Greek, Roman, and Jewish churches, and demonstrated the errors which had crept into the calendar from the First Council of Nicaea until 1692.

In 1702 Nieto succeeded Solomon Ayllon as ecclesiastical chief of the Portuguese Jews in London; and two years after his settlement in that city he published his theological treatise, Della Divina Providencia, ó sea Naturalezza Universal, ó Natura Naturante (London, 1704). He explained that 'nature' was a modern word, and in reality referred to the action of God in governing natural phenomena. This work provoked opposition against him, including accusations of Spinozism (which in the atmosphere of the time meant pantheism or atheism ), but some of the accusers were believed to be heretics motivated by their support for Sabbatai Zevi .

Tzvi Ashkenazi , who was called in as arbitrator, decided in his favor (Hakham Tzvi, Responsa, No. 18). Not only was he exonerated, but he was highly praised for his teachings.  Nieto was also highly praised by Rabbi Chaim Azulay (the 'Chida'). He died in London and is buried in the Velho Cemetery in Mile End .

[ 1 ] Nieto was a powerful controversialist. In his Matteh Dan , or Kuzari Heleq Sheni (London, 1714), written in Hebrew and Spanish on the model of the Kuzari of Judah ha-Levi , he defended the Oral Torah against the Karaites , and showed that the disagreements in the Talmud lay not in essential laws but in minor matters. (Within the fictional framework of the book, his spokesman argues against the historic Karaite etc., even quoting from Karaite literature, but as there were few if any actual Karaites in Western Europe at the time of writing, the real attack was against Jewish dissidents such as Uriel Acosta .) He also waged war untiringly on the supporters of the Shabbethaian heresies, which he regarded as dangerous to the best interests of Judaism, and in this connection wrote his Esh Dat (London, 1715) against Hayyun (who supported Shabbetai Zevi).

He claims that the rabbis were conversant with the sciences and that the Jews were the source of the world's wisdom.

[ 2 ] Nieto was one of the most accomplished Jews of his time and was equally distinguished as philosopher, physician, poet, mathematician, astronomer, and theologian. A prolific writer, his connection with Christian scholars was extensive, especially with Ungar [ cs ] , the bibliographer. Nieto was the first to fix the time for the beginning of Sabbath eve for the latitude of England.

Bibliography [ edit ] Della Divina Providencia, ó sea Naturalezza Universal, ó Natura Naturante , London 1704 Los Triunfos de la Pobreza , Panegírico, 1709 Respuesta al Sermón Predicado por el arzobispo de Cangranor , London 1710 Matteh Dan, or Kuzari Heleq Sheni , London 1714 Esh Daat, London 1715 Sermón, Oración y Problemático Dialogo , London 1716 Noticias recónditas y póstumas del procedimiento de las Inquisiciones de España y Portugal ; London 1722 Translations [ edit ] Triumphs of Poverty, Guadeloupe, 2018. First English translation, by Walter Hilliger. Kindle eBook, Paperback, 2018; ISBN 978-2956185932 On Divine Providence or Universal Nature , Guadeloupe, 2018. First English translation by Walter Hilliger; ISBN 978-2-9561859-4-9 References [ edit ] ^ "David Nieto (1654 - 1728)" .

Geni.com . 2017.

^ Fuss, Abraham M. (1994).

"The Study of Science and Philosophy Justified by Jewish Tradition" .

The Torah U-Madda Journal .

5 : 101– 114.

ISSN 1050-4745 .

JSTOR 40914819 .

Steinschneider , Cat. Bodl.

, col. 881 Meyer Kayserling , Gesch. der Juden in Portugal, pp. 325–326 Jewish World, Dec. 19, 1879 Wolf, Johann Christoph , Bibliotheca Hebræa iii Cat.

Anglo-Jew. Hist. Exh.

1887 Portrait in Jewish Chronicle , June 28, 1901 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Joseph Jacobs and Goodman Lipkind (1901–1906).

"Nieto, David" . In Singer, Isidore ; et al. (eds.).

The Jewish Encyclopedia . New York: Funk & Wagnalls.

v t e Sabbateanism Sabbateans Leaders Sabbatai Zevi Nathan of Gaza Abraham Yachini Moses Pinheiro Joshua Heschel Zoref Abraham Miguel Cardoso Samuel Primo Nehemiah Hayyun Johan Kemper Mordecai Mokiach Behr Perlhefter Abraham Rovigo Meir bar Hiyya Rofe Judah Leib Prossnitz Moses Meïr Kamanker Dönmeh Leaders Jacob Querido Mehmed Cavid Ahmet Emin Yalman Places Yeni Mosque Frankists Jacob Frank Eve Frank Moses Dobruška Opponents Jacob ben Aaron Sasportas Jacob Hagis David Nieto Tzvi Ashkenazi Moses Hagiz Jacob Emden Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Australia Portugal Netherlands Poland Vatican Israel People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=David_Nieto&oldid=1305160266 " Categories : 1654 births 1728 deaths 17th-century English rabbis 18th-century English rabbis Rabbis from London 17th-century Republic of Venice rabbis Sephardi rabbis English Sephardi Jews Italian emigrants to England Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 11:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents David Nieto 4 languages Add topic

