Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life, education, and medical career 2 Early congressional career (1976–1985) Toggle Early congressional career (1976–1985) subsection 2.1 Elections 2.2 Tenure 3 Libertarian Party and ventures Toggle Libertarian Party and ventures subsection 3.1 1985–1997 3.2 1988 presidential campaign 4 Later congressional career (1997–2013) Toggle Later congressional career (1997–2013) subsection 4.1 Elections 4.2 Tenure 4.3 Committee assignments 5 2008 presidential campaign Toggle 2008 presidential campaign subsection 5.1 2008 Republican primary campaign 5.2 Endorsement after ending campaign 6 2012 presidential campaign Toggle 2012 presidential campaign subsection 6.1 2012 Republican primary campaign 6.1.1 Iowa 6.1.2 South Carolina, Florida, and Nevada 6.1.3 Alleged irregularities 6.2 Republican National convention 6.3 Endorsement after ending campaign 7 Political party identification 8 Political positions Toggle Political positions subsection 8.1 Foreign policy 8.2 Domestic issues 8.3 Economic issues 8.4 Climate change 8.5 Healthcare 8.6 Immigration 8.7 Ballots and voting 8.8 Secession 8.9 Social issues 9 Post-congressional career Toggle Post-congressional career subsection 9.1 2016 presidential election 9.2 2020 presidential election 9.3 2024 presidential election 10 Personal life 11 Media relating to Ron Paul Toggle Media relating to Ron Paul subsection 11.1 Books 11.2 Films 12 Bibliography Toggle Bibliography subsection 12.1 Other contributions 13 See also 14 References 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Ron Paul 67 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Bislama Български Brezhoneg Català Cebuano Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch Dolnoserbski Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Føroyskt Français Gaeilge 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Malagasy मराठी مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Ślůnski Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 16 August 2025 .

American politician (born 1935) This article is about the former U.S. Representative from Texas. For his son, see Rand Paul .

Ron Paul Paul in 2023 Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Texas In office January 3, 1997 – January 3, 2013 Preceded by Greg Laughlin Succeeded by Randy Weber Constituency 14th district In office January 3, 1979 – January 3, 1985 Preceded by Robert Gammage Succeeded by Tom DeLay Constituency 22nd district In office April 3, 1976 – January 3, 1977 Preceded by Robert R. Casey Succeeded by Robert Gammage Constituency 22nd district Personal details Born Ronald Ernest Paul ( 1935-08-20 ) August 20, 1935 (age 89) Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania, U.S.

Political party Libertarian (1987–1996, since 2015) [ 1 ] Other political affiliations Republican (before 1987, 1996–2015) Spouse Carolyn Wells ​ ( m.

1957) ​ Children 5, including Rand Education Gettysburg College ( BS ) Duke University ( MD ) Occupation Politician physician author Signature Website Official website Military service Allegiance United States Branch/service United States Air Force Years of service 1963–1965 1965–1968 Rank Captain [ 2 ] Unit Air National Guard Texas Air National Guard Ron Paul's voice Paul gives a speech criticizing the country's interventionist foreign policy Recorded October 17, 2003 This article is part of a series about Ron Paul Political positions Campaign for Liberty F.R.E.E Young Americans for Liberty Draft Ron Paul movement Newsletters U.S. Representative from Texas Early congressional career (1976–1985) Later congressional career (1997–2013) Published works A Foreign Policy of Freedom The Revolution: A Manifesto End the Fed Liberty Defined Presidential campaigns 1988 convention 2008 primaries convention 2012 primaries convention v t e Ronald Ernest Paul (born August 20, 1935) is an American author, activist, medical doctor, and politician who served as the U.S. representative for Texas's 22nd congressional district from 1976 to 1977, and again from 1979 to 1985, as well as for Texas's 14th congressional district from 1997 to 2013. On three occasions, he sought the presidency of the United States , first as the Libertarian Party nominee in 1988 , and then as a candidate for the Republican Party in 2008 and 2012 .

A self-described constitutionalist , Paul is a critic of several of the federal government 's policies, especially the existence of the Federal Reserve and tax policy , as well as the military–industrial complex , the war on drugs , and the war on terror . He has also been a vocal critic of mass surveillance policies such as the Patriot Act and the NSA surveillance programs . In 1976, Paul formed the Foundation for Rational Economics and Education (FREE), and in 1985 was named the first chairman of the conservative PAC Citizens for a Sound Economy , both free-market groups focused on limited government .

[ 3 ] He has been characterized as the "intellectual godfather" of the Tea Party movement , a fiscally conservative political movement started in 2007 and popularized in 2009 that is largely against most matters of interventionism .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Paul served as a flight surgeon in the U.S. Air Force from 1963 to 1968, and worked as an obstetrician-gynecologist from the 1960s to the 1980s.

[ 6 ] When his son, Rand Paul , was elected as a U.S. senator from Kentucky, Paul became the first U.S. representative in history to serve concurrently with a child in the Senate.

[ 7 ] He is a senior fellow and distinguished counselor of the Mises Institute , [ 8 ] and has published a number of books and promoted the ideas of economists of the Austrian School , such as Murray Rothbard , Friedrich Hayek , and Ludwig von Mises , during his political campaigns. He has cited President Grover Cleveland as a preferred model of governance.

[ 9 ] After the popularity and grassroots enthusiasm of his 2008 presidential bid, Paul announced in July 2011 that he would not seek reelection to Congress in order to focus on his 2012 bid for the presidency.

[ 10 ] Finishing in the top four with delegates in both races (while winning four states in the 2012 primaries ), he refused to endorse the Republican nominations of John McCain and Mitt Romney during their respective 2008 and 2012 campaigns against Barack Obama . In May 2012, Paul announced that he would not be competing in any other presidential primaries but that he would still compete for delegates in states where the primary elections had already been held.

[ 11 ] At both the 2008 and 2012 Republican National Conventions, Paul received the second-highest number of delegates, behind only McCain and Romney, respectively.

Paul remained active after his retirement from electoral politics, giving speeches promoting libertarian and libertarian-conservative ideas on college campuses.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] He also continues to provide political commentary through The Ron Paul Liberty Report , a web show he co-hosts on YouTube . At 81, and despite not running, Paul received one electoral vote from a Texas faithless elector in the 2016 presidential election , making him the oldest person to receive an Electoral College vote, as well as the second registered Libertarian presidential candidate in history to receive an electoral vote, after John Hospers in 1972.

Early life, education, and medical career [ edit ] Ronald Ernest Paul was born on August 20, 1935, in Pittsburgh , [ 14 ] the son of Howard Caspar Paul (1904–1997), who ran a small dairy company, and Margaret Paul (née Dumont; 1908–2001). His paternal grandfather emigrated from Germany , [ 15 ] and his paternal grandmother, a devout Christian, was a first-generation German American .

[ 16 ] Ron Paul has four brothers.

[ 17 ] As a junior at suburban Dormont High School , he was the 200-meter dash state champion.

[ 18 ] Paul went to Gettysburg College , where he was a member of the Lambda Chi Alpha fraternity.

[ 19 ] He graduated with a B.S.

degree in biology in 1957.

[ 18 ] Paul earned a Doctor of Medicine degree from Duke University 's School of Medicine in 1961, and completed his medical internship at the Henry Ford Hospital in Detroit and his residency in obstetrics and gynecology at Magee-Womens Hospital in Pittsburgh .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Paul served as a flight surgeon in the United States Air Force from 1963 to 1965 and then in the United States Air National Guard from 1965 to 1968. Paul and his wife then relocated to Texas , where he began a private practice in obstetrics and gynecology .

[ 21 ] One child that he helped deliver was famous Tejano singer Selena Quintanilla .

[ 22 ] Early congressional career (1976–1985) [ edit ] While a medical resident in the 1960s, Paul was influenced by Friedrich Hayek 's The Road to Serfdom , which caused him to read other publications by Ludwig von Mises and Ayn Rand . He came to know economists Hans Sennholz and Murray Rothbard well, and credits his interest in the study of economics to them.

[ 23 ] When President Richard Nixon " closed the gold window " by ending American participation in the Bretton Woods System , thus ending on August 15, 1971, the U.S. dollar 's loose association with gold , [ 23 ] Paul decided to enter politics, [ 24 ] and became a Republican candidate for the United States Congress .

[ 25 ] Elections [ edit ] In 1974, incumbent Robert R. Casey defeated him for the 22nd district .

[ 21 ] President Gerald Ford later appointed Casey to the Federal Maritime Commission , and Paul won an April 1976 special election to the vacant office after a runoff .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Paul lost the next regular election to Democrat Robert Gammage by fewer than 300 votes (0.2%), but defeated Gammage in a 1978 rematch, and was reelected in 1980 and 1982.

[ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] Gammage underestimated Paul's popularity among local mothers: "I had real difficulty down in Brazoria County , where he practiced, because he'd delivered half the babies in the county. There were only two obstetricians in the county, and the other one was his partner." [ 32 ] Tenure [ edit ] Paul in 1979 Paul served in Congress three different periods: first from 1976 to 1977, after he won a special election, then from 1979 to 1985, and finally from 1997 to 2013.

[ 33 ] In his early years, Paul served on the House Banking Committee , where he blamed the Federal Reserve for inflation and spoke against the banking mismanagement that resulted in the savings and loan crisis .

[ 15 ] [ 34 ] Paul argued for a return to the gold standard maintained by the U.S. from 1873 to 1933, and with Senator Jesse Helms convinced the Congress to study the issue.

[ 23 ] He spoke against the reinstatement of registration for the military draft in 1980, in opposition to President Jimmy Carter and the majority of his fellow Republican members of Congress.

[ 35 ] During his first term, Paul founded the Foundation for Rational Economics and Education (FREE), a non-profit think tank dedicated to promoting principles of limited government and free-market economics.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] In 1984, Paul became the first chairman of the Citizens for a Sound Economy (CSE), [ 3 ] a conservative political group founded by Charles and David Koch "to fight for less government, lower taxes, and less regulation." CSE started a Tea Party protest against high taxes in 2002.

[ 38 ] In 2004, Citizens for a Sound Economy split into two new organizations, with Citizens for a Sound Economy being renamed as FreedomWorks , and Citizens for a Sound Economy Foundation becoming Americans for Prosperity . The two organizations would become key players in the Tea Party movement from 2009 onward.

Paul proposed term-limit legislation multiple times, while himself serving four terms in the House of Representatives .

[ 35 ] In 1984, he decided to retire from the House in order to run for the U.S. Senate , complaining in his House farewell address that "Special interests have replaced the concern that the Founders had for general welfare... It's difficult for one who loves true liberty and utterly detests the power of the state to come to Washington for a period of time and not leave a true cynic." [ 39 ] [ 40 ] Paul lost the Republican primary to Phil Gramm , who had switched parties the previous year from Democrat to Republican. Another candidate of the senatorial primary was Henry Grover , a conservative former state legislator who had lost the 1972 gubernatorial general election to Democrat Dolph Briscoe , Jr.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] On Paul's departure from the House, his seat was assumed by former state representative Tom DeLay , who would later become House majority leader .

[ 43 ] Libertarian Party and ventures [ edit ] 1985–1997 [ edit ] Following the loss of the 1984 senate race, Paul returned to his obstetrics practice and took part in a number of other business ventures.

[ 15 ] [ 44 ] Along with his former congressional chief of staff, Lew Rockwell , Paul founded a for-profit enterprise, Ron Paul & Associates, Inc. (RP&A) in 1984, with Paul serving as president, Rockwell as vice president, Paul's wife Carol as secretary, and daughter Lori Pyeatt as treasurer.
The company published a variety of political and investment-oriented newsletters , including Ron Paul Freedom Report and Ron Paul Survival Report , [ 45 ] and by 1993 was generating revenues in excess of $900,000.

[ 46 ] Paul also co-owned a mail-order coin dealership, Ron Paul Coins , for twelve years with Burt Blumert , who continued to operate the dealership after Paul resumed office in 1996.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] Paul spoke multiple times at the American Numismatic Association 's 1988 convention.

[ 47 ] He worked with his Foundation for Rational Economics and Education on such projects as establishing the National Endowment for Liberty, continuing publication of newsletters, and producing the At Issue public policy series that was broadcast on the Discovery Channel and CNBC .

[ 36 ] 1988 presidential campaign [ edit ] Main article: Ron Paul 1988 presidential campaign Paul left the Republican Party in 1987 and launched a bid for the presidency running on the Libertarian Party ticket. His candidacy was seen as problematic because of the party's platform position of support for freedom of choice on abortions.

Native American activist Russell Means , Paul's rival for the nomination, emphasized that he was in favor of abortion rights .

[ 49 ] In a forum held prior to the nomination, Means dismissed the greater funds raised by Paul's campaign, commenting that Means was receiving "10 times more press" than the former Congressman and was therefore "100 times more effective".

[ 50 ] On September 25, 1988, American psychologist and psychedelic advocate Timothy Leary held a fundraiser for Paul, who attended the event.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] Journalist Debra Saunders attended and wrote about her experience.

[ 54 ] In the 1988 presidential election, Paul was on the ballot in 46 states, [ 55 ] scoring third in the popular vote with 432,179 votes (0.5%).

[ 56 ] Paul was kept off the ballot in Missouri , due to what the St. Louis Post-Dispatch termed a "technicality," and received votes there only when written in, [ 57 ] just as he did in North Carolina .

[ 58 ] According to Paul, his presidential campaign was about more than obtaining office; he sought to promote his libertarian ideas, often to school and university groups regardless of vote eligibility. He said, "We're just as interested in the future generation as this election. These kids will vote eventually, and maybe, just maybe, they'll go home and talk to their parents." [ 55 ] Paul considered running again for president in 1992 , [ 59 ] but instead chose to endorse Republican Pat Buchanan that year, and served as an adviser to Buchanan's ultimately unsuccessful presidential primary campaign against incumbent President George H. W. Bush .

[ 60 ] Later congressional career (1997–2013) [ edit ] An earlier congressional portrait of Paul, c.

1997 Paul in his Congressional office, September 1999 Elections [ edit ] Further information: Texas's 14th congressional district 1996 campaign During 1996, Paul was re-elected to Congress after a difficult campaign. The Republican National Committee endorsed incumbent Greg Laughlin in the primary; Paul won with assistance from baseball pitcher, constituent, and friend Nolan Ryan , tax activist and publisher Steve Forbes [ 15 ] and conservative commentator Pat Buchanan (the latter two of whom had run in the 1996 Republican Party presidential primaries ). Paul narrowly defeated Democratic attorney Charles "Lefty" Morris in the fall election, despite Morris' criticism over controversial statements in several newsletters that Paul published .

1998–2013 In 1998 and 2000, Paul defeated Loy Sneary, a Democratic Bay City, Texas , rice farmer and former Matagorda County judge.

[ 24 ] In the 2008 Republican primary, [ 61 ] he defeated Friendswood city councilman Chris Peden , [ 62 ] with over 70 percent of the vote [ 63 ] and ran unopposed in the general election.

[ 64 ] In the 2010 Republican primary, Paul defeated three opponents with 80 percent of the vote.

[ 65 ] On July 12, 2011, Paul announced that he would not seek re-election to the House in order to pursue the 2012 presidential election .

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] Tenure [ edit ] Legislation Main article: List of legislation sponsored by Ron Paul Of the 620 bills that Paul had sponsored through December 2011, over a period of more than 22 years in Congress, only one had been signed into law—a lifetime success rate of less than 0.3%.

[ 68 ] The sole measure authored by Paul that was ultimately enacted allowed for a federal customhouse to be sold to a local historic preservation society (H.R. 2121 in 2009).

[ 68 ] 2007 congressional portrait By amending other legislation, he helped prohibit funding for national identification numbers , funding for federal teacher certification, [ 24 ] International Criminal Court jurisdiction over the U.S. military, American participation with any U.N.

global tax , and surveillance of peaceful First Amendment activities by citizens.

[ 69 ] In November 1997, Paul was one of eighteen Republicans in the House to co-sponsor a resolution by Bob Barr that sought to launch an impeachment inquiry against President Bill Clinton .

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] The resolution did not specify any charges or allegations.

[ 71 ] This was an early effort to impeach Clinton, predating the eruption of the Clinton–Lewinsky scandal . The eruption of that scandal would ultimately lead to a more serious effort to impeach Clinton in 1998.

[ 72 ] On October 8, 1998, Paul voted in favor of legislation that was passed to open an impeachment inquiry .

[ 73 ] On December 19, 1998 , Paul voted in favor of all four proposed articles of impeachment against Clinton (only two of which received the needed majority of votes to be adopted).

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] Two days prior, on December 16, Paul had stated that he would vote to impeach based on Clinton's military attacks in the Middle East, namely the 1998 bombing of Iraq and Operation Infinite Reach , and not necessarily the Lewinsky scandal, which he described as far less serious than the "unconstitutionality of presidents waging wars".

[ 78 ] Affiliations Paul was honorary chairman of, and is a member of the Republican Liberty Caucus , a political action committee that describes its goal as electing "liberty-minded, limited-government individuals".

[ 79 ] He is an initiating member of the Congressional Rural Caucus , which deals with agricultural and rural issues, and the 140-member Congressional Wildlife Refuge Caucus .

[ 80 ] Committee assignments [ edit ] Paul served on the following committees and subcommittees.

[ 81 ] Committee on Financial Services Subcommittee on Domestic Monetary Policy and Technology (chairman) Subcommittee on International Monetary Policy and Trade Committee on Foreign Affairs Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations With the election of the 112th Congress , and a resulting GOP majority in the House , Paul became the chairman of the Subcommittee on Domestic Monetary Policy and Technology starting in January 2011.

[ 82 ] Paul's congressional career ended on January 3, 2013, with the swearing in of the 113th Congress .

2008 presidential campaign [ edit ] Main article: Ron Paul 2008 presidential campaign See also: 2008 Republican Party presidential primaries 2008 Republican primary campaign [ edit ] Paul campaigning for president in Manchester, New Hampshire , June 2007 Supporters outside of the Fox News debate in September 2007 Paul formally declared his candidacy for the 2008 Republican nomination on March 12, 2007, on C-SPAN .

[ 83 ] Few major politicians endorsed him, and his campaign was largely ignored by traditional media.

[ 84 ] However, he attracted an intensely loyal grassroots following, [ 85 ] interacting through internet social media.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] In May 2007, shortly after the first televised primary debates, the blogs search engine site Technorati .com listed Paul's name as the term most frequently searched for; [ 86 ] and Paul's campaign claimed that Paul had more YouTube channel subscribers than Barack Obama or any other candidate for president.

[ 89 ] Paul fundraised more money than any other Republican candidate in the fourth quarter of 2007, as the primary season headed into the Iowa caucuses.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] Despite benefiting from campaign contributions from individual donors, [ 92 ] and the supporters determined to keep his name a frequent topic of discussion on the internet, [ 86 ] over the course of the campaign Paul was unable to translate the enthusiasm of his core supporters into large enough numbers of actual primary votes to unseat his rivals. Paul came in 5th place in both the January 4 Iowa caucuses (10% of votes cast) [ 93 ] and the January 8 New Hampshire primary (8%).

[ 94 ] With the exception of the Nevada caucuses January 19, where he came in 2nd (14%) behind Mitt Romney (51%), he did little better through the rest of January: Michigan 4th (6%), South Carolina 5th (4%), Florida 5th (3%). On Super Tuesday, February 5, he placed 4th in almost every state, generally taking in a mere 3–6% of the votes although he did better in the northern states of North Dakota (21%, 3rd place) and Montana (25%, 2nd place).

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] By March, front-runner John McCain had secured enough pledged delegates to guarantee that he would win the nomination, and Romney and Mike Huckabee had both formally withdrawn from the race. Paul, who had won no state primaries, knew that it was now impossible for him to win the nomination, as he had captured only 20 [ 97 ] —40 pledged delegates compared to more than 1,191 for McCain, yet he refused to concede the race and said that it was unlikely that he would ultimately endorse McCain.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] Over the next few weeks, Paul's supporters clashed with establishment Republicans at several county and state party conventions over state party rules, the party platforms, and selection of delegates for the national convention.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] [ 103 ] In one instance, Nevada's state party leaders in response to Paul's supporters at the state nominating convention, resorted to prematurely shutting down the convention before selecting national delegates, with a plan to reconvene at a later date.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] On June 12, 2008, Paul withdrew his bid for the Republican nomination. He later said that one of the reasons he did not run in the general election as a third-party candidate, after losing the primaries, was that, as a concession to gain ballot access in certain states, he had signed legally binding agreements to not run a third-party campaign if he lost the primary.

[ 106 ] Some of the $4 million remaining campaign contributions was invested into the political action and advocacy group called Ron Paul's Campaign for Liberty .

[ 107 ] Endorsement after ending campaign [ edit ] Paul's Rally for the Republic , held in Minneapolis, Minnesota on September 2, 2008 At a September 10, 2008, press conference, Paul announced his general support of four third-party candidates: Cynthia McKinney ( Green Party ); Bob Barr ( Libertarian Party ); Chuck Baldwin ( Constitution Party ); and Ralph Nader (independent). He said that each of them had pledged to adhere to a policy of balancing budgets, bringing the troops home, defending privacy and personal liberties, and investigating the Federal Reserve. Paul also said that under no circumstances would he be endorsing either of the two main parties' candidates (McCain—Republican Party, or Obama—Democratic Party) because there were no real differences between them, and because neither of them, if elected, would seek to make the fundamental changes in governance that were necessary. He urged instead that, rather than contribute to the "charade" that the two-party election system had become, the voters support the third-party candidates as a protest vote, to force change in the election process.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] Later that same day, Paul gave a televised interview with Nader saying much the same again.

[ 110 ] Two weeks later, "shocked and disappointed" that Bob Barr (the Libertarian nominee) had pulled out of attending the press conference at the last minute and had admonished Paul for remaining neutral and failing to say which specific candidate Paul would vote for in the general election, Paul released a statement saying that he had decided to endorse Chuck Baldwin , the Constitution Party candidate, for president.

[ 111 ] Paul withdrew from active campaigning in the last weeks of the primary election period. He received 42,426 votes, or 0.03% of the total cast, in the general election.

[ 112 ] 2012 presidential campaign [ edit ] Main article: Ron Paul 2012 presidential campaign See also: 2012 Republican Party presidential primaries 2012 Republican primary campaign [ edit ] Congressman Ron Paul speaking at the Western Republican Leadership Conference in Las Vegas , Nevada , in October 2011 Paul won several early straw polls for the 2012 Republican presidential nomination [ 113 ] and formed an official exploratory committee in late April 2011.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] He participated in the first Republican presidential debate on May 5, 2011 [ 116 ] and on May 13, 2011, formally announced his candidacy in an interview on ABC 's Good Morning America .

[ 117 ] He placed second in the 2011 Ames Straw Poll , missing first by 0.9%.

[ 118 ] Paul indicated in a June 2011 interview that if nominated, he would consider former New Jersey Superior Court judge Andrew Napolitano as his running mate.

[ 119 ] In December 2011, with Paul's increased support, the controversy over racist and homophobic statements in several Ron Paul newsletters in the 1980s and early 1990s once again gained media attention.

[ 120 ] During this time Paul supporters asserted that he was continually ignored by the media despite his significant support, citing examples of where television news shows would fail to mention Paul in discussions of the Republican presidential hopefuls even when he was polling second.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] [ 123 ] Iowa [ edit ] Ron Paul's presidential campaign managers Jesse Benton , John Tate and Demetri Kesari were all found guilty of paying former Iowa state senator Kent Sorenson $73,000 to switch his support from Rep.

Michele Bachmann to Paul.

[ 124 ] In court papers filed in August 2014, Sorenson said that he had been paid by both presidential campaigns for his endorsement and pled guilty to criminal charges stemming from the incident.

[ 125 ] Paul came in third in the Iowa Republican Caucus held on January 3, 2012. Out of a turnout of 121,503 votes, Paul took 26,036 (21%) of the certified votes.

Rick Santorum and Mitt Romney finished in a virtual tie for first place with 25% each, [ 126 ] although Ron Paul had ultimately won [ 127 ] Iowa at the Republican National Convention gathering 22 delegates to Mitt Romney's 5. In the New Hampshire primary held on January 10, 2012, Paul received 23% of the votes and came in second after Romney's 39%.

[ 128 ] South Carolina, Florida, and Nevada [ edit ] Sign in support of Paul in Ann Arbor, Michigan on the day of the 2012 Michigan primary Paul's results then declined, despite the withdrawal of candidates Michele Bachmann , Jon Huntsman and Rick Perry . He had fourth-place finishes in the next two primaries, on January 21 in South Carolina (with 13% of the vote) [ 129 ] and on January 31 in Florida (where he received 7% of the vote).

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] [ 132 ] On February 4, Paul finished third in Nevada with 18.8% of the vote.

[ 133 ] Three non-binding primaries were held on February 7; Paul took 3rd place in Colorado [ 134 ] and Missouri [ 135 ] with 13% and 12% of the vote, respectively. He fared better in Minnesota [ 136 ] with 27%, finishing second to Rick Santorum . On May 14, Paul's campaign announced that due to lack of funds (though despite financial backing from financiers Peter Thiel and Mark Spitznagel ) [ 137 ] he would no longer actively campaign for votes in the 11 remaining primary states, including Texas and California, that had not yet voted.

[ 11 ] [ 138 ] He would, however, continue to seek to win delegates for the national party convention in the states that had already voted.

Alleged irregularities [ edit ] In June, a group of 132 supporters of Paul, demanding the freedom as delegates to the upcoming Republican Party National Convention to cast votes for Paul, filed a lawsuit in U.S. District Court against the Republican National Committee and 55 state and territorial Republican party organizations for allegedly coercing delegates to choose Mitt Romney as the party's presidential nominee.

[ 139 ] The suit alleged that there had been "a systematic campaign of election fraud at state conventions", employing rigging of voting machines, ballot stuffing, and falsification of ballot totals. The suit further pointed to incidents at state conventions, including acts of violence and changes in procedural rules, allegedly intended to deny participation of Paul supporters in the party decision-making and to prevent votes from being cast for Paul. An attorney representing the complainants said that Paul campaign advisor Doug Wead had voiced support for the legal action.

[ 139 ] Paul himself told CNN that although the lawsuit was not a part of his campaign's strategy and that he had not been advising his supporters to sue, he was not going to tell his supporters not to sue, if they had a legitimate argument. He said, "If they're not following the rules, you have a right to stand up for the rules. I think for the most part these winning caucuses that we've been involved in we have followed the rules. And the other side has at times not followed the rules." [ 140 ] Republican National convention [ edit ] Paul declined to speak at the Republican National Convention as a matter of principle, saying that the convention planners had demanded that his remarks be vetted by the Romney campaign and that he make an unqualified endorsement of Romney.

[ 141 ] Paul had felt that "It wouldn't be my speech... That would undo everything I've done in the last 30 years. I don't fully endorse him for president." [ 141 ] Many of Paul's supporters and delegates walked out of the convention in protest over rules adopted by the convention that reduced their delegate count and that would make it harder for non-establishment candidates to win the party's nomination in future elections.

[ 142 ] Supporters and media commentators had noted that the delegations from states where Paul had had the most support were given the worst seats in the convention hall, while delegations from regions with no electoral votes, such as the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa, and Puerto Rico, were given prime seats at the front.

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] Endorsement after ending campaign [ edit ] As in 2008, Paul ultimately refused to endorse the ticket selected by the Republican Party in 2012. He said that there was no essential difference between Romney and his Democratic opponent, President Obama, on the most critical policies: "I've been in this business a long time and believe me there is essentially no difference from one administration to another no matter what the platforms... The foreign policy stays the same, the monetary policy stays the same, there's no proposal for any real cuts and both parties support it." [ 145 ] Paul received 26,204 write-in votes, or 0.02% of the total cast in the election.

[ 146 ] Political party identification [ edit ] Throughout his entire tenure in Congress, Paul has represented his district as a member of the Republican Party; however, he has frequently taken positions in direct opposition to the other members and the leadership of the party, and he has sometimes publicly questioned whether he really belonged in the party. Paul voted for Dwight D. Eisenhower for president in 1956 when he was 21 years old.

[ 147 ] He had been a lifelong supporter of the Republican Party by the time he entered politics in the mid-1970s.

[ 147 ] He was one of the first elected officials in the nation to support Ronald Reagan 's presidential campaign, [ 148 ] and he actively campaigned for Reagan in 1976 and 1980.

[ 149 ] After Reagan's election in 1980, Paul quickly became disillusioned with the Reagan administration's policies. He later recalled being the only Republican to vote against Reagan budget proposals in 1981, [ 150 ] [ 151 ] aghast that "in 1977, Jimmy Carter proposed a budget with a $38 billion deficit, and every Republican in the House voted against it. In 1981, Reagan proposed a budget with a $45 billion deficit—which turned out to be $113 billion—and Republicans were cheering his great victory. They were living in a storybook land." [ 148 ] He expressed his disgust with the political culture of both major parties in a speech delivered in 1984 upon resigning from the House of Representatives to prepare for a (failed) run for the Senate, and he eventually apologized to his libertarian friends for having supported Reagan.

[ 150 ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Ron Paul's 1987 Resignation Letter to the RNC By 1987, Paul was ready to sever all ties to the Republican Party, as he explained in a blistering resignation letter: "Since [1981] Ronald Reagan and the Republican Party have given us skyrocketing deficits, and astoundingly a doubled national debt. How is it that the party of balanced budgets, with control of the White House and Senate, accumulated red ink greater than all previous administrations put together? ... There is no credibility left for the Republican Party as a force to reduce the size of government. That is the message of the Reagan years." [ 147 ] [ 149 ] A month later, he announced he would seek the 1988 Libertarian Party nomination for president. During the 1988 campaign, Paul called Reagan "a dramatic failure" [ 149 ] and complained that "Reagan's record is disgraceful. He starts wars, breaks the law, supplies terrorists with guns made at taxpayers' expense and lies about it to the American people." [ 152 ] Paul predicted that "the Republicans are on their way out as a major party," [ 150 ] and he said that, although registered as a Republican, he had always been a libertarian at heart.

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] Paul returned to his private medical practice and managing several business ventures after losing the 1988 election; but by 1996, he was ready to return to politics, this time running on the Republican Party ticket again. He said that he had never read the entire Libertarian platform when he ran for president as a Libertarian in 1988, and that "I worked for the Libertarians on my terms, not theirs." [ 153 ] He added that in terms of a political label he preferred to call himself "a constitutionalist. In Congress I took an oath to uphold the Constitution, not the (Republican) platform." [ 153 ] When he lost the Republican Party presidential primary election in 2008, Paul criticized the two major political parties, saying that there was no real difference between the parties and that neither of them truly intended to challenge the status quo. He refused to endorse the Republican Party's nominee for president, John McCain , and lent his support to third-party candidates instead.

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] In the 2012 presidential campaign, during which he acknowledged it was unlikely that he would win the Republican Party nomination, [ 156 ] Paul again asserted that he was participating in the Republican Party on his own terms, trying to persuade the rest of the party to move toward his positions rather than joining in with theirs.

[ 157 ] He expressed doubt that he would support any of his rivals should they win the nomination, warning that, "If the policies of the Republican Party are the same as the Democrat Party and they don't want to change anything on foreign policy, they don't want to cut anything, they don't want to audit the Fed and find out about monetary policy, they don't want to have actual change in government, that is a problem for me." [ 158 ] On that same theme he said in another interview, "I would be reluctant to jump on board and tell all of the supporters that have given me trust and money that all of a sudden, I'd say, [all] we've done is for naught. So, let's support anybody at all ... even if they disagree with everything that we do." [ 159 ] Political positions [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Libertarianism in the United States Schools Agorism Anarcho-capitalism Austro Authoritarian Autarchism Bleeding-heart Christian Conservative Consequentialist Feminist Fusionism Geo Green Market anarchism Minarchism Natural-rights Neo Paleo Panarchism Paternalist Propertarianism Socialist Techno Transhumanist Voluntaryism Principles Anti-imperialism Civil libertarianism Constitutionalism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Economic freedom Evictionism Free banking Free market Free-market environmentalism Free migration Free trade Free will Freedom of association Freedom of contract Freedom of speech Homestead principle Individuality Individualism Liberty Limited government Localism Marriage privatization Natural rights and legal rights Non-aggression principle Non-interventionism Non-politics Non-voting Open border Polycentric law Private defense agency Private property Public choice theory Restorative justice Right to bear arms Right to privacy Rugged Individualism Self-ownership Single tax Small government Spoiled ballot Spontaneous order Stateless society Tax resistance Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntary association Voluntary society History Age of Enlightenment Abolitionism in the United States Classical liberalism Anti-Federalists Transcendentalism Individualist anarchism in the United States Old Right New Left New Right Freedom School Economics Austrian School Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Georgism Laissez-faire Neoliberalism Supply-side economics Intellectuals Andrews Barnett Block Boudreaux Brennan Caplan Carson Chamberlain Chartier Chodorov Cowen Ebeling Epstein Franklin D. Friedman M. Friedman P. Friedman R. Friedman Galambos Garrett George Griffin Gordon Harper Hazlitt Heinlein Hess Hoppe Hospers Huemer Jefferson Kinsella Konkin R. Lane Liggio LeFevre Machan Mencken Menger Mises Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Raico Read Robertson Rockwell Rothbard Samuels Schulman Sciabarra Scott Skousen Smith Spooner Somin Sowell Sumner Sutton Stephenson Szasz Taleb Thoreau Tuccille Tucker Volokh Wilder Williams Wilson (Clyde) Wilson (Robert) Politicians Amash Barr Brakey Burt Chafee Cleveland Flake Goldwater Jacobs Johnson Jorgensen Lee Massie McAfee Nolan Oliver Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Polis Sanford Sarwark Sununu Ventura Weld Wu Commentators Chamberlain Gillespie Gutfeld Jones Kauffman McElroy Miller Napolitano Postrel Pugsley Rogan Smith Soave Stone Stossel Welch Will Woods Activists Ben Garrison Jillette Koch (Charles) Koch (David) Reitman Kubrick Smith Prince Teller Thiel Literature The Anarchist Cookbook Anarchy, State, and Utopia The Betrayal of the American Right The Case Against Education Civil Disobedience Conceived in Liberty The Creature from Jekyll Island Defending the Undefendable The Discovery of Freedom End the Fed The Ethics of Liberty For a New Liberty Free to Choose The Future and Its Enemies The God of the Machine It Usually Begins with Ayn Rand Liberty The Machinery of Freedom Man, Economy and State The Moon is a Harsh Mistress The Mainspring of Human Progress The Market for Liberty The Myth of the Rational Voter No, They Can't No Treason New Libertarian Manifesto Our Enemy, the State The Problem of Political Authority Progress and Poverty Protection or Free Trade Radicals for Capitalism Seeing Like a State To Serve and Protect The Unconstitutionality of Slavery Issues Abortion Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political parties Politics State Theories of law Symbols Come and take it Gadsden flag Idols Ron Swanson Patrick Bateman Walter White Organizations Cato Institute Federalist Society Free State Project Foundation for Economic Education International Alliance of Libertarian Parties Libertarian Party Liberty International Mises Institute Reason Foundation Reason (magazine) Students for a Democratic Society Students for Liberty Young Americans for Liberty Movements American militia movement Boogaloo movement Dark Enlightenment Objectivist movement Objectivism Sovereign citizen movement Comparable Libertarianism in Hong Kong Libertarianism in the United Kingdom ( England ) Related Conservatism in the United States Left-libertarianism Liberalism in the United States Libertarian Democrat Libertarian Republican Libertarian science fiction On Democracy in America Outline of libertarianism Right-libertarianism Liberalism portal Conservatism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Main article: Political positions of Ron Paul Paul has been described as conservative and libertarian .

[ 15 ] According to University of Georgia political scientist Keith Poole, Paul had the most conservative voting record of any member of Congress from 1937 to 2002, [ 160 ] [ 161 ] and is the most conservative of the candidates that had sought the 2012 Republican nomination for president.

[ 162 ] Other analyses have judged Paul much more moderate. The National Journal , for instance, rated Paul only the 145th-most-conservative member of the House of Representatives (out of 435) based on votes cast in 2010.

[ 163 ] [ 164 ] The National Journal 's analysis gave Paul a 2011 composite ideological rating of 54% liberal and 46% conservative.

[ 165 ] The foundation of Paul's political philosophy is the conviction that "the proper role for government in America is to provide national defense, a court system for civil disputes, a criminal justice system for acts of force and fraud, and little else." [ 166 ] He has been nicknamed "Dr. No", reflecting both his medical degree and his insistence that he will "never vote for legislation unless the proposed measure is expressly authorized by the Constitution." [ 24 ] [ 34 ] In 2008, Paul spoke at the John Birch Society 's 50th-anniversary celebration.

[ 167 ] [ 168 ] Foreign policy [ edit ] An anti-war activist, Paul promotes a noninterventionist foreign policy and an end to American imperialism .

[ 169 ] He advocates withdrawal from the United Nations and from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization , for reasons of maintaining strong national sovereignty.

[ 170 ] Paul voted for the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Terrorists in response to the September 11 attacks , but suggested war alternatives such as authorizing the president to grant Letters of Marque and Reprisal targeting specific terrorists, in lieu of launching an Afghanistan invasion . An opponent of the Iraq War as well, and potential war with Iran , he has criticized neoconservatism and U.S. foreign policy in the Middle East, arguing that both inadvertently cause terrorist reprisals against Americans, such as the 9/11 attacks. Paul has stated that "Israel is our close friend" and that it is not the place of the United States to "dictate how Israel runs her affairs". Paul, a critic of the US's implementation of most foreign aid , said in 2011 that "it was our foreign aid that helped Mubarak retain power to repress his people in the first place." [ 171 ] Following the Orange Revolution protests in 2004, which led to Viktor Yanukovych 's ouster from government, Paul accused the National Endowment for Democracy of having staged a coup in Ukraine.

[ 172 ] [ 173 ] Paul supported the 2014 Crimean status referendum , [ 174 ] for which he was called a friend of Vladimir Putin by The Atlantic , [ 175 ] and has objected to sanctions during the Russo-Ukrainian War and foreign aid to Ukraine .

[ 176 ] Domestic issues [ edit ] Paul endorses constitutional rights , such as the right to keep and bear arms , and habeas corpus for political detainees. He was one of only three Republicans in the House to vote against the Patriot Act . Paul opposes federal use of torture , presidential autonomy , a national identification card , warrantless domestic surveillance , and the draft . He has also called for shutting down the TSA and moving matters of airline security to private businesses.

[ 177 ] Paul believes that the notion of the separation of church and state is currently misused by the court system: "In case after case, the Supreme Court has used the infamous ' separation of church and state ' metaphor to uphold court decisions that allow the federal government to intrude upon and deprive citizens of their religious liberty." [ 178 ] After the April 2013 Boston Marathon bombing , Paul commented on the tactics used by governing forces into a harsh criticism that he has written as a "military-style occupation of an American city".

[ 13 ] Economic issues [ edit ] Paul speaking at the 2011 Liberty Political Action Conference (LPAC) Paul is a proponent of Austrian School economics; he has authored six books on the subject, and displayed pictures of Austrian School economists Friedrich Hayek , Murray Rothbard , and Ludwig von Mises (as well as of President Grover Cleveland and Chicago School economist Milton Friedman ) [ 179 ] on his office wall. He regularly voted against almost all proposals for new government spending, initiatives, or taxes; [ 180 ] he cast two thirds of all the lone negative votes in the House during a 1995–1997 period.

[ 24 ] Paul pledged never to raise taxes, [ 181 ] and states he has never voted to approve a budget deficit . Paul believes that the country could abolish the individual income tax by scaling back federal spending to its fiscal year 2000 levels; [ 182 ] [ 183 ] financing government operations would be primarily by excise taxes and non-protectionist tariffs . He endorses eliminating most federal government agencies , terming them unnecessary bureaucracies. On April 15, 2011, Paul was one of four Republican members of Congress to vote against Representative Paul Ryan 's budget proposal, known as " The Path to Prosperity ".

[ 184 ] Paul has consistently warned of hyperinflation and called for a return to the gold standard as far back as 1981.

[ 185 ] [ 186 ] From 1999 until his retirement, he introduced bills into each Congress seeking to eliminate the Federal Reserve System in a single year, [ 187 ] [ 188 ] [ 189 ] a position he outlines in his 2009 book End the Fed . Paul is a strong proponent of free trade , once saying that "free trade is an answer to a lot of conflicts around the world".

[ 190 ] He rejects membership in the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) and the World Trade Organization as "managed trade".

[ 191 ] He has also advocated for open trade and better relations with the country of Cuba . In addition, Paul argued in 2012 that "as well intentioned as sanctions are, they almost always backfire and hurt the people." [ 190 ] Paul has described his interest in ending wars and lowering military spending as partly an "economic issue", adding, "We'd save a lot of money by not being engaged [in overseas conflict] like this." [ 192 ] Climate change [ edit ] As a free-market environmentalist , Paul asserts private property rights in relation to environmental protection and pollution prevention.

[ 193 ] He rejects the scientific consensus on climate change and has claimed that global warming is a hoax in a 2009 Fox Business interview.

[ 194 ] Healthcare [ edit ] Paul has stated, "The government shouldn't be in the medical business." He pushes to eliminate federal involvement with and management of health care , which he argues would allow prices to decrease due to the fundamental dynamics of a free market.

[ 195 ] He also opposes federal government influenza inoculation programs.

[ 196 ] Immigration [ edit ] Paul endorses increased border security and opposes welfare for illegal immigrants , birthright citizenship , and amnesty ; [ 197 ] he voted for the Secure Fence Act of 2006 . In a 2019 interview, Paul expressed disapproval of President Donald Trump 's proposed border wall along the southern US border, saying, "I don't like walls. I don't want to wall people in and wall people out." [ 198 ] Ballots and voting [ edit ] Paul is an outspoken proponent of increased ballot access for third-party candidates.

[ 199 ] He has sought to repeal the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 , also known as the Motor Voter law.

[ 200 ] Secession [ edit ] Paul has stated that secession from the United States "is a deeply American principle" and that "If the possibility of secession is completely off the table there is nothing to stop the federal government from continuing to encroach on our liberties and no recourse for those who are sick and tired of it." [ 201 ] Paul wrote the remarks in a post on his Congressional website in one of his final public statements as a member of Congress, noting that many petitions had been submitted to the White House calling for secession in the wake of the November 2012 election.

[ 202 ] Social issues [ edit ] Paul at the 2007 National Right to Life Committee Convention Citing the Ninth and Tenth Amendments , Paul advocates states' rights to decide how to regulate social matters not cited directly by the Constitution. He opposes federal regulation of such matters as the death penalty [ 203 ] (although he opposes capital punishment), [ 204 ] of education, [ 205 ] of drugs, and of marriage. Regarding same-sex marriage , he stated in 2011 that "My personal opinion is government shouldn't be involved. The whole country would be better off if individuals made those decisions and it was a private matter." [ 206 ] He endorsed revising the military's " don't ask, don't tell " policy to concern mainly disruptive sexual behavior (whether heterosexual or homosexual).

[ 207 ] His abortion-related legislation, such as the Sanctity of Life Act in 2005, is intended to negate Roe v. Wade and to get "the federal government completely out of the business of regulating state matters." [ 208 ] Paul says his years as an obstetrician led him to believe that life begins at conception .

[ 209 ] [ 210 ] Paul was critical of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 , arguing that it sanctioned federal interference in the labor market and did not improve race relations . He once remarked: "The Civil Rights Act of 1964 not only violated the Constitution and reduced individual liberty; it also failed to achieve its stated goals of promoting racial harmony and a color-blind society".

[ 211 ] Paul opposes affirmative action .

[ 212 ] Paul opposes the federal War on Drugs , [ 213 ] and advocates that states should decide whether to regulate or deregulate drugs such as medical and recreational marijuana, and other substances.

[ 214 ] [ 215 ] In 2001, he joined with Democratic Congressman Barney Frank in helping pass the States' Rights to Medical Marijuana Act (H.R. 2592), an attempt to stop the federal government from preempting states' medical marijuana laws.

[ 216 ] Paul again partnered with Frank in support of online gambling rights. In 2006, both strongly opposed H.R. 4777, the Internet Gambling Prohibition and Enforcement Act, and H.R. 4411, the Goodlatte-Leach Internet Gambling Prohibition Act .

[ 217 ] [ 218 ] In June 2018, Paul posted a tweet containing a racist cartoon and a caption which invoked the Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory . The tweet read "Are you stunned by what has become of American culture? Well, it's not an accident. You've probably heard of 'Cultural Marxism,' but do you know what it means?" The tweet was later deleted with an apology, stating that a staff member had inadvertently posted what Paul described as an "offensive cartoon".

[ 219 ] [ 220 ] [ 221 ] Post-congressional career [ edit ] Paul speaking at a 2022 conference hosted by the Young Americans for Liberty student activism organization In April 2013, Paul founded the Ron Paul Institute for Peace and Prosperity , a foreign policy think tank that seeks to promote his non-interventionist views.

[ 222 ] The institute is part of his larger foundation Foundation for Rational Economics and Education . In the same month, he began to offer the Ron Paul Curriculum , a homeschool online curriculum developed by Gary North and taught from a "free market and Christian" perspective.

[ 223 ] In June 2013, Paul criticized the NSA surveillance program and praised Edward Snowden for having performed a "great service to the American people by exposing the truth about what our government is doing in secret".

[ 224 ] In April 2015, Paul began appearing in infomercials for Stansberry & Associates Investment Research , warning about an upcoming financial meltdown as a result of the imminent crash of the world's currencies.

[ 225 ] [ 226 ] In March 2017, Paul predicted a market downturn again.

[ 227 ] Paul was a critic of President Trump's plans to increase the number of military personnel in Afghanistan. In August 2017, he said that Americans don't see Afghanistan as a threat to their personal security and being aggressive in foreign policy only loses Trump some of his support base.

[ 228 ] Paul has also called for Trump to bring American troops back from Syria in April 2018, on the grounds that the threat from ISIS has been eliminated.

[ 229 ] He continues to voice his disagreements regarding foreign policy, and more recently, regarding the events involving America and Iran.

[ 230 ] [ 231 ] In 2013, Paul established the Ron Paul Channel, an Internet broadcast. Its slogan was "Turn Off Your TV. Turn On the Truth".

[ 232 ] [ 233 ] In 2015, Paul ended all relationships with the Ron Paul Channel in order to start a new Internet program, which he co-hosts with Daniel McAdams, called The Ron Paul Liberty Report .

[ 234 ] 2016 presidential election [ edit ] Paul endorsed his son, Senator Rand Paul , in the 2016 Republican primary and campaigned for him in Iowa.

[ 235 ] After his son dropped out, Paul said that no Republican or Democratic candidate even came close to holding libertarian views.

[ 236 ] Paul expressed disappointment in former New Mexico governor Gary Johnson 's Libertarian Party nomination for president, and told independent voters that Green Party nominee Jill Stein was a better candidate for those who "lean towards progressivism and liberalism", while emphasizing that he was not endorsing her.

[ 237 ] Paul received one electoral vote from a Texas faithless elector , South Texas College political science professor William Greene (who had been pledged to Donald Trump ), [ 238 ] in the 2016 presidential election, [ 239 ] [ 240 ] making Paul the oldest person ever to receive an electoral vote, and the second Libertarian Party member to receive an electoral vote, after John Hospers in 1972 .

[ 241 ] 2020 presidential election [ edit ] In the 2020 Democratic primary , Paul described Hawaii representative Tulsi Gabbard as "the most intelligent" and "the very, very best" option of the Democratic candidates, primarily for her views on foreign policy, adding, "We probably wouldn't agree with too much on economics." [ 192 ] 2024 presidential election [ edit ] In April 2023, in an episode of The Ron Paul Liberty Report titled "President Kennedy?", Paul praised then-Democratic (later Independent) presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy Jr.

for his stances on noninterventionism, the pharmaceutical industry , and crony corporatism , saying "[Kennedy's] baggage is telling the truth" and advocated for his participation in the major party presidential debates.

[ 242 ] A few days before the election, Elon Musk expressed interest in having Paul join the proposed Department of Government Efficiency during a second Trump presidency , which Musk has suggested could help cut the U.S. federal budget by up to US$2 trillion. Paul responded that he was happy to discuss the idea with Musk, although declined any "official position" within the new department.

[ 243 ] [ 244 ] Personal life [ edit ] Paul at a rally in Erlanger, Kentucky , in October 2010, along with his son, senatorial candidate Rand Paul of Kentucky, and his grandson, William Paul (pictured from right to left) Paul has been married to Carol (Carolyn) Wells since 1957.

[ 245 ] They met in 1952 when Wells asked Paul to be her escort to her 16th birthday party.

[ 246 ] [ 247 ] They have five children, who were baptized Episcopalian : [ 15 ] Ronald, Lori, Randal , Robert, and Joy. Paul's son Randal (Rand) is the junior United States senator from the state of Kentucky. Raised a Lutheran , Paul later became a Baptist .

[ 248 ] Since 1995, Carol Paul has published the Ron Paul Family Cookbook , a collection of recipes she and her friends contributed, and which was sold in part to support Ron Paul's political campaigns.

[ 249 ] His life and career is the subject of the 2012 film Ron Paul Uprising .

[ 250 ] Paul and his wife reside in Lake Jackson, Texas .

[ 251 ] On September 25, 2020, Paul was hospitalized after slurring his words while speaking during a livestream event. Paul later posted a photo of himself in a hospital bed to his Twitter page, along with the statement "I am doing fine. Thank you for your concern." [ 252 ] In April 2021, following Paul's absence from his daily show, the Ron Paul Liberty Report , his co-host Daniel McAdams revealed Paul's daughter, Lori Pyeatt, had recently died.

[ 253 ] Media relating to Ron Paul [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Ron Paul: Father of the Tea Party , by Jason Rink, 2011 [ 254 ] Ron Paul's rEVOLution: The Man and the Movement He Inspired , by Brian Doherty, 2012 [ 255 ] Films [ edit ] The Housing Bubble , a 2018 documentary starring Ron Paul, and featuring numerous archival clips of his predictions over the years.

America: Freedom to Fascism , 2006 film featuring an interview from Paul.

American Drug War: The Last White Hope , 2007 documentary in which Paul has a cameo appearance.

I.O.U.S.A.

, 2008 documentary featuring Paul among the cast.

Brüno , 2009 film by Sacha Baron Cohen in which Paul has a cameo appearance.

An Inconvenient Tax , 2010 documentary featuring Paul among the cast.

Ron Paul Uprising , 2012 film by William Lewis, about Paul and his campaign for the presidency.

[ 250 ] Atlas Shrugged Part III: Who Is John Galt?

, 2014 adaptation of Atlas Shrugged in which Paul has a cameo appearance.

Bibliography [ edit ] Main article: Ron Paul bibliography Paul, Ron (1981).

Gold, Peace, and Prosperity: The Birth of a New Currency (PDF) . Lake Jackson, TX: Foundation for Rational Economics and Education .

ISBN 978-9110412804 .

OCLC 7877384 . Retrieved July 30, 2007 .

Paul, Ron; Lehrman, Lewis ; U.S. Gold Commission (September 1982).

The Case for Gold: A Minority Report of the U.S. Gold Commission (PDF) . Washington, DC: Cato Institute (2d ed.

Ludwig von Mises Institute , 2007).

ISBN 978-0932790316 .

OCLC 8763972 . Retrieved July 30, 2007 .

Paul, Ron (1983).

Abortion and Liberty . Lake Jackson, TX: Foundation for Rational Economics and Education.

ISBN 978-0912453026 .

OCLC 9682249 .

Paul, Ron (1983).

Ten Myths About Paper Money: And One Myth About Paper Gold . Lake Jackson, TX: Foundation for Rational Economics and Education.

OCLC 11765863 .

Paul, Ron (1984).

Mises and Austrian Economics: A Personal View (PDF) .

Auburn , AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute (2d ed. 2004).

OCLC 19968524 . Retrieved July 30, 2007 .

Paul, Ron (1987).

Freedom Under Siege: The U.S. Constitution After 200 Years . Lake Jackson, TX: Foundation for Rational Economics and Education (2d ed. Ludwig von Mises Institute, 2007).

ISBN 978-1610164443 .

OCLC 19697005 .

Paul, Ron (1990).

Challenge to Liberty: Coming to Grips with the Abortion Issue . Lake Jackson, TX: Ron Paul Enterprises.

OCLC 46960450 .

Paul, Ron (1991).

The Ron Paul Money Book: The Monetary Writings of Congressman Ron Paul . Plantation Publishing.

Paul, Ron (2000).

A Republic, If You Can Keep It . Lake Jackson, TX: Foundation for Rational Economics and Education.

OCLC 45414993 . Archived from the original on September 4, 2011 . Retrieved September 6, 2011 .

Paul, Ron (2002).

The Case for Defending America . Lake Jackson, TX: Foundation for Rational Economics and Education.

OCLC 49744552 .

Paul, Ron (2002).

The Ron Paul – Liberty In Media Awards–2001 . Jersey City, NJ: Palisade Business Press.

ISBN 978-1893958845 .

Paul, Ron (2003).

The Ron Paul – Liberty In Media Awards – Vol. 2–2002 . Jersey City, NJ: Palisade Business Press.

Paul, Ron (2004).

The Ron Paul – Liberty In Media Awards – Vol. 3–2003 . Jersey City, NJ: Palisade Business Press.

ISBN 978-1893958241 .

Upton, Fred ; Paul, Ron (2005).

Indecency in the Media: Rating and Restricting Entertainment Content: Should the House Pass H.R. 3717, the Broadcast Decency Enforcement Act?

. Washington, DC: Congressional Digest Corp.

OCLC 81150568 .

Rangel, Charles B.

; Paul, Ron (2006).

Compulsory National Service: 2006–2007 Policy Debate Topic: Should the All-Volunteer Force be Replaced by Universal, Mandatory National Service?

.

Bethesda , MD: Congressional Digest Corp.

OCLC 84912971 .

Paul, Ron (2007).

A Foreign Policy of Freedom: Peace, Commerce, and Honest Friendship . Lake Jackson, TX: Foundation for Rational Economics and Education .

ISBN 978-0912453002 .

OCLC 145174995 .

Paul, Ron (2008).

Pillars of Prosperity .

Auburn , AL: Ludwig von Mises Institute.

ISBN 978-1933550244 .

Paul, Ron; Haddad, Philip; Marsh, Roger (2008).

Ron Paul Speaks .

Guilford , CN: Lyons Press.

ISBN 978-1599214481 .

OCLC 199459258 .

Paul, Ron (2008).

The Revolution: A Manifesto . New York: Grand Central Publishing .

ISBN 978-0446537513 .

OCLC 191881970 .

Paul, Ron (2009).

End the Fed . New York: Grand Central Publishing .

ISBN 978-0446549196 .

OCLC 318878539 .

Paul, Ron (2011).

Liberty Defined: 50 Essential Issues That Affect Our Freedom . New York: Grand Central Publishing .

ISBN 978-1455501458 .

Paul, Ron (2013).

The School Revolution: A New Answer for Our Broken Education System . New York: Grand Central Publishing .

ISBN 978-1455577170 .

OCLC 828057047 .

Paul, Ron (2015).

Swords Into Plowshares: A Life in Wartime and a Future of Peace and Prosperity . Ron Paul Institute for Peace and Prosperity.

ISBN 978-0996426503 .

Paul, Ron (2017).

The Revolution at Ten Years . Ron Paul Institute for Peace and Prosperity.

ISBN 978-0996426558 .

Other contributions [ edit ] Belloc, Hilaire ; Chesterton, Cecil (2007) [1911].

The Party System . Paul, Ron (foreword).

Norfolk , VA: IHS Press.

ISBN 978-1932528114 .

OCLC 173299105 .

Fortman, Erik; Lavello, Randy (2004).

Webs Of Power: Government Agencies, Secret Societies, & Elite Legacies . Paul, Ron (interview).

Austin , Texas: Van Cleave Publishing.

ISBN 978-0975967003 .

OCLC 61026033 .

Haugen, David M.; Musser, Susan (2007).

Human Embryo Experimentation . Paul, Ron (Chapter 9: No form of stem cell research should be federally funded).

Detroit , MI: Greenhaven Press.

ISBN 978-0737732436 .

OCLC 84152907 .

Haugen, David M., ed. (2007).

National Security . Paul, Ron (Chapter 1–7: The federal debt is a threat to national security).

Detroit , MI: Greenhaven Press.

ISBN 978-0737737615 .

OCLC 144227284 .

Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : Jaeger, James; Baehr, Theodore ; Griffin, G. Edward ; Paul, Ron; Vieira, Edwin (2007).

Fiat Empire: Why the Federal Reserve Violates the U.S. Constitution (DVD). Beverly Hills, CA: Cornerstone-Matrixx Entertainment.

OCLC 192133806 .

Minns, Michael Louis (2001).

How to Survive the IRS . Paul, Ron (foreword). Fort Lee, NJ: Barricade Books.

ISBN 978-1569801703 .

OCLC 44860846 .

Paul, Ron; Hayashi, Terry; Pardo, Victoriano & Fisher, Edwin (August 1, 1969). "Evaluation of Renal Biopsy in Pregnancy Toxemia".

Obstetrics and Gynecology .

34 (2). American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists: 235– 241.

PMID 5798269 .

Paul, Ron (1999).

"Being Pro-Life is Necessary to Defend Liberty" .

International Journal of Sociology and Social Policy .

19 ( 3– 4). MCB University Press, Ltd: 11.

doi : 10.1108/01443339910788712 .

ISSN 0144-333X .

OCLC 89482648 – via Emerald Group Publishing .

Paul, Ron; Bartlett, Roscoe et al. (2001).

The United Nations & the New World Order (Videotape).

Brunswick, OH : American Portrait Films, Inc.

ISBN 978-1573411325 .

OCLC 56793278 .

Pearl, Sandy; Beutel, Bill; Alis, Bob; Weingold, Dave; Paul, Ron; Bartsch, Ed (1980).

Born Again (Videotape). Athens, GA: University of Georgia Instructional Resources Center.

OCLC 7407395 .

Skousen, Mark; Weber, Chris; Ketcher, Michael (1987).

The Closing Door: The End of Financial Privacy in America and How to Protect Yourself . Paul, Ron (introduction).

Bethel , CN: Institute for the Preservation of Wealth (worldcat.org/oclc/35396237 2d ed. 1988).

ISBN 978-0938689034 .

OCLC 17209571 .

Vieira, Edwin Jr. (1983).

Pieces of Eight . Paul, Ron (foreword). Fort Lee, NJ: Sound Dollar Committee.

ISBN 978-0815962267 .

OCLC 9919612 .

von NotHaus, Bernard, ed. (September 1, 2003).

The Liberty Dollar Solution to the Federal Reserve . Paul, Ron (Chapter 21: Abolish the Fed).

Evansville , IN: American Financial Press.

ISBN 978-0967102528 .

See also [ edit ] Criticism of the Federal Reserve Draft Ron Paul movement Libertarian Republican List of federal political scandals in the United States List of peace activists List of politicians affiliated with the Tea Party movement Paulville, Texas Students for Ron Paul References [ edit ] ^ Lau, Ryan (February 3, 2018).

"Ron Paul Attacks Libertarian Leadership in Response to Controversy" .

71Republic . Archived from the original on February 4, 2018 . Retrieved February 3, 2018 .

I paid my lifetime membership, in 1987, with a gold coin, to make a point.

^ Heaster, Sean.

"Ron Paul" . Archived from the original on May 15, 2013 . Retrieved March 2, 2013 .

^ a b "Citizens for a Sound Economy" (PDF) .

Citizens for a Sound Economy . Archived from the original (PDF) on January 14, 2014 . Retrieved June 25, 2013 .

^ Smith, James F. (December 16, 2007).

"Ron Paul's tea party for dollars" .

The Boston Globe .

Archived from the original on October 25, 2012 . Retrieved September 22, 2012 .

^ Green, Joshua (August 5, 2011).

"The Tea Party's Brain" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on October 23, 2012 . Retrieved September 22, 2012 .

^ Rovner, Julie (October 25, 2011).

"Before he delivered for voters, Paul delivered babies" . NPR.

^ Douglas, William (January 5, 2011).

"Father watches with pride as Rand Paul becomes U.S. senator" .

The McClatchy Company .

Archived from the original on August 26, 2012 . Retrieved September 22, 2012 .

^ "Faculty and Staff" .

Mises Institute . Retrieved November 24, 2021 .

^ Bedard, Paul (September 2011).

"Ron Paul Says All Modern Presidents--Including Reagan--Stink" .

US News . Retrieved September 17, 2021 .

^ Trygstad, Kyle (July 12, 2011).

"Ron Paul to Retire from Congress" .

Roll Call .

Archived from the original on September 19, 2012 . Retrieved September 22, 2012 .

^ a b Dinan, Stephen (May 14, 2012).

"Ron Paul ends his hunt for votes" .

The Washington Times .

Archived from the original on August 22, 2012 . Retrieved May 14, 2012 .

^ Molly K., Hooper.

"Retiring Ron Paul to make his case for liberty on college campuses next year" .

The Hill . Archived from the original on November 21, 2012 . Retrieved May 1, 2013 .

^ a b Camia, Catalina (April 29, 2013).

"Ron Paul slams Boston police response to blasts" .

USA Today . Retrieved May 1, 2013 .

^ Anderson, Lisa (November 13, 2007).

"A seller of ideas" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved September 22, 2012 .

[ dead link ] ^ a b c d e f Caldwell, Christopher (July 22, 2007).

"The Antiwar, Anti-Abortion, Anti-Drug-Enforcement-Administration, Anti-Medicare Candidacy of Dr. Ron Paul" .

The New York Times Magazine .

Archived from the original on June 12, 2022 . Retrieved September 22, 2012 .

^ Paul, Ron (2009).

End the Fed . Grand Central Publishing. p.

27 .

ISBN 978-0446568180 . Retrieved April 3, 2016 .

^ "A Brief Look at Ron Paul's Family Tree Genealogy Families.com" .

www.families.com . Retrieved August 27, 2023 .

^ a b Wereschagin, Mike (June 17, 2007).

"Presidential candidate Ron Paul drawing diverse crowds" .

Pittsburgh Tribune-Review . Archived from the original on October 5, 2008.

^ Linton Weeks (December 4, 2011).

"5 Things You May Not Know About Ron Paul" . NPR . Retrieved January 13, 2016 .

^ Halbfinger, David M. (February 5, 2012).

"Ron Paul's Flinty Worldview Was Forged in Early Family Life" .

The New York Times . New York.

Archived from the original on February 6, 2012 . Retrieved February 26, 2012 .

^ a b c Summer, Sean P. (2008).

"Ron Paul biography" .

Pennsylvania Center for the Book . Penn State University Libraries. Archived from the original on October 12, 2011.

^ Guerra, Joey (March 31, 2022).

"The doctor who delivered a baby Selena was presidential hopeful Ron Paul" .

Houston Chronicle .

^ a b c Taylor, Jay (May 11, 2000).

"Taylor Interview with Ron Paul. In Defense of our 'Unalienable Rights ' " .

J. Taylor's Gold & Technology Stocks .

Archived from the original on August 29, 2000.

^ a b c d e Gwynne, S.C. (October 2001).

"Dr. No" .

Texas Monthly .

^ Barrick, Chris (November 2, 2007).

"Ron Paul's Presidential Bid" .

Cross and Crescent .

Lambda Chi Alpha . Archived from the original on November 4, 2007.

^ "Names in the News" .

Tri-City Herald . April 4, 1976.

[ dead link ] ^ House Committee Print (December 2010).

A Concise History of the House of Representatives Committee on Appropriations .

^ Burton, Danielle (March 23, 2007).

"10 Things You Didn't Know About Ron Paul" .

U.S. News & World Report . Archived from the original on May 17, 2007.

^ "In Texas" .

The Bonham Daily Favorite . November 12, 1976.

^ Ayres, B. Drummond Jr. (November 4, 1976).

"Many Democrats in South Winon Carter's Coattails; G.O.P. Weakened in Region at All Political Levels" .

The New York Times .

(subscription required) ^ Douthat, Ross (December 31, 2011).

"Pariahs and Prophets" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on January 9, 2015.

^ Goodwyn, Wade (October 7, 2007).

"Paul Has Long Drawn Support from Unlikely Places" .

the '08 Candidates' First Campaign . NPR.

Archived from the original on December 28, 2007.

^ "Biography" .

Biographical Directory of the United States Congress .

Archived from the original on January 27, 2013.

^ a b "About Ron Paul" .

Ron Paul 2008 . 2007. Archived from the original on October 23, 2007 . Retrieved October 23, 2007 .

^ a b Fund, John H. (January 13, 1997). "The Libertarian Congressman Is Back".

The Wall Street Journal : A18, column 3.

^ a b "Introduction to FREE and NEFL" .

Foundation for Rational Economics and Education . Archived from the original on April 30, 2008.

^ Paul, Ron; Lehrman, Lewis (2007).

The Case for Gold: A Minority Report of the U.S. Gold Commission . Ludwig von Mises Institute.

ISBN 978-1610160537 . Retrieved April 3, 2016 .

^ "Welcome to the US TEA PARTY" .

Citizens for a Sound Economy . Archived from the original on September 13, 2002.

^ Berlau, John. "Now Playing Right Field".

Insight on the News .

^ Paul, Ron (September 19, 1984).

"Some Observations on Four Terms in Congress" .

LewRockwell.com .

^ "Elections of Texas Governors, 1845–2010" (PDF) .

Texas Almanac .

Texas State Historical Association .

^ "Gramm Voices Surprise" .

The Victoria Advocate . May 6, 1984.

^ "Members and leaders of the Texas Legislature" . Legislative Reference Library of Texas. Archived from the original on February 8, 2012.

^ Doherty, Brian (November 1999).

"Eminentoes: A principled maverick" .

American Spectator .

32 (11) . Retrieved February 13, 2008 .

^ Sanchez, Julian; Weigel, David (January 16, 2008).

"Who Wrote Ron Paul's Newsletters?" . Retrieved August 6, 2018 .

^ Moore, Martha T. (December 23, 2011).

"1995 video shows Ron Paul discussing newsletters" .

USA Today .

Archived from the original on December 16, 2013.

^ a b Doyle, Al (July 23, 2007).

"Presidential candidate Paul passionate over hard money: Texas legislator once ran investment coin firm" (PDF) .

Coin World . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 25, 2007 . Retrieved February 14, 2008 .

^ Taylor, Jay (March 17, 2006).

"Congressman Ron Paul Talks About Gold, Oil & the Economy" .

J. Taylor's Gold & Technology Stocks . Retrieved February 14, 2008 .

^ Turner, Wallace (September 4, 1987).

"Major Libertarian Candidate Opposes Party Stand on Abortion" .

The New York Times . Retrieved June 25, 2019 .

^ "Libertarian delegates hear party candidates debate" .

The Bulletin . Bend, OR. September 4, 1987. p. 3.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Timothy Leary and Robert Anton Wilson.

Los Angeles (1988) "On the 25th of September we're going to have, in the room upstairs, a bone fide candidate for the President of the United States. The Libertarian Party, he's running ... his name is Ron Paul. Many of you are probably closet Libertarians..." ( @ 56:27 ) ^ Caldwell, Christopher (July 22, 2007).

"The Antiwar, Pro-Abortion, Anti-Drug-Enforcement-Administration, Anti-Medicare Candidacy of Dr. Ron Paul." New York Times . Archived from the original.

^ Gillespie, Nick (December 9, 2011).

"Five Myths About Ron Paul." Washington Post . Archived from the original.

^ Saunders, Debra.

"Ron Paul: Turn On, Tune In, Drop Out." Real Clear Politics (December 22, 2011). Archived from the original.

^ a b Rosenthal, Andrew (October 17, 1988).

"Now for a Real Underdog: Ron Paul, Libertarian, for President" .

The New York Times . Retrieved March 21, 2008 .

^ "1988 VOTE: The Final Word" .

The New York Times . December 29, 1988 . Retrieved March 21, 2008 .

^ Nugent, Franklin (November 7, 1988). "If You Don't Like Bush Or Dukakis ... Libertarian Candidate Offers Common-Sense Policies For America".

St. Louis Post-Dispatch . St. Louis, MO: 3C.

^ Leip, Dave (November 7, 1988).

"1988 Presidential General Election Results – North Carolina" .

Dave Leip's Atlas of U.S. Presidential Elections . p. 1 . Retrieved March 21, 2014 .

^ Elvin, John (October 16, 1991).

"Another Ron" .

The Washington Times . Archived from the original on June 29, 2012 . Retrieved June 25, 2008 .

^ Rothbard, Murray (January 10, 1992).

"Weighing the Buchanan factors; Ideals for the heartland" .

LewRockwell.com . Retrieved June 25, 2008 .

^ "Paul Vows to Remain a Republican in Race" .

San Francisco Chronicle . Associated Press. February 9, 2007. Archived from the original on April 11, 2008 . Retrieved February 12, 2007 .

^ Martin, Gary (May 22, 2007).

"Paul gets primary challenger" .

San Antonio Express-News . Archived from the original on May 11, 2008 . Retrieved July 11, 2007 .

^ "2008 Republican Party Primary Election" .

Texas Secretary of State . March 4, 2008. Archived from the original on July 9, 2008 . Retrieved March 5, 2008 .

^ Gamboa, Suzanne (November 5, 2008) "Olson upends Lampson in closely watched race" . Archived from the original on December 8, 2008 . Retrieved November 5, 2008 .

, Dallas Morning News. Retrieved November 7, 2008.

^ Pershing, Ben (March 3, 2010).

"Ron Paul easily fends off primary challenges" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on January 12, 2012 . Retrieved July 17, 2010 .

^ "Ron Paul attracts loyal following" .

The Detroit News . Retrieved September 14, 2011 .

Alt URL Archived May 6, 2014, at the Wayback Machine ^ Good, Chris (August 5, 2011).

"The End of the Ron Paul Era?" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved August 9, 2011 .

^ a b Fahrenthold, David A. (December 26, 2011).

"Ron Paul's House Record Marked by Bold Strokes, and Futility" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved January 30, 2012 .

^ Bresnahan, John (October 10, 2007).

"Paul says Americans' freedoms under siege" .

Politico . Retrieved October 10, 2007 .

^ Pace, David (November 6, 1997).

"17 in House seek probe to impeach president" .

The Record . The Associated Press . Retrieved March 4, 2021 – via Newspapers.com.

^ a b Hutcheson, Ron (November 17, 1997).

"Some House Republicans can't wait for elections" .

Asheville Citizen-Times . Knight-Rider Newspapers – via Newspapers.com.

^ Barkham, Patrick (November 18, 1998).

"Clinton impeachment timeline" .

The Guardian . Retrieved March 6, 2021 .

^ "Roll Call 498 Roll Call 498, Bill Number: H. Res. 581, 105th Congress, 2nd Session" .

clerk.house.gov . Office of the Clerk, U.S. House of Representatives. October 8, 1998 . Retrieved March 1, 2021 .

^ "Roll Call 546 Roll Call 546, Bill Number: H. Res. 611, 105th Congress, 2nd Session" .

Office of the Clerk, U.S. House of Representatives . December 19, 1998 . Retrieved March 6, 2021 .

^ "Roll Call 545 Roll Call 545, Bill Number: H. Res. 611, 105th Congress, 2nd Session" .

Office of the Clerk, U.S. House of Representatives . December 19, 1998 . Retrieved March 6, 2021 .

^ "Roll Call 544 Roll Call 544, Bill Number: H. Res. 611, 105th Congress, 2nd Session" .

Office of the Clerk, U.S. House of Representatives . December 19, 1998 . Retrieved March 6, 2021 .

^ Washington, U. S. Capitol Room H154; p:225-7000, DC 20515-6601 (December 19, 1998).

"Roll Call 543 Roll Call 543, Bill Number: H. Res. 611, 105th Congress, 2nd Session" .

Office of the Clerk, U.S. House of Representatives . Retrieved March 6, 2021 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ "Situation in Iraq and Impeachment | C-SPAN.org" .

www.c-span.org .

^ "Frequently Asked Questions" .

Republican Liberty Caucus . 2002 . Retrieved March 17, 2007 .

^ "The Congressional Wildlife Refuge Caucus" .

National Wildlife Refuge Association. January 15, 2008. Archived from the original on December 28, 2007 . Retrieved February 13, 2008 .

^ "Who is Ron Paul?" .

U.S. House of Representatives . Archived from the original on September 24, 2007 . Retrieved September 27, 2007 .

^ Sudeep Reddy (December 16, 2010).

"Q&A: Ron Paul on His New Perch" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved February 23, 2011 .

^ Martin, Gary (March 12, 2007).

"Paul formally launches presidential bid" .

San Antonio Express-News . Archived from the original on December 5, 2008 . Retrieved March 13, 2007 .

^ "Ron Paul's Mistreatment by Mass Media" .

Blip.tv . October 26, 2007. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012 . Retrieved December 21, 2011 .

^ Seelye, Katherine Q.; Wayne, Leslie (November 11, 2007).

"The Web Takes Ron Paul for a Ride" .

The New York Times . Retrieved February 27, 2012 .

^ a b c Wilson, Chris (May 9, 2007).

"Ron Paul's Online Rise" .

U.S. News & World Report . Retrieved December 3, 2007 .

^ Klein, Rick (May 5, 2007).

"The Ron Paul Effect" .

ABC News . Retrieved February 13, 2008 .

^ Englehardt, Tom (July 23, 2007).

"Why the U.S. Military Loves Ron Paul" .

the Nation . Archived from the original on June 30, 2009 . Retrieved February 13, 2008 .

^ "Paul #1, Obama #2" .

Ron Paul 2008 . May 20, 2007 . Retrieved September 27, 2007 .

^ Stephanopoulos, George (July 6, 2007).

"Ron Paul Tops McCain in Cash on Hand" .

ABC News . Archived from the original on September 30, 2007 . Retrieved July 7, 2007 .

^ Malcolm, Andrew (February 1, 2008).

"News shocker: Ron Paul was biggest GOP fundraiser last quarter" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved February 13, 2008 .

^ "Ron Paul Campaign Money" . Race for the White House.

OpenSecrets . February 1, 2008. Archived from the original on February 13, 2008 . Retrieved February 13, 2008 .

^ Johnson, Craig; Wilkerson, James E.

"Republican Caucus History" .

Des Moines Register . Archived from the original on July 7, 2012 . Retrieved February 27, 2012 .

^ "Presidential Primary Election January 8, 2008" .

New Hampshire Secretary of State . Archived from the original on July 6, 2008 . Retrieved January 11, 2008 .

^ "2008 Primary Season Election Results" .

The New York Times . Retrieved February 27, 2012 .

^ "CNN Politics: Election Center 2008" .

CNN . Retrieved February 27, 2012 .

^ Hume, Brit (March 5, 2008). "Fox News Channel Special Report with Brit Hume".

Fox News .

^ Elkins, Sarah (March 19, 2008).

" ' I Feel Badly about Just Quitting': Ron Paul on Why He's Still Running for President" .

The Daily Beast . Retrieved February 27, 2012 .

^ Malcolm, Andrew (March 5, 2008).

"Ron Paul Lives!" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved February 27, 2012 .

^ "Paul Says He's Still in the Race to 'Influence Ideas' " .

CNN.com . March 10, 2008 . Retrieved February 27, 2012 .

^ "Paul Backers Claim Chunk of State Party".

Fort Worth Star-Telegram . Los Angeles Times. March 24, 2008.

^ Mannies, Jo (March 18, 2008). "Ron Paul's Missouri Backers Muscle Up: They Say Caucus Strategy was to Get GOP to Return to Roots".

St. Louis Post-Dispatch .

^ von Sternberg, Bob; Duchschere, Kevin (April 8, 2008). "Paul Backers Manage to Nab Delegates—in Minnesota and Elsewhere, Their Tactics Raised Eyebrows, but They're Hoping to Earn Him Stage Time at the GOP National Convention".

Star Tribune . p. 1B.

^ Coolican, J. Patrick (April 12, 2008).

"Ron Paul Campaign Dominates Convention: Meeting Reveals a Party, in This State at Least, Far from United" .

Las Vegas Sun . Retrieved February 27, 2012 .

^ "Ron Paul Backers Outmaneuver Nevada GOP Establishment" . KOLO-TV.

Associated Press . April 28, 2008. Archived from the original on February 15, 2012 . Retrieved February 27, 2012 .

^ Dubner, Stephen J. (November 14, 2008).

"Ron Paul Answers Your Questions: Part One" .

Freakonomics.com . Retrieved February 2, 2012 .

^ "Paul suspends presidential campaign; forms new organization" .

CNN . June 12, 2008. Archived from the original on May 25, 2012 . Retrieved July 25, 2008 .

^ "Ron Paul urges voters to skip McCain, Obama" .

CNN . September 10, 2008. Archived from the original on April 8, 2016 . Retrieved September 10, 2008 .

^ Kugel, Allison (October 15, 2008).

"Ron Paul: Washington's True Maverick Talks Bailouts, the United States Constitution and Re-Making the US Dollar" .

PR.com . Retrieved June 16, 2011 .

^ "Ron Paul & Ralph Nader interview by Wolf Blitzer" . CNN. September 10, 2008 . Retrieved February 27, 2012 .

^ Paul, Ron (September 22, 2008).

"A New Alliance" .

Campaign for Liberty . Archived from the original on December 12, 2008 . Retrieved September 22, 2008 .

^ "2008 Official Presidential General Election Results" (PDF) . U.S. Federal Election Commission. January 22, 2009.

^ Madison, Lucy (February 28, 2011).

"Ron Paul and Herman Cain lead the pack in Tea Party Patriots straw poll" .

CBS News . Retrieved April 5, 2011 .

^ "Ron Paul kicks off exploratory committee for 2012 bid" .

NBC News . April 26, 2011 . Retrieved April 26, 2011 .

^ "Ron Paul officially announces 2012 presidential exploratory committee" .

The Hill . April 26, 2011.

Archived from the original on April 8, 2016 . Retrieved April 26, 2011 .

^ Taylor, Alexandra (May 5, 2011).

"FOX/SC Debate Features Just 5 of 2012 GOP" . Archived from the original on May 9, 2011 . Retrieved May 5, 2011 .

^ "Rep. Ron Paul announces candidacy for president" .

CNN . May 13, 2011. Archived from the original on September 22, 2016 . Retrieved May 13, 2011 .

^ Falcone, Michael; Walter, Amy; Jaffe, Matthew; Volack, Jason (August 13, 2011).

"Bachmann Wins Ames Straw Poll, Ron Paul in Close Second" .

ABC News . Retrieved August 14, 2011 .

^ Steel, Alex (June 17, 2011).

"Ron Paul's VP Prospect?" .

TheStreet .

^ Rutenberg, Jim; Oppel, Richard A. Jr. (December 20, 2011).

"New Focus on Incendiary Words in Paul's Newsletters" .

The New York Times .

^ Smith, Ron.

"Ron Paul, aka the invisible candidate" .

The Baltimore Sun .

Archived from the original on April 18, 2016.

^ Ramsey, Bruce.

"Ron Paul Ignored" .

The Seattle Times . Archived from the original on October 19, 2011.

^ James, Frank.

"Ron Paul Wears Invisibility Cloak In News Media's Eyes" . NPR.

^ Pitt, David (May 11, 2018).

"Court upholds convictions of 2012 Ron Paul campaign staffers" .

Associated Press .

^ Gold, Matea (August 27, 2014).

"Former Iowa state senator pleads guilty in Ron Paul endorsement-for-pay scheme" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved August 27, 2014 .

^ Jacobs, Jennifer (January 12, 2012).

"2012 GOP Caucus Count Unresolved" .

Des Moines Register . Archived from the original on January 21, 2012 . Retrieved January 21, 2012 .

^ "Iowa Republican Caucuses" .

The New York Times .

^ "New Hampshire – Summary Vote Results" .

Associated Press . January 11, 2012 . Retrieved January 11, 2012 .

^ "Gingrich Wins SC GOP Primary; Romney Second" .

News4Jax.com . January 21, 2012. Archived from the original on May 10, 2012 . Retrieved January 22, 2012 .

^ "Florida Election Watch" . Florida Department of State: Division of Elections . Retrieved February 1, 2012 .

^ "Florida Election Watch: Candidate County Reporting" . Florida Department of State: Division of Elections. Archived from the original on February 1, 2012 . Retrieved February 1, 2012 .

^ "Google Politics & Elections" . January 31, 2012. Archived from the original on February 1, 2012 . Retrieved January 31, 2012 .

^ Welch, William M. (February 5, 2012).

"Mitt Romney wins Nevada GOP caucuses" .

USA Today . Archived from the original on February 8, 2012 . Retrieved February 5, 2012 .

^ "2012 Colorado Caucuses" . Fox News. October 1, 2006. Archived from the original on November 16, 2012 . Retrieved March 10, 2013 .

^ "2012 Missouri Primary" . Fox News. October 1, 2006. Archived from the original on November 16, 2012 . Retrieved March 10, 2013 .

^ "2012 Minnesota Caucuses" . Fox News. October 1, 2006. Archived from the original on November 15, 2012 . Retrieved March 10, 2013 .

^ DeBord, Matthew (March 5, 2012).

"Meet Mark Spitznagel, Ron Paul's L.A. hedge-fund guy" .

KPCC . Retrieved April 10, 2015 .

^ Good, Chris (May 14, 2012).

"Ron Paul to Stop Campaigning in New States" .

ABC News . Retrieved May 14, 2012 .

^ a b Roth, Caroline (June 19, 2012).

"RNC Faces Suit from Paul Backers" .

National Journal . Archived from the original on June 19, 2012 . Retrieved June 19, 2012 .

^ "Ron Paul interview with Wolf Blitzer" .

CNN (The Situation Room) . June 19, 2012 . Retrieved June 19, 2012 .

^ a b Harwood, John (August 25, 2012).

"Libertarian legion stands ready to accept torch from Paul" .

The New York Times .

^ Mehta, Seema (August 28, 2012).

"Ron Paul supporters walk out of GOP convention" .

Los Angeles Times .

^ Friess, Steve (August 26, 2012).

"Ron Paul delegates get nosebleed seats" .

Politico .

^ Dunham, Richard (August 27, 2012).

"Ron Paul delegates get worse seats than Republicans from Guam, Samoa" .

Houston Chronicle .

^ David, Javier (October 11, 2012).

"Ron Paul won't endorse Romney, cites more of the same" .

CNBC .

^ "2012 presidential election results state by state" .

The Green Papers . November 11, 2012.

^ a b c s:Ron Paul's 1987 Resignation Letter to the RNC ^ a b Roberts, Jerry (September 17, 1988). "Libertarian Candidate Rolls Out His Values".

San Francisco Chronicle .

^ a b c Nichols, Bruce (March 15, 1987). "Ron Paul Wants to Get Americans Thinking: Republican-Turned-Libertarian Seeks Presidency".

The Dallas Morning News .

^ a b c d Kutzmann, David M. (May 24, 1988). "Small Party Battles Big Government Libertarian Candidate Opposes Intrusion into Private Lives".

San Jose Mercury News : 12A.

^ a b Kennedy, J. Michael (May 10, 1988).

"Politics 88: Hopeless Presidential Race: Libertarian Plods On – Alone and Unheard" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved January 31, 2012 .

^ Paolanonio, S.A. (September 13, 1987). "Libertarian Seeks Presidency Third Party Tries a 5th Campaign".

The Philadelphia Inquirer : E02.

^ a b Robison, Clay (February 15, 1996). "Campaign 96/U.S. House/Paul Favors Repealing Federal Anti-Drug Laws".

Houston Chronicle .

^ "Two-Party 'Charade' Must End, Ron Paul Says" .

CNN . September 10, 2008. Archived from the original on January 1, 2012 . Retrieved February 1, 2012 .

^ Paul, Ron (September 22, 2008).

"A New Alliance" .

Ron Paul's Campaign for Liberty . Archived from the original on September 23, 2008 . Retrieved February 1, 2012 .

^ Moran, Terry (January 2, 2012).

"Does Ron Paul See Himself in the Oval Office? 'Not Really?

' " .

ABC News . Retrieved January 31, 2012 .

^ "Interview with Ron Paul" .

CNN State of the Union with Candy Crowley . June 5, 2011 . Retrieved February 1, 2012 .

^ McCormick, John; Lerer, Lisa (December 31, 2011).

"Paul Sees Top-Two Finish in Iowa while Wary of Backing Rivals" .

Bloomberg News . Retrieved January 31, 2012 .

^ "Ron Paul Talks Presidential Politics, Policy" .

Fox News Sunday . November 6, 2011. Archived from the original on December 9, 2011 . Retrieved January 31, 2012 .

^ "Is John Kerry a Liberal?" . Retrieved March 25, 2010 .

^ Keith Poole, "Estimating a Basic Space From A Set of Issue Scales," American Journal of Political Science , 42 (July 1998), pp. 954–93.

^ Poole, Keith T.

"Ideological Locations of 2012 Republican Presidential Candidates (Updated January 5, 2012)" .

Voteview Blog . Archived from the original on January 21, 2012 . Retrieved January 24, 2012 .

^ House, Billy (February 24, 2011).

"The Most Conservative Members of the House: Each is a Confirmed Budget Hawk and as a Group They are not above Being a Little Strident" .

National Journal Daily . Archived from the original on July 23, 2013 . Retrieved January 24, 2012 .

^ "Vote Ratings 2010: How Did Your Member of Congress Vote?" .

National Journal . Archived from the original on February 16, 2012 . Retrieved January 24, 2012 .

^ "Ron Paul's Ratings and Positions" .

votesmart.org .

^ Paul, Ron (February 5, 2007).

"Political Power and the Rule of Law" .

Texas Straight Talk . Archived from the original on March 27, 2012 . Retrieved January 28, 2012 .

^ Campbell, Walter (July 10, 2008).

"Birchers celebrate 50th" .

La Cañada Valley Sun . Retrieved September 16, 2021 – via latimes.com.

^ Kirchick, James (December 22, 2011).

"Ron Paul: The new teflon candidate?" .

CBS News . Retrieved September 16, 2021 .

^ Paul, Ron (May 22, 2007).

"Patriotism" .

Congressional Record .

U.S. House of Representatives . Retrieved October 23, 2007 .

^ Paul, Ron (January 6, 2009).

"Opportunities for Peace and Nonintervention" .

LewRockwell.com .

^ "Ron Paul Responds to President Obama's Middle East Speech" (Press release). Archived from the original on May 23, 2011.

^ Kirchick, James (May 9, 2014).

"Is Rand Paul a Secret Hawk? Or Maybe Not a Total Dove?" .

The Daily Beast . Retrieved March 16, 2020 .

^ Paul, Ron (December 9, 2004).

"What Has NED Done in Ukraine?" .

lewrockwell.com . Retrieved March 16, 2020 .

^ Kirchick, James (March 16, 2014).

"Ron Paul Is Supporting Russia's Illegal Occupation of Crimea" .

The Daily Beast . Archived from the original on March 25, 2022 . Retrieved April 8, 2022 .

^ Journal, Lucia Graves, National (July 21, 2014).

"Ron Paul Is Putin's New Best Friend" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on November 1, 2021 . Retrieved April 8, 2022 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Jackson, Jon (March 7, 2022).

"Ron Paul says Putin replaced COVID as excuse for government's failures" .

Newsweek .

Archived from the original on April 2, 2022 . Retrieved April 8, 2022 .

He went on to write that sanctions imposed on Russia gives the government an excuse to raise gas prices, even while it doesn't ban Russian oil imports. Paul also suggested that the Putin-ordered invasion gave the Federal Reserve an opportunity to postpone what he said were "planned interest rate increases." "The Ukraine crisis also provides an excuse for Congress to do what Congress does best: increase federal spending. President Biden has requested Congress provide an additional $10 billion in emergency military aid to Ukraine," the former congressman wrote. "Congress will likely quickly approve the President's request. This will not likely be the last time Congress rushes billions of 'emergency' money to Ukraine." He theorized another consequence of the invasion could be lobbyists for military industries seeking to expand the country's military budget, in which Congress would likely agree to, he said.

^ "Shut Down the TSA! – Ron Paul Institute for Peace and Prosperity" . February 4, 2019.

^ Paul, Ron (June 13, 2002).

"Restoring First Amendment Protections of Religion and Religious Speech to the U.S. House of Representatives" . Archived from the original on December 5, 2010 . Retrieved December 8, 2010 .

^ Will, George F (February 18, 2007).

"A Cheerful Anachronism" .

Newsweek . Archived from the original on April 8, 2016 . Retrieved March 17, 2008 .

^ Copeland, Libby (July 9, 2006).

"Congressman Paul's Legislative Strategy? He'd Rather Say Not" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved October 23, 2007 .

^ Kartch, John (April 24, 2007).

"Rep. Ron Paul Signs Presidential Taxpayer Protection Pledge" . Americans for Tax Freedom. Archived from the original on October 11, 2007 . Retrieved October 23, 2007 .

^ Paul, Ron (January 30, 2003).

"End the Income Tax – Pass the Liberty Amendment" .

Congressional Record .

U.S. House of Representatives . Archived from the original on March 1, 2008 . Retrieved March 8, 2008 .

^ "Paul Want Less Government, Less Taxes, and Abolish IRS" .

Antiwar President . September 13, 2007. Archived from the original on July 5, 2007 . Retrieved October 23, 2007 .

^ "Final vote results for roll call 277" . Clerk of the House of Representatives. April 15, 2011 . Retrieved April 23, 2011 .

^ Five Myths About the Gold Standard, Congressman Ron Paul, Congressional Record. 97th Congress, First Session. Volume 127, Part II. February 23, 1981. No. 28: "I believe such a standard to be not only desirable and feasible, but absolutely necessary if we aim to avoid the very real possibility of hyperinflation in the near future, and economic collapse. But in Washington today we have five myths about the gold standard." ^ Menza, Justin (August 24, 2012).

"GOP Appeased Me on Gold Standard: Rep. Ron Paul" .

CNBC .

^ "H.R. 1148: Federal Reserve Board Abolition Act" .

106th Congress, 1999-03-17 . Retrieved January 23, 2012 .

^ "H.R. 1094: Federal Reserve Board Abolition Act" .

112th Congress, 2011-03-15 . Retrieved January 23, 2012 .

^ Paul, Ron (September 11, 2007).

"Question and Answer session following Keynote speech at the Johns Hopkins Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies forum "Foreign Policy: A View from a Presidential Candidate" " .

Ron Paul Audio . Archived from the original on March 24, 2009 . Retrieved October 23, 2007 .

^ a b "Ron Paul is the Only GOP Candidate Who Gets it Right on Cuba" .

Mic . January 2012.

^ "Ron Paul on Free Trade" .

www.ontheissues.org .

^ a b "Ron Paul calls Tulsi Gabbard 'very best' Democratic candidate" .

Washington Examiner . May 6, 2019.

^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : "Texas Straight Talk (01/06/2012)" .

YouTube . January 18, 2012 . Retrieved February 5, 2013 .

^ Anchor: David Asman (November 4, 2009).

America's Nightly Scoreboard .  7 minutes in. Fox Business Network.

^ Paul, Ron (May 5, 2004).

"Free market Medicine" .

LewRockwell.com . Retrieved November 14, 2008 .

^ Malcolm, Arthur (April 30, 2009).

"Ron Paul pooh-poohs swine flu; yet another grab for more Fed control!" .

Los Angeles Times . Archived from the original on April 8, 2016 . Retrieved October 7, 2009 .

^ Paul, Ron.

"Issue: Border Security and Immigration Reform" .

Ron Paul 2008 . Archived from the original on June 4, 2010 . Retrieved June 20, 2010 .

^ Samuel, Brett (January 8, 2019).

"Ron Paul: Remove incentives for illegal immigrants instead of building border wall" .

The Hill . Retrieved October 21, 2020 .

^ Paul, Ron (July 15, 2004).

"End the Two-Party Monopoly!" .

Congressional Record . House of Representatives. Archived from the original on September 30, 2007 . Retrieved October 23, 2007 .

^ "H.R. 2139: To Repeal the National Voter Registration Act of 1993" .

108th Congress, 2003-05-15 . Retrieved January 23, 2012 .

^ Paul, Ron (November 19, 2012).

"Ron Paul: 'Secession is a deeply American principle ' " .

Politico .

^ Paul, Ron (November 19, 2012).

"Secession: Are we free to go?" .

Texas Straight Talk . Archived from the original on December 12, 2012.

^ Lofton, John (August 2007).

"Excerpts From Our Exclusive Ron Paul Interview" .

American View . Archived from the original on October 8, 2007 . Retrieved October 23, 2007 .

^ Rockwell, Lew (December 13, 2010).

"Ron Paul, Defender of Human Dignity" .

LewRockwell.com .

^ "Ron Paul on Education: Republican Representative (TX-14)" .

On the Issues . September 1, 2007 . Retrieved October 23, 2007 .

^ Shoenberg, Shira (December 20, 2011).

"Ron Paul favors states' rights on same-sex marriage issue" .

The Boston Globe .

^ Paul, Ron (June 5, 2007).

"Transcript of June 5 "CNN/WMUR/ New Hampshire Union Leader " Republican presidential debate" . CNN . Retrieved November 14, 2008 .

^ Eddlem, Thomas R. (May 2, 2005).

"Who had the right to rule?" .

The New American . American Opinion Publishing, Inc . Retrieved October 5, 2007 .

^ Murtagh, Joseph (June 28, 2007).

"An Interview with Presidential Candidate Congressman Ron Paul" . Muckraker Report.

Team Liberty . Archived from the original on October 18, 2007 . Retrieved September 27, 2007 .

^ FITSNews (November 28, 2018).

"Ron Paul: Allow Americans to 'Opt Out' of Abortion and War" . Retrieved January 29, 2020 .

^ Paul, Ron.

"The Trouble With the '64 Civil Rights Act" .

LewRockwell.com . Retrieved November 14, 2015 .

^ "Ron Paul on the Issues" .

The Washington Post . Archived from the original on February 20, 2009 . Retrieved December 22, 2011 .

^ Paul, Ron (April 17, 2004).

"The War on Drugs is a War on Doctors" .

Congressional Record . U.S. House of Representatives. Archived from the original on August 2, 2008 . Retrieved November 14, 2008 .

^ "H.R. 2592" . Library of Congress. July 23, 2001. Archived from the original on July 22, 2013 . Retrieved November 14, 2008 .

^ Kelsey Harclerode (March 2012).

"What Would President Ron Paul's Drug Policy Look Like?" .

The Atlantic .

^ Frank, Barney (2002).

"Frank Calls for Action on Medical Marijuana Legislation" . United States House of Representatives. Archived from the original on March 29, 2009.

^ "Thomas (Library of Congress): HR 4777" . September 22, 2006. Archived from the original on October 18, 2014 . Retrieved August 17, 2020 – via Thomas.loc.gov.

^ "Thomas (Library of Congress): HR 4411" . July 13, 2006. Archived from the original on November 25, 2008 . Retrieved August 17, 2020 – via Thomas.loc.gov.

^ "Ron Paul Tweets Racist Cartoon, Blames Staffer In Latest Deflection Of Bigoted Remarks Attributed To Libertarian Hero" .

CBS News . July 2, 2018 . Retrieved February 19, 2023 .

^ Riotta, Chris (July 2, 2018).

"Ron Paul tweets, then deletes racist cartoon" .

The Independent . Retrieved February 19, 2023 .

^ Mathis-Lilley, Ben (July 2, 2018).

"Ron Paul Becomes Latest Republican to Post Literal Nazi Content" .

Slate . Retrieved February 19, 2023 .

^ Wyler, Grace (April 12, 2013).

"Ron Paul Is Launching His Own Foreign Policy Institute" .

BusinessInsider.com . Retrieved May 12, 2013 .

^ "Ron Paul launches libertarian-edged home school curriculum" .

Fox News . April 8, 2013.

^ Weiner, Rachel (June 10, 2013).

"Ron Paul praises Edward Snowden" .

The Washington Post .

^ Moody, Chris (June 11, 2015).

"Ron Paul's apocalypse is now" . CNN . Retrieved September 22, 2015 .

^ Hook, Janet (May 21, 2015).

"Ron Paul Ads Warn of Financial Crisis" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved September 22, 2015 .

^ Pei, Anna (March 29, 2017).

"Ron Paul: The 'euphoria' in the markets has passed" . CNBC.

^ Lai, Brian (September 26, 2017). "Terrorism and Foreign Policy".

Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Politics .

doi : 10.1093/acrefore/9780190228637.013.491 .

ISBN 978-0190228637 .

^ "Ron Paul: Bring troops home from Syria now" .

USA Today .

^ "Ron Paul blasts Trump: 'Foreign policy is in shambles' " .

Washington Examiner . January 3, 2020 . Retrieved January 29, 2020 .

^ "Don't trust Trump on Iran: Ron Paul" .

Orange County Register . January 6, 2020 . Retrieved January 29, 2020 .

^ "Ron Paul Channel" .

^ Wing, Nick (July 9, 2013).

" 'The Ron Paul Channel' Launching This Summer, Wants You To 'Turn Off Your TV,' 'Turn On The Truth' " .

The Huffington Post .

^ "Ron Paul Ends Relationship with Voices of Liberty – Campaign for Liberty" .

Campaign for Liberty . Retrieved April 3, 2016 .

^ Gillespie, Nick (August 14, 2015).

"Updated: Ron Paul Endorses Son Rand as 'Best Hope' to Lead Country" .

Reason . Retrieved March 10, 2017 .

^ Girdusky, Ryan (February 5, 2016).

" "No libertarian": Ron Paul slams Ted Cruz, says Sanders is more pro-free market" .

Red Alert Politics .

^ Hensch, Mark (October 3, 2016).

"Ron Paul to independents: Vote Green Party" .

The Hill . Retrieved August 15, 2017 .

^ Patrick Svitek (January 9, 2017).

"Rogue Texas elector explains decision to back Ron Paul" .

The Texas Tribune .

^ Schmidt, Kiersten; Andrews, Wilson (December 19, 2016).

"A Historic Number of Electors Defected, and Most Were Supposed to Vote for Clinton" .

The New York Times .

^ Patrick Svitek; Bobby Blanchard; Aliyya Swaby (December 19, 2016).

"Texas electors cast 36 votes for Trump, 1 for Kasich, 1 for Ron Paul" .

The Texas Tribune .

^ "Passings: John Hospers" .

Los Angeles Times . June 14, 2011 . Retrieved November 26, 2023 .

^ "President Kennedy?" .

YouTube . April 6, 2023 . Retrieved August 19, 2024 .

^ "Elon Musk asks this ex-Congressman to join second Trump term" .

Hindustan Times . November 2, 2024.

^ "Ron Paul vows to join Elon Musk, help eliminate government waste in a Trump admin" .

The Hill . November 5, 2024.

^ Paul, Carol (March 16, 2007).

"The American Dream – Through the Eyes of Mrs. Ron Paul" .

Daily Paul . Archived from the original on October 11, 2007 . Retrieved March 22, 2008 .

^ Sheri & Bob Stritof.

"Carol and Ron Paul Marriage Profile".

Archived October 24, 2016, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Ron Paul" .

Biography . A&E Television Networks. Archived from the original on April 12, 2016 . Retrieved April 3, 2016 .

^ Husna Haq (May 13, 2011).

"Election 101: Ron Paul sets sights on 2012. Ten things to know about him. – What is his family and religious background?" .

The Christian Science Monitor . Retrieved August 9, 2011 .

^ McDevitt, Caitlin (November 29, 2011).

"Ron Paul's family publishes 2012 cookbook" .

Politico . Retrieved June 16, 2013 .

. For earlier versions see: Paul, Carol (1997).

The Ron Paul family cookbook . Clute, TX. p. 16.

OCLC 793200538 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) and Paul, Carol (2002).

The Ron Paul family spring cookbook: including "The American dream, through the eyes of Mrs. Ron Paul" . Clute, TX. p. 32.

OCLC 793200539 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b Lewis, Debbie (June 2, 2012).

"Dr. Ron Paul: Systematic extinction of the GOP" .

PRonlinenews.com . Archived from the original on April 20, 2016.

^ Craig Hlavaty; Houston Chronicle (July 2, 2013).

"Vince Vaughn spotted mingling at Ron Paul's barbecue in Lake Jackson" .

Houston Chronicle . Retrieved April 3, 2016 .

^ Ross, Lee; Henney, Megan (September 25, 2020).

"Ron Paul hospitalized for 'precautionary' reasons in Texas, Fox News has learned" .

Fox News . Retrieved September 25, 2020 .

^ "Lori (Paul) Pyeatt Requiescat in pace" . April 6, 2021.

^ Sanneh, Kelefa .

"Party Crasher" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved April 18, 2021 .

^ Scribd Ron Paul's rEVOLution: The Man and the Movement He Inspired by Brian Doherty Archived March 6, 2016, at the Wayback Machine External links [ edit ] Ron Paul at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Data from Wikidata Ron Paul at IMDb Appearances on C-SPAN Fact-checking at PolitiFact .com Issue positions and quotes at On the Issues Congress Profile at OpenSecrets Profile at GovTrack Biography at the Biographical Directory of the United States Congress Financial information (federal office) at the Federal Election Commission Profile at Vote Smart Ron Paul TV . Ron Paul presidential candidate media and Internet video campaign.

U.S. House of Representatives Preceded by Bob Casey Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Texas's 22nd congressional district 1976–1977 Succeeded by Bob Gammage Preceded by Bob Gammage Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Texas's 22nd congressional district 1979–1985 Succeeded by Tom DeLay Preceded by Greg Laughlin Member of the U.S. House of Representatives from Texas's 14th congressional district 1997–2013 Succeeded by Randy Weber Party political offices Preceded by David Bergland Libertarian nominee for President of the United States 1988 Succeeded by Andre Marrou U.S. order of precedence (ceremonial) Preceded by John Mica as Former US Representative Order of precedence of the United States as Former US Representative Succeeded by Michael C. Burgess as Former US Representative v t e Ron Paul Political positions Electoral history 1988 presidential campaign 2008 presidential campaign 2012 presidential campaign Legislation Sponsored legislation American Sovereignty Restoration Act Family Education Freedom Act Federal Reserve Transparency Act Sanctity of Life Act Books Bibliography A Foreign Policy of Freedom: Peace, Commerce, and Honest Friendship The Revolution: A Manifesto End the Fed Liberty Defined Organizations Foundation for Rational Economics and Education (FREE) Campaign for Liberty Students for Ron Paul Citizens for a Sound Economy Related Draft Ron Paul movement Ron Paul newsletters Moneybomb Rand Paul Paulville, Texas Tea Party movement ( 2009 Tea Party protests ) Category Links to related articles v t e Libertarian Party Chairpersons of the LNC D. Nolan S. Nolan Crane Bergland Clark Grant VerHagen Turney Walter Gingell Dasbach Bergland Lark Neale Dixon Redpath Neale Sarwark Bishop-Henchman Bilyeu McArdle Nekhaila Presidential tickets 1972 Hospers / Nathan 1976 MacBride / Bergland 1980 Clark / Koch 1984 Bergland / Lewis 1988 Paul / Marrou 1992 Marrou / Lord 1996 Browne / Jorgensen 2000 Browne / Olivier 2004 Badnarik / Campagna 2008 Barr / Root 2012 Johnson / Gray 2016 Johnson / Weld 2020 Jorgensen / Cohen 2024 Oliver / ter Maat Parties by state and territory State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Territory District of Columbia Conventions 1972 (Denver) 1973 (Strongsville) 1974 (Irving) 1975 (New York City) 1976 (Washington, D.C.) 1977 (San Francisco) 1978 (Boston) 1979 (Los Angeles) 1980 (Los Angeles) 1981 (Denver) 1983 (New York City) 1985 (Phoenix) 1987 (Seattle) 1989 (Philadelphia) 1991 (Chicago) 1993 (Salt Lake City) 1996 (Washington) 1998 (Washington) 2000 (Anaheim) 2002 (Indianapolis) 2004 (Atlanta) 2006 (Portland) 2008 (Denver) 2010 (St. Louis) 2012 (Las Vegas) 2014 (Columbus) 2016 (Orlando) 2018 (New Orleans) 2020 (Orlando) 2021 chair election 2022 (Reno) 2024 (Washington) Affiliated organizations Libertarian National Committee Mises Caucus Radical Caucus Libertarians for Life Related articles Libertarianism Committee to Form a Libertarian Party Party factions Dallas Accord Electoral history History Libertarian pledge Libertarianism portal v t e Patriot Act Titles I · II · III · IV · V · VI · VII · VIII · IX · X · History Acts modified Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 Electronic Communications Privacy Act Computer Fraud and Abuse Act Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act Family Educational Rights and Privacy Act Money Laundering Control Act Bank Secrecy Act Right to Financial Privacy Act Fair Credit Reporting Act Immigration and Nationality Act of 1952 Victims of Crime Act of 1984 Telemarketing and Consumer Fraud and Abuse Prevention Act People George W. Bush John Ashcroft Alberto Gonzales Patrick Leahy Orrin Hatch Jon Kyl Dianne Feinstein Viet D. Dinh Joe Biden Michael Chertoff Barack Obama Eric Holder Chuck Schumer Lamar Smith Bob Graham Jay Rockefeller Arlen Specter Mike Oxley Dick Armey Paul Sarbanes Trent Lott Tom Daschle Russ Feingold Ellen Huvelle Ron Paul Lisa Murkowski Ron Wyden Dennis Kucinich Larry Craig John E. Sununu Richard Durbin Bernie Sanders Jerry Nadler John Conyers Jr.

Butch Otter Government organizations Federal Bureau of Investigation Department of Justice Select Committee on Intelligence Department of the Treasury FinCEN Department of State National Institute of Standards and Technology Customs Service Immigration and Customs Enforcement Non-government organizations American Civil Liberties Union American Library Association Center for Democracy and Technology Center for Public Integrity Electronic Frontier Foundation Electronic Privacy Information Center Humanitarian Law Project v t e Rand Paul Political positions Electoral history 2016 presidential campaign Legislation Read the Bills Act Federal Reserve Transparency Act Stop Arming Terrorists Act Books The Tea Party Goes to Washington Government Bullies Taking a Stand Related Kelley Paul (wife) Ron Paul (father) 2010 U.S. Senate election 2016 U.S. Senate election 2022 U.S. Senate election Tea Party movement v t e ( ← 1984 ) 1988 United States presidential election ( 1992 → ) Republican Party Convention Primaries results Candidates Nominee: George H. W. Bush campaign VP nominee: Dan Quayle Other candidates: Bob Dole Pete du Pont Ben Fernandez Alexander Haig Jack Kemp Paul Laxalt Isabell Masters Pat Robertson Donald Rumsfeld Harold Stassen Democratic Party Convention Primaries results Candidates Nominee: Michael Dukakis campaign VP nominee: Lloyd Bentsen Other candidates: Douglas Applegate Bruce Babbitt Joe Biden campaign positions David Duke Dick Gephardt Al Gore campaign Gary Hart Jesse Jackson campaign Lyndon LaRouche campaign positions Andy Martin Patricia Schroeder Paul Simon James Traficant Third-party and independent candidates Libertarian Party Convention Nominee: Ron Paul campaign positions VP nominee: Andre Marrou Other candidates: Jim Lewis Russell Means New Alliance Party Nominee: Lenora Fulani Populist Party Nominee: David Duke Prohibition Party Nominee: Earl Dodge VP nominee: George Ormsby Socialist Equality Party Nominee: Edward Winn Socialist Party Nominee: Willa Kenoyer VP nominee: Ron Ehrenreich Socialist Workers Party Nominee: James Warren VP nominee: Kathleen Mickells Workers World Party Nominee: Larry Holmes VP nominee: Gloria La Riva Independents and others Jack Herer Lyndon LaRouche Herbert G. Lewin William A. Marra Eugene McCarthy Other 1988 elections: House Senate Gubernatorial v t e ( ← 2004 ) 2008 United States presidential election ( 2012 → ) 2008 United States elections Candidates Comparison Debates Congressional endorsements Fundraising Ballot access Timeline Super Tuesday Potomac primary Super Tuesday II Polls national statewide international Democratic Party ▌ WFP Convention superdelegates Polls statewide national Debates Primaries Primary results VP candidate selection Candidates Nominee: Barack Obama campaign positions endorsements cross-party VP nominee: Joe Biden positions Other candidates: Evan Bayh campaign Joe Biden campaign positions Hillary Clinton campaign positions endorsements Chris Dodd campaign John Edwards campaign positions Mike Gravel campaign Dennis Kucinich campaign Bill Richardson campaign Tom Vilsack campaign Republican Party ▌ CPNY · ▌ IPNY Convention Polls statewide national Debates Political positions Primaries Primary results VP candidate selection Candidates Nominee: John McCain campaign positions endorsements cross-party VP nominee: Sarah Palin candidacy positions Other candidates : Sam Brownback campaign John H. Cox Jim Gilmore campaign Rudy Giuliani campaign positions Mike Huckabee campaign positions Duncan L. Hunter campaign Alan Keyes campaign Ray McKinney Ron Paul campaign positions Mitt Romney campaign positions Tom Tancredo campaign Fred Thompson campaign Tommy Thompson campaign Draft movements Democratic: Al Gore Mark Warner Republican: Newt Gingrich Condoleezza Rice movement Independent : Michael Bloomberg movement Third party and independent candidates Constitution Party ( convention ) Nominee: Chuck Baldwin campaign VP nominee: Darrell Castle Other candidates: Daniel Imperato Alan Keyes campaign Green Party ( convention ) Nominee: Cynthia McKinney campaign positions VP nominee: Rosa Clemente Other candidates: Elaine Brown Libertarian Party ( convention ) Nominee: Bob Barr campaign positions VP nominee: Wayne Allyn Root Other candidates: Mike Gravel campaign Steve Kubby Wayne Allyn Root Mary Ruwart Doug Stanhope America's Independent Party Nominee: Alan Keyes campaign VP nominee: Brian Rohrbough Boston Tea Party Nominee: Charles Jay Objectivist Party Nominee: Tom Stevens Peace and Freedom Party Nominee: Ralph Nader campaign VP nominee: Matt Gonzalez Other candidates: Gloria La Riva Cynthia McKinney campaign Brian Moore campaign Prohibition Party Nominee: Gene Amondson Reform Party Nominee: Ted Weill VP nominee: Frank McEnulty Socialism and Liberation Party Nominee: Gloria La Riva VP nominee: Eugene Puryear Socialist Party Nominee: Brian Moore campaign VP nominee: Stewart Alexander Other candidates: Eric Chester Socialist Workers Party Nominee: Róger Calero Alternate nominee: James Harris VP nominee: Alyson Kennedy Independent / Other Jeff Boss Stephen Colbert campaign Earl Dodge Bradford Lyttle Frank Moore Joe Schriner Jonathon Sharkey Other 2008 elections: House Senate Gubernatorial v t e ( ← 2008 ) 2012 United States presidential election ( 2016 → ) Fundraising National polls Statewide polls ( pre-2012 , early 2012 ) Timeline General election debates Newspaper endorsements Hurricane Sandy Democratic Party Convention Primaries Results Candidates Incumbent nominee: Barack Obama campaign endorsements positions Incumbent VP nominee: Joe Biden positions Challengers Bob Ely Keith Judd Warren Mosler Vermin Supreme Randall Terry John Wolfe Republican Party Convention Primaries Debates Statewide polls National polls Straw polls Candidates Nominee: Mitt Romney campaign endorsements positions VP nominee: Paul Ryan positions Other candidates Michele Bachmann campaign Herman Cain campaign positions Mark Callahan Jack Fellure Newt Gingrich campaign positions Stewart Greenleaf John Davis Jon Huntsman campaign Gary Johnson campaign Fred Karger Andy Martin Thaddeus McCotter campaign Jimmy McMillan Roy Moore Ron Paul campaign positions Tim Pawlenty campaign Rick Perry campaign positions Buddy Roemer campaign Rick Santorum campaign Libertarian Party Convention Candidates Nominee: Gary Johnson campaign VP nominee: Jim Gray Other candidates Carl Person Sam Sloan Green Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: Jill Stein campaign VP nominee: Cheri Honkala Other candidates: Stewart Alexander Roseanne Barr Other third-party and independent candidates American Independent Party Nominee: Tom Hoefling Other candidates: Wiley Drake Virgil Goode campaign Edward C. Noonan Laurie Roth American Third Position Party Nominee: Merlin Miller VP nominee: Virginia Abernethy Constitution Party Convention Nominee: Virgil Goode campaign VP nominee: Jim Clymer Other candidates: Laurie Roth Robby Wells Freedom Socialist Party Nominee: Stephen Durham Grassroots Party Nominee Jim Carlson Justice Party Nominee: Rocky Anderson VP nominee: Luis J. Rodriguez Socialism and Liberation Nominee: Peta Lindsay Peace and Freedom Party Nominee: Roseanne Barr VP nominee: Cindy Sheehan Other candidates: Stewart Alexander Rocky Anderson Peta Lindsay Prohibition Party Nominee: Jack Fellure Other candidates: James Hedges Reform Party Nominee: Andre Barnett Other candidates: Laurence Kotlikoff Buddy Roemer campaign Robby Wells Socialist Equality Party Nominee Jerry White Socialist Workers Party Nominee: James Harris Socialist Party Nominee: Stewart Alexander campaign VP nominee: Alejandro Mendoza Independents and others Objectivist Party Tom Stevens Independents Lee Abramson Randy Blythe Jeff Boss Robert Burck Terry Jones Joe Schriner Michael Bloomberg attempt to draft Other 2012 elections : House Senate Gubernatorial Portals : Biography Christianity Conservatism Libertarianism Literature Medicine Politics Texas United States Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Norway Poland Israel Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People US Congress DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ron_Paul&oldid=1306229433 " Categories : Ron Paul 1935 births Living people Paul family 20th-century American essayists 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American physicians 20th-century Texas politicians 21st-century American essayists 21st-century American male writers 21st-century American non-fiction writers 21st-century Texas politicians 21st-century Baptists American anti-abortion activists American anti–Iraq War activists American anti-war activists Anti-corporate activists American columnists American foreign policy writers American gun rights activists American libertarians American male non-fiction writers American people of German descent American political writers Baptists from Texas Candidates in the 1988 United States presidential election Candidates in the 2008 United States presidential election Candidates in the 2012 United States presidential election Christian libertarians Critics of neoconservatism American drug policy reform activists Duke University School of Medicine alumni Gettysburg College alumni Homeschooling advocates Libertarian Party (United States) presidential nominees Libertarian theorists Libertarianism in the United States Mises Institute people Monetary reformers Paleolibertarianism Pennsylvania Libertarians Pennsylvania Republicans People from Lake Jackson, Texas Physicians from Texas Politicians from Pittsburgh Privacy activists Protestants from Texas Republican Party members of the United States House of Representatives from Texas Right-wing populists in the United States Southern Baptists Tea Party movement activists Texas Libertarians Texas Republicans United States Air Force Medical Corps officers University of Pittsburgh people Writers from Texas 20th-century members of the United States House of Representatives Right-libertarianism Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2024 Articles with dead external links from April 2016 Pages containing links to subscription-only content Articles with dead external links from June 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Use mdy dates from October 2020 Use American English from March 2016 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Articles with hAudio microformats Pages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 16:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ron Paul 67 languages Add topic

