Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Status 2 Provenance 3 Contents 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 General references 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi 4 languages العربية فارسی Тоҷикӣ اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( June 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi ( Persian : ذخیرهٔ خوارزمشاهی Zakhīra-i Khwârazmshâhī , "Treasure Dedicated to the King of Khwarazm " or Treasure of Khwarazmshah ), is a Persian medical encyclopedia written by the Persian physician, Ismail Gorgani (1040-1136) in 1110.

[ 1 ] Manuscript of Jurjani's Tashrih Zakhirah-i Khwarazmshahi , vol. I (on anatomy). Copy created in Safavid Iran , dated 1663 Modern title page of Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Status [ edit ] This Persian medical book is equal in prestige to the famous medical book by Avicenna , which is considered a medical canon. Although the book of Zakhirah-i Khvarazm'Shahi is written in Persian it contains a few Arabic words.
The book builds upon works by Avicenna, Akhaveiny, and other doctors of traditional medicine written in the fifth century or before.

[ citation needed ] This Iranian traditional medicinal book has been translated into other languages such as Turkish, Urdu, and Hebrew, and by the author himself into Arabic. After writing this encyclopedic book, Gorgani wrote Khafi Alayee as a contraction of it.

Provenance [ edit ] At five places in the volume (fols. 75a, 76a, 95a, 98b, and 162b), a later hand in a fine calligraphic script has repeated the following statement: "The owner and possessor of this medical book called Jawahir al-maqal is Khamrah Aghā ibn Rustum ibn Muḥammad Aghā ibn Khiḍr Aghā ibn Mīr Khamrah ibn Mīr Mīzā ibn Aḥmad Beg, in the year 1211 [= 1796–7]." An owner's stamp accompanies these inscriptions. Schullian/Sommer (Cat. of incun. & MSS., p. 338) initially interpreted this name as that of the compiler of the collection, [ 2 ] however, the inscription clearly indicates that this is the name of a later owner.

The volume was acquired in 1941 by the Army Medical Library from A.S. Yahuda, who had obtained it in Ebril in northern Iraq (ELS 1685 med 45).

[ 3 ] Contents [ edit ] Zakhira-i Khvarazm'Shahi contains 10 chapters and a preface. The preface describes the ecology of the Khorezm and the foods and nutrition of the people of the Khorezm (now called Khorasan ). Chapter one is about the importance of medicine , human anatomy , and general pathophysiology . Chapter two is related to symptoms and signs of the diseases and methods of treatment, sphygmology ("sphygmo" in Greek means pulse), and any liquid material excreted from the body (such as sweat and urine). Chapter three is about the water and weather, nutrition, exercise, emotions, sleep and wakefulness, and methods of treatment for children and the elderly. Chapter four is about the differential diagnoses and course of diseases. Chapter five defines fever categories and natural moisture and its relation with fever. In chapter six, he writes about treatment of any diseases that relate to the head, cervix, and the upper and lower limbs and trunk. In chapter seven of his book, he writes about methods of treatment of different types of wounds, inflammations, oncology , burns by hot water, hot oil and fire, cauterization , and orthopedics . Chapter eight is about diseases that relate to the integument system such as general dermatology , hair pathology , fatness, weight loss and methods of treatment of it. Chapter nine contain topic about the toxins, drugs, animal bites and rabidity, and insects stings. Finally in chapter ten, he writes about the classification of drugs and basic pharmacology, drugs for the ear, eye, nose and mouth, epilepsy, stroke, and pharmacological terminology.

References [ edit ] ^ Abivardi, Cyrus (2001).

Iranian Entomology: An Introduction, Volume 1 . Berlin: Springer Science & Business Media. p. 485.

ISBN 9783540675921 . Retrieved 29 June 2015 .

^ Schullian/Sommer, Cat. of incun. & MSS., p. 338, entry P25.

^ U.S. National Library of Medicine. (n.d.). Islamic Medical Manuscripts: Catalogue - Encyclopedias 11-13. Retrieved from https://www.nlm.nih.gov/hmd/arabic/E11_E13.html General references [ edit ] Shoja, Mohammadali M.; Tubbs, R. Shane; Khalili, Majid; Khodadoost, Kazem; Loukas, Marios; Cohen-Gadol, Aaron A. (2010). "Esmail Jorjani (1042–1137) and His Descriptions of Trigeminal Neuralgia, Hemifacial Spasm, and Bell's Palsy".

Neurosurgery .

67 (2): 431– 434.

doi : 10.1227/01.NEU.0000372088.18260.B1 .

PMID 20644430 .

Hosseini, Seyed Fazel; Alakbarli, Farid; Ghabili, Kamyar; Shoja, Mohammadali M. (2011). "Hakim Esmail Jorjani (1042–1137 ad): Persian physician and jurist".

Archives of Gynecology and Obstetrics .

284 (3): 647– 650.

doi : 10.1007/s00404-010-1707-7 .

PMID 20931210 .

S2CID 2681493 .

Ashtiyani, S. C.; Zarei, A.; Elahipour, M. (2009).

"Innovations and discoveries of Jorjani in medicine" .

Journal of Medical Ethics and History of Medicine .

2 : 16.

PMC 3713907 .

PMID 23908730 .

Shoja, Mohammadali M.; Tubbs, R. Shane (2007).

"The history of anatomy in Persia" .

Journal of Anatomy .

210 (4): 359– 378.

doi : 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2007.00711.x .

PMC 2100290 .

PMID 17428200 .

Ardekani, Mohammad Reza Shams; Moatar, Fariborz (2005). "A Research Conducted on the Life and Works of Hakim Sayyid Esmail Jurjani".

Journal of the International Society for the History of Islamic Medicine .

4 (7): 2.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi .

http://www.wdl.org/en/item/10608/ Hatami, H (2012).

"Healthy Ageing in Iranian Traditional Medicine's Resources in the Occasion of the World Health Day 2012" .

International Journal of Preventive Medicine .

3 (4): 227– 9.

PMC 3354391 .

PMID 22624078 .

v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zakhireye_Khwarazmshahi&oldid=1277058848 " Categories : Medical works of medieval Iran Medical works of the medieval Islamic world Persian encyclopedias Persian literature Works about the history of medicine Iranian books Memory of the World Register in Iran 12th-century Persian books Hidden categories: Articles lacking in-text citations from June 2015 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles containing Persian-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2015 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 22 February 2025, at 11:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi 4 languages Add topic

