Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Effects 2 Occurrence 3 Influence of aerosols 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Drizzle 64 languages Afrikaans العربية Авар Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 贛語 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lombard മലയാളം მარგალური Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Walon 文言 吴语 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Light liquid precipitation For other uses, see Drizzle (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Drizzle" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Drizzle in Norfolk, England .

Drizzle is a light precipitation which consists of liquid water drops that are smaller than those of rain – generally smaller than 0.5 mm (0.02 in) in diameter.

[ 1 ] Drizzle is normally produced by low stratiform clouds and stratocumulus clouds. Precipitation rates from drizzle are on the order of a millimetre (0.04 in) per day or less at the ground. Owing to the small size of drizzle drops, under many circumstances drizzle largely evaporates before reaching the surface, and so may be undetected by observers on the ground. The METAR code for drizzle is DZ and for freezing drizzle is FZDZ .

[ 2 ] Effects [ edit ] Part of a series on Weather Temperate and polar seasons Winter Spring Summer Autumn Tropical seasons Dry season Harmattan Wet season Storms Cloud Cumulonimbus cloud Arcus cloud Downburst Microburst Heat burst Derecho Lightning Volcanic lightning Thunderstorm Air-mass thunderstorm Thundersnow Dry thunderstorm Mesocyclone Supercell Tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Dust devil Fire whirl Anticyclone Cyclone Polar low Extratropical cyclone European windstorm Nor'easter Subtropical cyclone Tropical cyclone Atlantic hurricane Typhoon Storm surge Dust storm Simoom Haboob Monsoon Amihan Gale Sirocco Firestorm Winter storm Ice storm Blizzard Ground blizzard Snow squall Precipitation Drizzle Freezing Graupel Hail Megacryometeor Ice pellets Diamond dust Rain Freezing Cloudburst Snow Rain and snow mixed Snow grains Snow roller Slush Topics Air pollution Atmosphere Chemistry Convection Physics River Climate Cloud Physics Fog Mist Season Cold wave Heat wave Jet stream Meteorology Severe weather List Extreme Severe weather terminology Canada Japan United States Weather forecasting Weather modification Glossaries Meteorology Climate change Tornado terms Tropical cyclone terms Weather portal v t e While most drizzle has only a minor immediate impact upon humans, freezing drizzle can lead to treacherous conditions. Freezing drizzle occurs when supercooled drizzle drops land on a surface whose temperature is below freezing.

[ 3 ] These drops immediately freeze upon impact, leading to the buildup of sheet ice (sometimes called black ice ) on the surface of roads.

Occurrence [ edit ] Drizzle in Bournemouth , England .

Drizzle tends to be the most frequent form of precipitation over large areas of the world's oceans, particularly in the colder regions of the subtropics . These regions are dominated by shallow marine stratocumulus and trade wind cumulus clouds , which exist entirely within the marine boundary layer . Despite the low rates of surface accumulation, drizzle exerts a major influence over the structure, coverage, and radiative properties of clouds in these regions.

This has motivated scientists to design more sophisticated and sensitive instruments such as high-frequency radars which can detect drizzle. These studies have shown that the quantity of drizzle is strongly linked to cloud morphology and tends to be associated with updrafts within the marine boundary layer. Increased amounts of drizzle tend to be found in marine clouds that form in clean air masses that have low concentrations of cloud droplets. This interconnection between clouds and drizzle can be explored using high-resolution numerical modelling such as large eddy simulation .

Influence of aerosols [ edit ] It has been hypothesized by a group of atmospheric scientists at Texas A&M University [ 4 ] that particulates in the atmosphere caused by human activities may suppress drizzle. According to this hypothesis, because drizzle can be an effective means of removing moisture from a cloud, its suppression could help to increase the thickness, coverage, and longevity of marine stratocumulus clouds. This would lead to increased cloud albedo on a regional to global scale, and a cooling effect on the atmosphere. Estimates using complex global climate models suggest that this effect may be partially masking the effects of greenhouse gas increases on global surface temperature . However, it is not clear that the representation of the chemical and physical processes needed to accurately simulate the interaction between aerosols, clouds, and drizzle in current (as of 2005 [update] ) climate models is sufficient to fully understand the global impacts of changes in particulates.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Fog Mist Rain Snow grains References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Drizzle .

^ National Weather Service Observing Handbook No. 8, Aviation Weather Observations for Supplementary Aviation Weather Reporting Stations (SAWRS), Manual Observations, October 1996 ^ Spence, Charles F. (2006).

Aim/Far .

McGraw Hill Professional . p. 294.

ISBN 978-0-07-147924-0 .

^ Henson, Robert; Guides, Rough (2007).

The Rough Guide to Weather . Penguin. p. 63.

ISBN 978-1-4053-8461-2 .

^ "Can Aerosols Influence Weather Patterns?" .

Texas A&M Today . 2018-01-22 . Retrieved 2019-05-24 .

^ "Are aerosols reducing coastal drizzle and increasing cloud cover?" . Eurekalert.org. 2005-06-30 . Retrieved 2013-08-25 .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Drizzle&oldid=1274803647 " Categories : Precipitation Rain Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2012 All articles needing additional references Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2005 All articles containing potentially dated statements Commons link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 February 2025, at 10:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Drizzle 64 languages Add topic

