Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Belgium 2 Catholic Church Toggle Catholic Church subsection 2.1 Holy See 3 France 4 Italy 5 Portugal 6 Iran 7 Russia 8 Saudi Arabia 9 Spain 10 Turkey 11 United Kingdom 12 United States 13 Ukraine 14 See also 15 Notes 16 References 17 External links Toggle the table of contents Decree 51 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Shqip Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Edict or proclamation usually issued by a head of state Royal Polish Decree issued by Casimir III the Great A decree is a legal proclamation , usually issued by a head of state , judge , [ 1 ] royal figure , or other relevant authorities , according to certain procedures. These procedures are usually defined by the constitution , Legislative laws , or customary laws of a government .

Belgium [ edit ] Main article: Decree (Belgium) In Belgium , a decree is a law of a community or regional parliament , e.g. the Flemish Parliament .

Catholic Church [ edit ] Part of a series on the Canon law of the Catholic Church Ius vigens (current law) 1983 Code of Canon Law Omnium in mentem Magnum principium Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Ad tuendam fidem Ex corde Ecclesiae Indulgentiarum Doctrina Praedicate evangelium Veritatis gaudium Custom Matrimonial nullity trial reforms of Pope Francis Documents of the Second Vatican Council Christus Dominus Lumen gentium Optatam totius Orientalium ecclesiarum Presbyterorum ordinis Sacrosanctum concilium Precepts of the Church Legal history Jus antiquum ( c.

33 –1140) Ancient Church Orders Didache The Apostolic Constitutions Canons of the Apostles Collections of ancient canons Collectiones canonum Dionysianae Collectio canonum quadripartita Collectio canonum Quesnelliana Collectio canonum Wigorniensis Gelasian Decree Symmachian forgeries Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals Donation of Constantine Gregorian Reform Lay investiture controversy Dictatus papae Libertas ecclesiae Plenitudo potestatis Jus novum ( c.

1140 –1563) Corpus Juris Canonici Decretum Gratiani Decretist Canon Episcopi Margaritae Jus commune Decretals of Gregory IX Decretalist Regulæ Juris Extravagantes Liber Septimus Jus novissimum ( c.

1563 –1918) Council of Trent Benedictus Deus Tametsi Apostolicae Sedis moderationi Jus codicis (1918-present) 1917 Code of Canon Law Ecclesiae Sanctae 1983 Code of Canon Law Other Contractum trinius Papal judge-delegate Right of option Eastern law Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Eastern Canonical Reforms of Pius XII Nomocanon Eparchy Exarchate Ordinariate for Eastern Catholic faithful Protosyncellus Liturgical law Latin Church General Roman Calendar Ranking of liturgical days in the Roman Rite General Instruction of the Roman Missal Code of Rubrics Sacrosanctum Concilium Mysterii Paschalis Musicam sacram Scripturarum thesaurus Liturgiam authenticam Quattuor abhinc annos Ecclesia Dei Summorum Pontificum Magnum principium Traditionis custodes Red Mass Holy day of obligation Sacramental law Communicatio in sacris Ex opere operato Omnium in mentem Validity and liceity Sacraments Holy Orders Impediment (Catholic canon law) Abstemius Defect of birth Obligation of celibacy Nullity of Sacred Ordination Apostolicae curae Dimissorial letters Episcopal consecrators Approbation (Catholic canon law) Confession Penitential canons Paenitentiale Theodori Seal of the Confessional Internal and external forum Note on the importance of the internal forum and the inviolability of the Sacramental Seal Apostolic Penitentiary Canon penitentiary Complicit absolution Sacramentum Poenitentiae Eucharist Eucharistic discipline Canon 915 Celebret Mass stipend Sacramentals Indulgence Indulgentiarum doctrina Sacred places Altars Major basilica Minor basilica Oratory (chapel) Sacred times Feast days Fast days and abstinence Paenitemini Holy day of obligation Matrimonial law Canonical form (Latin Church) Tametsi Ne Temere Banns of marriage Declaration of Nullity Dignitas connubii Matrimonial Nullity Trial Reforms of Pope Francis Vetitum Defender of the Bond Impediments to Marriage Affinity Clandestinity Impediment of crime Disparity of cult Ligamen Public propriety Matrimonial dispensation Ratum sed non consummatum Sanatio in radice Natural marriage Pauline privilege Petrine privilege Supreme authority, particular churches , and canonical structures Supreme authority of the Church Roman Pontiff Papal conclave College of Bishops Supra-diocesan/eparchal structures College of Cardinals Conference of bishops Synod of Bishops Particular churches Churches sui juris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Local particular churches Appointment of bishops Abbacy nullius Apostolic vicariate Apostolic vicar Apostolic administration Apostolic administrator Diocese/Archdiocese Aeque principaliter Cathedraticum In persona episcopi Diocesan Curia Moderator of the Curia Chancery Deanery Vicar forane Eparchy Eparchal curia Military ordinariate Mission sui juris Personal ordinariate Anglicanorum Coetibus Juridic persons Parish Team of priests in solidum Collegiate church Parish register Lay trusteeism Roman Curia Dicastery Congregation Pontifical council Personal prelature Types of membership of Opus Dei Association of the Christian faithful Vicar general Quinquennial visit ad limina Jurisprudence Canonical coronation Canonically crowned images Computation of time Custom Delegata potestas non potest delegari Derogation Dispensation Taxa Innocentiana Faculty Indult Impediment Donation Interpretation Pontifical Council for Legislative Texts Jurisdiction Peritus Obreption & subreption Obrogation Promulgation Resignation of the Roman Pontiff Sede vacante Simony Vacatio legis Validity and liceity Visitation Apostolic visitor Philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law Theology Ecclesiology Treatise on Law Determinatio Temporal goods (property) Benefice Cathedraticum Contract law Mass stipend Stole fee Temporalities Law of persons Person (Catholic canon law) Formal act of defection from the Catholic Church Canonical age Emancipation Exemption Heresy Clerics Secular clergy Regular clergy Obligation of celibacy Clerics and public office Incardination and excardination Laicization (dispensation) Canonical faculties Office Canonical provision Canonical election Juridic and physical persons Jus patronatus Associations of the faithful Consecrated life Canonical documents Acta Apostolicae Sedis Acta Sanctae Sedis Censor librorum Imprimatur Imprimi potest Notary Protonotary apostolic Apostolic constitution Canon Concordat Decree Decretal Encyclical Motu proprio Ordinance Papal brief Papal bull Penitential Positive law Rescript Parish register Ecclesiastical Latin Penal law Canon 1324 Canon 1397 §2 Censure (Catholic canon law) De delictis gravioribus Complicit absolution Crimen sollicitationis Excommunication List of excommunicable offences in the Catholic Church List of people excommunicated by the Catholic Church List of cardinals excommunicated by the Catholic Church Interdict Laicization (penal) Latae sententiae and ferendae sententiae Lifetime of prayer and penance Canonical admonitions Ecclesiastical prison Procedural law Pars statica (tribunals & ministers/parties) Tribunals Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura Tribunal of the Roman Rota Apostolic Penitentiary Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith Ministers of Justice Judicial Vicar / Officialis Auditor Parties Defender of the Bond Procurator Pars dynamica (trial procedure) Dignitas connubii (matrimonial causes) Appeal as from an abuse Presumption Penal procedure Vos estis lux mundi Canonization Congregation for the Causes of Saints Maiorem hac dilectionem Advocatus Diaboli Oblatio vitae Positio Beatification and canonization process in 1914 Election of the Roman Pontiff Current law Universi Dominici gregis Papal renunciation Reforms of Pope Benedict XVI Historical Cum proxime Jus exclusivae Papal appointment Aeterni Patris Filius Romano Pontifici eligendo Ingravescentem aetatem Ubi periculum Quia propter Legal practice and scholarship List of legal abbreviations Academic degrees Licentiate of Canon Law Doctor of Canon Law Doctor of both laws Journals and Professional Societies Canon Law Society of America The Jurist Faculties of canon law Catholic University of America School of Canon Law Canonists Medieval Gratian Hostiensis Jean Lemoine Raymond of Penyafort Rufinus Johannes Teutonicus Geoffrey of Trani Burchard of Worms Brocard Modern & Contemporary Eugenio Corecco John D. Faris Pietro Gasparri Ladislas Orsy Edward N. Peters Law of consecrated life Solemn vow Exclaustration Manifestation of Conscience Canonical erection of a house of religious Pontifical right Diocesan right Congregation for Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life Institute of consecrated life Religious institute Congregation Order Monasticism Canons regular Mendicant orders Clerics regular Secular institute Cum Sanctissimus Primo Feliciter Provida Mater Ecclesia Society of apostolic life Decretum laudis Catholicism portal v t e Main articles: Decree (canon law) and Canon law (Catholic Church) See also: Decretal and Decretum Gratiani A decree ( Latin : decretum ) in the usage of the canon law of the Catholic Church has various meanings. Any papal bull , brief , or motu proprio is a decree inasmuch as these documents are legislative acts of the pope . In this sense, the term is quite ancient. The Roman Congregations were formerly empowered to issue decrees in matters which come under their particular jurisdiction but were forbidden from continuing to do so under Pope Benedict XV in 1917.

[ 2 ] Each ecclesiastical province and also each diocese may issue decrees in their periodical synods within their sphere of authority.

While in a general sense all documents promulgated by an ecumenical council can be called decrees, in a specific sense some of these documents, as at the Second Vatican Council , were called more precisely constitutions or declarations.

[ 3 ] Canon 29 of the 1983 Code of Canon Law defines general decrees: General decrees, by which a competent legislator makes common provisions for a community capable of receiving a law, are true laws and are regulated by the provisions of the canons on laws.

[ 4 ] Holy See [ edit ] Main articles: Law of Vatican City , Decretal , and Decree (canon law) See also: Canon law (Catholic Church) The Holy See uses decrees from the pope such as papal bull , papal brief or motu proprio as legislative acts.

[ 5 ] France [ edit ] See also: Politics of France The word décret , literally "decree", is an old legal usage in France and is used to refer to executive orders issued by the French President or Prime Minister . Any such order must not violate the French Constitution or Civil Code , and a party has the right to request an order be annulled in the French Council of State . Orders must be ratified by Parliament before they can be modified into legislative Acts. Special orders known as décret-loi , literally "decree-act" or "decree-law", [ 6 ] [ 7 ] usually considered an illegal practice under the 3rd and 4th Republic, were finally abolished and replaced by the regulations under the 1958 Constitution.

Except for the reserve powers of the President (as stated in Art. 16 of the 1958 Constitution, exercised only once so far), the executive can issue decrees in areas that the Constitution grants as the responsibility of Parliament only if a law authorizes it to do so. In other cases, orders are illegal and, should anyone sue for the order's annulment, it would be voided by the Council of State. There exists a procedure for the Prime Minister to issue ordinances in such areas, but this procedure requires Parliament's express consent (see Art 38 of the 1958 Constitution).

Orders issued by the Prime Minister take two forms: Orders ( décrets simples ); Orders-in-council ( décrets en Conseil d'État ), when a statute mandates the advisory consultation of the Council of State .

Sometimes, people refer to décrets en Conseil d'État improperly as décrets du Conseil d'État . This would imply that it is the Council of State that makes the decree, whereas the power of decreeing is restricted to the president or prime minister; the role of the administrative sections of the council is purely advisory.

Decrees may be classified into: Regulations , which may be: Application decrees ( décrets d'application ), each of which must be specifically authorized by one or more statutes to determine some implementation conditions of this or these statutes; these constitute secondary legislation and are roughly equivalent to British statutory instruments ; Autonomous regulations ( règlements autonomes ), which may be taken only in areas where the Constitution does not impose statute law (passed by the Legislature ); these constitute primary legislation ; Particular measures, such as the nomination of high-level civil servants .

Only the prime minister may issue regulatory or application decrees. Presidential decrees are  generally nominations or exceptional measures where the law mandates a presidential decree, such as the dissolution of the French National Assembly , the calling of new legislative elections, and the grant of the title Marshal of France .

Decrees are published in the Journal Officiel de la République Française ( French Gazette ).

Italy [ edit ] Main article: Law of Italy According to clause 77 of the Italian Constitution , The Government may not, without an enabling act from the Houses [of Parliament], issue decrees having the force of ordinary law.

When in extraordinary cases of necessity and urgency the Government adopts provisional measures having the force of law, it must on the same day present said measures for confirmation to the Houses which, even if dissolved, shall be extraordinally summoned for this purpose and shall convene within five days.

The decrees lose effect from their inception if they are not confirmed within sixty days from their publication. The Houses may however regulate by law legal relationships arising out of unconfirmed decrees.

The effectiveness for sixty days produces the effects immediately, giving rights or expectations whose legal basis was precarious, especially when the conversion law never intervened.

[ 8 ] Portugal [ edit ] Main article: Law of Portugal In Portugal there are several types of decree ( Portuguese : decreto ) issued by the various bodies of sovereignty or by the bodies of local government of autonomous regions .

As of 2022 [update] , there are the following types of decree: Decree-law ( Portuguese : decreto-lei ): is a legislative act issued by the Government of Portugal under its legislative powers defined by Article 198 of the Portuguese Constitution ; Regional legislative decree ( Portuguese : decreto legislativo regional ): is a regional law, issued by the legislative assembly of an autonomous region, within its powers defined by articles 227 and 233 of the Constitution; Decree of the President of the Republic ( Portuguese : decreto do Presidente da República ): is a decree issued by the President of Portugal , for the ratification of international treaties, the appointment or dismissal of members of the Government or to exercise other presidential powers defined in the Constitution; Decree ( Portuguese : decreto ): is an act issued by the Government of Portugal to approve an international agreement whose approval is not within the competence of the Assembly of the Republic or has not been submitted to it or within the Government administrative jurisdiction laid down in Article 199 of the Constitution in relation to a statute that requires this decree; Regulatory decree ( Portuguese : decreto regulamentar ): is an act issued by the Government of Portugal, under its administrative jurisdiction laid down in Article 199 of the Constitution, to make the necessary regulations for the proper execution of the laws and to take all actions and decisions necessary to promote economic and social development and to meet the community needs; Regional regulatory decree ( Portuguese : decreto regulamentar regional ): is an act issued by the legislature or the government of an autonomous region, regulating the proper implementation of regional legislative decrees; A decree from the representative of the Republic ( Portuguese : decreto do representante da República ): is the decree of appointment or removal of members of the government of an autonomous region, issued by the representative of the Republic for that region.

Iran [ edit ] 9 October 1981, Jamaran , Tehran ; Ruhollah Khomeini as supreme leader of Iran signs presidential decree of Ali Khamenei .

According to article 110 of the constitution , the Supreme Leader delineates the general policies of the Islamic Republic.

Russia [ edit ] Main articles: Decree of the President of Russia and Order of the Government of Russia After the Russian Revolution , a government proclamation of wide meaning was called a "decree" ( декрет dekret ); a more specific proclamation was called an Ukase указ ukaz . Both terms are usually translated as 'decree'.

During the Soviet Union 's existence, governmental proclamations issued by the Government of the Soviet Union as well as proclamations issued by the Central Committee of the Communist Party were called Decisions ( Постановления Postanovleniya and in some cased joint resolutions were issued .

According to the Russian Federation's 1993 constitution , an ukaz is a presidential decree. Such an ukaz has the force of law, but may not alter the Russian constitution or the regulations of existing laws, and may be superseded by laws passed by the Federal Assembly .

The Government of Russia can also issue decrees formally called Decisions ( Постановления Postanovleniya or Orders ( Распоряжения Rasporyazheniya ) and may not contradict the constitution/laws or presidential decrees.

Saudi Arabia [ edit ] Royal decrees, along with the Sharia , are the sources of law in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia.

Spain [ edit ] In Spain, decrees come in several forms: Royal decree Royal Decree-Law Royal Legislative Decree Turkey [ edit ] The decree law ( Turkish : Kanun Hükmünde Kararname, KHK ) in Turkey is a type of legislative instrument issued by the government , based on the authority granted either by a specific enabling act from the legislative body or directly from the Constitution . These decrees have the force of law in a material sense and acquire formal and organic legal power upon the approval of the parliament. According to Article 87 of the 1982 Constitution of Turkey, granting the Council of Ministers the authority to issue decree laws on specific matters is included in the duties and powers of the Grand National Assembly of Turkey .

[ 9 ] Article 91 of the Constitution also regulates the issuance of decree laws. It states: "The Grand National Assembly of Turkey may delegate the power to issue decree laws to the Council of Ministers. However, with the exception of martial law and states of emergency , the fundamental rights , individual rights and duties , and political rights and duties listed in the first and second sections of the second part of the Constitution cannot be regulated by decree laws." Decree laws in Turkey are categorized into two types: ordinary and extraordinary. Ordinary decree laws are issued by the Council of Ministers and require an enabling act from the Grand National Assembly. They cannot regulate fundamental rights, individual rights and duties, or political rights and duties. Extraordinary decree laws, on the other hand, are issued by the Council of Ministers under the presidency of the President . They do not require an enabling act from the Grand National Assembly and can regulate any area, provided they fulfill obligations arising from international law . Decree laws are subject to both political scrutiny by the parliament and judicial review by the Constitutional Court .

[ 10 ] Following the approval of the 2017 constitutional amendment referendum in Turkey and the 2018 general elections , which led to the election of the President by popular vote , Article 91 of the Constitution was repealed. With this change, decree laws were replaced by Presidential Decrees ( Turkish : Cumhurbaşkanlığı Kararnameleri, CBK ) in the new system.

[ 11 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Main article: Order-in-Council In the United Kingdom , Orders-in-Council are either primary legislation deriving their authority from the royal prerogative , promulgated by the Privy Council in the name of the Monarch; or secondary legislation, promulgated by a minister of the Crown using the authority granted by an act of Parliament or other primary legislation. Both are subject to judicial review , the former with some exceptions.

[ 12 ] United States [ edit ] Main article: Law of the United States In US legal usage, during the 19th and early 20th centuries, a decree was an order of a court of equity determining the rights of the parties to a suit, according to equity and good conscience. Since the 1938 procedural merger of law and equity in the federal courts under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, the term judgment (the parallel term in the common law) has generally replaced decree . This is now true also in most state courts.

[ 13 ] The term decree is broadly treated as synonymous with judgment .

[ 14 ] A decree is often a final determination, but there are also interlocutory decrees. A final decree fully and finally disposes of the whole litigation, determining all questions raised by the case, and it leaves nothing that requires further judicial action; it is also appealable. An interlocutory decree is a provisional or preliminary order that determines issues of fact or law in advance of a final decree, but leaves other issues to be resolved and thus does not resolve the litigation.

[ 15 ] It is usually not appealable, although preliminary injunctions by federal courts are appealable even though interlocutory.

[ 16 ] Executive orders , which are instructions from the President to the executive branch of government, are decrees in the general sense in that they have the force of law, although they cannot override statute law or the Constitution and are subject to judicial review. Governors of individual states may also issue state executive orders .

Ukraine [ edit ] Main article: Law of Ukraine You can help expand this section with text translated from the corresponding article in Ukrainian .

Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the Ukrainian article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 292 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Ukrainian Wikipedia article at [[:uk:Указ Президента України]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|uk|Указ Президента України}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

In Ukraine, decrees issued by the president are a major source of legal acts. Decrees are referred to as ukazy ( Ukrainian : укази ; sing.

указ , ukaz ).

See also [ edit ] Consent decree Edict Fatwa Firman Official Communications of the Chinese Empire Memorial to the throne Proclamation Rule by decree Rescript Soviet Decree Ukase Notes [ edit ] ^ "decree" .

LII / Legal Information Institute . Retrieved 2024-06-22 .

^ René Metz, What is Canon Law?

^ "Documents of the Second Vatican Council" .

www.vatican.va . Retrieved 2019-02-06 .

^ Canon 29 , 1983 Code of Canon Law ; accessed 30 March 2016.

^ "Decree" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . Retrieved 2007-02-17 .

^ "decree-law" in the Random House Dictionary.

^ "decree-law" in the Merriam-Webster Dictionary.

^ Buonomo, Giampiero (2000).

"Sanatoria del condono decaduto: a favore dei centri di recupero ma a rischio di incostituzionalità" .

Diritto&Giustizia Edizione Online . Archived from the original on 2012-08-01 . Retrieved 2016-03-17 .

^ KAVLAKOĞLU, Erdoğan.

KANUN HÜKMÜNDE KARARNAME KAVRAMI VE TÜRK ANAYASASINDA KANUN HÜKMÜNDE KARARNAMELERİN YERİ . Yüksek Denetleme Kurulu. Archived from the original on February 6, 2006.

^ TAN, Turgut.

TÜRK HUKUKUNDA KANUN HÜKMÜNDE KARARNAME UYGULAMASI VE SORUNLAR .

Ankara Universitesi Siyasal Bilgiler Fakultesi, Ogretim Uyesi.

^ Taşdöğen, Salih (2016-09-01).

"Cumhurbaşkanlığı Kararnameleri" .

Ankara Üniversitesi Hukuk Fakültesi Dergisi .

65 (3): 937– 966.

doi : 10.1501/Hukfak_0000001827 .

hdl : 11424/258964 .

ISSN 1301-1308 .

^ "Decree" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 7 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 915.

^ Lehman, Jeffrey; Phelps, Shirelle (2005).

West's Encyclopedia of American Law, Vol. 4 (2 ed.). Detroit: Thomson/Gale. p. 38.

ISBN 9780314201577 .

^ Matulewska, Aleksandra (1 June 2016).

"Semantic Relations between Legal Terms. A Case Study of the Intralingual Relation of Synonymy" .

Studies in Logic, Grammar and Rhetoric .

45 (1): 161– 174.

doi : 10.1515/slgr-2016-0022 .

S2CID 123298982 .

^ Brunsman, Robert H. (1954). "Decrees and Their Enforcement".

University of Illinois Law Forum .

51 : 41.

^ Cornell Law School , Legal Information Institute.

References [ edit ] Executive decree authority , John M. Carey and Matthew Soberg Shugart, Eds., Cambridge University Press, 1998, ISBN 0-521-59722-6 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Decrees .

All external sites in French unless otherwise noted.

1946 Constitution of the 4th Republic 1958 Constitution of the 5th Republic v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases : National Germany NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐lxtr4
Cached time: 20250814215158
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.614 seconds
Real time usage: 0.790 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2993/1000000
Revision size: 20601/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 145204/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5822/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 20/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 73448/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.370/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19131037/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  603.035      1 -total
 15.53%   93.628      1 Template:Canon_law
 15.32%   92.413     14 Template:Lang
 15.03%   90.631      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 10.97%   66.137      2 Template:Cite_web
  9.21%   55.519      1 Template:Expand_language
  8.20%   49.441      1 Template:Short_description
  8.16%   49.202      1 Template:Ambox
  6.62%   39.938      1 Template:Law
  6.36%   38.332      1 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:322949:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215158 and revision id 1297910261. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Decree&oldid=1297910261 " Categories : Sources of law Decrees Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2022 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing Russian-language text Articles needing translation from Ukrainian Wikipedia Articles containing Ukrainian-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 29 June 2025, at 08:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Decree 51 languages Add topic

