Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Implications 2 History 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Explanatory gap 12 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Inability to describe conscious experiences in solely physical or structural terms This article is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( September 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the philosophy of mind , the explanatory gap is the difficulty that physicalist philosophies have in explaining how physical properties give rise to the way things feel subjectively when they are experienced. It is a term introduced by philosopher Joseph Levine .

[ 1 ] In the 1983 paper in which he first used the term, he used as an example the sentence, "Pain is the firing of C fibers ", pointing out that while it might be valid in a physiological sense, it does not help us to understand how pain feels.

The explanatory gap has vexed and intrigued philosophers and AI researchers alike for decades and caused considerable debate. Bridging this gap (that is, finding a satisfying mechanistic explanation for experience and qualia ) is known as " the hard problem ".

[ 2 ] The hardness of the problem is such that mysterians believe it can never be solved by humans.

Ned Block argues that there also exists a "harder problem" of consciousness, due to the possibility of different physical and functional neurological systems potentially having phenomenal overlap.

[ 3 ] An example of a phenomenon in which there is no gap is a modern computer's behavior, which can be adequately explained by its physical components alone, such as its circuitry and software.

[ 4 ] In contrast, it is thought by many mind-body dualists (e.g.

René Descartes , David Chalmers ) that subjective conscious experience constitutes a separate effect that demands another cause that is either outside the physical world (dualism) or due to an as yet unknown physical phenomenon (see for instance quantum mind , indirect realism ).

Proponents of dualism claim that the mind is substantially and qualitatively different from the brain and that the existence of something metaphysically extra-physical is required to "fill the gap". Similarly, some argue that there are further facts —facts that do not follow logically from the physical facts of the world—about conscious experience. For example, they argue that what it is like to experience seeing red does not follow logically from the physical facts of the world.

In addition to the qualities of subjective experiences, the existence of personal identity also poses potential problems for physicalist philosophies. The question of why an individual has their particular personal identity has been called the vertiginous question by philosopher Benj Hellie [ 5 ] , and has been termed the "Even Harder Problem of Consciousness" by Tim S. Roberts.

[ 6 ] However, proponents of open individualism may argue that the existence of personal identity is illusory.

[ 7 ] Implications [ edit ] The nature of the explanatory gap is disputed. Some consider it to be simply a limit on our current explanatory ability.

[ 8 ] They argue that future neuroscience findings or philosophers' work could close the gap. Others argue that the gap is a definite limit on our cognitive abilities as humans—no amount of further information will allow us to close it.

[ 9 ] There is no consensus about what metaphysical conclusions the existence of the gap provides. Those who use its existence to support dualism have often assumed that an epistemic gap—particularly if it is a definite limit on our cognitive abilities—necessarily entails a metaphysical gap.

[ 10 ] Joseph Levine and others [ clarification needed ] opt to either remain silent on the matter or argue that no such metaphysical conclusion should be drawn.

[ 1 ] He agrees that conceivability (as used in the Zombie and inverted spectrum arguments) the theory is flawed as a means of establishing metaphysical realities; but argues that even if we come to the metaphysical conclusion that qualia are physical, they still present an explanatory problem.

While I think this materialist response is right in the end, it does not suffice to put the mind-body problem to rest. Even if conceivability considerations do not establish that the mind is in fact distinct from the body, or that mental properties are metaphysically irreducible to physical properties, still they do demonstrate that we lack an explanation of the mental in terms of the physical.

[ 11 ] However, such an epistemological or explanatory problem might indicate an underlying metaphysical issue—the non-physicality of qualia, even if not proven by conceivability arguments, is far from ruled out.

In the end, we are right back where we started. The explanatory gap argument doesn't demonstrate a gap in nature, but a gap in our understanding of nature. Of course, a plausible explanation for there being a gap in our understanding of nature is that there is a genuine gap in nature. But so long as we have countervailing reasons for doubting the latter, we have to look elsewhere for an explanation of the former.

[ 11 ] According to Levine, the core of the problem is our lack of understanding of what it means for a qualitative experience to be fully comprehended. He emphasizes that we do not even know to what extent it is appropriate to inquire into the nature of this kind of experience. He uses the laws of gravity as an example, which laws seem to explain gravity completely, yet do not account for the gravitational constant. Similar to how gravity appears to be an inexplicable brute fact of nature, the case of qualia may be one in which we either lack essential information or explore a natural phenomenon that is not further apprehensible. Levine suggests that, for this reason, perhaps we should consider whether it is necessary to find a more complete explanation of qualitative experience.

[ 12 ] Levine points out that understanding how much there is to be known about qualitative experience seems even more difficult because we lack a way to articulate what it means for actualities to be knowable in the manner he has in mind. He concludes that there are good reasons to want a more complete explanation of qualitative experiences. One is that consciousness appears to manifest only where mentality is demonstrated in physical systems that are quite highly organized.

This, of course, may indicate a human capacity for reasoning that is no more than the result of organized functions.

[ clarification needed ] Levine argues that it seems counterintuitive to accept this implication that the human brain, so highly organized as it is, could be no more than a routine executor.

[ non sequitur ] He notes that while materialism appears to entail the reducibility of anything that is not physically primary to an explanation of its dependence on a mechanism that can be described in terms of physical fundamentals, that kind of reductionism does not attempt to reduce psychology to physical science. However, it still entails that inexplicable classes of facts are not treated as relevant to statements pertinent to psychology.

[ how?

] [ citation needed ] Christian List believes that the existence of first-personal facts provides a refutation of not only physicalist theories of consciousness, but also most standard versions of dualism.

[ 13 ] Many philosophers have doubted that the explanatory gap can be solved. As proponents of the argument use it to support arguments against materialism, physicalism, and naturalism, its arguments appear to resist any scientific or philosophical solution to the problem. David Chalmers acknowledged that even when science somehow bridges the gap, the problem will persist.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Main article: Leibniz's gap Leibniz's passage describing the explanatory gap is as follows: It must be confessed, moreover, that perception, and that which depends on it, are inexplicable by mechanical causes, that is, by figures and motions, And, supposing that there were a mechanism so constructed as to think, feel and have perception, we might enter it as into a mill. And this granted, we should only find on visiting it, pieces which push one against another, but never anything by which to explain a perception. This must be sought, therefore, in the simple substance, and not in the composite or in the machine.

See also [ edit ] Animal consciousness Binding problem Blindsight Causality Consciousness Eliminative materialism Explanation Functionalism (philosophy of mind) Further facts Idealism Innatism Ideasthesia Materialism Mind Mind-body problem New mysterianism Philosophical zombie Philosophy of mind Platonism Problem of other minds Qualia Reductionism Reverse engineering Sentience Solipsism Turing test Vertiginous question Vitalism Leibniz's gap References [ edit ] ^ a b Levine, J. 1983. "Materialism and qualia: the explanatory gap", Pacific Philosophical Quarterly , 64: 354–361.

^ a b David Chalmers , Facing Up to the Problem of Consciousness , JCS, 2 (3), 1995 Archived 2011-05-14 at the Wayback Machine , pp. 200–19.

^ Block, Ned (2002).

"The Harder Problem of Consciousness" .

The Journal of Philosophy .

99 (8): 391– 425.

doi : 10.2307/3655621 .

JSTOR 3655621 .

S2CID 111383062 .

^ "Chapter 4: Mind and Body" .

www.utm.edu . Retrieved 15 March 2022 .

^ Hellie, Benj (2013).

"Against Egalitarianism" .

Analysis .

73 (2): 304– 320.

doi : 10.1093/analys/ans101 .

^ Roberts, Tim S. (September 2007).

" The Even Harder Problem of Consciousness by Roberts. Tim S." NeuroQuantology .

5 (2): 214– 221.

doi : 10.14704/nq.2007.5.2.129 .

^ Kolak, Daniel (2007-11-03).

I Am You: The Metaphysical Foundations for Global Ethics . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 978-1-4020-3014-7 .

^ Dennett, D. C. 1991.

Consciousness Explained . Boston: Little, Brown and Company.

^ McGinn, C. 1989. “Can we solve the mind-body problem?” Mind , 98: 349–66 ^ Chalmers, D. 1996.

The Conscious Mind . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

^ a b J. Levine, "Conceivability, Identity, and the Explanatory Gap" in Stuart R. Hameroff, Alfred W. Kaszniak and David Chalmers (eds.), Towards a Science of Consciousness III: The Third Tucson Discussions and Debates , The MIT Press, 1999, pp 3–12.

^ Levin, Janet (2002).

"Is Conceptual Analysis Needed for the Reduction of Qualitative States?" .

Philosophy and Phenomenological Research .

64 (3): 571– 591.

doi : 10.1111/j.1933-1592.2002.tb00161.x .

ISSN 0031-8205 .

JSTOR 3070969 . Retrieved 15 March 2022 .

^ List, Christian (2023).

"A quadrilemma for theories of consciousness" . The Philosophical Quarterly . Retrieved 3 September 2024 .

External links [ edit ] Joseph Levine's homepage "What is it like to be a bat?" Archived 2011-10-16 at the Wayback Machine Thomas Nagel, The Philosophical Review LXXXIII, 4 (October 1974): 435–50.

v t e Consciousness Figures Philosophy Alfred North Whitehead Arthur Schopenhauer Baruch Spinoza Bertrand Russell Brian O'Shaughnessy Charles Augustus Strong Christopher Peacocke Colin McGinn Daniel Dennett David Chalmers David Hume David Papineau David Pearce Donald Davidson Douglas Hofstadter Edmund Husserl Frank Jackson Fred Dretske Galen Strawson George Berkeley George Henry Lewes Georges Rey Gottfried Leibniz Immanuel Kant John Eccles John Locke John Polkinghorne John Searle Joseph Levine Karl Popper Keith Frankish Kenneth M. Sayre Maurice Merleau-Ponty Max Velmans Michael Tye Martin Heidegger Ned Block Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Philip Goff René Descartes Thomas Metzinger Thomas Nagel William Kingdon Clifford William Lycan William Seager Psychology Carl Gustav Jung Donald D. Hoffman Franz Brentano Gustav Fechner Julian Jaynes Kurt Koffka Max Wertheimer Sigmund Freud Wilhelm Wundt William James Wolfgang Köhler Neuroscience Anil Seth Antonio Damasio Benjamin Libet Bernard Baars Christof Koch Francis Crick Francisco Varela Gerald Edelman Giulio Tononi Karl Pribram Lawrence Weiskrantz Michael Gazzaniga Michael Graziano Patrick Wilken Roger Sperry Stanislas Dehaene Steven Laureys Stuart Hameroff Wolf Singer Others Annaka Harris David Bohm Eugene Wigner Erwin Schrödinger Marvin Minsky Max Planck Roger Penrose Susan Blackmore Victor J. Stenger Wolfgang Pauli Theories Philosophy of mind Anomalous monism Computationalism Double-aspect theory Eliminative materialism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Idealism Interactionism Materialism Mind–body dualism Monism Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Panpsychism Parallelism Physicalism Property dualism Reflexive monism Revisionary materialism Solipsism Type physicalism (reductive materialism, identity theory) Science Attention schema theory Consciousness causes collapse Dynamic core hypothesis Damasio's theory of consciousness Electromagnetic theories of consciousness Global workspace theory Higher-order theories of consciousness Holonomic brain theory Integrated information theory Lamme's recurrent feedback hypothesis Multiple drafts model Orchestrated objective reduction Topics Agnosia Altered state of consciousness Animal consciousness Artificial consciousness Attention Attentional control Awareness Binding problem Binocular rivalry Blindsight Brain Cartesian theater Consciousness after death Disorders of consciousness Divided consciousness Dual consciousness (split-brain) Experience Explanatory gap Free will Flash suppression Hallucination Hard problem of consciousness Heterophenomenology Higher consciousness Illusion Introspection illusion Knowledge argument Locked-in syndrome Mind Mind–body problem Minimally conscious state Neural correlates of consciousness Neurophenomenology Ontology Phenomenology Philosophical zombie Philosophy of mind Primary consciousness Problem of other minds Qualia Quantum mind Reentry Sakshi Purusha Secondary consciousness Sentience Sentientism Sociology of human consciousness Soul Stream of consciousness Subconscious Subjective character of experience Subjectivity and objectivity Unconscious mind Unconsciousness Upanishads Visual masking Consciousness causes collapse Yogachara Works A Universe of Consciousness Association for the Scientific Study of Consciousness Consciousness and Cognition Consciousness Explained Cosmic Consciousness How the Self Controls Its Brain Journal of Consciousness Studies Online Consciousness Conference Psyche The Astonishing Hypothesis The Conscious Mind The Emperor's New Mind The Science of Consciousness Understanding Consciousness " What Is It Like to Be a Bat?

" Wider than the Sky Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Explanatory_gap&oldid=1303790156 " Categories : Arguments in philosophy of mind Concepts in the philosophy of mind Consciousness Metaphysics of mind Mind–body problem Phenomenology Philosophical analogies Philosophical problems Philosophy of science Physicalism Subjective experience Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles with style issues from September 2020 All articles with style issues Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2020 This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 02:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Explanatory gap 12 languages Add topic

