Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Methods 3 Help within the dental community 4 Benefits 5 In dental insurance policies 6 References Toggle the table of contents Teledentistry 2 languages العربية Slovenčina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Use of telecommunications in dental care Teledentistry is the use of information technology and telecommunications for dental care , consultation, [ 1 ] education, and public awareness (compare telehealth and telemedicine ).

History [ edit ] In 1994, the Department of Defense introduced the Total Dental Access Program (TDA) for the Army.

[ 2 ] The goals of TDA were to increase soldier's access to care and reduce associated costs. At the time, they used what was called the plain-old-telephone-system (POTS).

In the early nineteen nineties, videoconferencing, e-mail, fax , and telephone calls were used but more recently, video conferencing and high-quality image transfer have become easily accessible. These, and the considerable improvements in digital camera technology, have provided radical new opportunities.

Nearly a third of all Americans do not visit a dentist regularly enough, according to the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index.

[ 3 ] There are many reasons for this, most notably affordability, access and fear.

Several teledental companies operate in the United States. Direct-to-consumer orthodontics companies like SmileDirectClub also utilize teledentistry, but have drawn criticism regarding proper supervision of care.

[ 4 ] Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, dental practices were ordered to be shutdown [ 5 ] to help curb the spread of the coronavirus. As a means of providing a method by which dentists could still communicate with their patients during the shutdown, teledentistry became adopted across the world. In the US, several laws had been enacted to curb the rise of direct-to-consumer orthodontics which also invalidated the use of teledentistry by duly licensed dentists. These laws were quickly rescinded to address the pandemic and hence teledentistry is now widely used by dentists in the US.

[ 6 ] Methods [ edit ] Live Video (Synchronous) :
Live two-way video between a patient and provider using audiovisual telecommunications technology.

[ 7 ] Live video is often used to triage patients to the appropriate level of care or for specialty consultations. The American Dental Association has designated the code D9995 for this type of teledentistry.

Store-and-forward (Asynchronous) :
Transmission of recorded health information (for example, radiographs or digital impressions taken by an appropriately licensed provider) through a secure electronic communications system to a practitioner, who uses the information to evaluate or diagnose the patient's condition outside at a later time.

[ 7 ] The American Dental Association has designated the code D9996 for this type of teledentistry.

Remote Patient Monitoring :
Health data collection from an individual in one location (usually outside of a conventional clinical setting), which is transmitted to a provider in a different location for use in care and related support.

[ 7 ] mHealth :
Health promotion and education via mobile devices such as cell phones or tablets.

[ 7 ] Help within the dental community [ edit ] Another method is the Remote Monitoring Method in which dentists communicate with each other through the use of radiographs and other data like the patient's clinical findings, photographs, test results and case history. The patient is not present in this method of teleconsultation.

Disadvantages of this can include misinterpretation of messages, privacy issues and insufficient training of the professionals.

[ 8 ] Benefits [ edit ] Teledentistry can provide easier, cheaper and less intimidating way to connect with dentistry. Teledentistry can also be used to assist general dentists with speciality work [ 9 ] and improve services to underserved populations such as in rural or less developed areas.

[ 10 ] In dental insurance policies [ edit ] The dental insurance industry had adopted ADA codes such as D9995 and D9996 to acknowledge that teledentistry as a subset of telehealth exists and that these codes are recognized by the industry. However, largely the dental insurance companies had not made these codes payable to dentists in the event that they were actually billed when a teledentistry service was rendered to a patient. With the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the American Dental Association in November 2020, The resolution also states that dental insurers—both public and private—should cover services provided through teledentistry at the same level as if the services were delivered in a traditional in-person encounter.

[ 11 ] This recommendation from the American Dental Association was strongly adopted by dental insurance carriers who in turn went a step further to include value added benefits to their dental insurance policies to allow for teledentistry.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] References [ edit ] ^ Clark, GT (2000). "Teledentistry: What is it now, and what will it be tomorrow?".

Journal of the California Dental Association .

28 (2): 121– 7.

doi : 10.1080/19424396.2000.12223058 .

PMID 11323836 .

S2CID 46508527 .

^ Rocca, M. A.; Kudryk, V. L.; Pajak, J. C.; Morris, T (1999).

"The evolution of a teledentistry system within the Department of Defense" .

Proceedings. AMIA Symposium : 921– 4.

ISSN 1531-605X .

PMC 2232632 .

PMID 10566495 .

^ "Oral Health Isn't Much Of Americans' Concern, Poll Finds: One-Third Didn't See The Dentist Last Year" .

Medical Daily . 2014-04-29 . Retrieved 2017-11-27 .

^ "In-home teeth straightening can save thousands. But brace yourself for the risks" .

Los Angeles Times . 2020 . Retrieved 2020-05-27 .

^ Kalenderian, Elsbeth; Spallek, Heiko; Franklin, Amy; Olsen, Gregory; Walji, Muhammad F. (24 February 2022).

"COVID-19 and Dentistry: Challenges and Opportunities for Providing Safe Care" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "Governor Abbott Signs Texas Teledentistry Bill into Law" .

Dentistry Today . 2021-06-18 . Retrieved 2021-12-29 .

^ a b c d "ADA Policy of Teledentistry" .

American Dental Association . 2015 . Retrieved 2020-05-25 .

^ Santi, Dr Priti (2019-07-06).

"Why is teledentistry wonderful for you?" .

DentalDost . Retrieved 2020-12-11 .

^ "Teledentistry Shows Potential to Assist Rural Communities" . NIH. December 24, 2008. Archived from the original on January 13, 2009.

^ Chen, Jung-Wei; Hob-Dell, Martin H.; Dunn, Kim; Johnson, Kathy A.; Zhang, Jiajie (2003).

"Teledentistry and its use in dental education" .

Journal of the American Dental Association .

134 (3): 342– 6.

doi : 10.14219/jada.archive.2003.0164 .

PMID 12699048 .

^ "ADA updates teledentistry policy" .

^ "News releases" .

^ "New Teledentistry Coverage Benefit Delta Dental of Iowa Members - Delta Dental of Iowa" .

^ Delta Dental of Arizona (January 19, 2022).

"Delta Dental of Arizona Launches Delta Dental Virtual Visits Delivered by TeleDentistry.com" .

www.deltadentalaz.com . Retrieved 2023-04-14 .

^ "Delta Dental of Illinois adds 24/7 virtual visits" . 10 March 2022.

v t e Telemedicine and telehealth Background concepts Health informatics In absentia health care Telecommunication Medical record Admission note Blue Button De-identification Electronic health record Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act Personal health record Patient participation Decision aids Doctor–patient relationship E-patient Health 2.0 Health education Knowledge translation mHealth Participative decision-making in organizations Patient Activation Measure Shared decision-making Health information on the Internet Health information on Wikipedia Online patient education PubMed PubMed Central Telemedicine subspecialties eHealth Remote surgery Remote therapy Remote patient monitoring Tele-audiology Tele-epidemiology Teledentistry Teledermatology Telemental health Telenursing Teleophthalmology Telepathology Telepharmacy Telepsychiatry Teleradiology Telerehabilitation Roles to play Open-source healthcare software Patient opinion leader Research participant Virtual patient Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Teledentistry&oldid=1301336786 " Categories : Dentistry Telemedicine Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 07:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Teledentistry 2 languages Add topic

