Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Sociological perspectives Toggle Sociological perspectives subsection 2.1 McCarthyism 2.2 Paranoid-style politics 3 Current size 4 Social structure 5 Conspiracism 6 Right-wing populism 7 History Toggle History subsection 7.1 Conspiracy theories 7.2 Anti-Masonic Party 7.3 Nativism and xenophobia 7.4 White paramilitary organizations in the Southern United States 7.5 American Protective Association 7.6 Second Ku Klux Klan 7.7 Great Depression 7.7.1 Father Coughlin 7.7.2 Smaller fringe groups 7.8 McCarthyism 7.9 John Birch Society 7.10 American Independent Party 7.11 Constitutional militia and patriot movements 7.12 Paleoconservatism 7.13 Counter-jihad 7.14 Minuteman Project 7.15 Alt-right 7.16 Groypers 8 Notable organizations 9 See also 10 Notes 11 Works cited 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Radical right (United States) 5 languages العربية Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political preference that leans towards extreme conservatism and anti-socialism This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e See also: Fascism in the United States In the politics of the United States , the radical right is a political preference that leans towards ultraconservatism , white nationalism , white supremacy , or other far-right ideologies in a hierarchical structure which is paired with conspiratorial rhetoric alongside traditionalist and reactionary aspirations.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] The term was first used by social scientists in the 1950s regarding small groups such as the John Birch Society in the United States, and since then it has been applied to similar groups worldwide.

[ 5 ] The term "radical" was applied to the groups because they sought to make fundamental (hence " radical ") changes within institutions and remove persons and institutions that threatened their values or economic interests from political life.

[ 6 ] Terminology Among academics and social scientists there has been disagreement over how right-wing political movement should be described, and no consensus over what the proper terminology should be exists, although the terminology which was developed in the 1950s, based on the use of the words "radical" or "extremist", is the most commonly used one. Other scholars simply prefer to call them "The Right" or " conservatives ", which is what they call themselves. The terminology is used to describe a broad range of movements.

[ 5 ] The term "radical right" was coined by Seymour Martin Lipset . It was included in a book titled The New American Right ( 1955).

[ 7 ] The contributors to that book identified a conservative "responsible Right" as represented by the Republican administration of Dwight D. Eisenhower and a radical right that wished to change political and social life.

[ 8 ] Further to the right of the radical right, they identified themselves as the "ultraright", adherents of which advocated drastic change, but they only used violence against the state in extreme cases. In the decades since, the ultraright, while adopting the basic ideology of the 1950s radical right, [ 9 ] has updated it to encompass what it sees as "threats" posed by the modern world . It has leveraged fear of those threats to draw new adherents, and to encourage support of a more militant approach to countering these perceived threats. A book written by Klaus Wah in the year 2000, The Radical Right , contrasts the radical right of the 1950s, which obtained influence during the Reagan administration, to the radical right of today, which has increasingly turned to violent acts beginning with the Oklahoma City bombing in 1995.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 10 ] Wahl's book documents this evolution: "Ideologies of [today's] radical right emphasize social and economic threats in the modern and postmodern world (e.g., globalization, immigration). The radical right also promises protection against such threats by an emphatic ethnic construction of 'we', the people, as a familiar, homogeneous in-group, anti-modern, or reactionary structures of family, society, an authoritarian state, nationalism , the discrimination, or exclusion of immigrants and other minorities ... While favoring traditional social and cultural structures (traditional family and gender roles, religion , etc.) the radical right uses modern technologies and it does not ascribe to a specific economic policy; some parties advocate a liberal, free-market policy, but other parties advocate a welfare state policy. Finally, the radical right can be scaled by using different degrees of militancy and aggressiveness from right-wing populism to racism , terrorism , and totalitarianism ." [ 11 ] Ultraright groups, as The Radical Right definition states, are normally called " far-right " groups, [ 12 ] but they may also be called "radical right" groups.

[ 13 ] According to Clive Webb, "Radical right is commonly, but not exclusively used to describe anticommunist organizations such as the Christian Crusade and the John Birch Society ... [T]he term far right ... is the label most broadly used by scholars ... to describe militant white supremacists ." [ 14 ] Sociological perspectives McCarthyism The study of the radical right began in the 1950s as social scientists attempted to explain McCarthyism , which was seen as a lapse from the American political tradition. A framework for description was developed primarily in The Pseudo-Conservative Revolt by the American historian Richard Hofstadter and The Sources of The "Radical Right" by Seymour Martin Lipset . These essays, along with others by Daniel Bell , Talcott Parsons , Peter Viereck and Herbert Hyman , were included in The New American Right (1955). In 1963, following the rise of the John Birch Society, the authors were asked to re-examine their earlier essays and the revised essays were published in the book The Radical Right . Lipset, along with Earl Raab, traced the history of the radical right in The Politics of Unreason (1970).

[ 15 ] The central arguments of The Radical Right provoked criticism. Some on the Right thought that McCarthyism could be explained as a rational reaction to communism. Others thought McCarthyism should be explained as part of the Republican Party's political strategy. Critics on the Left denied that McCarthyism could be interpreted as a mass movement and rejected the comparison with 19th-century populism. Others saw status politics, dispossession and other explanations as too vague.

[ 16 ] Paranoid-style politics Two different approaches were taken by these social scientists. Richard Hofstadter wrote an analysis in his influential 1964 essay The Paranoid Style in American Politics . Hofstadter sought to identify the characteristics of the groups. Hofstadter defined politically paranoid individuals as feeling persecuted, fearing conspiracy, and acting over-aggressive yet socialized . Hofstadter and other scholars in the 1950s argued that the major left-wing movement of the 1890s, the Populists, showed what Hofstadter said was "paranoid delusions of conspiracy by the Money Power".

[ 17 ] Historians have also applied the paranoid category to other political movements, such as the conservative Constitutional Union Party of 1860.

[ 18 ] Hofstadter's approach was later applied to the rise of new right-wing groups, including the Christian right and the Patriot movement .

[ 15 ] Current size Political scientist Gary Jacobson [ 19 ] gives an estimate of the "size of the extremist vote" as a fraction of Republican Party voters (there being essentially no right-wing extremists in the Democratic party ), based on sympathizers as well as active supporters of the " Proud Boys , Oath Keepers , QAnon etc.". He points to survey data of Republicans who answered "yes" to questions such as whether they had a "favorable opinion of the people who invaded the Capitol on Jan. 6 ", thought it likely that Donald Trump would "be reinstated as president before the end of 2021", and whether it was "definitely true" that "top Democrats are involved in elite child sex-trafficking rings ." Based on the results, which were stable over 2020–2022, he estimated that "20 to 25 percent of the Republican electorate can be considered extremists".

[ 20 ] Social structure Sociologists Lipset and Raab were focused on who joined these movements and how they evolved. They saw the development of radical right-wing groups as occurring in three stages. In the first stage certain groups came under strain because of a loss or threatened loss of power and/or status. In the second stage they theorize about what has led to this threat. In the third stage they identify people and groups whom they consider to be responsible. A successful radical right-wing group would be able to combine the anxieties of both elites and masses. European immigration for example threatened the elites because immigrants brought socialism and radicalism, while for the masses the threat came from their Catholicism. The main elements are low democratic restraint, having more of a stake in the past than the present and laissez-faire economics. The emphasis is on preserving social rather than economic status. The main population attracted are lower-educated, lower-income and lower-occupational strata. They were seen as having a lower commitment to democracy, instead having loyalty to groups, institutions and systems.

[ 21 ] However, some scholars reject Lipset and Raab's analysis. James Aho, for example, says that the way individuals join right-wing groups is no different from how they join other types of groups. They are influenced by recruiters and join because they believe the goals promoted by the group are of value to them and find personal value in belonging to the group. Several scholars, including Sara Diamond and Chip Berlet , reject the theory that membership in the radical right is driven by emotionality and irrationality and see them as similar to other political movements. John George and Laird Wilcox see the psychological claims in Lipset and Raab's approach as "dehumanizing" of members of the radical right. They claim that the same description of members of the radical right is also true of many people within the political mainstream.

[ 22 ] Richard Hofstadter found a common thread in the radical right, from fear of the Illuminati in the late 18th century, to anti-Catholic and anti-Masonic movements in the 19th to McCarthyism and the John Birch Society in the 20th. They were conspiracist , Manichean, absolutist and paranoid. They saw history as a conspiracy by a demonic force that was on the verge of total control, requiring their urgent efforts to stop it. Therefore, they rejected pluralistic politics, with its compromise and consensus-building. Hofstadter thought that these characteristics were always present in a large minority of the population. Frequent waves of status displacement would continually bring it to the surface.

[ 23 ] D. J. Mulloy, however, noted that the term "extremist" is often applied to groups outside the political mainstream and the term is dropped once these groups obtain respectability, using the Palestine Liberation Organization as an example. The mainstream frequently ignores the commonality between itself and so-called extremist organizations. Also, the radical right appeals to views that are held by the mainstream: antielitism, individualism, and egalitarianism. Their views on religion, race, Americanism and guns are held by a significant proportion of other white Americans.

[ 24 ] Conspiracism Main article: Conspiracy theory Further information: List of conspiracy theories Throughout modern history , conspiracism has been a major feature of the radical right [ 4 ] and subject to numerous books and articles, the most famous of which is Richard Hofstadter's essay The Paranoid Style in American Politics (1964). Imaginary threats have variously been identified as originating from American Catholics , non-whites , women , homosexuals , secular humanists , Mormons , Jews , Muslims , Hindus , Buddhists , American communists , Freemasons , bankers , and the U.S. government .

Alexander Zaitchik , writing for the Southern Poverty Law Center (SPLC), credited cable news hosts, including Glenn Beck , Lou Dobbs , the John Birch Society , and WorldNetDaily with popularizing conspiracy theories. In the Fall 2010 issue of the SPLC's Intelligence Report , he identified the following as the top 10 conspiracy theories of the radical right: [ 25 ] Chemtrails Martial Law Federal Emergency Management Agency Concentration Camps Foreign troops on US soil Door-to-door gun confiscations 9/11 as government plan Population control High Frequency Active Auroral Research Program (HAARP) Federal Reserve North American Union Common to most of these theories is an overarching belief in the existence of New World Order intent on instituting a one-world, communist government.

[ 25 ] Climate change being viewed as a hoax is also sometimes associated with the radical right.

[ 26 ] Since 2017, the QAnon conspiracy theory has been widely promulgated among fringe groups on the far-right.

[ 27 ] During the COVID-19 pandemic , far-right leaders and influencers have promoted anti-vaccination rhetoric and conspiracy theories surrounding the pandemic .

[ 28 ] Right-wing populism Main article: Right-wing populism § United States From the 1990s onward, parties that have been described as radical right became established in the legislatures of various democracies including Canada , Australia , Norway , France , Israel , Russia , Romania , and Chile , and they also entered coalition governments in Switzerland , Finland , Austria , the Netherlands , and Italy . However, there is little consensus about the reasons for this.

[ 29 ] Some of these parties had historic roots, such as the National Alliance , formed as the Italian Social Movement in 1946, the French National Front , founded in 1972, and the Freedom Party of Austria , an existing party that moved sharply to the right after 1986. Typically new right-wing parties, such as the French Poujadists , the U.S.

Reform Party and the Dutch Pim Fortuyn List enjoyed short-lived prominence.

[ 30 ] The main support for these parties comes from both the self-employed and skilled and unskilled labor, with support coming predominantly from males.

[ 31 ] However, scholars are divided on whether these parties are radical right, since they differ from the groups described in earlier studies of the radical right. They are more often described as populist.

[ 32 ] Studies of the radical right in the United States and right-wing populism in Europe have tended to be conducted independently, with very few comparisons made. European analyses have tended to use comparisons with fascism , while studies of the American radical right have stressed American exceptionalism . The U.S. studies have paid attention to the consequences of slavery, the profusion of religious denominations and a history of immigration, and saw fascism as uniquely European.

[ 33 ] Although the term "radical right" was American in origin, the term has been consciously adopted by some European social scientists. Conversely the term "right-wing extremism", which is European in origin, has been adopted by some American social scientists. Since the European right-wing groups in existence immediately following the war had roots in fascism, they were normally called " neo-fascist ". However, as new right-wing groups emerged with no connection to historical fascism, the use of the term "right-wing extremism" came to be more widely used.

[ 34 ] See also: Fascism in the United States Jeffrey Kaplan and Leonard Weinberg argued that the radical right in the U.S. and right-wing populism in Europe were the same phenomenon that existed throughout the Western world. They identified the core attributes as contained in extremism, behaviour and beliefs. As extremists, they see no moral ambiguity and demonize the enemy, sometimes connecting them to conspiracy theories such as the New World Order. Given this worldview, there is a tendency to use methods outside democratic norms, although this is not always the case. The main core belief is inequality, which often takes the form of opposition to immigration or racism. They do not see this new Right as having any connection with the historic Right, which had been concerned with protecting the status quo .

[ 35 ] They also see the cooperation of the American and European forms, and their mutual influence on each other, as evidence of their existence as a single phenomenon.

[ 36 ] Daniel Bell argues that the ideology of the radical right is "its readiness to jettison constitutional processes and to suspend liberties, to condone Communist methods in the fighting of Communism".

[ 37 ] Historian Richard Hofstadter agrees that communist-style methods are often emulated: "The John Birch Society emulates Communist cells and quasi-secret operation through 'front' groups, and preaches a ruthless prosecution of the ideological war along lines very similar to those it finds in the Communist enemy". He also quotes Barry Goldwater : "I would suggest that we analyze and copy the strategy of the enemy; theirs has worked and ours has not".

[ 38 ] American historian Rick Perlstein argues that radical right issues, including populism , nativism , and authoritarianism—embodied by conspiracy-minded right-wing movements, such as the Black Legion , Charles Coughlin , the Christian Front , and " birther " speculation [ 39 ] — have had more influence on mainstream conservatism than William F. Buckley 's libertarian ideas of limited government , free trade and free market economics ; or neoconservative ideas like pro-immigration and empire-building.

[ 39 ] History Conspiracy theories Main article: American political conspiracy theories See also: Far-right conspiracy theories and List of conspiracy theories The American Patriots who spearheaded the American Revolution in the 1770s were motivated primarily by an ideology that historians call Republicanism .

[ 40 ] It stressed the dangers of aristocracy , as represented by the British government, corruption, and the need for every citizen to display civic virtue. When public affairs took a bad turn, Republicans were inclined to identify a conspiracy of evil forces as the cause.

[ 41 ] Against this background of fear of conspiracies against American liberties the first Radical Right-style responses came in the 1790s.

[ 42 ] Some Federalists warned of an organized conspiracy involving Thomas Jefferson and his followers, and recent arrivals from Europe, alleging that they were agents of the French revolutionary agenda of violent radicalism, social equalitarianism and anti-Christian infidelity.

[ 43 ] The Federalists in 1798 acted by passing the Alien and Sedition Acts , designed to protect the country against both foreign and domestic radicals. Fear of immigration led to a riot in New York City in 1806 between nativists and Irishmen, which led to increased calls by Federalists to nativism.

[ 42 ] [ 44 ] Anti-Masonic Party Main articles: Anti-Masonic Party , Anti-Masonry § The United States , and Freemasonry in the United States In America, public outrage against privilege and aristocracy in the United States was expressed in the Northeast by advocates of anti-Masonry , the belief that Freemasonry comprised powerful evil secret elites which rejected republican values and were blocking the movement toward egalitarianism and reform. The anti-Masons, with a strong evangelical base, organized into a political party, the Anti-Masonic Party that pledged to rid Masons from public office. It was most active in 1828–1836. The Freemason movement was badly damaged and never fully recovered; the Anti-Mason movement merged into the coalition that became the new Whig Party . The anti-Masonry movement was not "radical"; it fully participated in democracy, and was animated by the belief that the Masons were the ones subverting democracy in America.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] While earlier accounts of the antimasons portrayed their supporters as mainly poor people, more recent scholarship has shown that they were largely middle-class.

[ 47 ] Nativism and xenophobia Main articles: Nativism (politics) § United States , Nativism in United States politics , Xenophobia § United States , Xenophobia in the United States , and Know-Nothing Riots in United States politics The arrival of large numbers of Irish Catholic immigrants in the 1830s and 1840s led to a reaction among Americans, who were alarmed by the levels of crime and welfare dependency among the new arrivals, and the danger of political power in the hands of the Pope. This led to the organized Nativists and xenophobes . Nativists in New York formed the American Republican Party . It merged into the Know Nothings in the 1850s. The Know-Nothing activists and Irish Catholics fought a series of election-day confrontations especially in the 1856 , with multiple injuries and a few deaths.

The Know Nothing party split over the issue of slavery and its northern wing merged into the Republican Party in the late 1850s.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] White paramilitary organizations in the Southern United States Starting in the 1870s and continuing through the late 19th century, numerous white supremacist paramilitary groups operated in the South , with the goal of intimidating African-American supporters of the Republican Party . Examples of such groups included the Red Shirts and the White League .

[ 50 ] American Protective Association In the Midwestern United States in 1887, the American Protective Association (APA) was formed by Irish Protestants from Canada who wanted to fight against the political power of Irish Catholic politicians. It was a secret organization with vastly exaggerated membership claims whose members campaigned for Protestant candidates in local elections and it opposed the hiring of Catholics for government jobs. The movement relied on forged documents and was rejected by mainstream Republicans. Anti-Catholicism was declining in America as the Catholics moved up the social ladder, and the APA quickly faded away in the mid-1890s.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] [ 53 ] Second Ku Klux Klan The Second Ku Klux Klan , was formed in 1915 but grew very slowly until the early 1920s. Then entrepreneurs took it over as a cash machine whereby well-paid state and local organizers formed a local chapter and collected initiation fees, while the national office sold expensive white robes with masks. The organizers collected the money and moved on, leaving locals with weak leadership.

[ 54 ] Once the state leaders were exposed as frauds in the mid-1920s, the KKK collapsed rapidly. Organizers promised membership would be secret, and appealed to Anti-Catholicism as well as hostility to Jews and African Americans.

Protestant fundamentalists were the main recruits, along with poorly educated men. The Klan organizers claimed that Catholics were controlled by the Pope. They supported prohibition and public schools. The Klan was anti-elitist and it also attacked "the intellectuals", seeing itself as the egalitarian defender of the common man.

[ 55 ] The Klan was denounced by the Republicans, but the Democrats split bitterly on a proposal to denounce the Klan in 1924.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] Great Depression During the Great Depression in the United States there were several popular new movements. On the left the largest by far was Huey Long 's Share Our Wealth , which attacked capitalism and was expanding from its base in Louisiana when Long was assassinated. On the right the most important was Father Coughlin .

[ 58 ] Father Coughlin Charles Coughlin (Father Coughlin) was a Catholic priest who immigrated from Canada to Detroit and began broadcasting on religious matters in 1926. When his program went national in 1930, he began to comment on political issues, promoting a left-wing attack that was highly critical of American capitalists. By 1932 he had millions of regular listeners. He supported Franklin D. Roosevelt in 1932 and promoted the early New Deal .

[ 59 ] He broke with Roosevelt in 1935 on foreign policy. Coughlin then denounced the New Deal , which he claimed had accomplished little but instead had strengthened the position of the bankers.

[ 60 ] In 1934 he set up the "National Union for Social Justice", as a network of local clubs he would control. The National Union never flourished and it closed in 1936.

[ 61 ] Instead he endorsed the left-wing presidential campaign of William Lemke , who campaigned on the Union Party ticket, as a new third party. Lemke was also supported by Gerald L. K. Smith , head of the remnants of the Share Our Wealth movement and Dr.

Francis Townsend , head of the left-wing Townsend Old Age movement. In the election, however, Lemke received fewer than 900,000 votes.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] After 1936 Coughlin used his radio show and magazine to push America far to the right.

[ 64 ] He endorsed the fascism of Mussolini's Italy and Hitler's Nazi Germany. At home he attacked labor unions and liberal politicians for being pro-Communist. He called for a corporate state and setting up "Social Justice Councils", which excluded non-Christians from their membership. His magazine, Social Justice , named Benito Mussolini as man of the year in 1938 and defended Hitler 's "persecution" of Jews, whom he linked with Communism. Major radio stations then refused to air his broadcasts and the Post Office banned Social Justice from the mails in 1942 after the U.S. entered World War II. The previous Catholic archbishop of Detroit had defended Coughlin but the new archbishop ordered him to cease his political activities and radio broadcasts. Coughlin did so and retired from political life.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] [ 67 ] Smaller fringe groups The Black Legion , which had a peak membership of 40,000 was formed by former Klansmen and operated in Indiana , Ohio and Michigan . Unlike the Klan, its members dressed in black and its organizational hierarchy was based on the organizational hierarchy of the military, not on the organizational hierarchy of fraternal organizations. Its members swore an oath to keep "the secrets of the order to support God, the United States Constitution , and the Black Legion in its holy war against Catholics, Jews, Communists, Negroes, and aliens". The organization went into decline after more than fifty members were convicted of various crimes in support of the organization. The typical member was from a small farm in the South, lacked a high school graduation diploma, was married with children and worked in unskilled labor.

[ 68 ] Gerald B. Winrod , a fundamentalist Christian minister who founded the Defenders of the Christian Faith revived the Illuminati conspiracy theory that was originally introduced into the United States in 1798. He claimed that the French and Russian Revolutions were both directed by the Illuminati and he also claimed that the Protocols of the Elders of Zion was an accurate expose of a Jewish conspiracy. He believed that the Jews, the Catholics, the communists and the bankers were all working together and plotting to destroy American Protestantism. Although Winrod's appeal was mainly limited to rural, poor, uneducated fundamentalist Christians, his magazine The Defender reached a peak circulation of 100,000 in the late 1930s.

[ 69 ] William Dudley Pelley 's Silver Shirts movement was overtly modelled on European fascism and introduced a populist statist plan for economic organization. The United States would be reorganized as a corporation, with individuals paid according to their contributions, although African Americans, aboriginals and aliens would be treated as wards of the state and therefore hold a lower status. The organization blamed the Jews for the depression, communism, and the spread of immorality, but it openly accepted Catholics as members. Its membership was largely uneducated, poor and elderly, with a high proportion of neurotics, and it also had a large female membership. Its main base of support was in small communities in the Midwest and on the West Coast, and it had almost no presence in the Southern States.

[ 70 ] McCarthyism Main article: McCarthyism Although the United States emerged from the Second World War as the world's most powerful country economically and militarily, communism had also been strengthened. Communism had spread in Eastern Europe and southeast Asia, and there were numerous Communist insurgencies.

[ 71 ] At the same time, Communist espionage had been found in the U.S. Responding to the fears the new enemy presented, Joe McCarthy , a Republican U.S. senator from Wisconsin, claimed in 1950 that there were 205 Communist spies in the State Department.

[ 72 ] The main target of McCarthyism, however, was ideological nonconformism, and individuals were targeted for their beliefs. Black lists were established in many industries restricting the employment of suspected nonconformists, and libraries were pressured to remove books and periodicals that were considered suspect. McCarthy investigated Voice of America and although no communists were found, 30 employees were fired as a result.

[ 73 ] The strongest support for McCarthyism came from some of the German and Irish Catholics, who had been isolationist in both world wars, had an anti-British bias, and opposed socialism on ostensibly religious grounds. Catholic support was far from uniform, and many Catholics were actively opposed to McCarthy and his methods.

[ 74 ] Much of the hostility was directed against the Eastern elites.

[ 75 ] Following the GOP landslide in 1952, McCarthy continued his investigations into the new Republican administration until the Republican party turned against him.

[ 76 ] John Birch Society The John Birch Society , which was created in 1958, combined economic liberalism with anti-communism . The founder, Robert Welch Jr.

, believed that the greatest enemy of man was government, and the more extensive the government, the greater the enemy. To him, government was inherently corrupt and a threat to peace. He advocated private institutions, local government and rigid individualism.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] American Independent Party The 1968 presidential campaign of George Wallace created a new party called the American Independent Party (AIP) which in later years came under the control of Radical Right elements. In 1969, the party had split into two groups, the anti-communist American Party under the leadership of T. Coleman Andrews and another group under the AIP founder Bill Shearer . Both groups opposed federal intervention into schools, favored police suppression of domestic disorder and victory in the Vietnam War. The two groups united under the American Party banner in order to support the 1972 presidential campaign of George Wallace, but after he withdrew they nominated U.S. Representative John G. Schmitz .

[ 79 ] Constitutional militia and patriot movements Main articles: American militia movement , Patriot movement , and Christian Patriot movement Although small militias had existed throughout the latter half of the 20th century, the groups became more popular during the early 1990s, after a series of standoffs between armed citizens and federal government agents, such as the 1992 Ruby Ridge siege and 1993 Waco Siege . These groups expressed concern for what they perceived as government tyranny within the United States and generally held libertarian and constitutionalist political views, with a strong focus on the Second Amendment gun rights and tax protest. They also embraced many of the same conspiracy theories as predecessor groups on the radical right, particularly the New World Order theory. Currently active examples of such groups are the 3 Percenters and the Oath Keepers . A minority of militia groups, such as Posse Comitatus and the Aryan Nations , were white nationalists and saw militia and patriot movements as a form of white resistance against what they perceived to be a liberal and multiculturalist government. In the 21st century, militia and patriot organizations were notably involved in the 2014 Bundy standoff , the 2016 Occupation of the Malheur National Wildlife Refuge , and in the 2021 United States Capitol attack .

Paleoconservatism Main article: Paleoconservatism Paul Gottfried first coined the term paleoconservatism in the 1980s. These conservatives stressed (post-Cold War) non-interventionist foreign policy, strict immigration law, anti-consumerism and traditional values and opposed the neoconservatives , who had more liberal views on these issues. The paleoconservatives used the surge in right-wing populism during the early 1990s to propel the presidential campaigns of Pat Buchanan in 1992, 1996 and 2000. They diminished in number after the September 11 attacks , where they found themselves at odds with the vast majority of American conservatives on how to respond to the threat of terrorism .

Counter-jihad Main article: Counter-jihad Further information: Criticism of Islam , Islam in the United States § Islamophobia , Islamophobia § Anti-Islamic hate crimes data in the United States , Islamophobia in the United States , and Religious discrimination in the United States § Discrimination against Muslims In the aftermath of the September 11 attacks in 2001, the Counter-jihad movement, supported by groups such as Stop Islamization of America and individuals such as Frank Gaffney and Pamela Geller , began to gain traction among the American right. They were widely dubbed " islamophobic " for their vocal condemnation of the Islamic religion and their belief that Muslims who were living in America posed a significant threat to it. They believed that the United States was under threat from " Islamic supremacism ", accusing the Council on American-Islamic Relations and even accusing prominent conservatives like Suhail A. Khan and Grover Norquist of supporting Islamist groups such as the Muslim Brotherhood .

Minuteman Project Jim Gilchrist , a conservative Republican, founded the Minuteman Project in April 2005. The Minutemen, inspired by the earlier Patriot movement and the original revolutionary Minutemen, advocated greater restrictions on illegal immigration and in the Southwestern United States , they engaged in volunteer activities and directed them against people who they believed were illegal immigrants. The group drew much criticism from people whose views on the immigration issues were more liberal, and President George W. Bush condemned them as " vigilantes ". The Minuteman Project was similar to the earlier Ranch Rescue organization, which played a very similar role.

Alt-right Main articles: Alt-right and Alt-lite The alt-right emerged during the 2016 U.S. presidential election cycle in support of the Donald Trump presidential campaign .

[ 80 ] It draws influences from paleoconservatism , paleolibertarianism , White nationalism , the manosphere , the Dark Enlightenment , identitarianism , and the neoreactionary movement , and it differs from previous radical right-wing movements due to its heavy internet presence on sites such as 4chan .

[ 80 ] Groypers Main article: Groypers Groypers , sometimes called the Groyper Army, are a group of White nationalist and far-right activists, who are notable for their attempts to introduce far-right politics into mainstream conservatism in the United States . The group is led by the far-right political commentator Nick Fuentes .

[ 81 ] Notable organizations Three Percenters (2008–2021) American Freedom Party (2009–present) Oath Keepers (2009–present) Traditionalist Worker Party (2013–2018) Atomwaffen Division (2013–present) Vanguard America (2015–2017???) Identity Evropa (2016–2020) Proud Boys (2016–present) Patriot Prayer (2016–present) Patriot Front (2017–present) The Base (2018–present) Groypers (2019–present) See also Conservatism portal United States portal American militia movement Christian nationalism Crypto-fascism Fascism in North America Hate crime laws in the United States Manosphere Nativism in United States politics Nazism in the Americas Para-fascism Patriot movement Positive Christianity Redemption movement Religious terrorism Right-wing terrorism Trumpism White nationalism Wingnut (politics) Xenophobia in the United States Notes ^ a b Potok, Mark (2004).

"The American radical right: the 1990s and beyond" . In Eatwell, Roger; Mudde, Cas (eds.).

Western Democracies and the New Extreme Right Challenge . Routledge Studies in Extremism and Democracy (1st ed.).

New York and London : Routledge . pp.

41– 61.

ISBN 9780415553872 .

LCCN 2003010829 .

^ a b Durham, Martin (2000).

"The rise of the right" .

The Christian Right, the Far Right, and the Boundaries of American Conservatism .

Manchester and New York : Manchester University Press . pp.

1– 23.

ISBN 9780719054860 .

^ Gannon, Thomas M. (July–September 1981).

"The New Christian Right in America as a Social and Political Force" .

Archives de sciences sociales des religions .

26 ( 52– 1).

Paris : Éditions de l'EHESS : 69– 83.

doi : 10.3406/assr.1981.2226 .

ISSN 0335-5985 .

JSTOR 30125411 .

^ a b Davis, David Brion, ed. (1971).

The Fear of Conspiracy: Images of Un-American Subversion from the Revolution to the present .

Ithaca, New York : Cornell University Press . pp.

xv– xix.

ISBN 9780801405983 .

OCLC 128472 .

^ a b Diamond, pp. 5–6 ^ Lipset, p. 307 ^ Plotke, p. lxxvii ^ Plotke, pp. xxvi–xxvii ^ Plotke, pp. xxxix–xl ^ Plotke, pp. xi–xii ^ Wahl, Klaus (2020).

The Radical Right. Biopsychosocial Roots and International Variations . London: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 14.

ISBN 978-3-030-25130-7 .

OCLC 1126278982 .

^ Davies & Lynch, p. 5 ^ Davies & Lynch, p. 335 ^ Webb, p. 10 ^ a b Mulloy, pp. 16–17 ^ Plotke, pp. xv–xvi ^ George B. Tindall, "Populism: A Semantic Identity Crisis," Virginia Quarterly Review, Oct 1972, Vol. 48#4 pp. 501–18 ^ John Mering, "The Constitutional Union Campaign of 1860: An Example of the Paranoid Style," Mid America, 1978, Vol. 60#2 pp. 95–106 ^ a political scientist at the University of California, San Diego, ^ Edsall, Thomas B. (7 December 2022).

"Trump Is Unraveling Before Our Eyes, but Will It Matter?" .

New York Times . Retrieved 10 December 2022 .

^ Mulloy, p. 23 ^ Mulloy, pp. 24–26 ^ Mulloy, p. 26 ^ Mulloy, pp. 29–32 ^ a b Zaitchick ^ "Bill Moyers Essay: When Congressmen Deny Climate Change and Evolution | Moyers & Company" .

^ Roose, Kevin (July 10, 2019).

"Trump Rolls Out the Red Carpet for Right-Wing Social Media Trolls" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved July 17, 2019 .

^ Carless, Will (2022-01-23).

"Far-right extremists look to bring vaccination opponents into their fold" .

USA Today . Retrieved 2022-03-31 .

^ Norris, p. 2 ^ Norris, p. 3 ^ Norris, p. 11 ^ Ignazi, p. 22 ^ Kaplan & Weinberg, p. 1 ^ Kaplan & Weinberg, pp. 10–11 ^ Kaplan & Weinberg, pp. 10–13 ^ Kaplan & Weinberg, p. 2 ^ Daniel Bell, ed.

The Radical Right (1962) p. 2.

^ Richard Hofstadter, The Paranoid Style in American Politics (Harvard University Press 1964) p. 33 ISBN 0674654617 ^ a b Perlstein, Rick (2017-04-11).

"I Thought I Understood the American Right. Trump Proved Me Wrong" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2017-04-12 .

^ Robert E. Shalhope, "Republicanism and Early American Historiography," William and Mary Quarterly Vol. 39, No. 2 (Apr., 1982), pp. 334–56 JSTOR 1918756 ^ Gordon S. Wood, "Rhetoric and Reality in the American Revolution," William and Mary Quarterly Vol. 23, No. 1 (Jan., 1966), pp. 3–32 JSTOR 2936154 ^ a b Lipset & Raab, pp. 34–39 ^ Peter Knight, Conspiracy theories in American history: an encyclopedia, (2003) vol 1 p. 367 ^ David Brion Davis, The fear of conspiracy: Images of un-American subversion from the revolution to the present (1971) ^ Lipset & Raab, pp. 39–47 ^ William Preston Vaughn, The Antimasonic Party in the United States, 1826–1843 (1983) ^ Berlet & Lyons, p. 39 ^ Lipset & Raab, pp. 47–58 ^ Tyler Anbinder, Nativism and slavery: The Northern Know Nothings and the Politics of the 1850s (1994) ^ J. Morgan Kousser, T he Shaping of Southern Politics: Suffrage Restriction and the Establishment of the One-Party South, 1880-1910 (Yale UP, 1974) online .

^ Lipset & Raab, pp. 79–81 ^ John Higham, Strangers in the Land (1955)  pp. 62, 80-87, 108; online ^ Donald Kinzer, An episode in anti-Catholicism: the American Protective Association (1964) ^ Charles C. Alexander, "Kleagles and cash: The Ku Klux Klan as a business organization, 1915-1930." Business History Review 39.3 (1965): 348-367 online .

^ Lipset & Raab, pp. 116–39 ^ Linda Gordon, The second coming of the KKK: The Ku Klux Klan of the 1920s and the American political tradition (Liveright, 2017) online .

^ Thomas R. Pegram, One hundred percent American: The rebirth and decline of the Ku Klux Klan in the 1920s (Rowman & Littlefield, 2011) online .

^ Alan  Brinkley, Voices of protest : Huey Long, Father Coughlin, and the Great Depression (1982) online ^ James P.  Shenton, "The Coughlin Movement and the New Deal." Political Science Quarterly 73.3 (1958): 352-373.

^ Lipset & Raab, pp. 167–69 ^ Craig A. Newton, "Father Coughlin and His National Union for Social Justice.” Southwestern Social Science Quarterly 41#3 (19600, pp. 341–49.

online ^ Lipset & Raab, pp. 169–70 ^ Peter A. Soderbergh, "The Rise of Father Coughlin, 1891-1930." Social Science (1967): 10-20 online .

^ James P.  Shenton, "Fascism and Father Coughlin." Wisconsin Magazine of History (1960): 6-11 online ^ Lipset & Raab, pp. 170–71 ^ Donald Warren, Radio Priest: Charles Coughlin The Father of Hate Radio (The Free Press,  1996) online .

^ Lucilla Cremoni, "Antisemitism and populism in the United States in the 1930s: The case of father Coughlin." Patterns of prejudice 32.1 (1998): 25-37.

^ Lipset & Raab, pp. 157–59 ^ Lipset & Raab, pp. 159–62 ^ Lipset & Raab, pp. 162–64 ^ Lipset & Raab, p. 212 ^ Lipset & Raab, pp. 215–16 ^ Lipset & Raab, p. 224 ^ Crosby, Donald F.S.J. (2011).

God, Church, and Flag : Senator Joseph R. McCarthy and the Catholic church, 1950–1957 . Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press . pp. 14–18 et passim .

ISBN 978-0-8078-9642-6 . Retrieved 15 March 2021 .

^ Lipset & Raab, p. 221 ^ Lipset & Raab, pp. 219–20 ^ Lipset & Raab, pp. 248–2
50 ^ Darren Mulloy, The World of the John Birch Society: Conspiracy, Conservatism, and the Cold War (Vanderbilt UP, 2014) online ^ Diamond, pp. 143–45 ^ a b Forscher, Patrick S.; Kteily, Nour S. (January 2020).

"A Psychological Profile of the Alt-Right" .

Perspectives on Psychological Science .

15 (1).

SAGE Publications on behalf of the Association for Psychological Science : 90– 116.

doi : 10.1177/1745691619868208 .

ISSN 1745-6924 .

PMC 6980479 .

PMID 31747343 .

S2CID 208214721 .

^ "Trump hosts Kanye West, Nick Fuentes at Mar-a-Lago dinner" .

ABC News .

Works cited Berlet, Chip. Lyons, Matthew Nemiroff.

Right-wing populism in America: too close for comfort . New York, NY: Guilford Press, 2000 ISBN 1572305622 Courser, Zachary. "The Tea 'Party' as a Conservative Social Movement". In SYMPOSIUM: THE FUTURE OF SOCIAL CONSERVATISM, Published online, Springer Science Media, LLC 2011 Davies, Peter. Lynch, Derek.

The Routledge companion to fascism and the far right . London: Routledge, 2002.

ISBN 0415214947 Diamond, Sara.

Roads to dominion: right-wing movements and political power in the United States . New York: Guilford Press, 1995 ISBN 0898628644 Hofstadter, Richard.

The Paranoid Style in American Politics (2008 edition), reprints famous essays from 1963 to 1964 Ignazi, Piero. "The extreme right: defining the object and assessing the causes" inn Martin Schain, Aristide R. Zolberg, Patrick Hossay (Eds.), Shadows over Europe: the development and impact of the extreme right in Western Europe . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002.

ISBN 0312295936 Kaplan, Jeffrey and Weinberg, Leonard.

The emergence of a Euro-American radical right .  NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1998 ISBN 0813525640 Lipset, Seymour Martin. "The sources of the "Radical Right". In Daniel Bell (Ed.), The radical right, Volume 2000 . New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2002 ISBN 0765807491 Lipset, Seymour Martin. Raab, Earl.

The Politics of Unreason: Right-Wing Extremism in America, 1790–1970 . New York: Harper & Row, 1970  ISBN Mulloy, D. J.

American extremism: history, politics and the militia movement . London:  Routledge, 2004 ISBN 0-415-32674-5 Norris, Pippa, "The Right in Elections" Paper in APSA Panel 36–15 at the Annual Meeting of the American Political Science Association, 2004, Chicago.

Plotke, David. "Introduction to the Transaction edition: the success and anger of the modern American Right". In Daniel Bell (Ed.), The radical right, Volume 2000 . New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 2002 ISBN 0765807491 Webb, Clive.

Rabble rousers: the American far right in the civil rights era . Athens, GA: University of Georgia Press, 2010 ISBN 0820327646 Zaitchick, "'Patriot' Paranoia: A Look at the Top Ten Conspiracy Theories", Intelligence Report , Fall 2010, Issue Number:  139 Further reading Art, David (2011).

Inside the Radical Right: The Development of Anti-Immigrant Parties in Western Europe . Cambridge, MA: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-1394-9883-8 .

Bell, Daniel, ed. (1963).

The Radical Right: The New American Right, Expanded and Updated . Garden City, NY: Doubleday & Co.

Bennett, David H. (1988).

The Party of Fear: From Nativist Movements to the New Right in American History . Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 978-0-8078-1772-8 .

Crawford, Alan (1980).

Thunder on the Right: The "New Right" and the Politics of Resentment . New York: Pantheon Books.

ISBN 978-0-3945-0663-0 .

Forster, Arnold; Epstein, Benjamin R. (1964).

Danger on the Right: The Attitudes, Personnel and Influence of the Radical Right and Extreme Conservatives . New York: Random House.

Hochschild, Anne Russell (2016).

Strangers in Their Own Land: Anger and Mourning on the American Right . New York: The New Press.

ISBN 978-1-6209-7225-0 .

Huntington, John S. (2021).

Far-Right Vanguard: The Radical Roots of Modern Conservatism . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 978-0-8122-9810-9 .

Minkenberg, Michael. "The Radical Right and Anti-Immigrant Politics in Liberal Democracies since World War II: Evolution of a Political and Research Field." Polity 53.3 (2021): 394-417. doi.org/10.1086/714167 Redekop, John H. (1968).

The American Far Right: A case study of Billy James Hargis and Christian Crusade . Grand Rapids, MI: William B. Eerdmans Publishing Co.

Tuska, Benjamin. "Know-Nothingism in Baltimore 1854-1860." Catholic Historical Review 11.2 (1925): 217-251.

online Walsh, David Austin (2024).

Taking America Back: The Conservative Movement and the Far Right . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0-3002-6097-7 .

External links Lyle and Florence Brothers papers at the American Heritage Center v t e Alt-right Ideas Core American Nationalism Antifeminism Fourteen Words Ghost skin White ethnostate White nationalism White supremacy Conspiracy theories Cultural Marxism Eurabia George Soros Great Replacement Homosexual agenda Kalergi Plan Murder of Seth Rich New World Order Pizzagate White genocide Zionist Occupation Government Related Alt-lite Alt-right pipeline Boogaloo movement Christian Identity DezNat Identitarian movement Incel Kinism Manosphere Men Going Their Own Way Neo-Confederates Neo-fascism Neo-nationalism Neo-Nazism Nouvelle Droite Paleoconservatism Paleolibertarianism QAnon Radical right Reactionary Dark Enlightenment Third Position Ultraconservatism Online culture Alt-tech 4chan /pol/ 8chan BitChute Epik Gab Gettr Minds Parler Rumble Terrorgram Truth Social Voat (defunct) Websites American Renaissance Breitbart News The Daily Stormer Infowars Kingdom Identity Ministries Kuruc.info Metapedia Occidental Observer The Occidental Quarterly Rebel News Red Ice Reddit (r/The_Donald) The Right Stuff StoneToss Stormfront TruNews Vanguard News Network VDARE WorldNetDaily Memes " Basket of deplorables " " Beta male " " Cuckservative " Fashwave Happy Merchant " It's okay to be white " Moon Man NPC OK gesture " Owning the libs " Pepe the Frog " Red pill and blue pill " Right Wing Death Squad " Remove Kebab " " Shadilay " " Snowflake " " Social justice warrior " Trash Doves Triple parentheses Undercut Groups AltRight Corporation American Freedom Party Anti-Communist Action The Base Deplorable Pride Diagolon Groypers Hundred-Handers Identity Evropa (defunct) Les Identitaires National Policy Institute Patriot Front Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Rise Above Movement Traditionalist Worker Party (defunct) Vanguard America Washington Summit Publishers Events Incidents Berkeley protests Comicsgate DeploraBall End Domestic Terrorism rally Gamergate Macron e-mail leaks Unite the Right rally Unite the Right 2 Attacks Assault of DeAndre Harris Charlottesville car attack Christchurch mosque shootings Murder of Blaze Bernstein Murder of Timothy Caughman Pittsburgh synagogue shooting Portland train attack Lists Timeline of activities involving the Proud Boys People James Allsup Andrew Anglin Andrew "weev" Auernheimer Steve Bannon Theodore "Vox Day" Beale Carl "Sargon of Akkad" Benjamin Owen Benjamin Peter Brimelow Christopher Cantwell Mike Cernovich Alain de Benoist John Derbyshire Jack Donovan David Duke Mike Enoch Guillaume Faye Haakon Forwald Daniel Friberg Nick Fuentes Jean-François Gariépy Ben Garrison Austin "Augustus Sol Invictus" Gillespie Tim "Baked Alaska" Gionet Jim Goad Faith Goldy Paul Gottfried Matthew Heimbach Michael A. Hoffman II Sam Hyde Dillon Irizarry Charles C. Johnson Greg Johnson William Daniel Johnson Alex Jones Jason Jorjani Ruuben Kaalep Tom Kawcyznski Jason Kessler Douglas Murray Steve King Elliott Kline Nick Land Lana Lokteff Laura Loomer Norman Lowell Kevin MacDonald Jeremy MacKenzie Stephen McNallen Merlin Miller Stephen Miller Stefan Molyneux Paul Nehlen Paul "GypsyCrusader" Nicholas Miller Ethan Nordean Jack Posobiec Bronze Age Pervert Paul Ray Ramsey William Regnery II Colin "Millennial Woes" Robertson Thomas Rousseau Steve Sailer Martin Sellner Lauren Southern Richard B. Spencer Brett Stevens Jared Taylor Tila Tequila Daryush "Roosh V" Valizadeh Paul Joseph Watson Lucian Wintrich Curtis Yarvin Milo Yiannopoulos Opposition and criticism People Antifa Steven "Destiny" Bonnell II Ian "Vaush" Kochinski Harry "Hbomberguy" Brewis Ian "Innuendo Studios" Danskin Robert Evans Emily Gorcenski Daryle Lamont Jenkins Angela Nagle David Neiwert Shaun Abigail "Philosophy Tube" Thorn Natalie "ContraPoints" Wynn Donna Zuckerberg Media Alt-America Angry Goy II Culture Warlords Devil's Bargain Feels Good Man I Don't Speak German It Came from Something Awful Kill All Normies Knowledge Fight White Right: Meeting the Enemy v t e Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Libertarian Moderate Movement Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Progressive Social Traditionalist Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian nationalism Classical liberalism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Gender essentialism Complementarianism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Militarism Moral absolutism Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Protectionism Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Tradition People Presidents Adams (John) Adams (John Quincy) G. H. W. Bush G. W. Bush Cleveland Coolidge Harding Hoover McKinley Nixon Reagan W. H. Taft Trump Washington Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan II Kavanaugh Kennedy O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft Thomas Vermeule Yoo Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Buckley Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eastman Eliot Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hazony Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kendall Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lasch Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet O'Connor Ong Ransom Rieff Santayana Sowell Strauss Viereck Voegelin Washington Weaver Yarvin Other figures Ailes Atwater Beck Breitbart Carlson Cheney Coulter Cruz DeSantis Dilling Elder Falwell Gingrich Giuliani Goldwater Hannity Ingraham Levin Limbaugh Lindbergh Lodge Lovecraft McCain McCarthy McConnell Novak O'Reilly Palin Rand Paul Ron Paul Pence Perot Quayle Romney Rove Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Schlafly Shapiro Stone Robert A. Taft Booker T. Washington Parties American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party of New York State Constitution Party Republican Party Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Movements Alt-right Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Dark Enlightenment Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBT Libertarian Republicans Militia movement Patriot movement Christian Radical Right Reactionary feminism Tea Party movement Trumpism Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Historical factions Bourbon Democrats Dixiecrats Loyalists Old Right Redeemers Southern Agrarians Other organizations 1789 Capital ATR FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Rockbridge Network Tea Party Patriots USCC Literature Democracy in America (1835–1840) Democracy and Leadership (1924) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) Losing Ground (1984) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Bell Curve (1994) A Republic, Not an Empire (1999) Hillbilly Elegy (2017) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) See also American nationalism Bibliography of conservatism in the United States List of American conservatives National conservatism Southern strategy Conservatism portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9ngrm
Cached time: 20250815223933
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.736 seconds
Real time usage: 0.909 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5049/1000000
Revision size: 54872/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 208369/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6214/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 34/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 154385/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.364/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7124646/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  609.782      1 -total
 26.96%  164.422      1 Template:Reflist
 21.48%  130.999     14 Template:Cite_book
 18.50%  112.820      1 Template:Conservatism_US
 10.74%   65.476      1 Template:Conservatism_US_footer
 10.71%   65.335      2 Template:Navbox
  9.96%   60.748      1 Template:Short_description
  6.80%   41.449      1 Template:Excerpt
  5.54%   33.773      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.42%   33.025      1 Template:Alt-right_footer Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:28358650:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815223933 and revision id 1301814428. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Radical_right_(United_States)&oldid=1301814428 " Categories : Antisemitism in the United States Far-right politics in the United States Islamophobia in the United States Paleoconservatism Neo-fascism in the United States Para-fascism Right-wing populism in the United States White supremacy in the United States Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 21:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Radical right (United States) 5 languages Add topic

