Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Establishment 2 History 3 Building 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Cornell University Center for Advanced Computing Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia A major contributor to this article appears to have a close connection with its subject.

It may require cleanup to comply with Wikipedia's content policies, particularly neutral point of view . Please discuss further on the talk page .

( February 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Frank H.T. Rhodes Hall The Cornell University Center for Advanced Computing (CAC), housed at Frank H. T. Rhodes Hall on the campus of Cornell University , is one of five original centers in the National Science Foundation 's Supercomputer Centers Program. It was formerly called the Cornell Theory Center.

Establishment [ edit ] The Cornell Theory Center (CTC) was established in 1985 under the direction of Cornell Physics Professor and Nobel Laureate Kenneth G. Wilson . In 1984, the National Science Foundation began work on establishing five new supercomputer centers, including the CTC, to provide high-speed computing resources for research within the United States. In 1985, a team from the National Center for Supercomputing Applications began the development of NSFNet , a TCP/IP -based computer network that could connect to the ARPANET at Cornell University and the University of Illinois at Urbana–Champaign . This high-speed network, unrestricted to academic users, became a backbone to which regional networks would be connected. Initially a 56- kbit/s network, traffic on the network grew exponentially; the links were upgraded to 1.5- Mbit/s T1s in 1988 and to 45 Mbit/s in 1991. The NSFNet was a major milestone in the development of the Internet and its rapid growth coincided with the development of the World Wide Web .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] In the early 1990s, in addition to support from the National Science Foundation , the CTC received funding from the Advanced Research Projects Agency , the National Institutes of Health , New York State , IBM Corporation, SGI, and members of the center's Corporate Research Institute.

[ 3 ] The center's focus was on developing scalable parallel computing resources for its user community and applying their expertise in parallel algorithm development and optimization to a wide range of scientific and engineering problems.

History [ edit ] In 1995, the building that houses what was then known as the Cornell Theory Center was named Frank H. T. Rhodes Hall which currently houses the Cornell University Center for Advanced Computing.

[ 4 ] The Cornell University Center for Advanced Computing, and its predecessor the Cornell Theory Center, deployed the first IBM RS/6000 SP supercomputer and first Dell supercomputer , and established a financial solutions center for supercomputing.

[ 5 ] Today, CAC is a partner on the National Science Foundation XSEDE project, a collection of integrated digital resources and services enabling open science research. CAC is also developing training for TACC's Frontera supercomputer, serving as the technical lead for the Scalable Cyberinfrastructure Institute for Multi-Messenger Astrophysics ( SCiMMA ) project, developing software for the Institute for Research and Innovation in Software for High Energy Physics ( IRIS-HEP ), and designing cyberinfrastructure for the NANOGrav Physics Frontiers Center .

A 175 times faster computation of a CDC hepatitis C model on a CAC MATLAB cloud is noted in the International Data Corporation 's What the Exascale Era Can Provide report.

[ 6 ] CAC was an early implementer of cloud computing with the deployment of Red Cloud. CAC also designed and deployed a federated cloud called Aristotle and builds cloud images and containerizes applications for efficiency and portability.

Under the Office of the Vice Provost for Research , CAC provides Cornell faculty, staff, and students, the national research community, and industry with a range of high performance computing and consulting services. Organizations that have participated in CAC's Partner Program include Boeing, Corning, Dell, Ford, HypoVereinsbank, Intel, Microsoft, Pfizer, and start-ups whose technologies have been acquired. The Center is under the direction of David Lifka and Richard Knepper .

Building [ edit ] Rhodes Hall is an eight-story building occupying a narrow, triangular site between Hoy Road and Cascadilla Gorge.

In 1989, blueprints and material samples were used to simulate new areas of the building before it was complete. Images of the building's stair tower were computed with a ray tracer using soft shadowing techniques.

[ 7 ] Aerial view of Frank H.T. Rhodes Hall Staircase in 2021.

References [ edit ] ^ "The Internet - The Launch of NSFNET" . National Science Foundation. Archived from the original on 2006-05-07 . Retrieved 2006-01-05 .

^ "A Brief History of NSF and the Internet" . National Science Foundation . Retrieved 2006-01-05 .

^ Cornell Theory Center , from the Free On-line Dictionary of Computing ^ "Caribbean Studies Association » Carole Boyce Davies" . Retrieved 2023-12-11 .

^ "History" . Cornell University . Retrieved 2010-09-18 .

^ "Real-World Examples of Supercomputers Used For Economic and Societal Benefits: A Prelude to What the Exascale Era Can Provide" (PDF) . International Data Corporation . Retrieved 2017-04-18 .

^ "Rhodes Hall Stair Tower gallery | Program of Computer Graphics" .

www.graphics.cornell.edu . Retrieved 2023-12-11 .

External links [ edit ] Official website of the Cornell University Center for Advanced Computing v t e Cornell University Located in : Ithaca, NY and New York City Colleges Agriculture and Life Sciences NYS Architecture, Art, and Planning Arts and Sciences Business Management Hotel Admin.

Applied Economics Computing and Information Science Engineering Graduate Human Ecology NYS Industrial and Labor Relations NYS Public Policy Law Medicine Medical Sciences Tri-Institutional Qatar Veterinary NYS Athletics Teams Baseball Basketball ( Men's , Women's ) Football Ice hockey ( Men's , Women's ) Men's lacrosse Men's soccer Men's squash Wrestling Venues Barton Hall Berman Field Hoy Field Jones Golf Course Lynah Rink Newman Arena Schoellkopf Field Culture All Sports Competition Give My Regards to Davy Harvard (hockey) rivalry Touchdown (mascot) Campus Campuses Central North Tech West Buildings A.D. White House Arboretum Art Museum Bailey Hall Balch Hall Barnes Hall Botanic Gardens Bradfield Hall Brain Collection Caldwell Hall Center for Advanced Computing Computing and Communications Center Comstock Hall Dairy Deke Fernow Hall Fuertes Observatory Goldwin Smith Hall Libraries Llenroc Hartung–Boothroyd Observatory McGraw Tower Morrill Hall Olin Library Ornithology Lab Press Rice Hall Risley Residential College Sage Chapel Sage Hall Statue of Ezra Cornell Stimson Hall Synchrotron Telluride House Thompson Institute Uris Library Straight Hall History People Ezra Cornell Henry W. Sage Andrew Dickson White Former Stone Hall Roberts Hall East Roberts Hall Cornell gorge suicides Irving Literary Society Morrill Land-Grant Acts New York State College of Forestry at Cornell Cornelliana Chimes Club of New York Dragon Day Far Above Cayuga's Waters Slope Day Songs People Alumni Faculty Presidents Trustees Publications Administrative Science Quarterly arXiv Cornell Chronicle Cornell Lunatic Cornell Policy Review Cornell Review Daily Sun Diacritics Epoch ILR Review International Affairs Review International Law Journal Journal of Empirical Legal Studies Journal of Law and Public Policy Law Review Legal Information Institute Oyez Project New German Critique Philosophical Review Student life Catholic Community Chorus Fraternities and sororities Aleph Samach Quill and Dagger Sphinx Head Glee Club Hotel Ezra Cornell Marching Band Messenger Lectures Pep Band WVBR-FM Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cornell_University_Center_for_Advanced_Computing&oldid=1288103649 " Categories : Cornell University Cornell University buildings Supercomputer sites 1985 establishments in New York (state) Hidden category: Wikipedia articles with possible conflicts of interest from February 2021 This page was last edited on 30 April 2025, at 13:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cornell University Center for Advanced Computing Add languages Add topic

