Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contents 2 Origins and influence on contemporaries 3 References 4 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Liber Ignium 7 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Occitan Português Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The Liber Ignium ad Comburendos Hostes (translated as On the Use of Fire to Conflagrate the Enemy , or Book of Fires for the Burning of Enemies , and abbreviated as Book of Fires ) is a medieval collection of recipes for incendiary weapons , including Greek fire and gunpowder , written in Latin and allegedly written by a certain Marcus Graecus ("Mark the Greek")—a person whose existence is debated by scholars. The work has been subjected to numerous academic analyses , resulting in contradictory conclusions vis-a-vis origin and influence on its contemporaries.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] One of the most influential studies of the Liber Ignium was conducted by Marcellin Berthelot which is cited in 20th century works on the topic.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Contents [ edit ] The Liber Ignium is a collection of 35 recipes without any internal classification, as it was typical of "secret recipe" list of the era.

[ 1 ] Of these, 14 are related to warfare, 11 with lamps and lights, 6 with the prevention and treatment of burns, and 4 with the preparation of chemicals , chiefly saltpetre . Some recipes were found to be worthless.

[ 2 ] Recipe no. 14 contains advice for the harvesting and processing of saltpeter. In Berthelot's interpretation, it says: "saltpeter is a mineral of the earth, and is found as an efflorescence on stones. This earth is dissolved in boiling water, then purified and passed through a filter. It is boiled for a day and a night and solidified, so that transparent plates of the salt are found at the bottom of the vessel." [ 2 ] Furthermore, there are four recipes (nos. 12, 13, 32, and 33) that describe mixtures resembling gunpowder.

[ 2 ] Origins and influence on contemporaries [ edit ] The premillennial Byzantine Greek origin of the text has been rejected by scholars, who date it to the late 13th century.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 2 ] [ 6 ] Study of the text has suggested that it was originally translated from Arabic , possibly by a person from Moorish Spain .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Joseph Needham says that the text is probably translated from Arabic by Jewish scholars in Spain. It contains several Arabic and Spanish words that are untranslated while several of the recipes for "automatic fire" and "oil of bricks" are identical to Arabic ones from the 12th century.

[ 10 ] The influence the Liber Ignium had on Roger Bacon and Albertus Magnus has been debated. Early scholars like the 18th-century scientist Johann Beckmann thought that both men had read and quoted it, but others have claimed that all three were based on a common source.

[ 1 ] Iqtidar Alam Khan writes that while the Liber Ignium contents can be traced back to Arabic and Chinese texts, the work of Bacon appears to represent a parallel tradition, especially because the decoded formulas of Bacon contain considerably less nitrate.

[ 11 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Partington, James Riddick. A History of Greek Fire and Gunpowder, The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998, pp. 58-60 ^ a b c d e f Joseph Needham; Gwei-Djen Lu; Ling Wang (1987).

Science and civilisation in China . Cambridge University Press. pp.

39– 41.

ISBN 978-0-521-30358-3 .

^ Partington, James Riddick.

A History of Greek Fire and Gunpowder , The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998, p. 43 ^ Kenneth Warren Chase (2003).

Firearms: a global history to 1700 . Cambridge University Press. p. 58.

ISBN 978-0-521-82274-9 .

^ Kelly DeVries (1992).

Medieval military technology . University of Toronto Press. p. 143.

ISBN 978-0-921149-74-3 .

^ Chisholm, Hugh (ed.) Gunpowder , Encyclopædia Britannica , 1910, p. 724 ^ Pan, Jixing.

On the Origin of Rockets , T'oung Pao , Vol. 73, pg. 5–6 ^ Partington, James Riddick. A History of Greek Fire and Gunpowder, The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1998, p. 42 ^ Dana, Charles E., Notes on Cannon-Fourteenth and Fifteenth Centuries, Proceedings of the American Philosophical Society , Vol. 50, pg. 149 ^ Needham 1986 , p. 39.

^ Iqtidar Alam Khan (2006). "The Indian Response to Firearms, 1300-1750". In Brenda J. Buchanan (ed.).

Gunpowder, explosives and the state: a technological history . Ashgate Publishing. pp.

51– 52.

ISBN 978-0-7546-5259-5 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Needham, Joseph (1986), Science & Civilisation in China, Volume 5 Part 7: The Gunpowder Epic , Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-30358-3 v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liber_Ignium&oldid=1217883757 " Categories : Alchemical documents 13th-century manuscripts 13th-century books in Latin This page was last edited on 8 April 2024, at 12:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liber Ignium 7 languages Add topic

