Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Manufacturing 2 Properties Toggle Properties subsection 2.1 Physical properties 2.2 Mechanical properties 2.3 Endurance 2.4 Lifetime 3 Seaming 4 Applications 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Geomembrane 11 languages العربية Català Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Português Русский Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Thin barrier used to control fluids; usually applied to structures or landscapes This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Geomembrane" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A geomembrane is  very low permeability synthetic membrane liner or barrier used with any geotechnical engineering related material so as to control fluid (liquid or gas) migration in a human-made project, structure, or system. Geomembranes are made from relatively thin continuous polymeric sheets, but they can also be made from the impregnation of geotextiles with asphalt , elastomer or polymer sprays , or as multilayered bitumen geocomposites . Continuous polymer sheet geomembranes are, by far, the most common.

Manufacturing [ edit ] The manufacturing of geomembranes begins with the production of the raw materials, which include the polymer resin, and various additives such as antioxidants, plasticizers, fillers, carbon black, and lubricants (as a processing aid).  These raw materials (i.e., the "formulation") are then processed into sheets of various widths and thickness by extrusion , calendering , and/or spread coating.

Three methods used to manufacture geomembranes [ 1 ] [ self-published source ] A 2010 estimate cited geomembranes as the largest geosynthetic material in dollar terms at US$1.8 billion per year worldwide, which is 35% of the market.

[ 2 ] The US market is currently divided between HDPE, LLDPE, fPP, PVC, CSPE-R, EPDM-R and others (such as EIA-R and BGMs ), and can be summarized as follows: [ citation needed ] (Note that Mm 2 refers to millions of square meters.) high-density polyethylene (HDPE) ~ 35% or 105 Mm 2 linear low-density polyethylene (LLDPE) ~ 25% or 75 Mm 2 polyvinyl chloride (PVC) ~ 25% or 75 Mm 2 flexible polypropylene (fPP) ~ 10% or 30 Mm 2 chlorosulfonated polyethylene (CSPE) ~ 2% or 6 Mm 2 ethylene propylene diene terpolymer (EPDM) ~ 3% or 9 Mm 2 The above represents approximately $1.8 billion in worldwide sales.  Projections for future geomembrane usage are strongly dependent on the application and geographical location.

Landfill liners and covers in North America and Europe will probably see modest growth ( ~ 5%), while in other parts of the world growth could be dramatic (10–15%).

[ citation needed ] Perhaps the greatest increases will be seen in the containment of coal ash and heap leach mining for precious metal capture.

Properties [ edit ] The majority of generic geomembrane test methods that are referenced worldwide are by the ASTM International|American Society of Testing and Materials ( ASTM ) due to their long history in this activity.  More recent are test method developed by the International Organization for Standardization ( ISO ).  Lastly, the Geosynthetic Research Institute (GRI) has developed test methods that are only for test methods not addressed by ASTM or ISO.  Of course, individual countries and manufacturers often have specific (and sometimes) proprietary test methods.

Physical properties [ edit ] The main physical properties of geomembranes in the as-manufactured state are: Thickness (smooth sheet, textured, asperity height) Density Melt flow index Mass per unit area (weight) Vapor transmission (water and solvent).

Mechanical properties [ edit ] There are a number of mechanical tests that have been developed to determine the strength of polymeric sheet materials.  Many have been adopted for use in evaluating geomembranes.  They represent both quality control and design, i.e., index versus performance tests.

tensile strength and elongation (index, wide width, axisymmetric, and seams) tear resistance impact resistance puncture resistance interface shear strength anchorage strength stress cracking (constant load and single point).

Endurance [ edit ] Any phenomenon that causes polymeric chain scission , bond breaking, additive depletion, or extraction within the geomembrane must be considered as compromising to its long-term performance.  There are a number of potential concerns in this regard.  While each is material-specific, the general behavior trend is to cause the geomembrane to become brittle in its stress-strain behavior over time.  There are several mechanical properties to track in monitoring such long term degradation:  the decrease in elongation at failure, the increase in modulus of elasticity , the increase (then decrease) in stress at failure (i.e., strength), and the general loss of ductility.  Obviously, many of the physical and mechanical properties could be used to monitor the polymeric degradation process.

ultraviolet light exposure (laboratory of field) radioactive degradation biological degradation (animals, fungi or bacteria) chemical degradation thermal behavior (hot or cold) oxidative degradation.

Lifetime [ edit ] Geomembranes degrade slowly enough that their lifetime behavior is as yet uncharted.  Thus, accelerated testing , either by high stress, elevated temperatures and/or aggressive liquids, is the only way to determine how the material will behave long-term.  Lifetime prediction methods use the following means of interpreting the data: Stress limit testing: A method by the HDPE pipe industry in the United States for determining the value of hydrostatic design basis stress.

Rate process method: Used in Europe for pipes and geomembranes, the method yields similar results as stress limit testing.

Hoechst multiparameter approach: A method that utilizes biaxial stresses and stress relaxation for lifetime prediction and can include seams as well.

Arrhenius modeling: A method for testing geomembranes (and other geosynthetics ) described in Koerner for both buried and exposed conditions.

[ 1 ] [ self-published source ] Seaming [ edit ] The fundamental mechanism of seaming polymeric geomembrane sheets together is to temporarily reorganize the polymer structure (by melting or softening) of the two opposing surfaces to be joined in a controlled manner that, after the application of pressure, results in the two sheets being bonded together.  This reorganization results from an input of energy that originates from either thermal or chemical processes.  These processes may involve the addition of additional polymer in the area to be bonded.

Ideally, seaming two geomembrane sheets should result in no net loss of tensile strength across the two sheets, and the joined sheets should perform as one single geomembrane sheet.  However, due to stress concentrations resulting from the seam geometry, current seaming techniques may result in minor tensile strength and/or elongation loss relative to the parent sheet.  The characteristics of the seamed area are a function of the type of geomembrane and the seaming technique used.

Applications [ edit ] Geomembrane installation as part of the construction of a base liner system of a landfill [ 2 ] Geomembranes have been used in the following environmental, geotechnical, hydraulic, transportation, and private development applications: As liners for potable water As liners for reserve water (e.g., safe shutdown of nuclear facilities) As liners for waste liquids (e.g., sewage sludge) Liners for radioactive or hazardous waste liquid As liners for secondary containment of underground storage tanks As liners for solar ponds As liners for brine solutions As liners for the agriculture industry As liners for the aquiculture industry, such as fish/shrimp pond As liners for golf course water holes and sand bunkers As liners for all types of decorative and architectural ponds As liners for water conveyance canals As liners for various waste conveyance canals As liners for primary, secondary, and/or tertiary solid-waste landfills and waste piles As liners for heap leach pads As covers (caps) for solid-waste landfills As covers for aerobic and anaerobic manure digesters in the agriculture industry As covers for power plant coal ash As liners for vertical walls:  single or double with leak detection As cutoffs within zoned earth dams for seepage control As linings for emergency spillways As waterproofing liners within tunnels and pipelines As waterproof facing of earth and rockfill dams As waterproof facing for roller compacted concrete dams As waterproof facing for masonry and concrete dams Within cofferdams for seepage control As floating reservoirs for seepage control As floating reservoir covers for preventing pollution To contain and transport liquids in trucks To contain and transport potable water and other liquids in the ocean As a barrier to odors from landfills As a barrier to vapors (radon, hydrocarbons, etc.) beneath buildings To control expansive soils To control frost-susceptible soils To shield sinkhole-susceptible areas from flowing water To prevent infiltration of water in sensitive areas To form barrier tubes as dams To face structural supports as temporary cofferdams To conduct water flow into preferred paths Beneath highways to prevent pollution from deicing salts Beneath and adjacent to highways to capture hazardous liquid spills As containment structures for temporary surcharges To aid in establishing uniformity of subsurface compressibility and subsidence Beneath asphalt overlays as a waterproofing layer To contain seepage losses in existing above-ground tanks As flexible forms where loss of material cannot be allowed.

Further information: Fabricated geomembranes See also [ edit ] Electrical liner integrity survey References [ edit ] ^ a b Koerner, R. M. (2012).

Designing With Geosynthetics (6th ed.). Xlibris Publishing Co., 914 pgs.

^ a b Müller, W. W.; Saathoff, F. (2015).

"Geosynthetics in geoenvironmental engineering" .

Science and Technology of Advanced Materials .

16 (3): 034605.

Bibcode : 2015STAdM..16c4605M .

doi : 10.1088/1468-6996/16/3/034605 .

PMC 5099829 .

PMID 27877792 .

Further reading [ edit ] ICOLD Bulletin 135, Geomembrane Sealing Systems for Dams , 2010, Paris, France, 464 pgs.

August, H., Holzlöhne, U. and Meggys, T. (1997), Advanced Landfill Liner Systems , Thomas Telford Publ., London, 389 pgs.

Kays, W. B. (1987), Construction of Linings for Reservoirs, Tanks and Pollution Control Foundation , J. Wiley and Sons, New York, NY, 379 pgs.

Rollin, A. and Rigo, J. M. (1991), Geomembranes: Identification and Performance Testing , Chapman and Hall Publ., London, 355 pgs.

Müller, W. (2007), HDPE Geomembranes in Geotechnics , Springer-Verlag Publ., Berlin, 485 pgs.

Sharma, H. D. and Lewis, S. P. (1994), Waste Containment Systems, Waste Stabilization and Landfills , J. Wiley and Sons, New York, NY, 586 pgs.

v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geomembrane&oldid=1302888140 " Categories : Geosynthetics Building materials Landfill Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2019 All articles needing additional references All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from December 2017 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2014 This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 23:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geomembrane 11 languages Add topic

