Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Scope Toggle Scope subsection 1.1 Definitions 1.2 Education outside the classroom 1.3 Aims 2 History 3 Philosophy and theory 4 Around the world Toggle Around the world subsection 4.1 UK 4.2 Australia and New Zealand 4.3 Canada 4.4 Chile 4.5 China 4.6 Denmark 4.7 Egypt 4.8 Ethiopia 4.9 Finland 4.10 France 4.11 India 4.12 Israel 4.13 Japan 4.14 Spain 4.15 Tanzania 5 Research and critical views 6 Trends 7 See also Toggle See also subsection 7.1 Activities 7.2 Associations 7.3 Organizations 7.4 People 7.5 Topics 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Outdoor education 13 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Shqip Slovenščina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Organized learning that takes place in the outdoors An outdoor visual arts class going on in National College of Arts , Pakistan Outdoor education is organized learning that takes place in the outdoors, such as during school camping trips. Outdoor education programs sometimes involve residential or journey wilderness -based experiences which engage participants in a variety of adventurous challenges and outdoor activities such as hiking , climbing , canoeing , ropes courses and group games .  Outdoor education draws upon the philosophy, theory, and practices of experiential education and environmental education .

A group of Outward Bound participants with physical disabilities after completing a ropes course , c. 1996.

Scope [ edit ] Outdoor education has diverse goals and practices, but is often described as learning about, in, and through the outdoors.

Definitions [ edit ] Outdoor education can be defined as experiential learning in, for, or about the outdoors . The term "outdoor education", however, is used broadly to refer to a range of organized activities that take place in a variety of ways in predominantly outdoor environments. Common definitions of outdoor education are difficult to achieve because interpretations vary according to culture, philosophy, and local conditions.

[ 1 ] Outdoor education is often referred to as synonymous with outdoor learning, outdoor school, forest schools and wilderness education. Outdoor education often uses or draws upon related elements and/or informs related areas, such as teaching students how to pitch tents and cook over a campfire. The hallmark of outdoor education is its focus on the "outdoor" side of this education; whereas adventure education would focus on the adventure side and environmental education would focus on environmental.

Expeditionary education involves expeditions into wilderness "where man is but a visitor." All of these activities typically involve experiential education .

Education outside the classroom [ edit ] Freshmen at Wyoming Catholic College hike in the Teton Mountains during a three-week backpacking course.

"Education outside the classroom" describes school curriculum learning, other than with a class of students sitting in a room with a teacher and books. It encompasses biology field trips and searching for insects in the school garden, as well as indoor activities like observing stock control in a local shop, or visiting a museum . It is a concept currently enjoying a revival because of the recognition of benefits from the more active style. The Education and Skills Committee [ 2 ] of the House of Commons of the United Kingdom has reported that it brings history and art to life, develops social skills, and clearly enhances geography and science.

[ 3 ] There are key policies in place for outdoor learning in England, [ 4 ] Scotland [ 5 ] and Wales.

Despite the evidence supporting an extension of educational camping and outdoor learning for children, there are a number of obstacles in the way. One of these obstacles is risk aversion amongst teachers, parents and others, raising reluctance to such diverse and physical tasks. The journalist Tim Gill has written about parental and institutional risk aversion affecting many activities with children in his book "No Fear".

[ 6 ] Another obstacle is the perceived high cost of facilitating outdoor learning. Creating an outdoor learning environment needn't cost a great deal, however. The UK Early Years Framework Stage, which outlines best practice in Early Years teaching, asserts that: "Outdoor learning is more effective when adults focus on what children need to be able to do rather than what children need to have . An approach that considers experiences rather than equipment places children at the centre of learning and ensures that individual children's learning and developmental needs are taken account of and met effectively" [ 7 ] Linda Tallent, a UK-based educational consultant who has worked extensively with schools to develop their outdoor spaces into learning environments, agrees. She believes that by focusing on activities and skill development, it is possible to develop an outdoor learning curriculum on a 'shoe string'.

[ 8 ] She cites a comment by Will Nixon, who reminds readers that 'Using the real world is the way learning has happened for 99.9% of human existence. Only in the last hundred years have we put it into a little box called a classroom.'.

[ 9 ] Tallent also refers to evidence from a number of studies that the most effective way of learning is through participation, and calls on educators to make a special effort to create opportunities for children to participate in their learning.

Aims [ edit ] Some typical aims of outdoor education are to: learn how to overcome adversity; enhance personal and social development; develop a deeper relationship with nature; boost self-confidence when camping with classmates; raise attainment through better teaching and learning experiences.

Outdoor education spans the three domains of self, others, and the natural world. The relative emphasis of these three domains varies from one program to another. An outdoor education program can, for example, emphasize one (or more) of these aims to: teach outdoor survival skills improve problem solving skills reduce recidivism enhance teamwork develop leadership skills understand natural environments promote spirituality provide an active, first-hand learning experience Outdoor education is often used as a means to create a deeper sense of place for people in a community. Sense of place is manifested through the understanding and connection that one has with the area in which they reside. Sense of place is an important aspect of environmentalism as well as environmental justice because it makes the importance of sustaining a particular ecosystem that much more personal to an individual.

[ 10 ] History [ edit ] Field trip: school children outdoors listening to man, c. 1899, US Modern outdoor education owes its beginnings to separate initiatives.

Organized camping was evident in the late nineteenth century and early twentieth century in Europe, the UK, the US, Australia, and New Zealand. The Scouting movement, established in the UK in 1907 by Robert Baden-Powell , employs non-formal education with an emphasis on practical outdoor activities.

[ 11 ] The first Outward Bound centre at Aberdyfi in Wales was established during the Second World War . The Forest schools of Denmark are examples of European programs with similar aims and objectives.

Key outdoor education pioneers include Kurt Hahn , a German educator who founded schools such as the Schule Schloss Salem in Germany ; the United World Colleges movement, the Duke of Edinburgh Award scheme (which emphasizes community service, craftsmanship skills, physical skill, and outdoor expeditions), and the Outward Bound movement.

The second half of the twentieth century saw rapid growth of outdoor education in all sectors (state, voluntary, and commercial) with an ever-widening range of client groups and applications. In this period Outward Bound spread to over 40 countries, including the US in the 1960s. Other US based outdoor education programs include Project Adventure and the National Outdoor Leadership School (NOLS). Project Adventure focuses on day use of ropes courses. NOLS uses the outdoor setting to train leaders for outdoor programs and for other settings including training every new US astronaut and 10% of the US Naval Academy. The Association for Experiential Education is a professional association for "experiential" educators. The Wilderness Education Association (WEA) is a consortium of college outdoor education programs with a standard curriculum based on an academic model. (See also North America in the Around the World section.) A history of outdoor education in the UK has been documented by Lyn Cook (1999), [ 12 ] and a history of outdoor education in New Zealand has been published in Pip Lynch's Camping in the Curriculum (2007).

[ 13 ] Philosophy and theory [ edit ] Philosophy and theory about outdoor education tends to emphasize the effect of natural environments on human beings , the educative role of stress and challenge, and experiential learning .

[ 1 ] One view is that participants are at their "rawest" level when outdoors because they are "stripped" of many of the conveniences of modern life. Participants can become more aware that they are part of a greater ecosystem and are not as bound by social customs and norms. In essence participants can be true to themselves and more able to see others as people regardless of race, class, religion etc. Outdoor education also helps instill the basic elements of teamwork because participants often need to work together and rely on others. For many people a high ropes course or an outdoor activity may stretch their comfort zone and cause them to challenge themselves physically which in turn can lead to challenging oneself mentally.

[ citation needed ] The roots of modern outdoor education can be found in the philosophical work of: Comenius John Dewey William James Aldo Leopold John Locke John Muir Jean-Jacques Rousseau Henry David Thoreau Johann Heinrich Pestalozzi The Outward Bound Process Model, adapted from Walsh and Golins (1976).

[ 14 ] Foundational work on the philosophy of outdoor education includes work by: Kurt Hahn Willi Unsoeld A wide range of social science and specific outdoor education theories and models have been applied in an effort to better understand outdoor education. Amongst the key theoretical models or concepts are: Experiential education theories Group development theories the Outward Bound Process Model [ 14 ] Stress , optimal arousal , comfort zone , and psychological flow theories Psychoevolutionary theory and the Biophilia hypothesis Around the world [ edit ] Outdoor education occurs, in one form or another, in most if not all countries of the world. However, it can be implemented very differently, depending on the cultural context. Some countries, for example, view outdoor education as synonymous with environmental education , whilst other countries treat outdoor education and environmental education as distinct. Modern forms of outdoor education are most prevalent in the UK, US, Australia, New Zealand, Europe and to some extent Asia and Africa.

[ citation needed ] [ 15 ] Many outdoor Education programs were cancelled in 2020 due to the COVID-19 Pandemic.

Map showing where in the world outdoor education is being practiced and where countries might be lacking in this type of learning.

UK [ edit ] The English Outdoor Council, an umbrella body, defines outdoor education as a way for students and teachers to be fully engaged in a lesson, all the while embracing the outdoors. The EOC deems outdoor education as "providing depth to the curriculum and makes an important contribution to students' physical, personal and social education.".

[ 16 ] In the UK, Learning through Landscapes champion the use of School Grounds as a cost effective, easily accessible place of learning and play.

Forest School .

[ 17 ] is also fashionable in the UK, providing a very specialist approach to personal development within the wider context of Outdoor Learning.

Australia and New Zealand [ edit ] Throughout Australia & New Zealand many school students undertake outdoor / outdoor and environmental education. Aust / NZ have several outdoor education degrees and vocational outdoor recreation programs. Once teachers and outdoor leaders have completed their studies, many have opportunities to work in schools, private organizations or various outdoor education centres in either country. Outdoor Education is mandated as part of the New Zealand Health and Physical Education as one of the 7 key areas of learning. The Australian Curriculum Assessment and Reporting Authority with support from Outdoor Education Australia has developed curriculum documents to support schools to conduct outdoor education throughout the country primarily through the learning areas of Science, Health and Physical Education and Humanities.

Canada [ edit ] Environmental education, most notably outdoor education in Canada is seen through outdoor camp and residential programs, school-based programs and commercial travel operations. Outdoor education in Canada is based around "hard" technical skills—often travel and camping skills—and the "soft"—group skills and personal growth qualities—are blended with, one might say, the "green" and "warm" skills of a complementary eco-adventure focus." [ 18 ] Adventures are found whether one is partaking in environmental awareness or team-building workshops throughout Canada.

Chile [ edit ] Chile's outdoor environmental education plays a significant role in helping students to connect with nature, promote sustainability values, and participate in place-based activities. Chilean teachers emphasize the limits of solely teaching in a classroom and have begun to take action towards strengthening their students environmental awareness and responsibility. There are some limitations that have been encountered within the integration of outdoor education due to logistical issues, safety concerns, and inconsistent institutional support, but despite these challenges, outdoor education has remained a prominent and valuable strategy in Chile to help engage students with their local ecosystems.

[ 19 ] China [ edit ] Outdoor education programs in China are influenced by the philosophical and cultural traditions that emphasize the importance of harmony with nature and personal development within nature. A lot of the educational experiences in China's natural environments incorporate risky and challenging elements that are framed as moral and reflective activities. They are designed to build engagement with nature skills and create internal connections to the natural world for students, balancing safety and meaningful experiences in nature.

[ 20 ] Denmark [ edit ] Denmark is known as one of the more environmentally conscious countries in the developed world. One of the ways in which this presents itself, is through the forest school system that exists there. Children are taught in the woods using nature and animals to learn about basic environmental education as well as the fundamental elementary education that is required.

[ 21 ] Egypt [ edit ] In Egypt, outdoor education is integrated into early childhood education with a focus on sustainability. Kindergarten classrooms and programs have begun to use natural spaces to introduce environmental topics in an experiential and developmentally appropriate way. These outdoor settings are integrated with broader education goals, that allow young students to interact with ecosystems, form relationships with nature, and practice sustainability through hands-on engagement. Studies have also shown that some children's cognitive and emotional development have improved from this outdoor integration, as environmental values are promoted from an early age.

[ 22 ] Ethiopia [ edit ] Ethiopian outdoor education is increasingly becoming incorporated into formal environmental education frameworks as a means of connecting students with local ecological issues and promoting sustainable development. A lot of these educational activities take place in schoolyards, agricultural fields, or community natural green spaces. These settings allow students to directly engage with their environment. The environmental education programs emphasize experiential learning and practical application, which aligns with Ethiopia's national goals related to environmental conservation and climate resilience. Teachers integrate traditional ecological knowledge with more modern sustainability concepts to encourage environmental awareness and cultural continuity among students.

[ 23 ] Finland [ edit ] At Finnish schools, the term “outdoor education” represents teaching and learning that takes place outside the classroom with the aim to achieve goals in the National core curriculum for basic education as and in the National core curriculum for upper secondary schools. In the upper secondary schools (students aged 16–18), the theme is “Sustainable
development”. Students are encouraged to pursue a sustainable lifestyle, to take action for sustainable development, and to examine the challenges of SD.

[ 24 ] Some vocational institutes offer secondary lever degree in Nature and Environmental Studies focusing mainly to tourism and experience industries.

[ 25 ] Humak University of Applied Sciences offers a bachelor's degree in Adventure and Outdoor Education in its English language programme focusing on the technical skills for the adventure sports and pedagogy, tourism and entrepreneurship. Annually 20 students are taken in to the programme.

[ 26 ] In addition Humak University of Applied Sciences offers updating education for teachers and persons active in adventure sports in their Open University of Applied Sciences.

[ 27 ] France [ edit ] Alain Kerjean founded in 1986 "Hors Limites-Outward Bound France", adaptation to adults of active pedagogy and introduces in France apprentissage par l'expérience movement. The first Latin country member of this network. Honnor president : SAS Prince Albert of Monaco. In 1994 was founded two bodies : Association Apprendre par l'expérience (youth), and SARL Expérientiel (corporate). From 2008, Alain Kerjean develops Outdoor Education for universities in Romania and advises in France training organizations wishing to design programs based on this pedagogy. His books and articles make available Anglo-Saxon research and publications on the subject to the French public.

[ citation needed ] India [ edit ] Similar to Ethiopia, outdoor education in India is increasingly being used to complement formal environmental education, specifically in efforts to address sustainability challenges through experiential learning. Schools have begun to incorporate activities into their curriculums such as gardening, nature walks, and field projects in order to connect students with ecological systems and promote environmental responsibility. Outdoor settings in India also serve as spaces for inquiry, observation, and community-based learning. This allows students to apply classroom knowledge to real-world contexts.

[ 28 ] Israel [ edit ] Israeli outdoor learning is shaped mostly by teacher perceptions, cultural values, and institution learning frameworks. Educators are taught through professional development to view the natural environment as an essential space to foster curiosity, creativity, and environmental understanding. While the outdoor education practices vary across the many different types of schools in Israel, some of the most effective programs place emphasis on unstructured play , as well as curriculum-driven exploration. There is a strong integration of nature into daily routines that support educational and developmental outcomes and offer young children regular contact with nature.

[ 29 ] Japan [ edit ] Japanese outdoor education is closely linked to nature experience programs and the development of "nature schools", which have become a prominent part of education reform efforts. These programs emphasize direct interaction with natural environments to cultivate environmental awareness, emotional development, and social skills among students. Nature schools provide structured opportunities for children to engage in activities such as forest exploration, farming, and season observation, which is usually conducted in rural or semi-natural environments. These experiences are intended to counteract the effects of urbanization and indoor lifestyles by encouraging cooperative experiential learning, as well as a deeper connection with nature.

[ 30 ] Spain [ edit ] The first major and highly publicized outdoor learning project was Ruta Quetzal . Launched with assistance of king Juan Carlos in 1979, it was heavily focused on exploring cross-Atlantic Hispanidad cultural links and for decades was managed by the adventurer and media celebrity, Miguel de la Quadra-Salcedo . The project is ongoing. There are numerous similar though less ambitious schemes currently operational, e.g.

Rumbo al Sur , annual tours in Africa managed by a TV reality-show star Telmo Aldaz de la Quadra-Salcedo .

[ 31 ] Tanzania [ edit ] In Tanzania, outdoor education is often integrated into environmental education programs that emphasize practical engagement with local ecological and community issues. Students have the opportunity to participate in tree planting, wildlife conservation projects, and school gardening. All of these activities help to instill a sense of environmental stewardship and community involvement in students. Outdoor learning is closely tied to traditional ecological knowledge and is used to teach sustainability concepts relevant to daily life, including water conservation, agriculture, and waste management. These experiences are supported by both formal curriculum goals and non-governmental initiatives that promote hands-on, locally grounded education.

[ 32 ] Research and critical views [ edit ] Example of an outdoor classroom at Juniata College in Huntingdon, Pennsylvania There is much anecdotal evidence about benefits of outdoor education experiences; teachers, for example, often speak of the improvement they have in relationships with students following a camping trip.

[ 33 ] However, hard evidence showing that outdoor education has a demonstrable long-term effect on behaviour or educational achievement is harder to identify; this may be in part because of the difficulty involved in conducting studies which separate out the effects of outdoor education on meaningful outcomes.

A major meta-analysis of 97 empirical studies indicated a positive overall effect of adventure education programs on outcomes such as self-concept, leadership, and communication skills.

[ 34 ] This study also indicated that there appeared to be ongoing positive effects. The largest empirical study of the effects of outdoor education programs (mostly Outward Bound programs) found small-moderate short-term positive impacts on a diverse range of generic life skills, with the strongest outcomes for longer, expedition-based programs with motivated young adults, and partial long-term retention of these gains.

[ 35 ] In "Adventure in a Bun", Chris Loynes [ 36 ] has suggested that outdoor education is increasingly an entertainment park consumption experience. In a paper entitled "The Generative Paradigm", [ 37 ] Loynes has also called for an increase in "creativity, spontaneity and vitality".

Outdoor education has been found more beneficial to those students who find classroom learning more challenging [ citation needed ] . Maynard, Waters & Clement (2013) [ 38 ] found that, resonating with their previous findings, the teachers in their study reported "that when engaged in child-initiated activity in the outdoor environment, over half of the children who in the classroom were perceived to be 'underachieving' appeared to behave differently" (p. 221). Their work aims to support the notion that the more natural outdoor spaces in which child-initiated activities take place both directly and indirectly diminish the perception of underachievement. This is important because a number of studies have shown that expectations based on perception of students is important for student learning.

This may also be due to a non-academic family background, or a personal psychological trait such as attention deficit hyperactivity disorder .

When German children from forest kindergartens went to primary school, teachers observed a significant improvement in reading, writing, mathematics, social interactions and many other areas.

[ 39 ] A yearlong study was done where a group of 9th and 12th grade students learned through outdoor education. The focus was on raising the critical thinking skills of the students as a measure of improvement, where critical thinking was defined to be, "the process of purposeful self-regulatory judgment and decision making". The problem solving capabilities included the ability of students to interpret, to analyze, to evaluate, to infer, to explain and to self-regulate. Researchers found that both 9th and 12th graders scored higher than the control groups in critical thinking by a significant amount.

[ 40 ] Using the Environment as an Integrating Context for learning (EIC) is the foundation of a substantial report [ 41 ] which found benefits in learning outside the classroom on standardized measures of academic achievement in reading, writing, math, science, and social studies; reduced discipline problems; and increased enthusiasm for learning and pride in accomplishments.

Trends [ edit ] There are several important trends and changing circumstances for outdoor education, including: Climate change Nature deficit disorder Exercise trends and fitness culture Rationalization (sociology) Standards-based education reform See also [ edit ] Activities [ edit ] Abseiling Adventure park Backpacking Camping Canoeing Geocaching Kayaking Nature study Questing Rafting Rock climbing Ropes course Sail training Snowboarding Orienteering / Wayfinding Slacklining Skateboarding Associations [ edit ] American Camp Association Association for Experiential Education Organizations [ edit ] The Duke of Edinburgh's Award – award for personal achievement, including outdoor activities National Outdoor Leadership School Boy Scouts of America – youth leadership and outdoors training, "Venturing" co-ed for 14-20 Boston Schoolyard Initiative – elementary school based outdoor environmental education Outdoor Education Group – educational organization in Australia Outward Bound – international educational organization NatureBridge — outdoor school since 1971 in US National Parks Solid Rock Outdoor Ministries – Christian Outdoor Leadership and Education organization.

John Muir Award (disambiguation) Forest School People [ edit ] Robert Stephenson Smyth Baden-Powell : Founder of the Scout Movement and The Scout Association .

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] Juliette Gordon Low : Founder of the Girl Scouts of the USA Daniel Carter Beard : Outdoorsman. Founder of the Boy Pioneers. Co-founder of the Boy Scouts of America and the Camp Fire Girls.

[ 44 ] Harold C. Bryant : worked on US national parks in education Edward Urner Goodman : Scoutmaster. Camp Director, Treasure Island Scout Reservation . National Program Director, Boy Scouts of America. Founder, Order of the Arrow .

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Bear Grylls / Edward Michael Grylls: Outdoor adventurer; summitted Mt. Everest.

Chief Scout of The Scout Association .

Luther Halsey Gulick : Proponent of Playground Education. Co-founder of the Boy Scouts of America and the Camp Fire Girls .

Kurt Hahn / Kurt Matthias Robert Martin Hahn: Experiential educator. Founder of Schule Schloss Salem , Gordonstoun , and United World Colleges system. Founded Outward Bound with Lawrence Durning Holt and Jim Hogan. Originator of the Moray Badge, the forerunner of the County Badge [ 47 ] William Hillcourt : Boy Scout; Scoutmaster; Scouting professional. Authored many books and articles on Scouting, outdoor activities, and Scout skills, including the first Scout Fieldbook and three editions of the Boy Scout Handbook of the BSA. Endeavored to maintain the outdoor orientation of US Boy Scouting.

[ 48 ] Clifton F. Hodge : nature study with an evolutionary perspective James Kielsmeier : Outward Bound instructor. Proponent of experiential education and service learning . Founder of the National Youth Leadership Council and the Center for Experiential Education and Service-Learning (University of Minnesota).

Ernst Killander : Soldier; Boy Scout leader; propagator of orienteering .

Richard Louv : Journalist. Proponent of nature awareness and opponent of what he termed " nature-deficit disorder ." John P. Milton : Conducted life transformation journeys in wilderness areas of Asia, Africa, North America, and South America. Founder of Sacred Passage and The Way of Nature Fellowship.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] Joshua Lewis Miner, III : Worked at Gordonstoun ; took Kurt Hahn 's ideas to the US. Co-founder of Colorado Outward Bound School with Charles Froelicher. Founder of Outward Bound USA . Inspired use of outdoor education in the Peace Corps .

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] Ohiyesa / Charles Alexander Eastman: North American Indian of the Isáŋyathi tribe of the Dakota nation; physician; author; worked closely with YMCA, Woodcraft Indians, and YMCA Indian Guides; co-founder of the Boy Scouts of America and Camp Fire Girls.

[ 53 ] [ 54 ] Tony Pammer: Canoeing instructor. Co-founder and CEO of the Outdoor Education Group .

[ 55 ] Jerry Pieh : Outward Bound instructor and school principal who pioneered the introduction of Outward Bound methods into the mainstream school system; father of Project Adventure (founded with Mary Ladd Smith, Robert Lentz, Karl Rohnke , Jim Schoel and others), which gave impetus to Adventure-Based Counseling.

[ 56 ] Edgar Munroe Robinson : YMCA summer camp director. Set up the fledgling Boy Scouts of America organization.

Ernest Thompson Seton : Founded the Woodcraft Indians and the Woodcraft League. Inspiration and major source of Baden-Powell's Scouting for Boys . Co-founder of the Boy Scouts of America and the Camp Fire Girls. Chief Scout of the Boy Scouts of America.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Topics [ edit ] Adventure therapy Adventure travel Deep ecology Ecopsychology Educational progressivism Environmental psychology Green exercise Minimal impact code Natural environment Outdoor recreation Rite of passage Summer camp Team building Wilderness therapy Forest kindergarten References [ edit ] ^ a b Outdoor recreation. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.trunity.net/lifegermination/topics/view/23121/ ^ Education and Skills Committee , House of Commons ^ Education Outside the Classroom (PDF) . House of Commons. 2005.

^ "Outdoor Learning Policies England| Learning through Landscapes" . 16 June 2024.

^ "Outdoor learning in Scotland | Learning through Landscapes" . 16 June 2024.

^ Gill, Tim (2007).

No fear: Growing up in a Risk Averse society (PDF) . Calouste Gulbenkian Foundation. p. 81.

ISBN 978-1-903080-08-5 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-03-06.

^ Early Years Framework Stage 'Effective Practice: Outdoor Learning", 2007 "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on July 1, 2008 . Retrieved September 24, 2010 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ Linda Tallent, 'Outdoor Learning', 2007 ^ Will Nixon, 'Letting Nature Shape Childhood', The Amicus Journal, Fall 1997, in Linda Tallent 'Outdoor Learning' 2007 ^ Kudryavtsev, Alex; Krasny, Marianne E.; Stedman, Richard C. (2012-04-01).

"The impact of environmental education on sense of place among urban youth" .

Ecosphere .

3 (4): art29.

Bibcode : 2012Ecosp...3...29K .

doi : 10.1890/ES11-00318.1 .

ISSN 2150-8925 .

^ "Scouting Education" .

World Organization of the Scout Movement . Retrieved 2022-08-01 .

^ Cook L. (1999). The 1944 Education Act and outdoor education: from policy to practice.

History of Education , 28 (2), 157-172.

ISBN 0-473-10583-7 ^ Lynch, P. (?).

Camping in the Curriculum: A History of Outdoor Education in New Zealand Schools . PML publications, Lincoln University, Canterbury, New Zealand.

^ a b Walsh, V., & Golins, G. L. (1976).

The exploration of the Outward Bound process . Denver, CO: Colorado Outward Bound School.

^ Lee, Chermaine (2022-01-24).

"Why some Asian schools are going wild" .

www.bbc.com . Retrieved 2022-01-24 .

^ English Outdoor Council. (n.d.).

"High Quality Outdoor Education" (PDF) . English Outdoor Council. Archived from the original on July 25, 2008 . Retrieved July 19, 2013 .

^ "What Is Forest School?" .

^ Henderson, B., & Potter, G. T. (n.d.). Outdoor Adventure Education in Canada: Seeking The Country Way Back In. 227-242.

^ Christie, Carla; Cárcamo-Ulloa, Luis; Barraza, Laura; Scheihing, Eliana (2025).

"Outdoor environmental education in Southern Chile: teachers' perspectives and challenges in excursions" .

Environmental Education Research .

31 (5): 1069– 1082.

Bibcode : 2025EnvER..31.1069C .

doi : 10.1080/13504622.2025.2469760 .

ISSN 1350-4622 .

^ Xu, Yujun; and Qian, Junwei (2025-02-12).

"Examining the risk-safety paradox in outdoor education from a Taoist perspective: a case study of a Chinese outdoor education experience" .

Sport, Education and Society .

30 (2): 137– 153.

doi : 10.1080/13573322.2023.2295874 .

ISSN 1357-3322 .

^ "Early Nature Lessons in Denmark's Forest Preschools -The official website of Denmark" .

denmark.dk . Retrieved 2016-10-06 .

^ El-Aasar, Marwa; Shafik, Zeinab; Abou-Bakr, Dalia (2024-04-01).

"Outdoor learning environment as a teaching tool for integrating education for sustainable development in kindergarten, Egypt" .

Ain Shams Engineering Journal .

15 (4): 102629.

doi : 10.1016/j.asej.2024.102629 .

ISSN 2090-4479 .

^ Gebrekidan, Tsegay Kahsay; Gebremedhin, Gebremariam Gebrezgabher (2024-04-01).

"Integration and effectiveness of formal environmental education in Africa and India: Review" .

European Journal of Sustainable Development Research .

8 (2): em0253.

doi : 10.29333/ejosdr/14368 .

ISSN 2542-4742 .

^ "Opetussuunnitelma ja ympäristökasvatus - LYKE-verkosto" .

finland.fi . Retrieved 2018-01-05 .

^ "Luonto ja ympäristöalan perustutkinto 2014" (PDF) .

finland.fi . Retrieved 2018-01-05 .

^ "Bachelor's Degree in Adventure and Outdoor Education" .

finland.fi . Retrieved 2018-01-05 .

^ "Suomen makein avoimen amk:n opintojakso? Seikkailukasvatus Humakissa" .

finland.fi . Retrieved 2018-01-05 .

^ Gebrekidan, Tsegay Kahsay; Gebremedhin, Gebremariam Gebrezgabher (2024-04-01).

"Integration and effectiveness of formal environmental education in Africa and India: Review" .

European Journal of Sustainable Development Research .

8 (2): em0253.

doi : 10.29333/ejosdr/14368 .

ISSN 2542-4742 .

^ Levy, Iris; Tish, Sigal; Tal, Pninat; Tal, Clodie; Kadury-Slezak, Michaela; Faruchi, Sapir (2025-04-01).

"What shapes the outdoor learning practices in Israeli kindergartens? ECE teachers' perceptions" .

Pedagogical Research .

10 (2): em0238.

doi : 10.29333/pr/16056 .

ISSN 2468-4929 .

^ KITANO, Hideo (2004-04-01), "Current State of Nature Experiences Activities and Nature Schools in Japan with Special Reference to Educational Reform" , The Asian Journal of Biology Education , 2 , Asian Journal of Biology Education Editing and Publishing Office, doi : 10.57443/ajbe.2.0_50 , 0 , retrieved 2025-04-09 ^ La expedición «Madrid Rumbo al Sur» reconoce problemas de financiación , [in:] ABC 10.09.2013 ^ Gebrekidan, Tsegay Kahsay; Gebremedhin, Gebremariam Gebrezgabher (2024-04-01).

"Integration and effectiveness of formal environmental education in Africa and India: Review" .

European Journal of Sustainable Development Research .

8 (2): em0253.

doi : 10.29333/ejosdr/14368 .

ISSN 2542-4742 .

^ "Let's Get Physical: Camping Excursions Bring Prairie Crossing Students Closer to Nature" . 10 July 2018.

^ Hattie, J. A., Marsh, H. W., Neill, J. T. & Richards, G. E. (1997).

Adventure education and Outward Bound: Out-of-class experiences that have a lasting effect .

Review of Educational Research , 67 , 43-87.

^ Neill, J. T. (2008).

Enhancing personal effectiveness: Impacts of outdoor education programs . PhD thesis. Sydney: University of Western Sydney.

^ Loynes, Chris (1998).

"Adventure in a Bun" (PDF) .

Journal of Experiential Education .

21 (1): 35– 39.

doi : 10.1177/105382599802100108 .

S2CID 143638838 .

^ Loynes, Chris (2002).

"The Generative Paradigm" (PDF) .

Journal of Adventure Education and Outdoor Learning .

2 (2): 113– 125.

doi : 10.1080/14729670285200221 .

S2CID 51831743 .

^ Maynard, Trisha; Waters, Jane; Clement, Jennifer (2013). "Child-initiated learning, the outdoor environment and the 'underachieving' child".

Early Years .

33 (3): 212.

doi : 10.1080/09575146.2013.771152 .

S2CID 143947914 .

^ Gorges R.

Waldkindergartenkinder Im Ersten Schuljahr Archived May 16, 2011, at the Wayback Machine (in German) ^ Ernest; Monroe (2004).

"The effects of environment-based education on students' critical thinking skills and disposition toward critical thinking" .

Environmental Education Research .

10 (4): 522 . Retrieved 14 March 2014 .

^ Lieberman, Gerald A.; Hoody, Linda L. (1998).

Closing the Achievement Gap (PDF) . State Education and Environment Round Table.

^ The Scout Movement is the most widespread associated network of outdoor adventure-based education implementers.

^ Aside from Scouting affiliates, there also have been organizations which sprouted out and away from the root Scout idea.

[1] ^ Books by Daniel Carter Beard ^ Block, Nelson, 2000, A Thing of the Spirit: the life of E. Urner Goodman , Boy Scouts of America.

^ Davis, Kenneth (PhD history, U Virginia; Colonel, US Army), The Brotherhood of Cheerful Service: a history of the Order of the Arrow , Boy Scouts of America, 1990, 1995, 2000.

ISBN 0839549989 .

ISBN 978-0839549987 .

^ Birth of Outward Bound ^ Block, Nelson, "William Hillcourt: Scoutmaster to the World", The Journal of Scouting History .

^ The Way of Nature Fellowship ^ John Milton Archived August 23, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ Miner, Joshua & Joseph Boldt, Outward Bound USA: learning through experience in adventure-based education , William Morrow & Co, 1981.

^ Miner, Joshua & Joseph Boldt, Outward Bound USA: Crew, Not Passengers , Mountaineers Books, 2002.

ISBN 978-0-89886-874-6 ^ Charles Alexander Eastman Archived May 28, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ Martinez, David, 2009 Dakota Philosopher , St. Paul, Minnesota: Minnesota Historical Society Press, ISBN 0-87351-629-X .

^ Outdoor Education Group Archived June 21, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ Project Adventure Evolution ^ Witt, David, 2010, Ernest Thompson Seton: The Life and Legacy of an Artist and Conservationist , Gibbs Smith.

ISBN 1423603915 .

ISBN 978-1423603917 .

^ Seton, Julia, By a Thousand Fires , 1967.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] External links [ edit ] Wikibooks has a book on the topic of: Outdoor Education Wikiversity has learning resources about Outdoor education Wikimedia Commons has media related to Outdoor education .

v t e Education Overview General Glossary Index Outline By perspective Aims and objectives Learning standards Anthropology Assessment Evaluation Course evaluation Psychometrics Standards-based Standardized test Teacher quality Economics Spending Free education Tuition payments Education sciences Evidence-based History Inclusion Leadership Neuroscience Pedagogy Philosophy Policy Politics Psychology Research Rights Sociology Technology Instructional Instructional design By subject Agricultural Art Bilingual Business Chemistry Computer science Death Design Economics Engineering Environmental Euthenics Health Language Legal Mathematics Medical Military Music Nursing Peace Performing arts Philosophy Physical Physics Reading Religious Science Sex Teacher Technology Values Vocational Alternative Adult education Autodidacticism Democratic Education reform Gifted education Homeschooling Religious education Special education Concepts 21st century skills Accreditation Accreditation mill Bloom's taxonomy Board of education Cognitive load Classroom management Class arrangement Compulsory education Critical thinking Curriculum Bias Development Hidden Studies Theory Diploma mill Learning theory Desirable difficulty Spacing effect Testing effect Lesson plan Pedagogical pattern School choice School discipline Teacher look Teacher retention Teaching method Active learning Blended learning Contemplative Demonstration Dialogic learning Experiential Feedback Passive Peer instruction Personalized Phenomenon-based Problem-based Problem solving Project-based Student-centered Socratic Teaching philosophy Wikimedia Books Definitions Images Learning resources News Quotes Texts Stages Early childhood education Primary education Secondary education Tertiary education Preschool → Kindergarten → Primary school → Infant → Junior → Secondary school → Middle school → High school → Higher education Vocational Further ( Continuing ) Undergraduate → Postgraduate Portal Education by region Education in Africa Sovereign states Algeria Angola Benin Botswana Burkina Faso Burundi Cameroon Cape Verde Central African Republic Chad Comoros Democratic Republic of the Congo Republic of the Congo Djibouti Egypt Equatorial Guinea Eritrea Eswatini Ethiopia Gabon The Gambia Ghana Guinea Guinea-Bissau Ivory Coast Kenya Lesotho Liberia Libya Madagascar Malawi Mali Mauritania Mauritius Morocco Mozambique Namibia Niger Nigeria Rwanda São Tomé and Príncipe Senegal Seychelles Sierra Leone Somalia South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Togo Tunisia Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe States with limited recognition Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic Somaliland Dependencies and other territories Canary Islands / Ceuta / Melilla (Spain) Madeira (Portugal) Mayotte / Réunion (France) Saint Helena / Ascension Island / Tristan da Cunha (United Kingdom) Education in Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal Education in Europe Sovereign states Albania Andorra Armenia Austria Azerbaijan Belarus Belgium Bosnia and Herzegovina Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Ireland Italy Kazakhstan Latvia Liechtenstein Lithuania Luxembourg Malta Moldova Monaco Montenegro Netherlands North Macedonia Norway Poland Portugal Romania Russia San Marino Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom States with limited recognition Abkhazia Kosovo Northern Cyprus South Ossetia Transnistria Dependencies and other entities Åland Faroe Islands Gibraltar Guernsey Isle of Man Jersey Svalbard Other entities European Union Education in  North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands Education in Oceania Sovereign states Australia Federated States of Micronesia Fiji Indonesia Kiribati Marshall Islands Nauru New Zealand Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Timor-Leste Tonga Tuvalu Vanuatu Associated states of New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Dependencies and other territories American Samoa Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Easter Island French Polynesia Guam Hawaii New Caledonia Norfolk Island Northern Mariana Islands Pitcairn Islands Tokelau Wallis and Futuna Education in South America Sovereign states Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Dependencies and other territories Falkland Islands French Guiana South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Schools portal Category WikiProject v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Political representation of nature Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself ( ethic ) Natural history ( museums ) Popular science Property theory ( common property ) Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States Japan Israel Other Yale LUX ^ Imran, Muhammad; and Almusharraf, Norah (2024-12-31).

"Shaping a sustainable future: a study of teachers' perspectives on environmental education awareness" .

Cogent Education .

11 (1): 2422223.

doi : 10.1080/2331186X.2024.2422223 .

^ Fan, Ming-Ren; Tran, Ngoc-Huy; Nguyen, Lam-Huu-Phuoc; Huang, Chin-Fei (2024-07-15).

"Effects of Outdoor Education on Elementary School Students' Perception of Scientific Literacy and Learning Motivation" .

European Journal of Educational Research .

13 (3): 1353– 1363.

doi : 10.12973/eu-jer.13.3.1353 .

ISSN 2165-8714 .

^ Borsos, Éva; and Boric, Edita (2024-10-19).

"Have teachers' opinions about outdoor education changed after the pandemic?" .

Journal of Biological Education .

58 (5): 1247– 1261.

doi : 10.1080/00219266.2023.2192730 .

ISSN 0021-9266 .

{{ cite journal }} : |first2= missing |last2= ( help ) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Mallette, Angela; Heaney, Shannon; McGlynn, Bridget; Stuart, Savannah; Witkowski, Samantha; Plummer, Ryan (2024-04-05).

"Outdoor education, environmental perceptions, and sustainability: Exploring relationships and opportunities" .

Journal of Outdoor and Environmental Education .

Bibcode : 2024JOEE..tmp...18M .

doi : 10.1007/s42322-024-00162-8 .

ISSN 2522-879X .

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: bibcode ( link ) NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐tksrx
Cached time: 20250812012105
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.944 seconds
Real time usage: 1.072 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 29268/1000000
Revision size: 48832/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 343237/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19356/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 17/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 174188/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.423/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8437446/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  917.616      1 -total
 36.96%  339.195      1 Template:Education
 36.78%  337.475      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 28.43%  260.839      1 Template:Reflist
 18.32%  168.092    103 Template:Iso2country
 14.08%  129.214      6 Template:Navbox
 11.72%  107.567      1 Template:Asia_topic
 11.10%  101.883     16 Template:Cite_journal
  9.60%   88.134      1 Template:Europe_topic
  8.07%   74.030      3 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2515017:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812012105 and revision id 1302142542. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Outdoor_education&oldid=1302142542 " Categories : Outdoor education Experiential learning Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2014 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2009 Commons category link from Wikidata CS1 errors: missing name CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: bibcode This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 16:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Outdoor education 13 languages Add topic

