Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Role 3 Common threads 4 Criticism 5 See also 6 Notes and references 7 General bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Popular science 41 languages العربية Asturianu বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska తెలుగు Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Interpretation of science intended for a general audience For other uses, see Popular science (disambiguation) .

For broader coverage of this topic, see Science communication .

Title page of Mary Somerville's On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences (1834), an early popular-science book Popular science (also called pop-science or popsci ) is an interpretation of science intended for a general audience . While science journalism focuses on recent scientific developments, popular science is more broad ranging. It may be written by professional science journalists or by scientists themselves. It is presented in many forms, including books, film and television documentaries, magazine articles, and web pages.

History [ edit ] Before the modern specialization and professionalization of science, there was often little distinction between "science" and "popular science", and works intended to share scientific knowledge with a general reader existed as far back as Greek and Roman antiquity.

[ 1 ] Without these popular works, much of the scientific knowledge of the era might have been lost. For example, none of the original works of the Greek astronomer Eudoxus (4th century BC) have survived, but his contributions were largely preserved due to the didactic poem Phenomena written a century later and commented on by Hipparchus . Explaining science in poetic form was not uncommon, and as recently as 1791, Erasmus Darwin wrote The Botanic Garden , two long poems intended to interest and educate readers in botany. Many Greek and Roman scientific handbooks were written for the lay audience, [ 2 ] and this "handbook" tradition continued right through to the invention of the printing press, with much later examples including books of secrets such as Giambattista Della Porta 's Magia Naturalis (1558) and Isabella Cortese 's Secreti (1561).

The 17th century saw the beginnings of the modern scientific revolution and the consequent need for explicit popular science writing. Although works such as Galileo 's The Assayer (1632) and Robert Hooke 's Micrographia (1665) were read by both scientists and the public, [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Newton's Principia (1687) was incomprehensible for most readers, so popularizations of Newton's ideas soon followed.

[ 5 ] Popular science writing surged in countries such as France, where books such as Fontenelle 's Conversations on the Plurality of Worlds (1686) were best-sellers.

[ 6 ] By 1830, astronomer John Herschel had recognized the need for the specific genre of popular science. In a letter to philosopher William Whewell , he wrote that the general public needed "digests of what is actually known in each particular branch of science... to give a connected view of what has been done, and what remains to be accomplished." [ 7 ] Indeed, as the British population became not just increasingly literate but also well-educated, there was growing demand for science titles.

[ 8 ] Mary Somerville became an early and highly successful science writer of the nineteenth century. Her On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences (1834), intended for the mass audience, sold quite well.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Arguably one of the first books in modern popular science, it contained few diagrams and very little mathematics. Ten editions of the book were published, and it was translated into multiple languages. It was the most popular science title from the publisher John Murray until On the Origin of Species (1859) by Charles Darwin .

[ 7 ] Role [ edit ] Popular science is a bridge between scientific literature as a professional medium of scientific research, and the realms of popular political and cultural discourse. The goal of the genre is often to capture the methods and accuracy of science while making the language more accessible. Many science-related controversies are discussed in popular science books and publications, such as the long-running debates over biological determinism and the biological components of intelligence, stirred by popular books such as The Mismeasure of Man and The Bell Curve .

[ 11 ] The purpose of scientific literature is to inform and persuade peers regarding the validity of observations and conclusions and the forensic efficacy of methods. Popular science attempts to inform and convince scientific outsiders (sometimes along with scientists in other fields) of the significance of data and conclusions and to celebrate the results. Statements in the scientific literature are often qualified and tentative, emphasizing that new observations and results are consistent with and similar to established knowledge wherein qualified scientists are assumed to recognize the relevance. By contrast, popular science emphasizes uniqueness and generality, taking a tone of factual authority absent from the scientific literature.

Common threads [ edit ] Some usual features of popular science productions include: Entertainment value or personal relevance to the audience Emphasis on uniqueness and radicalness Exploring ideas overlooked by specialists or falling outside established disciplines Generalized, simplified science concepts Presented for an audience with little or no science background, hence explaining general concepts more thoroughly Synthesis of new ideas that cross multiple fields and offer new applications in other academic specialties Use of metaphors and analogies to explain difficult or abstract scientific concepts Criticism [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( June 2025 ) Comparisons between original scientific reports, derivative science journalism, and popular science typically reveals at least some level of distortion and oversimplification .

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] List of science communicators List of popular science mass media outlets Amateur astronomy – Hobby of watching the sky and stars Citizen science – Amateur scientific research Folk science The Complete Works of Charles Darwin Online – Online digital book library Easiness effect – Epistemic overconfidence instilled by pop-sci oversimplifications Greatest Engineering Achievements of the 20th Century – Engineering branch of the United States National Academies Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets History of science Kalinga Prize – UNESCO science award List of notable online science encyclopedias – List of encyclopedias accessible via the Internet List of popular science books on evolution List of science museums National Association of Science Writers – Organization of science journalists Nature documentary – Documentary genre Nature writing – Nonfiction or fiction prose or poetry about the natural environment,  literary genre Popular history – Genre of historiography Popular Mechanics – American science magazine Popular mathematics – Mathematics for a general audience Popular psychology – Simplified everyday psychology Public awareness of science – Aspect of education and communication Scientific celebrity – Scientists well-known to the public Science communication – Public communication of science-related topics to non-experts Science & Entertainment Exchange – Science education Science museum – Museum devoted primarily to science Science by press conference – Aspect of science news Science outreach Physics outreach – Broadening awareness and understanding of physics Sense about Science – British non-profit organisation TED (conference) – American-Canadian organization of conferences Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Muñoz Morcillo, Jesús; Robertson-von Trotha, Caroline Y. (2020). Muñoz Morcillo, Jesús; Robertson-von Trotha, Caroline Y. (eds.).

Genealogy of Popular Science: From Ancient Ecphrasis to Virtual Reality . Verlag.

doi : 10.1515/9783839448359 .

ISBN 9783839448359 .

^ Stahl, William Harris (1962).

Roman science: origins, development, and influence to the later Middle Ages . Madison: University of Wisconsin Press.

^ Pellegrini, Giuseppe; Rubin, Andrea (2020). "20 Italy: The long and winding path of science communication". In Gascoigne, Toss; Schiele, Bernard; Leach, Joan; Riedlinger, Michelle; Lewenstein, Bruce V.; Massarani, Luisa; Broks, Peter (eds.).

Communicating Science: A Global Perspective . Australian National University Press. p. 469.

doi : 10.22459/CS.2020 .

ISBN 9781760463656 .

S2CID 230769184 .

^ Falkowski, Paul G. (2015). "2 Meet the Microbes. Life's Engines: How Microbes Made Earth Habitable".

Life's Engines . Princeton University Press. pp.

25– 27.

doi : 10.1515/9781400865727-004 .

^ Meadows, Jack (1986).

"The growth of science popularization: a historical sketch" .

Impact .

144 : 341– 346.

^ Boissoneault, Lorraine (13 February 2019).

"How 18th-Century Writers Created the Genre of Popular Science" .

Smithsonian Magazine .

^ a b Holmes, Richard (22 October 2014).

"In retrospect: On the Connexion of the Physical Sciences" .

Nature .

514 (7523): 432– 433.

Bibcode : 2014Natur.514..432H .

doi : 10.1038/514432a .

S2CID 4453696 .

^ Yeo, Richard R. (1993).

Defining science : William Whewell, natural knowledge, and public debate in early Victorian Britain . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

43– 44.

ISBN 0-521-43182-4 .

OCLC 26673878 .

^ Baraniuk, Chris (28 June 2017).

"Mary Somerville: Queen of 19th-century science" .

New Scientist .

235 (3132): 40– 1.

doi : 10.1016/S0262-4079(17)31271-X .

^ Strickland, Elisabetta (September 2017).

"Mary Fairfax Somerville, Queen of Science" .

Notices of the American Mathematical Society .

64 (8): 929– 31.

doi : 10.1090/noti1569 .

^ Murdz William McRae, "Introduction: Science in Culture" in The Literature of Science , pp. 1–3, 10–11 ^ Fahnestock, Jeanne. "Accommodating Science: The Rhetorical Life of Scientific Facts".

Written Communication .

3 (3): 275– 296.

doi : 10.1177/0741088386003003001 .

S2CID 146786632 .

General bibliography [ edit ] Andreas W. Daum , Varieties of Popular Science and the Transformations of Public Knowledge: Some Historical Reflections".

Isis. A Journal of the History of Science Society , 100 (June 2009), 319–332.

McRae, Murdo William (editor).

The Literature of Science: Perspectives on Popular Scientific Writing . The University of Georgia Press: Athens, 1993.

ISBN 0-8203-1506-0 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Popular science at Wikimedia Commons The dictionary definition of popular science at Wiktionary v t e Science and the public Citizen science Conversazione March for Science Participatory action research Community-based Patient and public involvement Physics outreach Popular science Public awareness of science Public science Science by press conference Science Café Science communication Science fair Science festival Science journalism Science museum Science outreach Science policy The Amateur Scientist v t e Environmental humanities Art Crop art Environmental art Environmental sculpture Land art Landscape painting Photography conservation landscape nature wildlife Sculpture trail Site-specific art Sustainable art Culture Cultural ecology Cultural landscape Ecolinguistics Ecological anthropology Ecosemiotics Environmental anthropology Ethnoecology Traditional ecological knowledge Literature Ecocomposition Ecocriticism Ecopoetry Geocriticism Nature writing Outdoor literature Philosophy Aesthetics of nature Critical realism Deep ecology Ecofeminism Ecophenomenology Ecosophy Environmental ethics Environmental justice Environmental philosophy Predation problem Social ecology Religion Ecotheology Environmental theology Religion and environmentalism Spiritual ecology Stewardship Other Anthrozoology Ecomusicology Environmental communication Environmental education adult arts-based Environmental history Environmental interpretation Environmental journalism Environmental law Outdoor education Political representation of nature Psychogeography Thematic interpretation Related Animal studies Bioethics Biophilia hypothesis Do it yourself ( ethic ) Natural history ( museums ) Popular science Property theory ( common property ) Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Simple living Slow food Spirit of place Sustainability studies Applied Arts and Crafts movement Acoustic ecology Biomimicry Ecological design Ecomuseum Educational trail Environmental design Landscape architecture assessment planning Nature center New Urbanism Sustainable architecture Sustainable design Sustainable fashion Themed walk Environment portal Category Commons Journals Degrees Portals : Science History of science Authority control databases National France BnF data Czech Republic Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Popular_science&oldid=1301176573 " Category : Popular science Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2022 Articles to be expanded from June 2025 All articles to be expanded Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 13:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Popular science 41 languages Add topic

