Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Work Toggle Work subsection 2.1 Systems ecology 2.2 Biophysical economics 3 Books 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Charles A. S. Hall 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American systems ecologist This article reads like a press release or a news article and may be largely based on routine coverage .

Please help improve it by adding independent secondary sources.

( April 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Charles A. S. Hall Born Charles Addison Scott Hall 1943 (age 81–82) Hingham, Massachusetts , U.S.

Alma mater Colgate University Pennsylvania State University University of North Carolina Known for work on Peak Oil Spouse Myrna Hall Scientific career Fields Ecology Charles A. S. Hall (born 1943) is an American systems ecologist and ESF Foundation Distinguished Professor at State University of New York in the College of Environmental Science & Forestry.

Biography [ edit ] Hall was born near Boston , and received a B.A. in biology from Colgate University , and an M.A. from Penn State University . He trained as systems ecologist by Howard Odum at the University of North Carolina , where he received a PhD.

Since then he has had a diverse career at Brookhaven Laboratory , The Ecosystems Center at the Marine Biological Laboratory, Woods Hole , Cornell University , University of Montana and, for the last 20 years, at the State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry ( SUNY ESF ).

Hall, professor of systems ecology at SUNY-ESF teaches a freshman course called The Global Environment and the Evolution of Human Culture and graduate-level courses in Systems Ecology , Ecosystems , Energy systems , Tropical Development and Biophysical Economics.

[ 1 ] Hall retired from full-time teaching in June 2012, [ 2 ] and he now works to consolidate his life work into a format that will continue to be useful for future research.

[ 3 ] Work [ edit ] Hall's research interests are in the field of Systems ecology with strong interests in biophysical economics , and the relation of energy to society . His work has involved streams, estuaries and tropical forests but focused increasingly on human-dominated ecosystems in the US and Latin America. His research reflects his interest in understanding and developing analyses and computer simulation models of the complex systems of nature and humans and their interactions. Halls focus has been on energy as it relates to economics and environment. His focus is studying material and energy flows referred to as Industrial ecology , and applying this perspective, to attempting to understand human economies from a biophysical rather than just social perspective.

Systems ecology [ edit ] Hall, and other biophysical economic thinkers are trained in ecology and evolutionary biology , fields that break down the natural world as done also by physicists. These views hold the global economy in a different perspective
that mainstream economists do not share. Central to Halls argument is an understanding that the survival of all living creatures is limited by the concept of energy return on investment ( EROEI ): that any living thing or living societies can survive only so long as they are capable of getting more net energy from any activity than they expend during the performance of that activity.

[ 4 ] Biophysical economics [ edit ] "Energy used by the economy is a proxy of the amount of real work done in our economy," according to Charles A. Hall. In the 1980s, Hall and others hypothesised, "Over time, the Dow Jones should snake about the real amount of work." Twenty years later, a century's market and energy data shows that whenever the Dow Jones Industrial Average spikes faster than US energy consumption, it crashes: 1929, 1970s, the dot.com bubble, and now with the mortgage collapse.

[ 5 ] Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen (a Romanian-born economist whose work in the 1970s began to define this new approach) models the economy as a living system. Like all life, it draws from its environment valuable (or “low entropy”) matter and energy, for animate life, food; for an economy, energy, ores, the raw materials provided by plants and animals. And like all life, an economy emits a high-entropy wake, it spews degraded matter and energy, that is... waste heat, waste gases, toxic byproducts, the molecules of iron lost to rust and abrasion. Low entropy emissions include trash and pollution in all their forms. Matter taken up into the economy can be recycled, using energy; but energy, used once, is forever unavailable to us at that level again. The law of entropy commands a one-way flow downward from more to less useful forms. Thus, Georgescu-Roegen, paraphrasing the economist Alfred Marshall , said: “Biology, not mechanics, is our Mecca.” [ 6 ] Books [ edit ] 1977 : Hall, C.A.S. and J.W. Day (eds.) Ecosystem modeling in theory and practice. An introduction with case histories. Wiley Interscience, NY.

1986: Hall, C.A.S., C.J. Cleveland and R. Kaufmann. Energy and Resource Quality: The ecology of the economic process. Wiley Interscience, NY. 577 pp. (Second Edition. University Press of Colorado).

1989 Day, J.W., C.A.S. Hall, M. Kemp and A. Yanez-Arenciba. 1989. Estuarine Ecology. Wiley Interscience. New York. 558 pp.

1989 Hall, C.A.S. Maximum power: the ideas and applications of H.T. Odum. University Press of Colorado.

2000 Hall, C.A.S. Quantifying sustainable development: The future of tropical Economies. Academic Press, San Diego.

2007 LeClerc, G. and C.A.S. Hall. (eds) Making World Development Work: Scientific alternatives to neoclassical economic theory. University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque. 2007.

2012 : Spain’s Photovoltaic Revolution: The energy return on investment with Pedro Prieto (Springer) 2012 : The Chinese Oil Industry: History and Future with Lianyong Feng, Yan Hu and Jianliang Wang (Springer) 2012 : The First Half of the Age of Oil: An Exploration of the Work of Colin Campbell and Jean Laherrère with Carlos Ramírez-Pascualli (Springer) 2012 : Energy and the Wealth of Nations: Understanding the Biophysical Economy with Kent A. Klitgaard (Springer) 2013 : Hall, Charles and Hanson, Doug.

New Studies on EROI.

Consolidation of papers published in Sustainabilities in 2011 MDPI Basil.

2016 : America's Most Sustainable Cities and Regions: Surviving the 21st Century Megatrends with Day, John W. (Springer) 2017 : Energy Return on Investment: A unifying principle for biology, Economics and sustainability (Springer) 2018 : Energy and the Wealth of Nations: An introduction to BioPhysical Economics (2nd Edition) with Kent A. Klitgaard (Springer) See also [ edit ] Systems science portal Systems ecology Energy quality Energy accounting Ecological economics Energy economics Industrial ecology Natural capital Econophysics Sustainability Environmental science Thermoeconomics References [ edit ] ^ http://web.mac.com/biophysicalecon/iWeb/Site/About%20Me.html Archived 2009-11-30 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved November-3-09 ^ http://www.esf.edu/efb/hall/CV_2014_a.pdf Archived 2016-03-12 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved April-12-16 ^ http://www.esf.edu/EFB/hall/ Archived 2021-03-09 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved April-12-16 ^ Gronewold, Nathanial (October 23, 2009).

"New School of Thought Brings Energy to 'the Dismal Science' " .

New York Times .

Greenwire .

^ Weyler, Rex (January 2009).

"Deep Green: Ecological Economics - The Best New Idea for 2009" .

Greenpeace.org .

Greenpeace International . Archived from the original on 20 June 2009.

^ Zencey, Eric (12 April 2009).

"Opinion - Mr. Soddy's Ecological Economy" .

The New York Times .

External links [ edit ] C.A.S.Hall's website at State University of New York Archived 2021-03-09 at the Wayback Machine The EROEI Institute [1] Hall's ongoing and archived work [2] v t e Systems science System types Art Biological Complex Coupled human–environment Ecological Economic Information Multi-agent Nervous Recommender Social Concepts Doubling time Leverage points Limiting factor Negative feedback Positive feedback Theoretical fields Control theory Cybernetics Earth system science Living systems Sociotechnical system Systemics Urban metabolism World-systems theory Analysis Biology Dynamics Ecology Engineering Neuroscience Pharmacology Philosophy Psychology Theory ( Systems thinking ) Scientists Russell L. Ackoff Victor Aladjev William Ross Ashby Ruzena Bajcsy Béla H. Bánáthy Gregory Bateson Anthony Stafford Beer Richard E. Bellman Ludwig von Bertalanffy Margaret Boden Alexander Bogdanov Kenneth E. Boulding Murray Bowen Kathleen Carley Mary Cartwright C. West Churchman Manfred Clynes George Dantzig Edsger W. Dijkstra Fred Emery Heinz von Foerster Stephanie Forrest Jay Wright Forrester Barbara Grosz Charles A. S. Hall Mike Jackson Lydia Kavraki James J. Kay Faina M. Kirillova George Klir Allenna Leonard Edward Norton Lorenz Niklas Luhmann Humberto Maturana Margaret Mead Donella Meadows Mihajlo D. Mesarovic James Grier Miller Radhika Nagpal Howard T. Odum Talcott Parsons Ilya Prigogine Qian Xuesen Anatol Rapoport John Seddon Peter Senge Claude Shannon Katia Sycara Eric Trist Francisco Varela Manuela M. Veloso Kevin Warwick Norbert Wiener Jennifer Wilby Anthony Wilden Applications Systems theory in anthropology Systems theory in archaeology Systems theory in political science Organizations List Principia Cybernetica Category Portal Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics ORCID Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Charles_A._S._Hall&oldid=1229410113 " Categories : 1943 births Living people American ecologists Colgate University alumni Eberly College of Science alumni State University of New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry faculty Systems ecologists University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill alumni Scientists from New York (state) Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 16 June 2024, at 17:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Charles A. S. Hall 1 language Add topic

