Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Epistemology and Science 2 Ontology of gender 3 Regional traditions Toggle Regional traditions subsection 3.1 North America 3.2 Central America 3.3 South America 3.4 Coyote tales 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Citations 4.2 Sources 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Indigenous American philosophy 6 languages العربية Español فارسی Français Português தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophies of the first inhabitants of the Americas Part of a series on Philosophy Philosophy portal Contents Outline Glossary History Categories Philosophies By period Ancient Egyptian Greek Roman Chinese Medieval Buddhism Neo-Confucianism Scholasticism Renaissance Modern Enlightenment Idealism Contemporary Analytic Continental By region African Egyptian Ethiopian South African Eastern Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Vietnamese Indigenous American Aztec Middle Eastern Iranian Western United States British French German Italian Russian By religion Buddhist Confucian Christian Hindu Islamic Jain Jewish Taoist Branches Epistemology Ethics Logic Metaphysics Aesthetics Education History Language Law Metaphilosophy Mind Ontology Phenomenology Political Religion Science Philosophers Aesthetic philosophers Epistemologists Ethicists Logicians Metaphysicians Philosophers of mind Social and political philosophers Women in philosophy v t e Indigenous American philosophy is the philosophy of the Indigenous peoples of the Americas . An Indigenous philosopher is an Indigenous American person who practices philosophy and draws upon the history, culture, language, and traditions of the Indigenous peoples of the Americas. Many different traditions of philosophy exist in the Americas, and have from Precolumbian times.

Indigenous-American philosophical thought consists of a wide variety of beliefs and traditions among different American cultures. Among some of U.S. Native American communities, there is a belief in a metaphysical principle called the ' Great Spirit ' ( Siouan : wakȟáŋ tȟáŋka ; Algonquian : gitche manitou ). Another widely shared concept was that of orenda ('spiritual power'). According to Whiteley (1998), for the Native Americans, "mind is critically informed by transcendental experience (dreams, visions and so on) as well as by reason." [ 1 ] The practices to access these transcendental experiences are termed shamanism . Another feature of the Indigenous American worldviews was their extension of ethics to non-human animals and plants.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Epistemology and Science [ edit ] The study of knowledge, belief, and the ways in which people acquire and process information (aka epistemology ) in Indigenous cultures can be somewhat different than in mainstream Western philosophy.

Vine Deloria Jr . often demonstrates in his work how Native American epistemology is found in ceremonies, community traditions and observation of nature and natural symbolism, in addition to more common academic approaches.

[ 3 ] Emphasis on Indigenous language and culture is a vital component of Native American epistemology, with language seen as essential to understanding psychology and different states of consciousness.

[ 4 ] Hester and Cheney have written about the strong link between nature and the interpretation of knowledge within Native American cultures. They believe that the mind interacts with the environment in a very active, conscious way.

[ 5 ] Ontology of gender [ edit ] Anne Waters has described a "nondiscrete ontology of being" in the context of gender.

[ 6 ] Regional traditions [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( October 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) North America [ edit ] In North America, Indigenous groups North of Mesoamerica often lack pre-colonial written histories. However, some oral traditions survived colonization. A common symbol for these groups were the six directions. Many considered the directions east, west, north, south, up, and down to be sacred to their understanding of the world. Some believe that this symbol cements a sense of place among the Indigenous groups who share it.

[ 7 ] Among the Hopi , there is a concept known as hopivotskwani , translating roughly to "the Hopi path of life". It entails behaving with a peaceful disposition, cooperation, humility, and respect. Hopi philosophy teaches that life is a journey, to be lived in harmony with the natural world. Thus, the Hopi believe that following hopivotskwani will lead to positive outcomes not only in interpersonal relationships, but also in interactions with nature, for example ensuring sufficient rainfall and a good harvest.

[ 8 ] [ better source needed ] As a rule, contemporary Pueblo peoples are very reluctant to share their traditional philosophical and spiritual worldviews with outsiders. This can be attributed to several factors, among them abuse of trust by early anthropologists and colonial Spanish intolerance for traditional Puebloan religions.

[ citation needed ] Central America [ edit ] Perhaps the best documented philosophical tradition of the Precolumbian and early colonial era is that of the Aztecs, a Nahuatl-speaking people who established a large and sophisticated empire in central Mexico prior to being conquered by the Spanish. Mesoamerican thought and philosophy is notable for its extensive usage of metaphor to explain abstract concepts.

[ 9 ] [ page needed ] The Aztecs thought of philosophy in more or less pragmatic and practical terms. A central feature of Aztec philosophy was the concept of teotl , a Nahuatl term for the animating force of the cosmos and an ever-acting and dynamic mover.

Teotl in theological terms could also symbolize a type of pantheism .

[ 10 ] Nahua philosophy was an intellectual tradition developed by individuals called tlamatini ('those who know something') [ 11 ] and its ideas are preserved in various Aztec codices and fragmentary texts. Some of these philosophers are known by name, such as Nezahualcoyotl , Aquiauhtzin , Xayacamach , Tochihuitzin coyolchiuhqui and Cuauhtencoztli.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] These authors were also poets and some of their work has survived in the original Nahuatl .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Aztec philosophers developed theories of metaphysics, epistemology, values, and aesthetics. Aztec ethics was focused on seeking tlamatiliztli ('knowledge', 'wisdom') which was based on moderation and balance in all actions as in the Nahua proverb "the middle good is necessary".

[ 14 ] The Nahua worldview posited the concept of an ultimate universal energy or force called Ōmeteōtl ('Dual Cosmic Energy') which sought a way to live in balance with a constantly changing, "slippery" world. The theory of Teotl can be seen as a form of Pantheism .

[ 14 ] According to James Maffie, Nahua metaphysics posited that teotl is "a single, vital, dynamic, vivifying, eternally self-generating and self-conceiving as well as self-regenerating and self-reconceiving sacred energy or force".

[ 13 ] This force was seen as the all-encompassing life force of the universe and as the universe itself.

[ 13 ] South America [ edit ] The Inca civilization also had an elite class of philosopher-scholars termed the amawtakuna or amautas who were important in the Inca education system as teachers of philosophy, theology, astronomy, poetry, law, music, morality and history.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Young Inca nobles were educated in these disciplines at the state college of Yacha-huasi in Cuzco , where they also learned the art of the quipu .

[ 15 ] Incan philosophy (as well as the broader category of Andean thought) held that the universe is animated by a single dynamic life force (sometimes termed camaquen or camac , as well as upani and amaya ).

[ 17 ] This singular force also arises as a set of dual complementary yet opposite forces.

[ 17 ] These "complementary opposites" are called yanantin and masintin . They are expressed as various polarities or dualities (such as male–female, dark–light, life and death, above and below) which interdependently contribute to the harmonious whole that is the universe through the process of reciprocity and mutual exchange called ayni .

[ 18 ] [ 17 ] The Inca worldview also included the belief in a creator God ( Viracocha ) and reincarnation .

[ 16 ] Coyote tales [ edit ] Academic Brian Yazzie Burkhart shares this story of Coyote : Coyote is wandering around in his usual way when he comes upon a prairie dog town. The prairie dogs laugh and curse at him. Coyote gets angry and wants revenge. The sun is high in the sky. Coyote decides that he wants clouds to come. He is starting to hate the prairie dogs and so thinks about rain. Just then a cloud appears.

Coyote says, "I wish it would rain on me." And that is what happened.

Coyote says, "I wish there were rain at my feet." And that is what happened.

"I want the rain up to my knees," Coyote says. And that is what happened.

"I want the rain up to my waist," he then says. And that is what happened.

[ 19 ] Eventually, the entire land is flooded. Coyote's mistake is not letting what is right guide his actions, but instead acting entirely on his own motivations. This is a reminder that one must be careful about what one desires, and must keep in mind the things around us and how we relate to them. Burkhart terms this the principle of relatedness.

[ 20 ] Indigenous peoples of the Americas portal Philosophy portal References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b Whiteley, Peter M. (1998).

"Native American philosophy" .

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Taylor & Francis .

doi : 10.4324/9780415249126-N078-1 .

ISBN 9780415250696 .

Archived from the original on 6 August 2020.

^ Pierotti, Raymond (2003).

"Communities as both Ecological and Social entities in Native American thought" (PDF) .

Native American Symposium 5 . Durant, OK: Southeastern Oklahoma State University . Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 April 2016.

^ Deloria, Vine; Wildcat, Daniel R. (2001).

Power and place: Indian education in America . Golden (Colo.): Fulcrum.

ISBN 978-1-55591-859-0 .

^ * Battiste, Marie (2002).

"Indigenous Knowledge and Pedagogy in First Nations Education: A Literary Review with Recommendations" (PDF) .

National Working Group on Education . Ottawa, Canada: 17. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2023-04-17 . Retrieved 2018-04-26 .

^ * Hester, L.; Cheney, J. (2001).

"Truth and Native American epistemology" (PDF) .

Social Epistemology .

15 (4): 319– 334.

doi : 10.1080/02691720110093333 .

S2CID 144297754 .

^ Waters (2003) , p. 97.

^ "Newsletter on American Indians in Philosophy" (PDF) .

University of Delaware : American Philosophical Association. 2002 . Retrieved December 24, 2021 .

^ "Hopi Indians - Anthropology - iResearchNet" .

^ Miller (1997) .

^ "Aztec Philosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 24 December 2019 .

^ Portilla, Miguel León (1990).

Use of "Tlamatini" in Aztec Thought and Culture: A Study of the Ancient Nahuatl Mind – Miguel León Portilla .

ISBN 9780806122953 .

Archived from the original on 17 December 2019 . Retrieved December 12, 2014 .

^ a b Leonardo Esteban Figueroa Helland (2012).

Indigenous Philosophy and World Politics: Cosmopolitical Contributions from across the Americas (PDF) (PhD dissertation). Arizona State University.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 November 2021.

^ a b c d Maffie, James (March 2002).

"Why Care about Nezahualcoyotl? Veritism and Nahua Philosophy" .

Philosophy of the Social Sciences .

32 (1). Sage Publications: 71– 91.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.878.7615 .

doi : 10.1177/004839310203200104 .

S2CID 144901245 . Archived from the original on 18 November 2021.

^ a b "Aztec Philosophy" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Archived from the original on 25 May 2020 . Retrieved 25 December 2016 .

^ a b Yeakel, John A. (Fall 1983).

"Accountant-Historians of the Incas" (PDF) .

Accounting Historians Journal .

10 (2): 39– 51.

doi : 10.2308/0148-4184.10.2.39 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 12 November 2021.

^ a b Adames, Hector Y.; Chavez-Dueñas, Nayeli Y. (2016).

Cultural Foundations and Interventions in Latino/a Mental Health: History, Theory and within Group Differences . Routledge. pp.

20– 21.

^ a b c Maffie, James (2009-12-04). "Pre-Columbian Philosophies". In Nuccetelli, Susana; Schutte, Ofelia; Bueno, Otávio (eds.).

A Companion to Latin American Philosophy (1 ed.). Wiley.

doi : 10.1002/9781444314847 .

ISBN 978-1-4051-7979-9 .

^ Webb, Hillary S. (2012).

Yanantin and Masintin in the Andean World: Complementary Dualism in Modern Peru .

^ Burkhart (2003) , pp. 15–16.

^ Burkhart (2003) , p. 16.

Sources [ edit ] Burkhart, Brian Yazzie (2003). "What Coyote and Thales Can Teach Us: An Outline of American Indian Epistemology". In Waters, Anne (ed.).

American Indian Thought: Philosophical Essays . Wiley-Blackwell. pp.

15– 26.

Miller, Mary Ellen (1997).

An Illustrated Dictionary of the Gods and Symbols of Ancient Mexico and the Maya (1st pbk. ed.). Thames and Hudson.

ISBN 9780500279281 .

Waters, Anne (2003). "Language Matters: Nondiscrete Nonbinary Dualism". In Waters, Anne (ed.).

American Indian Thought: Philosophical Essays . Wiley-Blackwell. pp.

97– 115.

Further reading [ edit ] Arola, A. (2011).

"Native American Philosophy" .

The Oxford Handbook of World Philosophy . Oxford Handbooks.

Barnhardt, R. (2005). "Indigenous knowledge systems and Alaska Native ways of knowing".

Anthropology & Education Quarterly .

36 (1): 8– 23.

doi : 10.1525/aeq.2005.36.1.008 .

Moore, K.D.; Peters, K.; Jojola, T.; Lacy, A. (2007).

How it is: The Native American philosophy of VF Cordova .

Parry, M.L.; Canziani, O.F.; Palutikof, J.P.; van der Linden, P.J.; Hanson, C.E. (2007).

Climate Change 2007: Working Group II: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability . Cambridge University Press. pp.

625– 666.

Tedlock, D.; Tedlock, B., eds. (1992).

Teachings from the American Earth: Indian Religion and Philosophy . W.W. Norton & Company.

Waters, Anne, ed. (2003).

American Indian Thought: Philosophical Essays . Wiley-Blackwell.

Younker, Jason (2008). "Review of How It Is: The Native American Philosophy of V. F. Cordova by V. F. Cordova, Kathleen Dean Moore, Kurt Peters, Ted Jojola, Amber Lacy".

Oregon Historical Quarterly .

109 (4): 641– 642.

doi : 10.1353/ohq.2008.0048 .

JSTOR 20615918 .

S2CID 245850581 .

v t e Indigenous peoples of the Americas Pre-history Paleo-Indians Pre-Columbian era Classification Archaeology Genetics Solutrean hypothesis Clovis First hypothesis Mythology/Religion Mythologies ‎ List of deities Religions Human sacrifice North America Arborglyph Fifth World Great Spirit Medicine man Medicine wheel The red road Totem pole Turtle Island Mesoamerica Common Cosmovision Creation Religion World tree Variations Aztec Maya Olmec South America Inca Mapuche Muisca Culture Andes Colombia Ecuador Peru Art Music Visual arts Painting Artists Writers European colonization European colonization Population history Columbian exchange Modern groups by country North America Belize Canada Costa Rica Dominica El Salvador Greenland Guatemala Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Trinidad and Tobago United States South America ( list ) Argentina Bolivia Brazil Chile Colombia Ecuador Guyana Paraguay Peru Suriname Uruguay Venezuela Related topics Ethnobotany Cherokee Iroquois Navajo Zuni Identity Languages Movements Philosophy Studies Trade Deerskin In popular culture Category Portal v t e North America articles History American Revolution California Gold Rush Canadian Confederation Civil War Cristero War European colonization New Spain New France British North America Louisiana Purchase Mexican–American War Mexican miracle Mexican Revolution Mexican War of Independence Paleo-Indians Peopling of the Americas Pre-Columbian era Progressive Era Roaring Twenties Turtle Island Timeline Lee Resolution (1776) American Declaration of Independence (1776) Constitution of the United States of America (1787) U.S. Bill of Rights (1791) War of 1812 World War I (1914–1918) Spanish flu (1918–1920) Stock market crash (1929) Great Depression (1930s) World War II (1939–1945) Cold War (1947–1991) Assassination of John F. Kennedy (1963) Civil Rights Act (1964) Apollo program Apollo 11 (1969) Oil crisis (1973) Three Mile Island accident (1979) Iran–Contra affair (1980s) Chiapas conflict (1990s) NAFTA agreement (1994) 9/11 attacks (2001) War on terror (2001–2021) Great Recession (2008) COVID-19 pandemic (2020–2023) Geography Cities Countries and dependent territories by population Extreme points Geology Islands Lakes Mountains Rivers Politics American imperialism North American Union (NAU) Organization of American States (OAS) Pan-Americanism Transatlantic relations Economy Agriculture Energy Telecommunications Tourism Transportation Countries by GDP (per capita) PPP per capita HDI Internet users Minimum wages Society Languages endangered Universities and colleges Culture Art Painting Sculpture Architecture Cuisine Etiquette Mass media Film Television Video game Radio Newspapers and magazines Social media Religion Sports Symbols Indigenous Music Philosophy Demographics Countries by population density Ethnic groups indigenous peoples classification Immigration Life expectancy Outline Category Portal Maps v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category Authority control databases International FAST National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Croatia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Indigenous_American_philosophy&oldid=1295214440 " Categories : Indigenous American philosophy Indigenous culture of the Americas Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles needing additional references from October 2020 All articles needing additional references All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from October 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2020 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from October 2020 This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 11:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Indigenous American philosophy 6 languages Add topic

