Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 See also 2 References 3 Further reading 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Foresight (futures studies) 11 languages Afrikaans Català Español فارسی Français Norsk bokmål Polski Português Suomi ไทย Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Term referring to various activities in futurology Futures studies Concepts Accelerating change Cashless society Global catastrophic risk Future Earth Mathematics Race Climate Space exploration Universe Historical materialism Kondratiev wave Kardashev scale Moore's law Peak oil Population cycle Resource depletion Singularity Swanson's law Techniques Backcasting Causal layered analysis Chain-linked model Consensus forecast Cross impact analysis Delphi Real-time Delphi Foresight Future-proof Futures wheel Future workshop Horizon scanning Reference class forecasting Scenario planning Systems analysis Threatcasting Trend analysis Technology assessment and forecasting Critical design Design fiction Exploratory engineering FTA Hype cycle Science fiction prototyping Speculative design TRL Technology scouting Related topics Futarchy Transhumanism v t e In futurology , especially in Europe, the term foresight has become widely used to describe activities such as: critical thinking concerning long-term developments, debate , wider participatory democracy , and shaping the future, especially by influencing public policy .

In the last decade, scenario methods, for example, have become widely used in some European countries in policy-making.

[ 1 ] The FORSOCIETY network brings together national Foresight teams from most European countries, and the European Foresight Monitoring Project is collating material on Foresight activities around the world. Foresight methods are used more and more in regional planning and decision–making (“regional foresight”). Several non-European think tanks, like Strategic Foresight Group , also engage in foresight studies.

The foresight of futurology is also known as strategic foresight. This foresight used by and describing professional futurists trained in Master's programs is the research-driven practice of exploring expected and alternative futures and guiding futures to inform strategy. Foresight includes understanding the relevant recent past; scanning to collect insight about present, futuring to describe the understood future including trend research; environment research to explore possible trend breaks from developments on the fringe and other divergencies that may lead to alternative futures; visioning to define preferred future states; designing strategies to craft this future; and adapting the present forces to implement this plan. There is notable but not complete overlap between foresight and strategic planning, change management, forecasting, and design thinking.

At the same time, the use of foresight for companies (“ corporate foresight ”) is becoming more professional and widespread [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Corporate foresight is used to support strategic management, identify new business fields [ 6 ] [ 7 ] and increase the innovation capacity of a firm.

[ 8 ] Foresight is not the same as futures research or strategic planning . It encompasses a range of approaches that combine the three components mentioned above, which may be recast as: futures (forecasting, forward thinking, prospectives), planning (strategic analysis, priority setting), and networking (participatory, dialogic) tools and orientations.

Much futurology research has been rather ivory tower work, but Foresight programmes were designed to influence policy - often R&D policy. Much technology policy had been very elitist; Foresight attempts to go beyond the "usual suspects" and gather widely distributed intelligence. These three lines of work were already common in Francophone futures studies going by the name la prospective . In the 1990s, an explosion of systematic organisation of these methods began in large-scale technology foresight programmes in Europe and elsewhere.

Foresight thus draws on traditions of work in long-range planning and strategic planning, horizontal policymaking and democratic planning, and participatory futurology - but was also highly influenced by systemic approaches to innovation studies, science and technology policy, and analysis of "critical technologies".

Many of the methods that are commonly associated with Foresight - Delphi surveys, scenario workshops, etc. - derive from futurology. So does the fact that Foresight is concerned with: [ 9 ] The longer-term - futures that are usually at least 10 years away (though there are some exceptions to this, especially in its use in private business). Since Foresight is action-oriented (the planning link) it will rarely be oriented to perspectives beyond a few decades out (though where decisions like aircraft design , power station construction or other major infrastructural decisions are concerned, then the planning horizon may well be half a century).

Alternative futures: it is helpful to examine alternative paths of development, not just what is currently believed to be most likely or business as usual. Often Foresight will construct multiple scenarios. These may be an interim step on the  way to creating what may be known as positive visions, success scenarios, aspirational futures. Sometimes alternative scenarios will be a major part of the output of Foresight work, with the decision about what future to build being left to other mechanisms.

See also [ edit ] Accelerating change Emerging technologies Foresight Institute Forecasting Horizon scanning Optimism bias Reference class forecasting Scenario planning Strategic foresight Strategic Foresight Group Technology forecasting Technology Scouting References [ edit ] ^ van Steenbergen, Bart: Scenarios As a Powerful Tool for Public Policy. As presented at the Prague Workshop on Futures Studies Methodology, October 2005, http://ceses.cuni.cz/english/051019.php Archived 2005-12-19 at the Wayback Machine . To be published in the proceedings.

^ Ratcliffe, John: Challenges for Corporate Foresight: Towards Strategic Prospective Through Scenario Thinking (presented at the conference “Foresight Management in Corporations and Public Organizations”, http://www.tukkk.fi/tutu/conference2005 , Helsinki 2005 ^ C. Daheim and G. Uerz, "Corporate foresight in Europe: from trend based logics to open foresight," Technology Analysis & Strategic Management, vol. 20, pp. 321-336, 2008) ^ Schwarz, J.-O. (2008) Assessing the future of futures studies in management , Futures, Vol. 40, Iss. 3, 237-246.

^ A. Hines & J. Gold, “An organizational futurist role for integrating foresight into corporations,” Technological Forecasting and Social Change, Available online 2 May 2014.

^ Rohrbeck, Rene (2010) Corporate Foresight: Towards a Maturity Model for the Future Orientation of a Firm , Springer Series: Contributions to Management Science, Heidelberg and New York, ISBN 978-3-7908-2625-8 ^ Rohrbeck, R., S. Mahdjour, S. Knab, T. Frese (2009) Benchmarking Report - Strategic Foresight in Multinational Companies Report of the European Corporate Foresight Group: Berlin, Germany ^ Rohrbeck, R. H.G. Gemuenden (2011) Corporate Foresight: Its Three Roles in Enhancing the Innovation Capacity of a Firm" Technological Forecasting and Social Change , 78(2), 231–243.

^ "Futurism Tools and Future Studies Techniques explained from a Futurist" .

morethandigital.info . 2023-11-13 . Retrieved 2025-02-21 .

Further reading [ edit ] There are numerous journals that deal with research on foresight: Technological Forecasting and Social Change Futures Futures & Foresight Science European Journal of Futures Research Foresight Research focusing more on the combination of foresight and national R&D policy can be found in International Journal of Foresight and Innovation Policy External links [ edit ] The FORLEARN Online Guide developed by the Institute for Prospective Technological Studies of the European Commission The Foresight Programme Archived 2008-08-21 at the Wayback Machine of UNIDO, the Investment and Technology Promotion Branch of the United Nations Industrial Development Organization.

Handbook of Knowledge Society Foresight published by the European Foundation, Dublin Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Foresight_(futures_studies)&oldid=1278050013 " Categories : Foresight (futures studies) Transhumanism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 February 2025, at 05:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Foresight (futures studies) 11 languages Add topic

