Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Career 3 Selected bibliography 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Richard Bradley (botanist) 10 languages تۆرکجه Български Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano مصرى Norsk bokmål Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English botanist and writer (1688–1732) Richard Bradley Born 1688 ( 1688 ) England Died 5 November 1732 (aged 43–44) Cambridge , England Scientific career Fields Botany Institutions University of Cambridge Richard Bradley FRS (1688 – 5 November 1732) was an English naturalist specialising in botany . He published important works on ecology, horticulture, and natural history .

Biography [ edit ] The History of succulent plants , 1739 Little is known about Bradley's childhood aside from an early interest in gardening and the fact that he lived in the vicinity of London, a city at the time with many amateur naturalists.

[ 1 ] Though Bradley lacked a university education, his first publication, Treatise of Succulent Plants , gained him traction with influential patrons like James Petiver and later, Hans Sloane .

[ 2 ] With their support, he was proposed and elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1712, at the age of 24.

Richard Bradley In 1714, Bradley visited the Netherlands and took an interest in horticulture. He spent the next decade back in England writing treatises on topics related to this central interest, like weather, fertiliser , productivity , and plant hybridisation . In recognition of his work in the field and with the (thereafter unfulfilled) promise that he would found and fund a university botanical garden , the University of Cambridge named Bradley its first professor of botany in 1724, a position he would hold until his death. As Bradley was not a wealthy man in his later life, and as this was an unsalaried position, the newly minted academic continued to focus most of his efforts on making a living through publishing. According to his rival and successor, John Martyn , as well as his successor's son Thomas Martyn , Bradley did this at the expense of his students, whom he reportedly neglected to lecture to.

[ 3 ] Bradley died penniless in 1732. It has been suggested that he may have lost his money in the financial crisis of 1720 - The South Sea Bubble .

[ 4 ] Career [ edit ] Bradley made notable innovations and discoveries across a wide array of disciplines. For example, New Improvements of Planting and Gardening included directions for the making and use of a rudimentary kaleidoscope to aid in formal garden design and layout.

[ 5 ] He also wrote about cooking, and was the first to publish recipes in English for the then-exotic pineapple as the main ingredient. His friend Sir Matthew Decker was the first to grow pineapples on English soil in the 1710s.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] His History of Succulent plants was the seminal treatise on the topic, and his studies of tulips and auriculas helped further accurate theories of plant reproduction . Bradley was also a pioneer in the examining of fungal spore germination and the pollination of plants by insects . His publications additionally contained information on how to build and use greenhouses , early theories regarding agricultural productivity , and pond ecology .

Richard Bradley's most lasting work may be in the study of infectious disease .

[ 8 ] When many scientists were still holding fast to the ideals of mechanical philosophy , Bradley turned to empirical studies and experiments for his work. Though spread across a handful of his papers, when taken together, a unified, biological theory of infectious diseases spanning all life – from plants and animals to humans – emerges.

The standard author abbreviation Bradley is used to indicate this person as the author when citing a botanical name .

[ 9 ] Selected bibliography [ edit ] Bradley was the prolific author of at least twenty-four original books and pamphlets; some of his major publications are listed below. Dates are for first editions.

1710: Treatise of Succulent Plants 1716–1727: History of Succulent Plants (appeared in five instalments).

Second edition corrected (London, 1739) 1719–1720: New Improvements of Planting and Gardening [ 10 ] 1721: A Philosophical Account of the Works of Nature [ 11 ] 1721: The Plague at Marseilles Considered [ 12 ] 1721–1723: A General Treatise of Husbandry and Gardening (appeared in fifteen issues and later collected into three volumes from 1721–1724) [ 13 ] 1727: Ten Practical Discourses Concerning Earth and Water, Fire and Air, as They Relate to the Growth of Plants [ 14 ] c.1727: The Country Housewife and Lady's Director [ 15 ] (cookery) 1730: A Course of Lectures upon the Materia Medica, Ancient and Modern [ 16 ] References [ edit ] ^ Egerton, Frank. "A History of the Ecological Sciences, Part 20: Richard Bradley, Entrepreneurial Naturalist." Bulletin of the Ecological Society of America . (April 2006): 117–127. Print.

^ Thomas, H. Hamshaw. "Richard Bradley, an Early Eighteenth Century Biologist [Abstract]." Bulletin of the British Society for the History of Science . 1.7 (May 1952): 176–178. Print.

^ The latter Martyn ended up establishing the first Cambridge University Botanic Garden , though the garden as it is known today was founded by the fourth Professor of Botany at Cambridge.

^ Thomas, H. Hamshaw (May 1952).

"Richard Bradley, an Early Eighteenth Century Biologist" .

Bulletin of the British Society for the History of Science .

1 (7): 176– 178.

doi : 10.1017/s0950563600000634 .

ISSN 0950-5636 .

^ The kaleidoscope as we know it today was invented by David Brewster about a century later.

^ The Country Housewife and Lady's Director at Google Books ; Bradley provided instructions for "a Tart of the Ananas, or Pine-Apple. From Barbadoes", "Marmalade of Pine-Apples, or Ananas", and "Crystal candy'd Sweet-meats", or rock sugar.

^ "Richard Bradley" .

Feast & Fast . 4 December 2019 . Retrieved 8 July 2024 .

^ Santer, Melvin. "Richard Bradley: A Unified, Living Agent Theory of the Cause of Infectious Diseases of Plants Animals, and Humans in the First Decades of the 18th Century." Perspectives in Biology and Medicine . 52.4 (Autumn 2009): 566–578.

^ International Plant Names Index .

Bradley .

^ New Improvements of Planting and Gardening at Google Books ^ A Philosophical Account of the Works of Nature at Google Books ^ The Plague at Marseilles Considered at Google Books ^ A General Treatise of Husbandry and Gardening at Google Books ^ Ten Practical Discourses Concerning Earth and Water, Fire and Air, as They Relate to the Growth of Plants at Google Books ^ (F.R.S.), Richard BRADLEY (1727).

The Country Housewife and Lady's Director, in the Management of a House and the Delights and Profits of a Farm ... The Sbcond [sic] Edition . Woodman & Lyon.

^ A Course of Lectures upon the Materia Medica, Ancient and Modern at Google Books External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Richard Bradley .

Richard Bradley, an Early Eighteenth Century Biologist by H. Hansham Thomas Database Entry at the Royal Society Works by Richard Bradley at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Richard Bradley at the Internet Archive v t e Natural history Pioneering naturalists Classical antiquity Aristotle ( History of Animals ) Theophrastus ( Historia Plantarum ) Aelian ( De Natura Animalium ) Pliny the Elder ( Natural History ) Dioscorides ( De Materia Medica ) Renaissance Ulisse Aldrovandi Gaspard Bauhin ( Pinax theatri botanici ) Otto Brunfels Hieronymus Bock Andrea Cesalpino Valerius Cordus Leonhart Fuchs Conrad Gessner ( Historia animalium ) Frederik Ruysch William Turner ( Avium Praecipuarum , New Herball ) John Gerard ( Herball, or Generall Historie of Plantes ) Enlightenment Robert Hooke ( Micrographia ) Marcello Malpighi Antonie van Leeuwenhoek William Derham Hans Sloane Jan Swammerdam Regnier de Graaf Carl Linnaeus ( Systema Naturae ) Georg Steller Joseph Banks Johan Christian Fabricius James Hutton John Ray ( Historia Plantarum ) Comte de Buffon ( Histoire Naturelle ) Bernard Germain de Lacépède Gilbert White ( The Natural History of Selborne ) Thomas Bewick ( A History of British Birds ) Jean-Baptiste Lamarck ( Philosophie zoologique ) 19th century George Montagu ( Ornithological Dictionary ) Georges Cuvier ( Le Règne Animal ) William Smith Charles Darwin ( On the Origin of Species ) Alfred Russel Wallace ( The Malay Archipelago ) Henry Walter Bates ( The Naturalist on the River Amazons ) Alexander von Humboldt John James Audubon ( The Birds of America ) William Buckland Charles Lyell Mary Anning Jean-Henri Fabre Louis Agassiz Philip Henry Gosse Asa Gray William Jackson Hooker Joseph Dalton Hooker William Jardine ( The Naturalist's Library ) Ernst Haeckel ( Kunstformen der Natur ) Richard Lydekker ( The Royal Natural History ) 20th century Martinus Beijerinck Abbott Thayer ( Concealing-Coloration in the Animal Kingdom ) Hugh B. Cott ( Adaptive Coloration in Animals ) Niko Tinbergen ( The Study of Instinct ) Konrad Lorenz ( On Aggression ) Karl von Frisch ( The Dancing Bees ) Ronald Lockley ( Shearwaters ) Topics Natural history museums ( List ) Parson-naturalists ( List ) Natural History Societies List of natural history dealers Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium Academics CiNii International Plant Names Index Artists Scientific illustrators People Trove DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Richard_Bradley_(botanist)&oldid=1297585505 " Categories : Professors of Botany (Cambridge) English botanists English food writers English gardeners English naturalists Fellows of the Royal Society Pre-Linnaean botanists 1688 births 1732 deaths History of the pineapple Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from August 2014 Use dmy dates from August 2014 Articles with hCards No local image but image on Wikidata Botanists with author abbreviations Commons link from Wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 27 June 2025, at 04:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Richard Bradley (botanist) 10 languages Add topic

