Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Original meaning 2 See also 3 References 4 Sources Toggle the table of contents Latitudinarian 9 languages Deutsch Français 한국어 Italiano Nederlands Português Русский Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For this term as used in philosophy, see Latitudinarianism (philosophy) .

Term referring to some Anglican theologians This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Latitudinarian" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Latitudinarians , or latitude men , were initially a group of 17th-century English theologians – clerics and academics – from the University of Cambridge who were moderate Anglicans (members of the Church of England ). In particular, they believed that adhering to very specific doctrines, liturgical practices, and church organizational forms, as did the Puritans , was not necessary and could be harmful: "The sense that one had special instructions from God made individuals less amenable to moderation and compromise, or to reason itself." [ 1 ] Thus, the latitudinarians supported a broad-based ( sensu lato , with "laxitude") Protestantism. They were later referred to as broad church (see also Inclusivism ).

Examples of the latitudinarian philosophy underlying the theology were found among the Cambridge Platonists and Sir Thomas Browne in his Religio Medici . Additionally, the term latitudinarian has been applied to ministers of the Scottish Episcopal Church who were educated at the Episcopal-sympathizing universities at Aberdeen and St Andrews , and who broadly subscribed to the beliefs of their moderate Anglican English counterparts.

[ 1 ] Today, latitudinarianism should not be confused with ecumenical movements, which seek to draw all Christian churches together, rather than seeking to de-emphasize practical doctrine. The term latitudinarian has taken on a more general meaning, indicating a personal philosophy that includes tolerance of other views, particularly, but not necessarily, on religious matters.

In the Catholic Church , latitudinarianism was condemned in the 19th-century document Quanta cura .

Pope Pius IX felt that, with its emphasis on religious liberty and the freedom to discard traditional Christian doctrines and dogmas, latitudinarianism threatened to undermine the church. (See Syllabus of Errors ) Original meaning [ edit ] The latitudinarian Anglicans of the 17th century built on Richard Hooker 's position in Of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity . Hooker (1554–1600) argues that what God cares about is the moral state of the individual soul. Aspects such as church leadership are " things indifferent ". However, the latitudinarians took a position far beyond Hooker's own and extended it to doctrinal matters.

As a positive position, the latitudinarian view held that human reason, when combined with the Holy Spirit , is a sufficient guide for the determination of truth in doctrinal contests; therefore, legal and doctrinal rulings that constrain reason and the freedom of the believer were neither necessary nor beneficial. At the time, their position was referred to as an aspect of low church (in contrast to the high church position). Later, the latitudinarian position was called broad church .

[ citation needed ] While always officially opposed by the Anglican church, the latitudinarian philosophy was, nevertheless, dominant in 18th-century England. Because of the Hanoverian reluctance [ 2 ] to act in church affairs, and the various groups of the religious debates being balanced against one another, the dioceses became tolerant of variation in local practice. Furthermore, after George I of Great Britain dismissed the Convocation , there was very little internal Church power to either sanction or approve.

[ citation needed ] Thus, with no Archbishop of Canterbury officially announcing it, nor Lords adopting it, latitudinarianism was the operative philosophy of the English church in the 18th century. For the 18th-century English church in the United States (which would become the Episcopal Church after the American Revolution ), some are of the opinion that latitudinarianism was the only practical course because the nation had official pluralism, diversity of opinion, and diffusion of clerical power.

See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Anglo-Catholic Antinomianism Bangorian Controversy Liberal Christianity John Tillotson References [ edit ] ^ a b Landsman, Ned (1997).

From Colonials to Provincials, American Thought and Culture 1680–1760 . Ithaca: Cornell University Press. p. 64.

^ George I was actually born in the Germanic state of Brunswick-Luneberg, the capital of which was Hanover. He was the Elector of Hanover until his accession to the British throne in 1714 at the age of 54. Because he was not a member of the Church of England , when he arrived, and despite becoming its head, his lack of knowledge and experience would have limited his authority to intervene in fact, if not in law.

Sources [ edit ] Abbey, Charles J.; Overton, John H.

(1896). "Ch. 4 & 5".

The English Church in the Eighteenth Century (2nd ed.).

v t e Christian theology by tradition Catholic Church Absolution Apostolic succession Assumption of Mary Dogmatic Christian humanism Traditionalism Ecumenical Councils Filioque Immaculate Conception Indulgences Infant baptism Josephology Liturgy Mariology Mass Modernism Natural law Papal infallibility Priesthood Purgatory Quartodecimanism Real presence Sacerdotalism Sacrament Sainthood Scotism Thomism Transubstantiation Ultramontanism Veneration Eastern Orthodox Church Apophatic theology Cataphatic theology Economy Essence–energies Gnomic will Metousiosis Phronema Phyletism Proskynesis Sobornost Symphonia Tabor Light Theoria Theosis Theotokos Oriental Orthodoxy Miaphysitism Monophysitism Monoenergism Monothelitism Aphthartodocetism Protestantism General Adiaphora Christian views on the Old Covenant Covenant theology Dispensationalism Supersessionism Evangelicalism Evangelical theology Five solae ( Sola fide Sola gratia Sola scriptura Soli Deo gloria Solus Christus ) Fundamentalism Protestant ecclesiology Priesthood of all believers Church covenant Protestant Soteriology Assurance Conditional election Conditional preservation of the saints Prevenient grace Total depravity Unlimited atonement Anglican Anglo-Catholicism Branch theory Broad church Center church High church Low church Baptist Believer's baptism Immersion baptism Separation of church and state Lutheran Confessional Lutheranism Evangelical Catholic Haugean Loci Theologici Lutheran orthodoxy Lutheran scholasticism Neo-Lutheranism Pietism Theology of the Cross Two kingdoms Pentecostal Baptism with the Holy Spirit Faith healing Glossolalia Prosperity theology Reformed (Calvinist) Christian reconstructionism TULIP Lordship salvation Predestination Wesleyan Christian perfection Imparted righteousness Second work of grace Wesleyan Quadrilateral Other Adventism Anabaptism Arminianism Free Grace Messianic Judaism Restorationism Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Latitudinarian&oldid=1293149114 " Categories : Church of England churchmanship Anglican Churchmanship Christian terminology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from August 2014 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2015 This page was last edited on 31 May 2025, at 00:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Latitudinarian 9 languages Add topic

