Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Hierarchy of ranks Toggle Hierarchy of ranks subsection 1.1 Zoology 1.2 Botany 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Botany 2.2 Zoology 2.3 Virology 3 See also 4 References 5 Works cited Toggle the table of contents Order (biology) 116 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kapampangan ქართული کٲشُر Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Malti مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Walon West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 粵語 Zeêuws 中文 Betawi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Taxonomic rank between class and family This article is about the taxonomic rank. For the sequence of species in a taxonomic list, see taxonomic sequence . For other uses, see Order .

The hierarchy of biological classification 's eight major taxonomic ranks . A class contains one or more orders. Intermediate minor rankings are not shown.

Order ( Latin : ordo ) is one of the eight major hierarchical taxonomic ranks in Linnaean taxonomy . It is classified between family and class . In biological classification , the order is a taxonomic rank used in the classification of organisms and recognized by the nomenclature codes . An immediately higher rank, superorder , is sometimes added directly above order, with suborder directly beneath order. An order can also be defined as a group of related families.

What does and does not belong to each order is determined by a taxonomist , as is whether a particular order should be recognized at all. Often there is no exact agreement, with different taxonomists each taking a different position. There are no hard rules that a taxonomist needs to follow in describing or recognizing an order. Some taxa are accepted almost universally, while others are recognized only rarely.

[ 1 ] The name of an order is usually written with a capital letter.

[ 2 ] For some groups of organisms, their orders may follow consistent naming schemes . Orders of plants , fungi , and algae use the suffix -ales (e.g.

Dictyotales ).

[ 3 ] Orders of birds and fishes [ 4 ] use the Latin suffix -iformes meaning 'having the form of' (e.g.

Passeriformes ), but orders of mammals , reptiles , amphibians and invertebrates are not so consistent (e.g.

Artiodactyla , Anura , Crocodylia , Actiniaria , Primates ).

Hierarchy of ranks [ edit ] Zoology [ edit ] For some clades covered by the International Code of Zoological Nomenclature , several additional classifications are sometimes used, although not all of these are officially recognized.

Name Latin prefix Examples Magnorder magnus , 'large, great, important' Boreoeutheria Superorder super , 'above' Euarchontoglires , Laurasiatheria Grandorder grandis , 'large' Euarchonta , Ferungulata Mirorder mirus , 'wonderful, strange' Primatomorpha , Ferae Order Primates , Procolophonomorpha Suborder sub , 'under' Haplorrhini , Procolophonia Infraorder infra , 'below' Simiiformes , Tarsiiformes Parvorder parvus , 'small, unimportant' Catarrhini , Mysticeti In their 1997 classification of mammals , McKenna and Bell used two extra levels between superorder and order: grandorder and mirorder .

[ 5 ] Michael Novacek (1986) inserted them at the same position.

Michael Benton (2005) inserted them between superorder and magnorder instead.

[ 6 ] This position was adopted by Systema Naturae 2000 and others.

Botany [ edit ] In botany , the ranks of subclass and suborder are secondary ranks pre-defined as respectively above and below the rank of order.

[ 7 ] Any number of further ranks can be used as long as they are clearly defined.

[ 7 ] The superorder rank is commonly used, with the ending -anae that was initiated by Armen Takhtajan 's publications from 1966 onwards.

[ 8 ] History [ edit ] The order as a distinct rank of biological classification having its own distinctive name (and not just called a higher genus ( genus summum )) was first introduced by the German botanist Augustus Quirinus Rivinus in his classification of plants that appeared in a series of treatises in the 1690s.

Carl Linnaeus was the first to apply it consistently to the division of all three kingdoms of nature (then minerals , plants , and animals ) in his Systema Naturae (1735, 1st. Ed.).

Botany [ edit ] Title page of the 1758 edition of Linnaeus's Systema Naturæ .

[ 9 ] For plants, Linnaeus' orders in the Systema Naturae and the Species Plantarum were strictly artificial, introduced to subdivide the artificial classes into more comprehensible smaller groups. When the word ordo was first consistently used for natural units of plants, in 19th-century works such as the Prodromus Systematis Naturalis Regni Vegetabilis of Augustin Pyramus de Candolle and the Genera Plantarum of Bentham & Hooker, it indicated taxa that are now given the rank of family (see ordo naturalis , ' natural order ').

In French botanical publications, from Michel Adanson 's Familles naturelles des plantes (1763) and until the end of the 19th century, the word famille (plural: familles ) was used as a French equivalent for this Latin ordo . This equivalence was explicitly stated in the Alphonse Pyramus de Candolle 's Lois de la nomenclature botanique (1868), the precursor of the currently used International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants .

In the first international Rules of botanical nomenclature from the International Botanical Congress of 1905, the word family ( familia ) was assigned to the rank indicated by the French famille , while order ( ordo ) was reserved for a higher rank, for what in the 19th century had often been named a 'cohort' ( cohors , [ 10 ] plural cohortes ).

Some of the plant families still retain the names of Linnaean "natural orders" or even the names of pre-Linnaean natural groups recognized by Linnaeus as orders in his natural classification (e.g.

Palmae or Labiatae ). Such names are known as descriptive family names.

Zoology [ edit ] In the field of zoology , the Linnaean orders were used more consistently. That is, the orders in the zoology part of the Systema Naturae refer to natural groups. Some of his ordinal names are still in use, e.g.

Lepidoptera (moths and butterflies) and Diptera (flies, mosquitoes, midges, and gnats).

[ 11 ] Virology [ edit ] In virology , the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses 's virus classification includes fifteen taxonomic ranks to be applied for viruses , viroids and satellite nucleic acids : realm , subrealm , kingdom , subkingdom, phylum , subphylum , class, subclass, order, suborder, family, subfamily , genus, subgenus , and species.

[ 12 ] There are currently fourteen viral orders, each ending in the suffix -virales .

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Cladistics Phylogenetics Systematics Taxonomic rank Taxonomy Virus classification References [ edit ] ^ Tobin, Allan J.; Dusheck, Jennie (2005).

Asking About Life . Boston: Cengage Learning. pp.

403– 408.

ISBN 978-0-030-27044-4 .

^ Translation Bureau (2015-10-15).

"Capitalization: Biological Terms" .

Writing Tips, TERMIUM Plus® . Public Services & Procurement Canada . Retrieved 2020-06-19 .

^ McNeill et al. 2012 & Article 17.1 ^ Leo S. Berg (1940).

Classification of fishes, both recent and fossil (PDF) (in Russian and English). Ann Arbor Michigan: J. N. Edwards.

^ McKenna, M.C. & Bell, S.G. (1997), Classification of Mammals , New York: Columbia University Press, ISBN 978-0-231-11013-6 ^ Benton, Michael J. (2005).

Vertebrate Palaeontology (3rd ed.). Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-63205-637-8 .

^ a b McNeill et al. 2012 & Article 4 ^ Naik, V.N. (1984), Taxonomy of Angiosperms , Tata McGraw-Hill, p. 111, ISBN 9780074517888 ^ Linnaeus, Carolus (1758).

Systema naturae per regna tria naturae :secundum classes, ordines, genera, species, cum characteribus, differentiis, synonymis, locis (in Latin) ( 10th ed.). Stockholm: Laurentius Salvius.

^ Briquet, J. (1912).

Règles internationales de la nomenclature botanique adoptées par le congrès international de botanique de Vienne 1905, deuxième edition mise au point d'après les décisions du congrès international de botanique de Bruxelles 1910; International rules of botanical nomenclature adopted by the International Botanical Congresses of Vienna 1905 and Brussels 1910; Internationale Regeln der botanischen Nomenclatur angenommen von den Internationalen Botanischen Kongressen zu Wien 1905 und Brüssel 1910 . Jena: Gustav Fischer.

Page 1.

^ Carl von Linné , translated by William Turton (1806).

Volume 2: Insects . A general system of nature: through the three grand kingdoms of animals, vegetables, and minerals, systematically divided into their several classes, orders, genera, species, and varieties. London: Lackington, Allen, and Co.

^ "ICTV Code. Section 3.IV, § 3.23; section 3.V, §§ 3.27-3.28." International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses . October 2018 . Retrieved November 28, 2018 .

^ "ICTV Taxonomy" .

International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses . 2018 . Retrieved Nov 8, 2019 .

Works cited [ edit ] McNeill, J.; Barrie, F.R.; Buck, W.R.; Demoulin, V.; Greuter, W.; Hawksworth, D.L.; Herendeen, P.S.; Knapp, S.; Marhold, K.; Prado, J.; Prud'homme Van Reine, W.F.; Smith, G.F.; Wiersema, J.H.; Turland, N.J. (2012).

International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants (Melbourne Code) adopted by the Eighteenth International Botanical Congress Melbourne, Australia, July 2011 . Regnum Vegetabile. Vol. 154. A.R.G. Gantner Verlag KG.

ISBN 978-3-87429-425-6 .

v t e Taxonomic ranks Realm ( vir.

) Subrealm ( vir.

) Domain /Superkingdom Kingdom Subkingdom Infrakingdom/Branch Superphylum / Superdivision ( bot.

) Phylum / Division ( bot.

) Subphylum / Subdivision ( bot.

) Infraphylum Parvphylum Superclass Class Subclass Infraclass Subterclass Parvclass Division ( zoo.

) Legion Cohort Magnorder Superorder Order Suborder Infraorder Parvorder Section ( zoo.

) Superfamily Family Subfamily Infrafamily Supertribe Tribe Subtribe Infratribe Genus Subgenus Section ( bot.

) Series ( bot.

) " Species complex " Species Subspecies Variety ( bot.

) Form ( bot.

) Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Order_(biology)&oldid=1301616115 " Categories : Orders (biology) Botanical nomenclature Plant taxonomy Zoological nomenclature Bacterial nomenclature Hidden categories: CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 20:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Order (biology) 116 languages Add topic

