Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Festivals 3 Regional variation 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Ashvin (month) 21 languages Afrikaans অসমীয়া বাংলা भोजपुरी Bikol Central Français ગુજરાતી हिन्दी ಕನ್ನಡ मैथिली मराठी მარგალური Nederlands नेपाली ଓଡ଼ିଆ ភាសាខ្មែរ Русский संस्कृतम् தமிழ் తెలుగు ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Seventh month of the Hindu calendar "Ashwin" redirects here. For other uses, see Ashwin (disambiguation) .

Ashvin Celebration of Durga Puja is a highlight of the month of Asvin in the Bengal region Native name अश्विन् ( Sanskrit ) Calendars Hindu calendar Bengali calendar Month number 6 (Hindu calendar) 6 (Bengali calendar) Number of days 31 (Bangladesh) 30/31 (India) Season Autumn Gregorian equivalent September–October Significant days Durga Puja Diwali (Amanta) Kali Puja (Amanta) Navaratri Sharad Purnima Karwa Chauth (Amanta) ← Bhadra (Hindu) Bhadro (Bengali) Kartika (Hindu) Kartik (Bengali) → Ashvin or Ashwin or Ashwan ( / ə ˈ ʃ w ɪ n / ; Sanskrit : आश्विन ; Malay / Indonesian : Aswin ; Thai : Asawin ), also known as Aswayuja , is the seventh month of the lunisolar Hindu calendar , the solar Tamil calendar , where it is known as Aippasi, and the solar Indian national calendar . It is the sixth month of the solar Bengali calendar and the seventh of the lunar Indian calendar of the Deccan Plateau . It falls in the season of Sharada , or autumn . In Hindu astrology , Ashvin begins with the Sun 's enter into Virgo .

It overlaps with September and October [ 1 ] of the Gregorian calendar and is the month in which Diwali , the festival of lights, is celebrated according to the amanta tradition (Diwali falls in Kartika according to the purnimanta tradition). In lunar religious calendars, Ashvin begins on the new moon or the full moon around the time of the September equinox .

Etymology [ edit ] Ashvini is the first star that appears in the evening sky. In Indian astrology , it is the head of Aries , or the first of the 27 Nakshatra . Ashvin also stands for the divine twins , the Ashvins , the gods of vision, Ayurvedic medicine , the glow of sunrise and sunset, and the aversion of misfortune and sickness in Hindu mythology .

Aswin is the Thai variant of Ashvin and stands for the warrior. The term is often translated into English as "knight". The Ashvins are described as representing the "blending of light and darkness" during the twilight period.

[ 2 ] Festivals [ edit ] Several major Hindu holidays take place in Ashvin. Those are as follows: Navaratri (1-9 lunar Ashvin) Durga Puja (6-10 lunar Ashvin) Saraswati Puja in South India (8-10 lunar Ashvin) Vijayadashami or Dussehra (10 lunar Ashvin), the last day of Navaratri Kojagiri Poornima (15 lunar Ashvin) Diwali festival ( amanta tradition), including Dhanteras (28 lunar Ashvin), Naraka Chaturdasi (29 lunar Ashvin) and Lakshmi Puja (30 lunar Ashvin) Kali Puja (new moon of lunar Ashvin), which is held as per the lunar calendar , usually falls in this month.

Regional variation [ edit ] According to the latest revised calendar of Bangladesh , Ashwin now consists of 31 days instead of 30 days. This revision went into effect on 16 October 2019.

Ashwin is known as aipasi (ஐப்பசி) in Tamil and begins when the sun enters Libra in October.

It's also called kunwaar (कुँवार) month in eastern Uttar Pradesh & western Bihar state.

See also [ edit ] Hinduism portal Astronomical basis of the Hindu calendar Hindu astronomy Hindu units of measurement List of most popular given names Tishrei References [ edit ] ^ Henderson, Helene. (Ed.) (2005) Holidays, festivals, and celebrations of the world dictionary Third edition. Electronic edition. Detroit: Omnigraphics, p. xxix.

ISBN 0-7808-0982-3 ^ Jah, J.C (1976).

The Hindu Festival of Divali in the Caribbean . Mona, Jamaica: Routledge. p. 53.

v t e Days and months of the Hindu calendar Days Pratipada Dvitiya Tritiya Chaturthi Panchami Shashthi Saptami Ashtami Navami Dashami Ekadashi Dvadashi Trayodashi Chaturdashi Amavasya Purnima Months Lunar Chaitra Vaishakha Jyeshtha Ashadha Shravana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartika Margashirsha (Agrahayana) Pausha Magha Phalguna Adhika-masa Solar Meṣa Vṛṣabha Mithuna Karkaṭa Siṃha Kanya Tulā Vṛścika Dhanu Makara Kumbha Mīna v t e Months of the Bengali calendars 1.

Bôishakh ( বৈশাখ ) 2.

Jyôishţhô ( জ্যৈষ্ঠ ) 3.

Ashaŗh ( আষাঢ় ) 4.

Shrabôn ( শ্রাবণ ) 5.

Bhadrô ( ভাদ্র ) 6.

Ashbin ( আশ্বিন ) 7.

Kartik ( কার্তিক ) 8.

Ôgrôhayôn ( অগ্রহায়ণ ) 9.

Poush ( পৌষ ) 10.

Magh ( মাঘ ) 11.

Falgun ( ফাল্গুন ) 12.

Chôitrô ( চৈত্র ) v t e Indian astronomy Astronomers Apastamba Aryabhata I Aryabhata II Vainu Bappu Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Baudhayana Brahmagupta Sandip Chakrabarti Radhagobinda Chandra Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar Amil Kumar Das P. Devadas Gautama Siddha M. K. Das Gupta Jyesthadeva Kamalakara Katyayana Lagadha Lalla Madhava of Sangamagrama Prasanta Chandra Mahalanobis Mahavira Manava Jayant Narlikar Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Venkatraman Radhakrishnan J. J. Rawal Megh Nad Saha Jagannatha Samrat Bapudeva Sastri Jai Singh II of Amber Nilakantha Somayaji Sripati Mahendra Suri Govind Swarup Utpala Varahamihira Shankara Variyar Vasistha Yajnavalkya Pathani Samanta Works Aryabhatiya Brahmanas Aitareya Brahmana Shatapatha Brahmana Bṛhat Saṃhitā Ganitagannadi Jyotirmimamsa Shulba Sutras Panchangam Khandakhadyaka Mahādevī Makarandasarini Siddhantas Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Maha-Siddhanta Pancha-Siddhantika Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Rājamṛgāṅka (astronomy book) Romaka Siddhanta Surya Siddhanta Vasishtha Siddhanta Tantrasangraha Treatise on Astrology of the Kaiyuan Era Vākyakaraṇa Vedanga Jyotisha Vedas Atharvaveda Rigveda Yavanajataka Zij Instruments Armillary sphere Astrolabe Celestial globe Compass Cross-staff Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorial sundial Globe Gnomon Mural instrument Quadrant Sextant Sundial Triquetrum Water clock Yantraraja Concepts Axial tilt Azimuth Cardinal direction Celestial equator Celestial sphere Celestial spheres Center of mass Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Geocentrism Geoheliocentrism Globe Gravity Heliocentrism Hindu units of time Jyotiṣa Kali ahargaṇa Kalpa Karana Manvantara Moonlight Nakshatra Nityayoga Parallax Precession Ritu Spherical Earth Sunlight Tithi Vāra Yuga Zodiacal sign Centres Jantar Mantar Jaipur New Delhi Ujjain Varanasi Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Other regions Babylonian astronomy Ancient Greek astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Islamic astronomy Chinese astronomy European astronomy Months of the Vedic calendar Chaitra Vaisakha Jyeshta Aashaadha Shraavana Bhadrapada Ashvin Kartik Margashirsha Pausha Maagha Phalguna Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ashvin_(month)&oldid=1305592665 " Categories : Months of the Bengali calendar Months of the Hindu calendar Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles containing Bengali-language text This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 00:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ashvin (month) 21 languages Add topic

