Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Original Greek meaning 2 Epistemology 3 Abstraction and self-reference 4 Etymology 5 Early use in English 6 Meta in gaming 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Meta (prefix) 26 languages العربية Беларуская Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית ქართული Кыргызча Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Русский Suomi Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Productive prefix in English derived from Greek Meta (from the μετά , meta , meaning 'after' or 'beyond') is an adjective meaning 'more comprehensive' or 'transcending'.

[ 1 ] In modern nomenclature, the prefix 
meta can also serve as a prefix meaning self-referential, as a field of study or endeavor ( metatheory : theory about a theory; metamathematics : mathematical theories about mathematics; meta-axiomatics or meta-axiomaticity: axioms about axiomatic systems; metahumor: joking about the ways humor is expressed; etc.).

[ 2 ] Original Greek meaning [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In Greek , the prefix meta- is generally less esoteric than in English ; Greek meta- is equivalent to the Latin words post- or ad- . The use of the prefix in this sense occurs occasionally in scientific English terms derived from Greek . For example, the term Metatheria (the name for the clade of marsupial mammals ) uses the prefix meta- in the sense that the Metatheria occur on the tree of life adjacent to the Theria (the placental mammals ).

Epistemology [ edit ] In epistemology , and often in common use, the prefix meta- is used to mean 'about (its own category)'. For example, metadata is data about data (who has produced them, when, what format the data are in and so on). In a database, metadata is also data about data stored in a data dictionary, describing information (data) about database tables such as the table name, table owner, details about columns, etc. – essentially describing the table. In psychology, metamemory refers to an individual's knowledge about whether or not they would remember something if they concentrated on recalling it. The modern sense of "an X about X" has given rise to concepts like " meta-cognition " (cognition about cognition), " meta-emotion " (emotion about emotion), " meta-discussion " (discussion about discussion), " meta-joke " (joke about jokes), and " metaprogramming " (writing programs about writing programs). In a rule-based system , a metarule is a rule governing the application of other rules.

[ 3 ] " Metagaming ", accordingly, refers to games about games. However, it has a different meaning depending on the context. In role-playing games , this means that someone with a higher level of knowledge is playing; that is, that the player incorporates factors that are outside the actual framework of the game – the player has knowledge that was not acquired through experiencing the game, but through external sources. This type of metagaming is often frowned upon in many role-playing game communities because it impairs game balance and equality of opportunity.

[ 4 ] Metagaming can also refer to a game that is used to create or change the rules while playing a game. One can play this type of metagame and choose which rules apply during the game itself, potentially changing the level of difficulty. Such metagames include campaign role-playing games like Halo 3 .

[ 5 ] Complex card or board games, e.g.

poker or chess , are also often referred to as metagames. According to Nigel Howard, this type of metagame is defined as a decision-making process that is derived from the analysis of possible outcomes in relation to external variables that change a problem.

[ 6 ] Abstraction and self-reference [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2022 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An example of self-referential humor on a wall in Paris, which requires an understanding of both the text and the transcending context through which the text is read Any subject can be said to have a metatheory , a theoretical consideration of its properties – such as its foundations , methods , form , and utility – on a higher level of abstraction. In linguistics, grammar is considered to be a metalanguage : a language operating on a higher level to describe properties of the plain language, and not itself.

Etymology [ edit ] The prefix comes from the Greek preposition and prefix meta- (μετα-), from μετά, [ 7 ] which typically means "after", "beside", "with" or "among". Other meanings include "beyond", "adjacent" and "self", and it is also used in the forms μετ- before vowels and μεθ- "meth-" before aspirated vowels .

The earliest form of the word "meta" is the Mycenaean Greek me-ta , written in Linear B syllabic script.

[ 8 ] The Greek preposition is cognate with the Old English preposition mid "with", still found as a prefix in midwife . Its use in English is the result of back-formation from the word "metaphysics". In origin Metaphysics was just the title of one of the principal works of Aristotle ; it was so named (by Andronicus of Rhodes ) because in the customary ordering of the works of Aristotle it was the book following Physics ; it thus meant nothing more than "[the book that comes] after [the book entitled] Physics ". However, even Latin writers misinterpreted this as entailing metaphysics constituted "the science of what is beyond the physical".

[ 9 ] Nonetheless, Aristotle's Metaphysics enunciates considerations of a nature [ clarification needed ] above physical reality, which one can examine through certain philosophy – for example, such a thing as an unmoved mover . The use of the prefix was later extended to other contexts, based on the understanding of metaphysics as meaning "the science of what is beyond the physical".

Early use in English [ edit ] The Oxford English Dictionary cites uses of the meta- prefix as "beyond, about" (such as meta-economics and meta-philosophy) going back to 1917. However, these formations are parallel to the original "metaphysics" and "metaphysical", that is, as a prefix to general nouns (fields of study) or adjectives. Going by the OED citations, it began being used with specific nouns in connection with mathematical logic sometime before 1929. (In 1920 David Hilbert proposed a research project in what was called " metamathematics .") A notable early citation is W. V. O. Quine 's 1937 use of the word "metatheorem", [ 10 ] where meta- has the modern meaning of "an X about X".

Douglas Hofstadter , in his 1979 book Gödel, Escher, Bach (and in the 1985 sequel, Metamagical Themas ), popularized this meaning of the term. The book, which deals with self-reference and strange loops , and touches on Quine and his work, was influential in many computer-related subcultures and may be responsible for the popularity of the prefix, for its use as a solo term, and for the many recent coinages which use it.

[ 11 ] Hofstadter uses meta as a stand-alone word, as an adjective, and as a directional preposition ("going meta," a term he coins for the old rhetorical trick of taking a debate or analysis to another level of abstraction, as when somebody says "This debate isn't going anywhere"). This book may also be responsible for the association of "meta" with strange loops, as opposed to just abstraction. According to Hofstadter, it is about self-reference , which means a sentence, idea or formula refers to itself. The Merriam-Webster Dictionary describes it as "showing or suggesting an explicit awareness of itself or oneself as a member of its category: cleverly self-referential".

[ 12 ] The sentence "This sentence contains thirty-six letters," and the sentence which embeds it, are examples of "metasentences" referencing themselves in this way. As maintained in the book Gödel, Escher, Bach , a strange loop is given if different logical statements or theories are put together in contradiction, thus distorting the meaning and generating logical paradoxes. One example is the liar paradox , a paradox in philosophy or logic that arises when a sentence claims its own falsehood (or untruth); for instance: "This sentence is not true." Until the beginning of the 20th century, this kind of paradox was a considerable problem for a philosophical theory of truth.

Alfred Tarski solved this difficulty by proving that such paradoxes do not exist with a consistent separation of object language and metalanguage.

[ 13 ] "For every formalized language, a formally correct and factually applicable definition of the true statement can be constructed in the metalanguage with the sole help of expressions of a general-logical character, expressions of the language itself and of terms from the morphology of the language, but on the condition that the metalanguage is of a higher order than the language that is the subject of the investigation." [ 14 ] Meta in gaming [ edit ] Main article: Metagaming § Competitive gaming Metagaming is a general term describing an approach to playing a game as optimally as possible within its current rules. The shorthand meta has been backronymed as "Most Effective Tactics Available" to tersely explain the concept.

In the world of competitive games , rule imprecisions and non-goal oriented play are not commonplace. As a result, the extent of metagaming narrows down mostly to studying strategies of top players and exploiting commonly used strategies for an advantage.

[ 15 ] Those may evolve as updates are released or new, better, strategies are discovered by top players.

[ 16 ] The opposite metagame of playing a relatively unknown strategy for surprisal is often called off-meta .

[ 15 ] This usage is particularly common in games that have large, organized play systems or tournament circuits. Some examples of this kind of environment are tournament scenes for tabletop or computer collectible card games like Magic: The Gathering , Gwent: The Witcher Card Game or Hearthstone , tabletop war-gaming such as Warhammer 40,000 and Flames of War , or team-based multiplayer online games such as Star Conflict , Dota 2 , League of Legends , and Team Fortress 2 . In some games, such as Heroes of the Storm , varied level design makes the battleground a significant factor in the metagame.

[ 16 ] The meta in these environments is often affected by new elements added by the game's developers and publishers, such as new card expansions in card games, or adjustments to character abilities in online games.

[ 17 ] The metagame may also come within player communities as reactions to win over currently-popular strategies, creating ebbs and flows of strategy types over time.

See also [ edit ] Philosophy portal Greece portal Benzene § Nomenclature Fourth wall Metaverse References [ edit ] ^ "Definition of META" .

www.merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 2019-12-01 .

^ "That's So Meta: Things are about to get meta" . Retrieved 2022-11-02 .

^ Schild, Uri J.; Herzog, Shai (1993).

The Use of Meta-rules in Rule Based Legal Computer Systems .

Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Law . ICAIL '93. Amsterdam, the Netherlands: ACM . pp.

100– 109.

doi : 10.1145/158976.158989 .

ISBN 0897916069 .

^ "METAGAME | What Does METAGAME Mean in Gaming?" .

www.cyberdefinitions.com . Retrieved 2021-11-19 .

^ Metagames, paragames and orthogames: a new vocabulary. M. Carter, M. Gibbs, and M. Harrop. FDG, pages 11–17. ACM, (2012 ).

https://people.eng.unimelb.edu.au/mharrop/pdf/metagames.pdf.

^ Howard, Nigel (1971).

Paradoxes of rationality: theory of metagames and political behavior . Cambridge: MIT Press.

ISBN 0-262-08046-X .

OCLC 277215 .

^ μετά , 
Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus Digital Library ^ "The Linear B word me-ta" .

Palaeolexicon.com .

^ "Metaphysics" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ Willard Van Orman Quine, "Logic Based on Inclusion and Abstraction", The Journal of Symbolic Logic , Vol. 2, No. 4, pp. 145–152, December 1937 ^ Cohen, Noam (Sep 5, 1988). "Meta-Musings".

The New Republic .

^ "Definition of META" .

www.merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 2021-11-19 .

^ Unifying the philosophy of truth . Theodora Achourioti, Henri Galinon, José Martínez Fernández, Kentaro Fujimoto. Dordrecht. 2015.

ISBN 978-94-017-9673-6 .

OCLC 911179637 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ Alfred Tarski: Der Wahrheitsbegriff in den formalisierten Sprachen , in: Studia Philosophica [Lemberg] 1 (1936), S. 261–405 pdf ^ a b Kokkinakis.

"Metagaming and metagames in Esports" .

International Journal of Esports .

^ a b "Proving Grounds: The Geography of the MOBA Map" .

The Meta . 2016-09-22. Archived from the original on September 12, 2023 . Retrieved 2020-09-07 .

^ Von Allen, Eric (December 15, 2016).

"Pros react to Dota 2 Patch 7.00" .

ESPN . Retrieved December 29, 2016 .

External links [ edit ] List of ancient Greek words starting with meta- , on Perseus v t e Meta- Domains and methods Meta-analysis Metabibliography Metaclass Semantic Web Metacognition Meta-learning Metamemory Meta-communication Metacomputing Metadata Metadesign Metadiscourse Meta-emotion Metamood Metafiction Metagaming Metagenomics Metaheuristic Metahistory Metahumor Metaknowledge Metalanguage Metapragmatics Metasemantics Metalinguistics Metamaterials Metamathematics Metamedia Metamodeling Metamodernism Metamotivation Metanarrative Metaobject Meta-optimization Meta-organization Metaphenomics Metaphilosophy Metaepistemology Metaethics Metalogic Meta-ontology Metaphysics Metametaphysics Metapolitics Metapopulation Metaprogramming Metapsychiatry Metapsychology Metapuzzle Meta-reference Meta-regulation Metascience Metasociology Meta-system Metatheorem Metatheory Metaverse NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐dzfs2
Cached time: 20250814220903
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.429 seconds
Real time usage: 0.543 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1327/1000000
Revision size: 12705/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 47393/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1194/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 59401/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.312/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15829260/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  488.361      1 -total
 28.89%  141.104      1 Template:Reflist
 20.06%   97.955      8 Template:Cite_web
 14.87%   72.602      1 Template:Lang
 12.27%   59.939      1 Template:Meta-prefix
 11.93%   58.281      1 Template:Navbox
 10.86%   53.017      1 Template:Short_description
 10.11%   49.397      1 Template:Excerpt
  8.99%   43.887      2 Template:Unreferenced_section
  8.20%   40.024      2 Template:Unreferenced Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1018814:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220903 and revision id 1301296078. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Meta_(prefix)&oldid=1301296078 " Categories : Abstraction Concepts in epistemology Philosophical methodology Self-reference Prefixes Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 maint: others Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Articles needing additional references from August 2022 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia articles needing clarification from December 2022 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 03:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Meta (prefix) 26 languages Add topic

