Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Deformation styles Toggle Deformation styles subsection 1.1 Thin-skinned deformation 1.2 Thick-skinned deformation 2 Geological environments associated with thrust tectonics Toggle Geological environments associated with thrust tectonics subsection 2.1 Collisional zones 2.2 Restraining bends on strike-slip faults 2.3 Passive margins 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Thrust tectonics 3 languages Italiano Nederlands 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in structural geology Cross-section diagram of the frontal part of a thin-skinned thrust zone Thrust tectonics or contractional tectonics is concerned with the structures formed by, and the tectonic processes associated with, the shortening and thickening of the crust or lithosphere . It is one of the three main types of tectonic regime, the others being extensional tectonics and strike-slip tectonics . These match the three types of plate boundary , convergent (thrust), divergent (extensional) and transform (strike-slip). There are two main types of thrust tectonics, thin-skinned and thick-skinned, depending on whether or not basement rocks are involved in the deformation. The principle geological environments where thrust tectonics is observed are zones of continental collision , restraining bends on strike-slip faults and as part of detached fault systems on some passive margins .

[ 1 ] Deformation styles [ edit ] In areas of thrust tectonics, two main processes are recognized: thin-skinned deformation and thick-skinned deformation . The distinction is important as attempts to structurally restore the deformation will give very different results depending on the assumed geometry.

[ 2 ] Thin-skinned deformation [ edit ] Thin-skinned deformation refers to shortening that only involves the sedimentary cover. This style is typical of many fold and thrust belts developed in the foreland of a collisional zone. This is particularly the case where a good basal decollement exists such as salt or a zone of high pore fluid pressure.

[ 3 ] Thick-skinned deformation [ edit ] Thick-skinned deformation refers to shortening that involves basement rocks rather than just the overlying cover. This type of geometry is typically found in the hinterland of a collisional zone.  This style may also occur in the foreland where no effective decollement surface is present or where pre-existing extensional rift structures may be inverted .

[ 4 ] Geological environments associated with thrust tectonics [ edit ] Collisional zones [ edit ] The most significant areas of thrust tectonics are associated with destructive plate boundaries leading to the formation of orogenic belts . The two main types are: the collision of two continental tectonic plates (for example the Arabian plate and Eurasian plate , which formed the Zagros fold and thrust belt ) and collisions between a continent and an island arc such as that which formed Taiwan .

[ 5 ] Restraining bends on strike-slip faults [ edit ] When a strike-slip fault is offset along strike such that the resulting bend in the fault hinders easy movement, e.g. a right stepping bend on a sinistral (left-lateral) fault, this will cause local shortening or transpression . Examples include the 'Big Bend' region of the San Andreas Fault , [ 6 ] and parts of the Dead Sea Transform .

[ 7 ] Passive margins [ edit ] Passive margins are characterised by large prisms of sedimentary material deposited since the original break-up of a continent associated with formation of a new spreading centre . This wedge of material will tend to spread under gravity and, where an effective detachment layer is present such as salt , the extensional faulting that forms at the landward side will be balanced at the front of the wedge by a series of toe-thrusts . Examples include the outboard part of the Niger delta (with an overpressured mudstone detachment) [ 8 ] and the Angola margin (with a salt detachment ).

[ 9 ] References [ edit ] ^ Butler, R.; Bond, C. (2020). "Chapter 9 – Thrust systems and contractional tectonics". In Scarselli, N.; Adam, J.; Chiarella, D. (eds.).

Principles of Geologic Analysis . Regional Geology and Tectonics. Vol. 1 (2 ed.). Elsevier. pp.

149– 167.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-444-64134-2.00008-0 .

ISBN 9780444641359 .

^ Shiner, P (2004). "Thin-skinned versus thick-skinned structural models for Apulian carbonate reservoirs: constraints from the Val d'Agri Fields, S Apennines, Italy".

Marine and Petroleum Geology .

21 (7): 805– 827.

Bibcode : 2004MarPG..21..805S .

doi : 10.1016/j.marpetgeo.2003.11.020 .

^ Hatcher, R. D. (2007).

"Confirmation of Thin-skinned Thrust Faulting in Foreland Fold-Thrust Belts and Its Impact on Hydrocarbon Exploration: Bally, Gordy, and Stewart, Bulletin of Canadian Petroleum Geology, 1966" (PDF) .

AAPG Search and Discovery Article .

70034 .

^ Butler, R. W. H.; Mazzoli, S.; Corrado, S.; De Donatis, M.; Di Bucci, D.; Gambini, R.; Naso, G.; Nicolai, C.; Scrocca, D.; Shiner, P.; Zucconi, V. (2004). McClay, K. R. (ed.).

"Applying thick-skinned tectonic models to the Apennine thrust belt of Italy—Limitations and implications" (PDF) .

Thrust tectonics and hydrocarbon systems: AAPG Memoir 82 . pp.

647– 67.

^ Timothy Briggs Byrne; Char-Shine Liu (2002).

Geology and Geophysics of an Arc-continent Collision, Taiwan . Special Paper 358. Geological Society of America.

ISBN 978-0-8137-2358-7 .

^ Rust, D. 1998. Contractional and extensional structures in the transpressive ‘Big Bend’ of the San Andreas fault, southern California. Geological Society, London, Special Publications; 135; pp. 119–126 ^ Gomez, F., Nemer, T., Tabet, C., Meghraoui, M. & Barazangi, M. 2007. Strain partitioning of active transpression within the Lebanese restraining bend of the Dead Sea Fault (Lebanon and SW Syria). Geological Society, London, Special Publications; 290; 285–303 ^ Bilotti, F. & Shaw, J.H. 2005. Deep-water Niger Delta fold and thrust belt modeled as a critical taper wedge: The influence of elevated basal fluid pressure on structural styles. AAPG Bulletin; 89; 11; 1475–1491 ^ Marton, G, & Schoenborn, G. 2008. Salt Tectonics of the Continent-Ocean Transition, Deep-Water Angola. MAPG conference abstract External links [ edit ] Contraction: Chapter 16; A complementary resource to Chapter 16 of the textbook "Strukturgeologi" by Haakon Fossen & Roy Gabrielsen v t e Structural geology Underlying theory Deformation mechanism Lamé's stress ellipsoid Mohr–Coulomb theory Mohr's circle Overburden pressure Rock mechanics Strain Strain partitioning Stress Stress field Tension Measurement conventions Brunton compass Inclinometer Orthographic projection Rake Stereographic projection Strike and dip Large-scale tectonics Accretionary wedge Allochthon Autochthon Back-arc basin Continental collision Convergent boundary Décollement Divergent boundary Extensional tectonics Fault block Fenster Fold and thrust belt Fold mountains Foreland basin Graben Half-graben Horse Horst Horst and graben Intra-arc basin Inversion Klippe List of tectonic plate interactions Mélange Mountain formation Nappe Obduction Orogeny Passive margin Plate tectonics Pull-apart basin Rift valley Rift Saddle Strike-slip tectonics Structural basin Suture Syneclise Terrane Thick-skinned deformation Thin-skinned deformation Thrust tectonics Fracturing Columnar jointing Dike Exfoliation joint Fissure Joint Vein Faulting Asperity Cataclasite Cataclastic rock Detachment fault Disturbance Fault friction Fault mechanics Fault scarp Fault trace Thrust fault Transfer zone Transform fault Foliation and lineation Cleavage Compaction Crenulation Fissility Oblique foliation Pressure solution Rock microstructure Slickenside Stylolite Tectonic phase Tectonite Folding Anticline Chevron Detachment fold Dome Homocline Monocline Syncline Vergence Boudinage Competence Kinematic analysis 3D fold evolution Paleostress inversion Paleostress Section restoration Shear zone Mylonite Pure shear Shear Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Thrust_tectonics&oldid=1256685276 " Categories : Structural geology Tectonics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 November 2024, at 02:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Thrust tectonics 3 languages Add topic

