Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Work Toggle Work subsection 2.1 Academic work and interests 2.2 Selfishness vs. altruism 2.3 Inequality vs. economic success 3 Publications 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Samuel Bowles (economist) 13 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano مصرى 日本語 Português Русский Svenska Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American economist Samuel Bowles Born ( 1939-01-06 ) January 6, 1939 (age 86) New Haven, Connecticut , U.S.

Academic background Education Yale University (B.A.) Harvard University (PhD) Influences Karl Marx , Karl Polanyi Academic work Discipline Economic theory , microeconomics , social psychology School or tradition Neo-Marxian economics Institutions University of Massachusetts Amherst Notable ideas Schooling in Capitalist America Samuel Stebbins Bowles ( / b oʊ l z / ; born June 1, 1939), [ 1 ] is an American economist and professor emeritus at the University of Massachusetts Amherst , where he continues to teach courses on microeconomics and the theory of institutions.

[ 2 ] His work belongs to the neo-Marxian [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] (variably called post-Marxian) [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] tradition of economic thought. However, his perspective on economics is eclectic and draws on various schools of thought, including what he and others refer to as post- Walrasian economics .

[ 9 ] Biography [ edit ] Bowles, the son of U.S. Ambassador and Connecticut Governor Chester Bowles , [ 10 ] graduated with a B.A. from Yale University in 1960, where he was a founding member of the Yale Russian Chorus , participating in their early tours of the Soviet Union. Subsequently, he received his Ph.D. in economics from Harvard University in 1965 with the thesis titled The Efficient Allocation of Resources in Education: A Planning Model with Applications to Northern Nigeria . In 1973, the Economics Department of the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, where Bowles taught until 2001, hired him along with Herbert Gintis , Stephen Resnick , Richard D. Wolff and Richard Edwards as part of a "radical package." Currently, Bowles is a professor of economics at the University of Siena , Italy and the Arthur Spiegel Research Professor and Director of the Behavioral Sciences Program at the Santa Fe Institute in Santa Fe, New Mexico. Additionally, Bowles continues to teach graduate-level courses in microeconomics at the University of Massachusetts Amherst .

[ 11 ] In 2006, Bowles was awarded the Leontief Prize for his outstanding contribution to economic theory by the Global Development and Environment Institute . He was elected fellow of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2020.

[ 12 ] Work [ edit ] Bowles has challenged economic theories that free markets and inequality maximize efficiency and argued that self-interested financial incentives can produce behavior that is inefficient and violates a society's morality. He has argued that economies with less inequality, such as Asian countries, have outperformed economies with more inequality, such as Latin American countries.

Academic work and interests [ edit ] On his website at the Santa Fe Institute , he describes his two main academic interests as first, "the co-evolution of preferences, institutions and behavior, with emphasis on the modeling and empirical study of cultural evolution, the importance and evolution of non-self-regarding motives in explaining behavior, and applications of these studies to policy areas such as intellectual property rights, the economics of education and the politics of government redistributive programs"; and the second being concerned with "the causes and consequences of economic inequality , with emphasis on the relationship between wealth inequalities, incomplete contracts, and governance of economic transactions in firms, markets, families and communities." [ 13 ] Bowles frequently collaborated with his former colleague Herbert Gintis (another Emeritus Professor of Economics from Umass Amherst), both of whom were asked by Martin Luther King Jr.

to write background papers for the 1968 Poor People's March .

[ 14 ] In addition, he works with and is supported by the MacArthur Research Network on Preferences, the MacArthur Research Network on the Effects of Inequality on Economic Performance and the Behavioral Sciences Program at the Santa Fe Institute. Bowles was one of the founders of economics curriculum reform initiative CORE Project which seeks to update the undergraduate curriculum to integrate topics such as altruism, inequality and environmental economics . He is a member of its steering group.

[ 15 ] It has published a free, online open-access textbook called The Economy , for which Bowles is one of the authors.

[ 15 ] Bowles is the author of numerous scholarly articles and books, among which A Cooperative Species. Human Reciprocity and Its Evolution (2011) and Schooling in Capitalist America , first published in 1976.

Selfishness vs. altruism [ edit ] Bowles has recently studied the way that people are motivated by selfishness and the desire to maximize their own income as compared to altruism and the desire to do a good job and be well regarded by others.

[ 16 ] People act not only for material interests, but also "to constitute themselves as dignified, autonomous, and moral individuals." Behavioral experiments suggest that "economic incentives may be counterproductive when they signal that selfishness is an appropriate response" and "undermine the moral values that lead people to act altruistically". Bowles gives the example of day care centers in Haifa, where a fine was imposed on parents who were late picking up their children at the end of the day. Rather than avoiding late pick-ups, parents responded by doubling the fraction of time they arrived late. After 12 weeks, the fine was revoked, but the enhanced tardiness persisted unabated. According to Bowles, this illustrates a "kind of negative synergy" between economic incentives and moral behavior, further stating: "The fine seems to have undermined the parents' sense of ethical obligation to avoid inconveniencing the teachers and led them to think of lateness as just another commodity they could purchase".

Bowles cites research by Ernst Fehr and others establishing that behavioral experiments modeling the voluntary provision of public goods show that "substantial fractions of most populations adhere to moral rules, willingly give to others, and punish those who offend standards of appropriate behavior, even at a cost to themselves and with no expectation of material reward".

Diego Rivera 's mural of factory workers at Ford's River Rouge assembly plant shows that according to Bowles organizations motivate members "by appealing to other-regarding motives such as the desire to do a good job and a sense of reciprocal obligations among members of a firm".

In most cases, "[i]ncentives undermine ethical motives" as they "may frame a decision problem and thereby suggest self-interest as appropriate behavior". Simply using market terminology offers justifications for actions that would otherwise be unjustifiable. Economic structures of societies produce people with different values. In a game in which individuals could choose how much to withdraw from a common pool ("the forest"), the withdrawal that maximized the gains of the group was substantially less than the withdrawal that maximized the gains of the individual. When subjects were trained in a game with incentives to be selfish, they continue to be selfish even when they play in a second game without those incentives. In a "regulation" model where individuals were fined for " overexploitation ", their behavior was entirely self-interested. In a society, "if the relevant incentives allow the selfish to exploit the civic-minded, then the latter are less likely to be copied". Studies of 15 small-scale societies shows that "individuals from the more market-integrated societies were also more fair-minded" in that they made more generous offers and preferred to reject an unfair offer even at the cost of receiving nothing. In these societies, "individuals engaging in mutually beneficial exchanges with strangers represent models of successful behavior who are then copied by others".

Inequality vs. economic success [ edit ] "What is the relationship between inequality and the economic success of nations, firms, and local communities?", Bowles asks. At the University of California, Berkeley, he and other researchers have challenged two views long held by most economists, namely that inequality goes hand-in-hand with a nation's economic success and that reducing economic inequalities inevitably compromises efficiency. For instance, he wrote that "East Asian countries with relatively level distributions of income have dramatically outperformed Latin American countries with less equal income distributions. Investments in the nutrition, health and education of poor children have produced not only more economic opportunity but higher economic performance. Indeed, emerging economic theory suggests that inequality may have adverse effects, blunting productive incentives and fueling costly conflicts between haves and have-nots".

[ 17 ] The traditional debate has been polarized, Bowles said, between ideal models of equality that overlooked the role of incentives and idealized models of the private market that overlooked inequality.

The Berkeley group studied four questions: How does inequality affect cooperation in local communities, and impact the local environment and other public goods, like irrigation water, neighborhood safety and other residential amenities, fisheries, forestry, and grazing lands?

How do inequalities affect the efficiency and productivity of farms, firms, and other entities, and are there more efficient forms of governance that can be promoted?

How do economic disparities among citizens affect bargaining, policy making, and economic performance at a national level?

What principles can guide the design of efficient and politically viable policies to alleviate poverty and enhance economic opportunity for the less well off?

Publications [ edit ] Bowles, Samuel (1969).

Planning educational systems for economic growth . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674670907 .

Bowles, Samuel; Kendrick, David A. (1970).

Notes and problems in microeconomic theory (1st ed.). Chicago: Markham Publishing.

ISBN 9780841020122 .

Also as Bowles, Samuel; Kendrick, David; Dixon, Peter B.

(1980).

Notes and problems in microeconomic theory . Amsterdam New York: North-Holland.

ISBN 9780444853257 .

Bowles, Samuel; Gordon, David M.

; Weisskopf, Thomas E. (1983).

Beyond the waste land: a democratic alternative to economic decline . Garden City, New York: Anchor Press/Doubleday.

ISBN 9780385183451 .

Also as Bowles, Samuel; Gordon, David M.

; Weisskopf, Thomas E. (1984).

Beyond the wasteland: a democratic alternative to economic decline . London: Verso.

ISBN 9780860918233 .

Bowles, Samuel; Gintis, Herbert (1986).

Democracy and capitalism: property, community, and the contradictions of modern social thought . New York: Basic Books.

ISBN 9780465016006 .

Also as Bowles, Samuel; Gintis, Herbert (2011).

Democracy and capitalism property, community, and the contradictions of modern social thought . London: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415608817 .

Bowles, Samuel; Pagano, Ugo ; Franzin, Maurizio (1999).

The politics and economics of power . London New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415185424 .

Bowles, Samuel; Gintis, Herbert (1998). Wright, Erik Olin (ed.).

Recasting Egalitarianism: new rules for communities, states, and markets . London, England: New York Verso.

ISBN 9781859842553 .

Bowles, Samuel; Arrow, Kenneth ; Durlauf, Steven (2000).

Meritocracy and economic inequality . Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press .

ISBN 9780691004686 .

Bowles, Samuel; Henrich, Joseph ; Boyd, Robert ; Camerer, Colin ; Fehr, Ernst ; Gintis, Herbert (2004).

Foundations of human sociality: economic experiments and ethnographic evidence from fifteen small-scale societies . Oxford New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199262052 .

Bowles, Samuel (2006).

Microeconomics: behavior, institutions, and evolution . Princeton, New Jersey Woodstock: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691126388 .

Bowles, Samuel; Gintis, Herbert ; Osborne Groves, Melissa (2005).

Unequal chances: family background and economic success . New York Princeton, New Jersey: Russell Sage Foundation, Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691136202 .

Bowles, Samuel; Gintis, Herbert ; Fehr, Ernst ; Boyd, Robert (2005).

Moral sentiments and material interests: the foundations of cooperation in economic life . Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.

ISBN 9780262572378 .

Bowles, Samuel; Roosevelt, Frank; Edwards, Richard (2005).

Understanding capitalism: competition, command, and change . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195138658 .

Bowles, Samuel; Durlauf, Steven; Hoff, Karla (2006).

Poverty traps . New York Princeton, New Jersey: Russell Sage Foundation Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691125008 .

Bowles, Samuel; Wallerstein, Michael ; Bardhan, Pranab (2006).

Globalization and egalitarian redistribution . Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691125190 .

Bowles, Samuel; Bardhan, Pranab ; Baland, Jean-Marie (2007).

Inequality, cooperation, and environmental sustainability . Princeton, New Jersey: Russell Sage Foundation, Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691128795 .

Bowles, Samuel; Gintis, Herbert (2011).

A cooperative species: human reciprocity and its evolution . Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691158167 .

Bowles, Samuel; Gintis, Herbert (2011).

Schooling in capitalist America: educational reform and the contradictions of economic life . Chicago, Illinois: Haymarket Books.

ISBN 9781608461318 .

Original printed in 1976.

Bowles, Samuel (2016).

The Moral Economy: Why Good Incentives Are No Substitute for Good Citizens . New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press.

ISBN 9780300163803 .

See also [ edit ] Capital accumulation Institutional economics Marxian economics Supply-side economics References [ edit ] ^ "Bowles, Samuel" . Library of Congress . Retrieved October 30, 2014 .

data view (born Jan. 6, 1939) ^ Samuel Bowles Archived August 30, 2006, at the Wayback Machine UMass Amherst Dept. of Economics Faculty.

^ Stanfield, J. R. (1989). "Veblenian and Neo-Marxian Perspectives on the Cultural Crisis of Late Capitalism".

Journal of Economic Issues .

23 (3): 717– 734.

doi : 10.1080/00213624.1989.11504935 .

JSTOR 4226169 .

^ Green, F.; Weisskopf, T. E. (1990). "The Worker Discipline Effect: A Disaggregative Analysis".

The Review of Economics and Statistics .

72 (2): 241– 249.

doi : 10.2307/2109713 .

JSTOR 2109713 .

^ Mason, P. L. (1993). "Variable Labor Effort, Involuntary Unemployment, and Effective Demand: Irreconcilable Concepts?".

Journal of Post Keynesian Economics .

15 (3): 427– 442.

doi : 10.1080/01603477.1993.11489953 .

JSTOR 4538355 .

^ Samuel Bowles, "Post-marxian economics: Labour, learning and history", Social Science Information , Volume 24 (3): 507, SAGE – September 1, 1985.

^ Barry Stewart Clark, Political economy: a comparative approach , ABC-CLIO, 1998, p. 67.

^ Richard D. Wolff and Stephen Cullenberg, "Marxism and Post-Marxism", Social Text 15 (Fall 1986), 126–135.

^ Bowles, Samuel & Herbert Gintis (1993).

"Post-Walrasian Political Economy" . In Bowles, Samuel; Herbert Gintis & Bo Gustafsson (eds.).

Markets and Democracy: Participation, Accountability and Efficiency . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

1– 10.

ISBN 9780511983580 . Retrieved November 27, 2012 .

^ Schaffer, Howard B., Chester Bowles: New Dealer in the Cold War , Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1993, p. 13.

^ UMass Amherst Fall 2010 Schedule of Classes Archived June 29, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Samuel S. Bowles" .

American Academy of Arts & Sciences . Retrieved January 7, 2021 .

^ Samuel Bowles ^ "Born Poor? Santa Fe economist Samuel Bowles says you better get used to it" [ permanent dead link ] ^ a b "Who creates CORE?" .

CORE Project . Archived from the original on August 1, 2021 . Retrieved May 11, 2018 .

^ Samuel Bowles (June 20, 2008).

"Policies designed for self-interested citizens may undermine "the moral sentiments": Evidence from economic experiments" (PDF) .

Science .

320 (5883): 1605– 1609.

Bibcode : 2008Sci...320.1605B .

doi : 10.1126/science.1152110 .

PMID 18566278 .

S2CID 20130878 . Archived from the original (PDF) on February 24, 2021 . Retrieved February 4, 2014 .

^ Samuel Bowles Archived March 7, 2009, at the Wayback Machine Home Page of the Network on the Effects of Inequality on Economic Performance External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Samuel Bowles .

Samuel Bowles' Webpage at the SFI which includes CV other academic information The MacArthur Research Network on Preferences The MacArthur Research Network on the Effects of Inequality on Economic Performance Archived March 7, 2009, at the Wayback Machine v t e Institutional economics Institutional economists Werner Abelshauser Clarence Edwin Ayres Joe S. Bain Shimshon Bichler Robert A. Brady Daniel Bromley Ha-Joon Chang John Maurice Clark John R. Commons Richard T. Ely Robert H. Frank John Kenneth Galbraith Walton Hale Hamilton Orris C. Herfindahl Albert O. Hirschman Geoffrey Hodgson János Kornai Simon Kuznets Hunter Lewis Jesse W. Markham Wesley Clair Mitchell Gunnar Myrdal Jonathan Nitzan Warren Samuels François Simiand Herbert A. Simon Frank Stilwell George W. Stocking Sr.

Lars Pålsson Syll Thorstein Veblen Edward Lawrence Wheelwright Erich Zimmermann New institutional economists Daron Acemoglu Armen Alchian Masahiko Aoki Steven N. S. Cheung Ronald Coase Harold Demsetz Avner Greif Claude Ménard Douglass North Mancur Olson Elinor Ostrom ( Bloomington school ) Oliver E. Williamson Behavioral economists George Ainslie Dan Ariely Nava Ashraf Ofer Azar Douglas Bernheim Samuel Bowles Sarah Brosnan Colin Camerer David Cesarini Kay-Yut Chen Rachel Croson Werner De Bondt Paul Dolan Stephen Duneier Catherine C. Eckel Armin Falk Urs Fischbacher Herbert Gintis Uri Gneezy David Halpern Charles A. Holt David Ryan Just Daniel Kahneman Djuradj Caranovic Ariel Kalil George Katona Jeffrey R. Kling George Loewenstein Graham Loomes Brigitte C. Madrian Gary McClelland Matteo Motterlini Sendhil Mullainathan Michael Norton Matthew Rabin Howard Rachlin Klaus M. Schmidt Eldar Shafir Hersh Shefrin Robert J. Shiller Uwe Sunde Richard Thaler Amos Tversky Robert W. Vishny Georg Weizsäcker Economic sociologists Jens Beckert Fred L. Block James S. Coleman Paul DiMaggio Paula England Mark Granovetter Donald Angus MacKenzie Joel M. Podolny Lynette Spillman Richard Swedberg Laurent Thévenot Carlo Trigilia Harrison White Viviana Zelizer Key concepts and ideas Accelerator effect Administered prices Barriers to entry Bounded rationality Conspicuous consumption Conspicuous leisure Conventional wisdom Countervailing power Effective competition Herfindahl index Hiding hand principle Hirschman cycle Instrumentalism Kuznets cycles Market concentration Market power Market structure Penalty of taking the lead Satisficing Shortage economy Structure–conduct–performance paradigm Technostructure Theory of two-level planning Veblen goods Veblenian dichotomy Related fields Cultural economics Development economics English historical school of economics Evolutionary economics Evolutionary psychology French historical school Historical school of economics Legal realism Microeconomics Post-Keynesian economics v t e Evolutionary psychologists Evolutionary psychology Biologists / neuroscientists Bernard Crespi John Crook Charles Darwin Richard Dawkins Jared Diamond W. D. Hamilton Alfred Kinsey Peter Kropotkin Gordon Orians Jaak Panksepp Margie Profet Peter Richerson Giacomo Rizzolatti Randy Thornhill Robert Trivers Carel van Schaik Claus Wedekind Mary Jane West-Eberhard Wolfgang Wickler George C. Williams David Sloan Wilson E. O. Wilson Richard Wrangham Anthropologists Jerome H. Barkow Christopher Boehm Robert Boyd Donald E. Brown Napoleon Chagnon Robin Dunbar Daniel Fessler Mark Flinn John D. Hawks Joseph Henrich Ruth Mace Daniel Nettle Stephen Shennan Donald Symons John Tooby Pierre van den Berghe Psychologists / cognitive scientists Mary Ainsworth Simon Baron-Cohen Justin L. Barrett Jay Belsky Jesse Bering David F. Bjorklund Paul Bloom John Bowlby Pascal Boyer Joseph Bulbulia David Buss Josep Call Anne Campbell Donald T. Campbell Peter Carruthers Noam Chomsky Leda Cosmides Martin Daly Paul Ekman Bruce J. Ellis Anne Fernald Aurelio José Figueredo Diana Fleischman Uta Frith Gordon G. Gallup David C. Geary Gerd Gigerenzer Peter Gray Jonathan Haidt Harry Harlow Judith Rich Harris Martie Haselton Stephen Kaplan Scott Barry Kaufman Douglas T. Kenrick Simon M. Kirby Robert Kurzban Brian MacWhinney Michael T. McGuire Geoffrey Miller Darcia Narvaez Katherine Nelson Randolph M. Nesse Steven Neuberg David Perrett Henry Plotkin Steven Pinker Paul Rozin Mark Schaller David P. Schmitt Nancy Segal Todd K. Shackelford Roger Shepard Irwin Silverman Peter K. Smith Dan Sperber Anthony Stevens Frank Sulloway Michael Tomasello Joshua Tybur Mark van Vugt Andrew Whiten Glenn Wilson Margo Wilson Other social scientists Christopher Badcock Samuel Bowles Ernst Fehr Herbert Gintis Dominic D. P. Johnson Gad Saad Literary theorists / philosophers Edmund Burke Joseph Carroll Daniel Dennett Denis Dutton Thomas Hobbes David Hume Research centers/ organizations Center for Evolutionary Psychology Human Behavior and Evolution Society Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain Sciences New England Complex Systems Institute Publications The Adapted Mind Evolution and Human Behavior The Evolution of Human Sexuality Evolution, Mind and Behaviour Evolutionary Behavioral Sciences Evolutionary Psychology Evolutionary psychology Psychology portal Evolutionary biology portal v t e Game theory Glossary Game theorists Games Traditional game theory Definitions Asynchrony Bayesian regret Best response Bounded rationality Cheap talk Coalition Complete contract Complete information Complete mixing Confrontation analysis Conjectural variation Contingent cooperator Coopetition Cooperative game theory Dynamic inconsistency Escalation of commitment Farsightedness Game semantics Hierarchy of beliefs Imperfect information Incomplete information Information set Move by nature Mutual knowledge Non-cooperative game theory Non-credible threat Outcome Perfect information Perfect recall Ply Preference Rationality Sequential game Simultaneous action selection Spite Strategic complements Strategic dominance Strategic form Strategic interaction Strategic move Strategy Subgame Succinct game Topological game Tragedy of the commons Uncorrelated asymmetry Equilibrium concepts Backward induction Bayes correlated equilibrium Bayesian efficiency Bayesian game Bayesian Nash equilibrium Berge equilibrium Bertrand–Edgeworth model Coalition-proof Nash equilibrium Core Correlated equilibrium Cursed equilibrium Edgeworth price cycle Epsilon-equilibrium Gibbs equilibrium Incomplete contracts Inequity aversion Individual rationality Iterated elimination of dominated strategies Markov perfect equilibrium Mertens-stable equilibrium Nash equilibrium Open-loop model Pareto efficiency Payoff dominance Perfect Bayesian equilibrium Price of anarchy Program equilibrium Proper equilibrium Quantal response equilibrium Quasi-perfect equilibrium Rational agent Rationalizability Rationalizable strategy Satisfaction equilibrium Self-confirming equilibrium Sequential equilibrium Shapley value Strong Nash equilibrium Subgame perfect equilibrium Trembling hand equilibrium Strategies Appeasement Bid shading Cheap talk Collusion Commitment device De-escalation Deterrence Escalation Fictitious play Focal point Grim trigger Hobbesian trap Markov strategy Max-dominated strategy Mixed strategy Pure strategy Tit for tat Win–stay, lose–switch Games All-pay auction Battle of the sexes Nash bargaining game Bertrand competition Blotto game Centipede game Coordination game Cournot competition Deadlock Dictator game Trust game Diner's dilemma Dollar auction El Farol Bar problem Electronic mail game Gift-exchange game Guess 2/3 of the average Keynesian beauty contest Kuhn poker Lewis signaling game Matching pennies Obligationes Optional prisoner's dilemma Pirate game Prisoner's dilemma Public goods game Rendezvous problem Rock paper scissors Stackelberg competition Stag hunt Traveler's dilemma Ultimatum game Volunteer's dilemma War of attrition Theorems Arrow's impossibility theorem Aumann's agreement theorem Brouwer fixed-point theorem Competitive altruism Folk theorem Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem Gibbs lemma Glicksberg's theorem Kakutani fixed-point theorem Kuhn's theorem One-shot deviation principle Prim–Read theory Rational ignorance Rational irrationality Sperner's lemma Zermelo's theorem Subfields Algorithmic game theory Behavioral game theory Behavioral strategy Compositional game theory Contract theory Drama theory Graphical game theory Heresthetic Mean-field game theory Negotiation theory Quantum game theory Social software Key people Albert W. Tucker Alvin E. Roth Amos Tversky Antoine Augustin Cournot Ariel Rubinstein David Gale David K. Levine David M. Kreps Donald B. Gillies Drew Fudenberg Eric Maskin Harold W. Kuhn Herbert Simon Herbert Scarf Hervé Moulin Jean Tirole Jean-François Mertens Jennifer Tour Chayes Ken Binmore Kenneth Arrow Leonid Hurwicz Lloyd Shapley Martin Shubik Melvin Dresher Merrill M. Flood Olga Bondareva Oskar Morgenstern Paul Milgrom Peyton Young Reinhard Selten Robert Aumann Robert Axelrod Robert B. Wilson Roger Myerson Samuel Bowles Suzanne Scotchmer Thomas Schelling William Vickrey Combinatorial game theory Core concepts Combinatorial explosion Determinacy Disjunctive sum First-player and second-player win Game complexity Game tree Impartial game Misère Partisan game Solved game Sprague–Grundy theorem Strategy-stealing argument Zugzwang Games Chess Chomp Clobber Cram Domineering Hackenbush Nim Notakto Subtract a square Sylver coinage Toads and Frogs Mathematical tools Mex Nimber On Numbers and Games Star Surreal number Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays Search algorithms Alpha–beta pruning Expectiminimax Minimax Monte Carlo tree search Negamax Paranoid algorithm Principal variation search Key people Claude Shannon John Conway John von Neumann Evolutionary game theory Core concepts Bishop–Cannings theorem Evolution and the Theory of Games Evolutionarily stable set Evolutionarily stable state Evolutionarily stable strategy Replicator equation Risk dominance Stochastically stable equilibrium Weak evolutionarily stable strategy Games Chicken Stag hunt Applications Cultural group selection Fisher's principle Mobbing Terminal investment hypothesis Key people John Maynard Smith Robert Axelrod Mechanism design Core concepts Algorithmic mechanism design Bayesian-optimal mechanism Incentive compatibility Market design Monotonicity Participation constraint Revelation principle Strategyproofness Vickrey–Clarke–Groves mechanism Theorems Myerson–Satterthwaite theorem Revenue equivalence Applications Digital goods auction Knapsack auction Truthful cake-cutting Other topics Bertrand paradox Chainstore paradox Computational complexity of games Helly metric Multi-agent system PPAD-complete Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Category v t e September Group Members G. A. Cohen John Roemer Jon Elster Adam Przeworski Erik Olin Wright Philippe Van Parijs Robert Jan van der Veen [ nl ] Robert Brenner Hillel Steiner Samuel Bowles Joshua Cohen See also Analytical Marxism Left-libertarianism Game theory Marxism Karl Marx John Rawls Robert Nozick Self-ownership Exploitation Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Greece Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Samuel_Bowles_(economist)&oldid=1305424686 " Categories : 1939 births American behavioral economists Complex systems scientists Marxian economists Living people Scientists from New Haven, Connecticut Harvard Graduate School of Arts and Sciences alumni Yale University alumni Academic staff of the University of Siena University of Massachusetts Amherst faculty Santa Fe Institute people Economists from Connecticut Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Game theorists Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from November 2011 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 00:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Samuel Bowles (economist) 13 languages Add topic

