Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 Works 3 Legacy 4 In popular culture 5 See also 6 References 7 General References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Ahmad ibn Majid 28 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego Italiano മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Português Qaraqalpaqsha Русский سرائیکی Shqip Svenska Tagalog Тоҷикӣ اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Ahmad ibn Mājid ) Arab navigator and cartographer Not to be confused with Ahmad Majid .

You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Arabic .

(July 2013) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Arabic Wikipedia article at [[:ar:أحمد بن ماجد]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|ar|أحمد بن ماجد}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Ahmad ibn Mājid أحمد بن ماجد Born c.

1432 Julfar (present-day Ras Al Khaimah Died c.

1500 Other names The Lion of the Sea Occupation Navigator / Cartographer Years active c.

1450 – c.

1500 Known for Navigator Notable work The Book of the Benefits of the Principles and Foundations of Seamanship ( Kitāb al-fawā’id fī uṣūl ʿilm al-baḥr wa-l-qawā’id ) Aḥmad ibn Mājid ( Arabic : أحمد بن ماجد ), also known as the "Arab Admiral" ( أمير البحر العربي , ʿAmīr al-Baḥr al-ʿArabī ) and the "Lion of the Sea", [ 1 ] was an Arab navigator and cartographer born c.

1432 [ 2 ] in Julfar , the present-day Ras Al Khaimah in the United Arab Emirates .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] He was raised in a family famous for seafaring; at the age of seventeen he was able to navigate ships. The exact date is not known, but Ibn Mājid probably died around 1500. Although long identified in the West as the navigator who helped Vasco da Gama find his way from Africa to India, contemporary research has shown Ibn Mājid is unlikely even to have met Da Gama.

[ 4 ] Ibn Mājid was the author of nearly forty works of poetry and prose.

Name [ edit ] At the beginning of his magnum opus , the Fawāʾid (see below), Ibn Mājid gives his name in full as Ḥājj al-Ḥaramayn al-Sharīfayn Shihāb al-Dīn Aḥmad ibn Mājid ibn Muḥammad ibn ʿAmr ibn Faḍl ibn Duwayk ibn Yūsuf ibn Ḥasan ibn Ḥusayn ibn Abī Muʿallaq al-Saʿdī ibn Abī Rakāʾib al-Najdī ( Arabic : حاج الحرمين الشريفين شهاب الدين أحمد بن ماجد بن محمد بن عمر بن فضل بن دويك بن يوسف بن حسن بن حسين بن أبي معلق السعدي بن أبي الركايب النجدي ).

[ 6 ] The Najdī and Saʿdī titles relate his lineage to the central Arabian Peninsula and to the Yemeni Tihamah respectively.

[ citation needed ] Works [ edit ] A selection from the Kitāb al-Fawā’id fī Uṣūl ‘Ilm al-Baḥr wa ’l-Qawā’id with Ibn Majid referring to the Gulf of Aden by its old name the Gulf of Berbera Ibn Mājid wrote several books on marine science and the movements of ships, which helped people of the Persian Gulf to reach the coasts of India , East Africa and other destinations. Among his many books on navigation , Kitāb al-Fawā’id fī Uṣūl ʿIlm al-Baḥr wa’l-Qawāʿid ( The Book of the Benefits of the Principles and Foundations of Seamanship ) is considered one of his best.

[ 7 ] It is an encyclopedia, describing the history and basic principles of navigation, latitude and longitude by way of celestial navigation , [ 8 ] lunar mansions , loxodromes , the difference between coastal and open-sea sailing, the locations of ports from East Africa to Indonesia, accounts of the monsoon and other seasonal winds, typhoons and other topics for professional navigators. He drew from his own experience and that of his father, also a famous navigator, and the lore of generations of Indian Ocean sailors. The book encompassed the entire science of navigation in the Indian Ocean at the time.

[ 9 ] Ibn Mājid was known as a muʿallim (“teacher”, the title for pilots), i.e. teacher of navigation. Most of his navigational calculations depended on sophisticated astronomical observations, especially using the lunar mansions ( manāzil al-qamar ) and the thirty-two stellar rhumbs ( akhnān ).

[ 9 ] Legacy [ edit ] Although Ibn Mājid was long held to have helped the Portuguese navigator Vasco da Gama cross from Africa to the Indian subcontinent, contemporary research has shown that he would have been in his seventies at the time of Da Gama’s trip. The actual pilot who sailed with Da Gama was a Gujarati and may have returned to Portugal with da Gama.

[ 10 ] [ 4 ] The man was provided to Da Gama by the Ruler of Malindi and was assumed by Da Gama and his men to be a Christian. He guided Da Gama’s ships to Mount Eli on the Indian coast after a 23-day voyage.

[ 11 ] Researchers have also used the three rutters of Ibn Mājid, particularly the ‘Sofala Rutter’, to comprehensively debunk the entire story of Ibn Mājid and any association with Da Gama. The evidence in these, letters written by da Gama himself and Ibn Mājid’s age (he considered himself too old to navigate in 1498, when da Gama arrived in Malindi—Ibn Mājid would have been 77), all provide a strong refutation of the entire story and it is now accepted as highly unlikely that Ibn Mājid had ever even met Da Gama, let alone given him the route to India.

[ 12 ] However, his printed works are thought to have been a valuable source for the Portuguese when they arrived in the region.

[ 9 ] Remembered as “The Lion of the Sea”, Ibn Mājid's true legacy was the substantial body of literature on navigation that he left behind. Arab sailing was at a pinnacle during Ibn Mājid's lifetime, when both Europeans and Ottomans had only a limited understanding of geography in the Indian Ocean. His Kitāb al-Fawāʾid was widely utilized by Arab sailors, and comprised celestial navigation, weather patterns, and charts of dangerous areas in which to sail. This tome, in addition to his poetic works, were the true legacy of the sailor. Two of Ibn Mājid’s famous hand-written books are now prominent exhibits in the Bibliothèque nationale de France .

[ 13 ] In popular culture [ edit ] In the television series Star Trek: Picard , set in the future, the character Cristóbal "Chris" Ríos (portrayed by Santiago Cabrera ) is a former Starfleet officer who once served on the Federation starship USS Ibn Majid , NCC-75710, as revealed in the 2020 episode "Broken Pieces" .

See also [ edit ] Islamic scholars List of Arab scientists and scholars References [ edit ] ^ Zacharias, Anna (2012-11-24).

" 'Lion of the Sea' - 500 years ago may be the new face of tourism" .

The National . Abu Dhabi.

Archived from the original on 2018-07-06 . Retrieved 2020-03-21 .

Ahmed bin Majid was a navigator, poet and scholar of such respect that he is known among mariners as "the Lion of the Sea" more than five centuries after his death.

^ Lunde, Paul (2005-08-01).

"The Navigator: Ahmad Ibn Majid" .

AramcoWorld . Vol. 56, no. 4. Houston, Texas. pp.

45– 48.

Archived from the original on 2015-12-22 . Retrieved 2020-03-21 .

^ Russell, Jesse; Cohn, Ronald (2012).

Ahmad Ibn Majid . Tbilisi State University.

ISBN 978-5512794289 .

^ a b c "Ruler of Sharjah revisits the Porto library that led him to an important discovery" .

The National . Retrieved 2020-10-04 .

^ Hawley, Donald (1971).

The trucial states (2. impr ed.). London: Allen & Unwin [u.a.] p. 69.

ISBN 978-0-04-953005-8 .

^ This is the wording in the Paris and Damascus manuscripts of the Fawāʾid , slightly different from the earlier Oxford Ms. See links to the Mss online .

^ "Ibn Majid" .

Medieval Science, Technology, and Medicine: An Encyclopedia . Routledge. 2005.

ISBN 978-1-135-45932-1 .

^ Hazem, Bashir (2014-06-11).

"Sultan Al Qasimi: I will exert the necessary efforts to search for answers for researchers' inquiries about Ahmed Ibn Majid" .

Emirates News Agency . Abu Dhabi.

Archived from the original on 2020-03-21 . Retrieved 2020-03-21 .

^ a b c Al-Salman, Mohamed Hameed (June 2012). "Arabian Gulf in the Era of Portuguese Dominance: A Study in Historical Sources".

Liwa .

4 : 32.

^ Tibbetts, Gerald Randall (1971).

Arab navigation in the Indian Ocean before the coming of the Portuguese: being a translation of Kitāb al-Fawāʼid fī uṣūl al-baḥr waʼl-qawāʼid of Aḥmad b. Mājid al-Najdī; together with an introduction on the history of Arab navigation, notes on the navigational techniques and on the topography of the Indian Ocean and a glossary of navigational terms . Oriental Translation Fund, New Series. Vol. 42. London: The Royal Asiatic Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

ISBN 978-0-718-90900-0 .

OCLC 9283280 .

^ Cliff, Nigel (2012).

The last crusade : the epic voyages of Vasco da Gama . London: Atlantic. p. 214.

ISBN 978-1-84887-017-8 .

OCLC 784016799 .

^ Subrahmanyam, Sanjay. (1997).

The career and legend of Vasco da Gama . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-47072-2 .

OCLC 34990029 .

^ Momin, A. R. (2019-04-15).

"Vasco da Gama's Voyage to India and the Ibn Majid Connection" .

The IOS (Institute of Objective Studies) Minaret: An online Islamic magazine . Vol. 13, no. 15, Leaves from Islamic History and Culture . New Delhi, India.

Archived from the original on 2019-05-14 . Retrieved 2020-03-21 .

General References [ edit ] Ahmad ibn Majid (15th Century CE – 9th Century AH): The lion of the Seas.

http://www.alrahalah.com/ .

Al-Salimi, Abdulrahman (2002). "Different succession chronologies of the Nabhani dynasty in Oman".

Proceedings of the Seminar for Arabian Studies . Vol. 32.

ISBN 2503513360 .

Al Salimi, Abdulrahman, and Eric Staples. 2019.

A Maritime Lexicon: Arabic Nautical Terminology in the Indian Ocean . Hildesheim: Georg Olms Verlag.

Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures, Helaine Selin, Springer Science & Business Media - 2013, p. 424, ISBN 9789401714167 .

Khoury, Ibrahim. 2001.

Aḥmad ibn Mājid, ḥayātuh, muʾalafātuh, istiḥāla liqāʾihi bi-Fāskū dī Ghāmā [ Aḥmad ibn Mājid, his Life, his Writings, and the Impossibility of His Meeting with Vasco da Gama ]. Ras al-Khaima, Markaz al-dirāsa wa-al-wathāʾiq.

Malhão Pereira, José Manuel. 2004.

As técnicas náuticas pregâmicas no Índico . Lisbon: Academia de Marinha.

The Report: Emerging Oman 2007 . Oxford Business Group. 2007.

ISBN 978-1-902339-62-7 . Retrieved 2023-03-30 .

Shihāb, Ḥasan Ṣāliḥ. 1982.

Fann al-milāḥah ʿinda al-ʿarab ( The Art of Navigation Among the Arabs ). Beirut: Dār al-ʿAwdah.

Khal Torabully, “The Maritime Memory of the Arabs”, documentary film (52') showing Arab navigation in the Indian Ocean, with a special attention to Ahmad bin Majid, Chamarel Film/Productions La Lanterne, 2000.

External links [ edit ] Ahmad, S. Maqbul (2008) [1970-80].

"Ibn Mājid, Shihāb Al-Dīn Aḥmad Ibn Mājid" .

Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Encyclopedia.com.

Technical note on Indian Ocean Arab Navigation Studies by J. Acevedo and I. Bénard of the RUTTER Project , listing all known manuscripts, editions and works of Ibn Mājid.

v t e Geography and cartography in the medieval Islamic world Geographers 9th century Al-Khwarizmi Abu Hanifa Dinawari Ya'qubi Sulaiman al-Tajir 10th century Ibn Khordadbeh Ahmad ibn Rustah Ahmad ibn Fadlan Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani Al-Masudi Istakhri Khashkhash Ibn Saeed Ibn Aswad Ibn Hawqal Ibn al-Faqih Al-Muqaddasi Buzurg ibn Shahriyar Qudama ibn Ja'far 11th century Al-Biruni Abu Saʿīd Gardēzī Al-Bakri Mahmud al-Kashgari Domiyat 12th century al-Zuhri Muhammad al-Idrisi Abu'l Abbas al-Hijazi 13th century Ibn Jubayr Saadi Shirazi Yaqut al-Hamawi Ibn Said al-Maghribi Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Mujawir 14th century Al-Dimashqi Abu'l-Fida Ibn al-Wardi Hamdallah Mustawfi Ibn Battuta Lin Nu 15th century Abd-al-Razzāq Samarqandī Ghiyāth al-dīn Naqqāsh Ahmad ibn Mājid Zheng He Ma Huan Fei Xin 16th century Sulaiman Al Mahri Piri Reis Mir Ahmed Nasrallah Thattvi Amīn Rāzī 17th century Evliya Çelebi Works Book of Roads and Kingdoms (al-Bakrī) Book of Roads and Kingdoms (ibn Khordadbeh) Tabula Rogeriana Kitab al-Rawd al-Mitar Mu'jam Al-Buldan Rihla The Meadows of Gold Piri Reis map Kitab al-Kharaj Influences Geography (Ptolemy) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States Netherlands Sweden Poland Israel People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ahmad_ibn_Majid&oldid=1300856498 " Categories : Arab scholars 1430s births 1500s deaths Geographers of the medieval Islamic world Arab cartographers 15th-century explorers Maritime navigators People from the Emirate of Ras Al Khaimah 15th-century geographers 15th-century Arab people Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Biography articles needing translation from Arabic Wikipedia Articles with hCards No local image but image on Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 19:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ahmad ibn Majid 28 languages Add topic

