Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Double bonds in alkenes 2 Variations 3 Group 14 alkene homologues 4 Types of double bonds between atoms 5 References Toggle the table of contents Double bond 43 languages العربية 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chemical bond involving four bonding electrons; has one sigma plus one pi bond In chemistry, a double bond is a covalent bond between two atoms involving four bonding electrons as opposed to two in a single bond . Double bonds occur most commonly between two carbon atoms, for example in alkenes . Many double bonds exist between two different elements: for example, in a carbonyl group between a carbon atom and an oxygen atom. Other common double bonds are found in azo compounds (N=N), imines (C=N), and sulfoxides (S=O). In a skeletal formula , a double bond is drawn as two parallel lines (=) between the two connected atoms; typographically, the equals sign is used for this.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Double bonds were introduced in chemical notation by Russian chemist Alexander Butlerov .

[ citation needed ] Double bonds involving carbon are stronger and shorter than single bonds . The bond order is two. Double bonds are also electron-rich, which makes them potentially more reactive in the presence of a strong electron acceptor (as in addition reactions of the halogens ).

Chemical compounds with double bonds Ethylene carbon–carbon double bond Acetone carbon–oxygen double bond Dimethyl sulfoxide sulfur–oxygen double bond Diazene nitrogen–nitrogen double bond Double bonds in alkenes [ edit ] Geometry of ethylene The type of bonding can be explained in terms of orbital hybridisation . In ethylene each carbon atom has three sp 2 orbitals and one p-orbital . The three sp 2 orbitals lie in a plane with ~120° angles. The p-orbital is perpendicular to this plane. When the carbon atoms approach each other, two of the sp 2 orbitals overlap to form a sigma bond . At the same time, the two p-orbitals approach (again in the same plane) and together they form a pi bond . For maximum overlap, the p-orbitals have to remain parallel, and, therefore, rotation around the central bond is not possible. This property gives rise to cis-trans isomerism . Double bonds are shorter than single bonds because p-orbital overlap is maximized.

2 sp 2 orbitals (total of 3 such orbitals) approach to form a sp 2 -sp 2 sigma bond Two p-orbitals overlap to form a pi-bond in a plane parallel to the sigma plane Pi bond (green) in ethylene With 133 pm, the ethylene C=C bond length is shorter than the C−C length in ethane with 154 pm. The double bond is also stronger, 636 kJ mol −1 versus 368 kJ mol −1 but not twice as much as the pi-bond is weaker than the sigma bond due to less effective pi-overlap.

In an alternative representation, the double bond results from two overlapping sp 3 orbitals as in a bent bond .

[ 3 ] Variations [ edit ] In molecules with alternating double bonds and single bonds, p-orbital overlap can exist over multiple atoms in a chain, giving rise to a conjugated system . Conjugation can be found in systems such as dienes and enones . In cyclic molecules , conjugation can lead to aromaticity . In cumulenes , two double bonds are adjacent and do not overlap with each other.

Double bonds are common for period 2 elements carbon , nitrogen , and oxygen , and less common with elements of higher periods, a distinction called the double bond rule . Metals, too, can engage in multiple bonding in a metal–ligand multiple bond .

Group 14 alkene homologues [ edit ] Double bonded compounds, alkene homologues, R 2 E=ER 2 are now known for all of the heavier group 14 elements. Unlike the alkenes these compounds are not planar but adopt twisted and/or trans bent structures. These effects become more pronounced for the heavier elements. The distannene (Me 3 Si) 2 CHSn=SnCH(SiMe 3 ) 2 has a tin-tin bond length just a little shorter than a single bond, a trans bent structure with pyramidal coordination at each tin atom, and readily dissociates in solution to form (Me 3 Si) 2 CHSn: (stannanediyl, a carbene analog). The bonding comprises two weak donor acceptor bonds, the lone pair on each tin atom overlapping with the empty p orbital on the other.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] In contrast, in disilenes each silicon atom has planar coordination but the substituents are twisted so that the molecule as a whole is not planar. In diplumbenes the Pb=Pb bond length can be longer than that of many corresponding single bonds [ 5 ] Plumbenes and stannenes generally dissociate in solution into monomers with bond enthalpies that are just a fraction of the corresponding single bonds. Some double bonds plumbenes and stannenes are similar in strength to hydrogen bonds.

[ 4 ] The Carter–Goddard–Malrieu–Trinquier model can be used to predict the nature of the bonding.

[ 4 ] Types of double bonds between atoms [ edit ] C O N S Si Ge Sn Pb C alkene carbonyl group imine thioketone , thial alkylidenesilanes O dioxygen nitroso compound sulfoxide , sulfone , sulfinic acid , sulfonic acid N azo compound S disulfur Si silenes Ge germenes Sn stannenes Pb plumbenes References [ edit ] ^ March, Jerry, 1929-1997. (1985).

Advanced organic chemistry : reactions, mechanisms, and structure (3rd ed.). New York: Wiley.

ISBN 0-471-88841-9 .

OCLC 10998226 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ McMurry, John (27 February 2015).

Organic chemistry (Ninth ed.). Boston, MA, USA.

ISBN 978-1-305-08048-5 .

OCLC 907259297 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Carey, Francis A., 1937- (2007).

Advanced organic chemistry . Sundberg, Richard J., 1938- (5th ed.). New York: Springer.

ISBN 978-0-387-44897-8 .

OCLC 154040953 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b c Power, Philip P. (1999). "π-Bonding and the Lone Pair Effect in Multiple Bonds between Heavier Main Group Elements".

Chemical Reviews .

99 (12): 3463– 3504.

doi : 10.1021/cr9408989 .

PMID 11849028 .

^ a b Wang, Yuzhong; Robinson, Gregory H. (2009). "Unique homonuclear multiple bonding in main group compounds".

Chemical Communications (35).

Royal Society of Chemistry : 5201– 5213.

doi : 10.1039/B908048A .

PMID 19707626 .

Pyykkö, Pekka; Riedel, Sebastian; Patzschke, Michael (2005). "Triple-Bond Covalent Radii".

Chemistry: A European Journal .

11 (12): 3511– 20.

doi : 10.1002/chem.200401299 .

PMID 15832398 .

v t e Chemical bonding theory Atomic orbital Quantum mechanics Introduction to quantum mechanics Types of bonds By symmetry Sigma (σ) Pi (π) Delta (δ) Phi (φ) By multiplicity 1 (single) 2 (double) 3 (triple) 4 (quadruple) 5 (quintuple) 6 (sextuple) By spin Triplet Singlet Exchange-coupled Valence bond theory Concepts Hybrid orbital Resonance Lewis structure Constituent units Covalent bond Lone pair Molecular orbital theory Concepts Molecular orbital LCAO MO diagram Constituent units Bonding MO Non-bonding MO Antibonding MO v t e Chemical bonds Intramolecular (strong) Covalent Electron deficiency 3c–2e 4c–2e 8c–2e Hypervalence 3c–4e Agostic Bent Coordinate (dipolar) Pi backbond Metal–ligand multiple bond Charge-shift Hapticity Conjugation Hyperconjugation Aromaticity homo bicyclo Metallic Metal aromaticity Ionic Intermolecular (weak) Van der Waals forces London dispersion Hydrogen Low-barrier Resonance-assisted Symmetric Dihydrogen bonds C–H···O interaction Noncovalent other Mechanical Halogen Chalcogen Metallophilic ( aurophilic ) Intercalation Stacking Cation–pi Anion–pi Salt bridge Bond cleavage Heterolysis Homolysis Electron counting rules Aromaticity Hückel's rule Baird's rule Möbius spherical Polyhedral skeletal electron pair theory Jemmis mno rules Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Double_bond&oldid=1300931049 " Category : Chemical bonding Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2017 This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 05:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Double bond 43 languages Add topic

