Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Founding 2 Movement Toggle Movement subsection 2.1 Impact of New American Poetry 3 Beat generation 4 Legacy 5 References 6 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 6.1 Print 6.2 Recordings and sound-files 7 External links Toggle the table of contents San Francisco Renaissance 11 languages Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano Latina Nederlands Português Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1947-1960s cultural events related to the Beats and Hippie movements San Francisco Renaissance Part of the Beat generation and Hippie movement Allen Ginsberg and A. C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada in San Francisco (1967) Date 1950s - 1960s (debated) Location San Francisco , United States Participants Beat writers The term San Francisco Renaissance is used as a global designation for a range of poetic activity centered on San Francisco , which brought it to prominence as a hub of the American poetry avant-garde in the 1950s.

[ 1 ] However, others (e.g., Alan Watts , Ralph J. Gleason ) felt this renaissance was a broader phenomenon and should be seen as also encompassing the visual and performing arts, philosophy, cross-cultural interests (particularly those that involved Asian cultures), and new social sensibilities.

Founding [ edit ] Kenneth Rexroth —poet, translator, critic, and author—is the founding father of the renaissance [ citation needed ] . Rexroth was a prominent second generation modernist poet who corresponded with Ezra Pound and William Carlos Williams and was published in the Objectivist Anthology . He was amongst the first American poets to explore Japanese poetry traditions such as haiku and was also heavily influenced by jazz . If Rexroth was the founding father, Madeline Gleason was the founding mother. During the 1940s, both she and Rexroth befriended a group of younger Berkeley poets consisting of Robert Duncan , and William Everson ; Jack Spicer and Robin Blaser became involved in the late 40s. Gleason and Duncan were particularly close and read and criticized each other's work.

Movement [ edit ] In April 1947, Gleason organized the First Festival of Modern Poetry at Marcelle Labaudt's Lucien Labaudt [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Gallery, [ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] 1407 Gough Street, [ 17 ] [ 18 ] San Francisco.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Over the space of two evenings, she brought twelve poets, including Rexroth, Robert Duncan and Spicer, to an audience of young poets and poetry lovers. This was the first public recognition of the range of experimental poetic practice that was current in the city.

[ 22 ] During the 1950s, Duncan and Robert Creeley both taught at Black Mountain College and acted as links between the San Francisco poets and the Black Mountain poets . Many of the San Francisco writers began to publish in Cid Corman 's Origin and in the Black Mountain Review , the house journals of the Black Mountain group. Spicer's interest in the cante jondo also led to links with the deep image poets. In 1957, Spicer ran his seminar "Poetry as Magic" at San Francisco State College with Duncan as a participant.

Impact of New American Poetry [ edit ] Perhaps the crucial cultural document here was (and is) Donald Allen 's anthology The New American Poetry 1945–1960 . In this assemblage, Allen grouped some of the poets as "San Francisco Renaissance", and as Marjorie Perloff observes: Duncan emerg(ed) as the leading poet of this group even as he also belongs to Black Mountain. These poets, who largely became known through oral performance in the Bay Area, include the following thirteen: Brother Antoninus (William Everson), Robin Blaser, Jack Spicer, James Broughton , Madeline Gleason , Helen Adam , Lawrence Ferlinghetti , Bruce Boyd , Kirby Doyle , Richard Duerden , Philip Lamantia , Ebbe Borregaard , and Lew Welch .

[ 23 ] The Allen anthology was central to defining both the poetics and broader cultural dynamics of a particular historical moment now referred to as the San Francisco Renaissance. Though a particular "generation"  had now been named (in large part because of the Allen anthology), today the debate continues as to the viability or use of the term San Francisco Renaissance as a "label"  to define an entire era or generation.

Those who believe the term is accurate will argue on the one hand that indeed a "group" did forge a "renaissance": the impact on our historical consciousness was (and is) measurable. Therefore, for them, the use of the term is still verifiable. On the other hand, there are those who argue that the label San Francisco Renaissance is just that: a label. As a label, therefore, it exists as a convenient and arbitrary "grouping" of something which remains (and even must remain) "unverifiable".  Since the impact of such a broad phenomenon on our consciousness cannot be measured, such an impact has not even been recognized or articulated yet, much less addressed as problematic in itself.

Beyond defining itself as itself (For example, defining some measurable impact on consciousness or on ourselves as human beings), critics of the term San Francisco Renaissance argue that beyond that particular use as a label (even if it helps to signal the arrival of a "new" phenomenon not accounted for on our consciousness), a word itself, as such, cannot act for us as an organizing principle. In other words, we are misguided if we do not recognize how this label fails us (beyond a certain usefulness as a label or "grouping") when it comes to truly measuring (much less accounting for) the impact of multiple, broad and dynamic social, political, and artistic changes in our consciousness.

Among those critical of terminology and among those who dare to question how and why it can impact consciousness, asking what that proposes for a definition of the human , perhaps Ron Silliman has been most articulate: ... San Francisco Renaissance is a grouping that I've argued before was largely a fiction created by Allen's need to organize his materials [ 24 ] Beat generation [ edit ] Around the same time that Duncan, Spicer and Blaser were at Berkeley, Gary Snyder , Philip Whalen and Lew Welch were attending Reed College in Portland, Oregon. All three stemmed initially from Rexroth and his curriculum and in the early 50s gravitated to the San Francisco area, where Spicer exercised an influence over Whalen and Welch.  Although later associated by outsiders and publicists with the Beats, their primary sources are West Coast.

Kirby Doyle , a native San Franciscan, and Bob Kaufman , originally from New Orleans, were with more reason associated in later accounts with the Beats.

Lawrence Ferlinghetti had been studying for a doctorate at the Sorbonne and, while in Paris, met Kenneth Rexroth, who later persuaded him to go to San Francisco to experience the growing literary scene there. Between 1951 and 1953, Ferlinghetti taught French, wrote literary criticism, and painted. In 1953, he and a business partner established the City Lights Bookstore and started publishing as City Lights Press two years later.

Snyder and Whalen, along with Michael McClure , were among the poets who performed at the famous Six Gallery poetry reading that Kenneth Rexroth organized in San Francisco on October 7, 1955.

[ 25 ] This reading signaled the full emergence of the San Francisco Renaissance into the public consciousness and helped establish the city's reputation as a center for countercultural activity that came to full flower during the hippie years of the 1960s. A short fictional account of this event forms the second chapter of Jack Kerouac 's 1958 novel The Dharma Bums . In the account, he describes Allen Ginsberg 's famous reading of his poem " Howl ".  Kerouac and Ginsberg had attended the reading with some of their poet friends.

Legacy [ edit ] The Bay Area-based philosopher and writer Alan Watts , in his autobiography, mentioned that by around 1960 or so "... something else was on the way, in religion, in music, in ethics and sexuality, in our attitudes to nature, and in our whole style of life", and described characteristics of a "Clear School" of poetry on whose roll he included "Alice Meynell, Walter de la Mare, Emily Dickinson, Kenneth Rexroth, Karl Shapiro, Jean Burden, and Eric Barker (to name but a few)." Watts asserted that these poets employ traditional rhythms and "say what they have to say with an easy, natural clarity which avoids both clichés and obscure allusions or bizarre, far-fetched images." [ 26 ] Some of the songwriters of the upcoming rock-music generation of the mid-1960s and later read and appreciated writers like Kerouac, Snyder, McClure, Ferlinghetti, and Ginsberg (e.g., Bob Dylan , for one, has talked about this). Hence, given that much of the late-'60s wave of groundbreaking rock music developed within rock's famous San Francisco Sound , it seems very likely that the writers of the San Francisco Renaissance had an influence on the lyrics, both artistically and in terms of attitudes to living.

The "underground press" that developed in America and elsewhere in the 1960s had one of its most interesting and colorful examples in the San Francisco Oracle which reflected the hippie culture and other aspects of the counterculture .  The Oracle gave much space to writings by Gary Snyder, Allen Ginsberg, Lawrence Ferlinghetti, Michael McClure, and other Beat writers, along with emerging younger writers.

Both Lawrence Ferlinghetti and Michael McClure were featured on-stage in the rock-star jammed The Last Waltz , a 1978 documentary and concert film made by Martin Scorsese about The Band (who had an immense following in the late 1960s to mid 1970s), a large number of their musical friends, and the 1976 concert of the same name.

References [ edit ] ^ Michael Davidson.

The San Francisco Renaissance: Poetics and Community at Mid-Century . Cambridge University Press.

^ "Lucien Adolphe Labaudt" .

tools.wmflabs.org .

^ "How San Francisco's Beach Chalet got its marvelous murals" . 15 June 2008.

^ "Coit Tower Murals Recall a Happier Time, When Paparazzi were Beloved « San Francisco Citizen" .

sfcitizen.com .

^ Marmol Radziner (Dec 9, 2013).

"Conceptual Design Review – Lakeview Residence – Project Narrative" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-05-16 . Retrieved 2018-12-10 .

^ Millard Sheets; William Vandavert (3 January 1944). "Lucien Labaudt". Letters to the Editors.

LIFE . Time Inc. p.

2 – via Google Books.

^ "Labaudt, Lucien, 1880-1943 @ SNAC" .

snaccooperative.org .

^ "Lucien Labaudt" .

SFMOMA .

^ "A82.2.1 - OMCA COLLECTIONS" .

collections.museumca.org .

^ "A87.2.1 - OMCA COLLECTIONS" .

collections.museumca.org .

^ "Data" (PDF) .

newfillmore.com . 2012.

^ Albright, Thomas (1985).

Art in the San Francisco Bay Area, 1945-1980: An Illustrated History . University of California Press.

ISBN 9780520051935 – via Google Books.

^ "Labaudt's Inspirational Beach Chalet Murals - FoundSF" .

www.foundsf.org .

^ "ACGA Site – Our History" .

acga.net .

^ ARCH.EXH.001_findingaid - SFMOMA Library & Archives 151 Third Street San Francisco, CA ^ Lucien Labaudts paintings and gallery - Guide to the San Francisco News-Call Bulletin Newspaper ^ "Bio" (PDF) .

www.jasonmccoyinc.com .

^ "Healdsburg Tribune, Enterprise and Scimitar 27 April 1967 — California Digital Newspaper Collection" .

cdnc.ucr.edu .

^ "Info" (PDF) .

www.nzepc.auckland.ac.nz .

^ Jarnot, Lisa (27 August 2012).

Robert Duncan, The Ambassador from Venus: A Biography . University of California Press.

ISBN 9780520234161 – via Google Books.

^ "Madeline Gleason and the Poetry of San Francisco" .

San Francisco Bay Times . 14 December 2016.

^ Wakimoto, Diana.

"LibGuides: Current Exhibits: The Beat Goes On: Bay Poetry Exhibit" .

library.csueastbay.edu .

^ "Electronic Poetry Center" .

epc.buffalo.edu .

^ "Silliman's Blog" .

^ Morgan, Bill (2003).

The Beat Generation in San Francisco . San Francisco: City Lights Publishing. p. 110.

^ Watts, Alan (1972).

In My Own Way: An Autobiography 1915–1965 . Pantheon. p. 284.

ISBN 978-0-394-46911-9 .

Sources [ edit ] Print [ edit ] Allen, Donald M., ed.

The New American Poetry: 1945-1960 (1960, reissued 1999); (University of California Press).

Ellingham, Lewis & Killian, Kevin.

Poet Be Like God: Jack Spicer and the San Francisco Renaissance , (Hanover, NH: Wesleyan University Press, 1998).

French, Warren G. "The San Francisco Poetry Renaissance 1955-1960" (Twayne, 1991).

ISBN 0-8057-7621-4 Davidson, Michael .

The San Francisco Renaissance: Poetics and Community at Mid-Century , (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989).

Kerouac, Jack The Dharma Bums , (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1958).

ISBN 0-14-004252-0 Snyder, Gary The Real Work: Interviews & Talks 1964-1979 .  (New York: New Directions, 1980).

ISBN 0-8112-0761-7 Spicer, Jack The Collected Books of Jack Spicer . Edited and with commentary by Robin Blaser. (Santa Rosa, Calif.: Black Sparrow Press , 1975).

Watts, Alan W.  "Breakthrough" (chapter) in In My Own Way , (New York: Pantheon, 1972).

ISBN 978-0-394-46911-9 Wagstaff, Christopher (ed).

Madeline Gleason: Collected Poems 1919–1979 (has a very useful historical introduction) Recordings and sound-files [ edit ] Howls, Raps & Roars: Recordings from the San Francisco poetry renaissance (compilation) (Universal Music Group, 1963; Fantasy Records 1993).

External links [ edit ] The Beats and the San Francisco Renaissance Captured April 25, 2005.

City Lights History v t e Schools of poetry Acmeism Akhmatova's Orphans Angry Penguins Auden Group The Beats Black Arts Movement Black Mountain poets British Poetry Revival Cairo poets Castalian Band Cavalier poets Chhayavaad Churchyard poets Conceptismo Confessionalists Créolité Cubo-Futurism Culteranismo Cyclic Poets Dada Deep image Della Cruscans Dolce Stil Novo Dymock poets Ecopoetry Ego-Futurism The poets of Elan Flarf Fugitives Garip Gay Saber Generation of '27 Generation of the '30s Generation of '98 Georgian poets Goliard The Group Harlem Renaissance Harvard Aesthetes Hungry generation Imaginism Imagism Informationist poetry İkinci Yeni Jindyworobaks Lake Poets Language poets Marinism Martian poetry Metaphysical poets Misty Poets Modernist poetry The Movement Négritude Neotericism New American Poetry New Apocalyptics New Formalism New York School Oberiu Objectivists Others Parnassian poets La Pléiade Précieuses Rhymers' Club San Francisco Renaissance Scottish Renaissance Sicilian School Sons of Ben Southern Agrarians Spasmodic poets Sung poetry Surrealism Symbolism Uranian poetry Zutiste Poetry portal v t e Counterculture of the 1960s ( timeline ) Arts Black Arts Movement Psychedelic art Psychedelic music Youthquake Cultural events San Francisco Renaissance Beatlemania British Invasion Mods and rockers Swinging Sixties Hippie movement Human Be-In Summer of Love Bed-Ins for Peace Woodstock Social and political movements American Indian Movement Anti-nuclear movement Back-to-the-land movement Black Power movement Civil rights movement Dialoguero Free school movement Free Speech Movement Gay liberation Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War protests Second-wave feminism Women's liberation movement Sexual revolution United States Media Underground press newspapers Subcultures Discordianism Freak scene Hippie Mod Rocker Rude boy UK underground Yippies Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=San_Francisco_Renaissance&oldid=1246627924 " Categories : American literary movements Culture of San Francisco Beat Generation Modernist poetry in English 20th-century American literature California literature Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2024 This page was last edited on 20 September 2024, at 03:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents San Francisco Renaissance 11 languages Add topic

