Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 History 3 Recreation 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Te Matuku Marine Reserve Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 36°50′33″S 175°07′48″E ﻿ / ﻿ 36.84250°S 175.13000°E ﻿ / -36.84250; 175.13000 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Te Matuku Marine Reserve Te Matuku Marine Reserve includes the southern-most bay and the surrounding area of sea Location Waiheke Island , Hauraki Gulf , New Zealand Coordinates 36°50′33″S 175°07′48″E ﻿ / ﻿ 36.84250°S 175.13000°E ﻿ / -36.84250; 175.13000 Area 690 ha (1,700 acres) Established 2003 Governing body Department of Conservation Te Matuku Marine Reserve is a marine reserve administered by the New Zealand Department of Conservation . It includes Te Matuku Bay , one of the largest and least disturbed estuaries on Waiheke Island , as well as a surrounding area of sea.

[ 1 ] It covers an area of 690 ha (1,700 acres) and was established in 2003.

[ 2 ] The bay and marine reserve are named after the now-rare matuku or Australasian bittern .

[ 3 ] Geography [ edit ] The marine reserve includes both the main bay and its entrance bays (Whites Bay, Little Bay, Sandy Bay and Otakawhe Bay) up to the high water line, and then out line level with Kauri Point on Ponui Island (Chamberlins Island).

[ 4 ] The sand, mudflats, mangroves and saltmarsh of Te Matuku Bay provides a habitat for eel grass, sea snails, cockles, crabs and worms, including colonies of spiny tubeworm ( Pomatoceros caeruleus ) that also used to be common in the inner Waitemata Harbour . During low tide, the bay almost dries out, allowing wading birds to hunt for these animals. During high tide, young flounder and mullet move in to feed on the invertebrates.

[ 3 ] [ 5 ] On the eastern side of the bay are small shell spits, which provide roosting and nesting areas for native and migrating shorebirds.

Godwits , red knot , wrybill , South Island oystercatcher and New Zealand dotterel are most common; banded dotterel , white-fronted tern , reef heron , spotless crake and Australasian bittern have also been found in smaller numbers.

[ 5 ] [ 3 ] Rig ( spotted dogfish ) and flatfish are common within the bay.

[ 3 ] Crayfish , banded kōkopu and New Zealand longfin eel live in the freshwater streams into the bay.

[ 5 ] The forest vegetation on the hillslopes surrounding the bay includes a mix of mature and regenerating coastal broadleaved forest; kauri , podocarp and broadleaved forest; and kanuka forest and scrub. It provides a habitat for kererū , grey warbler , silvereye , tūī , fantail , kingfisher , and morepork , and are part of the seasonal migration of kākā and shining cuckoo .

[ 5 ] The rocky shores and gravel beaches at the entrance to the bay are a habitat for common seashore snails , chitons , acorn barnacles , small black mussels and tubeworms . However, the introduced Pacific oyster has also been colonising the area.

[ 4 ] The reserve also extends out of the bay to the sandy muds in the Tāmaki Strait and around Passage Rock.

[ 3 ] The water around the rock is a habitat for horse mussels, large seaweeds, crayfish and snapper .

Tarāpunga ( red-billed gulls ), karoro ( black-backed gulls ), tara ( white-fronted terns ) and kawau paka ( little shags ) all nest on Passage Rock.

[ 4 ] The reserve also includes deeper areas off Ōtakawhe Bay at the entrance to Waiheke Channel, where tidal currents expose shell patches that sponges, anemones and soft corals colonise.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] In pre-European times, the bay was an important food-gathering and waka landing area for Māori, particularly Ngāti Paoa . It remains historically, spiritually and culturally important.

[ 4 ] The reserve was established in 2003.

[ 2 ] A pre-existing oyster farm within the deeper waters of the reserve was excluded from the technical description of the reserve.

[ 4 ] Twelve people were charged with unlawfully taking marine life from the reserve in 2020.

[ 6 ] Recreation [ edit ] A range of activities are banned in the marine reserve, including fishing, taking or killing marine life, and moving or removing any marine life or materials. People must not feed fish as it disturbs their natural behaviour, and they must take care when anchoring to avoid damaging the sea floor.

[ 1 ] Swimming, diving, boating and kayaking are all permitted within the reserve. Snorkelling is also allowed, but the tidal bay is often murky and not always suitable for snorkelling.

[ 4 ] Walking is also possible in the bay, but some cliff-top sections can be hazardous and some parts of the track are steep. Walkers need good walking footwear and all-weather gear, and must keep to the tracks and respect private property. Lighting fires is not permitted.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Marine reserves of New Zealand References [ edit ] ^ a b "Te Matuku Marine Reserve" .

doc.govt.nz .

Department of Conservation .

^ a b Hutching, Gerard.

"Marine protected areas" .

Te Ara - the Encyclopedia of New Zealand .

Ministry for Culture and Heritage .

^ a b c d e f "Te Matuku Marine Reserve" .

aa.co.nz .

Automobile Association of New Zealand .

^ a b c d e f g "Te Matuku Marine Reserve Brochure" (PDF) .

doc.govt.nz .

Department of Conservation .

^ a b c d "Te Matuku Bay" .

tiakitamakimakaurau.nz .

Auckland Council .

^ Boyle, Chelsea (1 September 2020).

"A dozen people charged for allegedly taking from Te Matuku marine reserve, Doc introducing infringement scheme" .

New Zealand Media and Entertainment .

New Zealand Herald .

v t e Hauraki Gulf / Tīkapa Moana , Auckland , New Zealand Populated islands Great Barrier Island Awana Bay Claris Harataonga Medlands Beach Kaitoke Beach Motairehe Ōkiwi Okupu Palmers Beach Port Fitzroy Tryphena Whangaparapara Whangapoua Beach Waiheke Island Blackpool Matiatia Oneroa Onetangi Onetangi Bay Ostend Palm Beach Rural Waiheke Surfdale Te Matuku Bay Others Rākino Island Pakatoa Island Pakihi Island Ponui Island Geographic features Uninhabited islands Aiguilles Dragon Gannet Rock Kahakaha / Frenchmans Cap Kaikōura Kotanui Island / Frenchmans Cap Little Barrier Mokohinau Motuihe Motukorea Motukaraka Motutapu The Noises Rakitu Rangitoto Rotoroa Takangaroa Tarahiki Te Hāwere-a-Maki / Goat Tiritiri Matangi Water bodies Colville Channel Cradock Channel Wairahi River Landforms Mount Hobson Windy Canyon Facilities and attractions Aotea Conservation Park Fullers Ferry Glenfern Sanctuary Regional Park Great Barrier Aerodrome Karamuramu Island Mine Mansion House Motuora Nature Reserve Okiwi Airfield Pumphouse ruins Sculpture on the Gulf SeaLink Ferry Smelting House ruins Stony Batter Tāwharanui Marine Reserve Te Matuku Marine Reserve Waiheke Island Aerodrome Whakanewha Regional Park Government Auckland Council Aotea / Great Barrier Island Local Board Waiheke Local Board Organisations Air Auckland Community and People of Waiheke Island Waiheke Radio v t e Protected areas of New Zealand Conservation parks Ahuriri Aorangi Aotea Catlins Coromandel Craigieburn Eyre Mountains/Taka Ra Haka Hakatere Hāwea Hanmer Kaimai Mamaku Kaimanawa Kaweka Ka Whata Tu O Rakihouia Korowai / Torlesse Tussocklands Lake Sumner Mavora Lakes Mount Richmond Northland North-west Nelson Oteake Pirongia Pureora Remutaka Ruahine Raukumara Ruataniwha Tararua Te Kahui Kaupeka Te Papanui Victoria Whakarewarewa Whirinaki Te Pua-a-Tāne Ecological islands Brook Waimārama Sanctuary Bushy Park Sanctuary Mountain Maungatautari Orokonui Ecosanctuary Tawharanui Open Sanctuary Zealandia Government purpose reserves Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Pukaha / Mount Bruce National Wildlife Centre Historic reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Maungauika / North Head Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Stony Batter Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Marine reserves Akaroa Auckland Islands Cape Rodney-Okakari Point Hautai Hawea (Clio Rocks) Hikurangi Horoirangi Kahukura (Gold Arm) Kahurangi Kapiti Kermadec Islands Kutu Parera (Gaer Arm) Long Bay-Okura Long Island-Kokomohua Moana Uta (Wet Jacket Arm) Motu Manawa-Pollen Island Moutere Hauriri / Bounty Islands Moutere Ihupuku / Campbell Island Moutere Mahue / Antipodes Island Parininihi Piopiotahi (Milford Sound) Pohatu / Flea Bay Poor Knights Islands Punakaiki Taipari Roa (Elizabeth Island) Tapuae Taputeranga Taumoana (Five Finger Peninsula) Tauparikākā Tāwharanui Te Angiangi Te Awaatu Channel (The Gut) Te Hapua (Sutherland Sound) Te Matuku Te Paepae o Aotea (Volkner Rocks) Te Tapuwae o Hua (Long Sound) Te Tapuwae o Rongokako Tonga Island Tuhua (Mayor Island) Ulva Island-Te Wharawhara Waiau Glacier Coast Westhaven (Te Tai Tapu) Whanganui-A-Hei (Cathedral Cove) Whangarei Harbour National parks Current Abel Tasman Aoraki / Mount Cook Arthur's Pass Egmont Fiordland Kahurangi Mount Aspiring Nelson Lakes Paparoa Rakiura Tongariro Westland Tai Poutini Whanganui Former Te Urewera National reserves Hāpūpū / J M Barker Lewis Pass Puhi Kai Iti / Cook Landing Site Subantarctic Islands Te Kuri a Paoa/Young Nick's Head Recreation reserves Bastion Point Otago Central Rail Trail Truby King Recreation Reserve Regional parks Akatarawa Ambury Ashley Rakahuri Ātiu Creek Auckland Botanic Gardens Āwhitu Battle Hill Farm Belmont Duder East Harbour Ferrymead Glenfern Sanctuary Hunua Ranges Kaitoke Lake Tekapo Long Bay Mahurangi Motukorea Browns Island Muriwai Mutukaroa / Hamlins Hill Ōmana Onekawa Te Mawhai Orere Point Pākiri Pakuratahi Papamoa Hills Queen Elizabeth Scandrett Shakespear Tāpapakanga Tāwharanui Tawhitokino Te Ārai Te Muri Te Rau Pūriri Waharau Waimakariri River Wainuiomata Regional Park Waitākere Ranges Waitawa Wenderholm Whakanewha Whakatīwai Scenic reserves Alice Eaves Reserve Bruce Park Goldie Bush Peel Forest Park Waro Limestone Wetlands Awarua Wetland Farewell Spit Firth of Thames Kopuatai Peat Dome Manawatū Estuary Pāuatahanui Wildlife Reserve Wairarapa Moana Whangamarino Other areas Fensham Reserve Hutt Water Collection Area Northern Pegasus Bay Wainuiomata Water Collection Area Whitireia Other Amenity area Ecological area Sanctuary area Wilderness area Wildlife management area Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Te_Matuku_Marine_Reserve&oldid=1266604512 " Categories : Marine reserves of New Zealand Protected areas of the Auckland Region Hauraki Gulf 2003 establishments in New Zealand Protected areas established in 2003 Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Use New Zealand English from April 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in New Zealand English Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 January 2025, at 11:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Te Matuku Marine Reserve Add languages Add topic

