Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Contents 3 Notable users and usage 4 Sources 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Bowditch's American Practical Navigator 3 languages Español Français Norsk bokmål Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from American Practical Navigator ) Encyclopedia of maritime navigation Bowditch's American Practical Navigator Frontispiece of 1802 first edition Publisher Defense Mapping Agency Hydrographic Topographic Center (DMAHTC) The American Practical Navigator (colloquially often referred to as Bowditch ), originally written by Nathaniel Bowditch , is an encyclopedia of navigation . It serves as a valuable handbook on oceanography and meteorology , and contains useful tables and a maritime glossary. In 1867 the copyright and plates were bought by the Hydrographic Office of the United States Navy . As of 2019 it is still published by the U.S. Government and is available free online from the National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency (NGA) , the modern successor agency to the 19th Century Hydrographic Office. The publication is considered one of America's nautical institutions.

[ citation needed ] History [ edit ] The most popular navigational text of the late 18th century was The Practical Navigator by John Hamilton Moore of the Royal Navy , first published in 1772. To have exact tables to work from, Bowditch recomputed all of Moore's tables, and rearranged and expanded the work. He contacted the US publisher of the work, Edmund March Blunt , who asked him to correct and revise the third edition on his fifth voyage. The task was so extensive that Bowditch decided to write his own book, and to "put down in the book nothing I can't teach the crew." On that trip, it is said that every man of the crew of 12, including the ship's cook, became competent to take and calculate lunar observations and to plot the correct position of the ship.

The New Practical Navigator was published in 1799, followed by a second edition in 1800.

By 1802, when Blunt was ready to publish a third edition, Nathaniel Bowditch and others had corrected so many errors in Moore's work that Blunt decided to publish it as the first edition of a new work, The New American Practical Navigator . The current edition of the American Practical Navigator traces its pedigree to that 1802 edition. Edmund M. Blunt continued to publish the book until 1833; upon his retirement, his sons, Edmund and George, assumed publication. The elder Blunt died in 1862; his son Edmund followed in 1866. The next year, 1867, George Blunt sold the copyright to the government for $25,000. The government has published Bowditch ever since. George Blunt died in 1878.

Nathaniel Bowditch continued to correct and revise the book until his death in 1838. Upon his death, the editorial responsibility for The New American Practical Navigator passed to his son, J. Ingersoll Bowditch . Very few significant changes were made under him. Editions from 1837 through 1880 are nearly identical in content. Ingersoll Bowditch continued editing the Navigator until George Blunt sold the copyright to the government. He outlived all of the principals involved in publishing and editing the Navigator , dying in 1889.

The U.S. government has published some 52 editions since acquiring the copyright to the book that has come to be known simply by its original author's name, "Bowditch". Since the government began production, the book has been known by its year of publishing, instead of by the edition number. After the first major revision, a total overhaul of the book's content completed in 1880 under the direction of Commander Philip H. Cooper , USN, the name was changed to American Practical Navigator . Much of Bowditch's original content, including his methods for clearing lunar distance observations, were dropped in 1880 (though a new method for clearing lunars remained in an appendix until the early 20th century). After numerous incremental revisions and printings in the period from 1914 to 1944, Bowditch was extensively revised between 1946 and 1958.

Nathaniel Bowditch The present volume, while retaining the basic format of the 1958 version, reorganizes the subjects, deletes obsolete text, and adds new material to keep pace with the extensive changes in navigation that have taken place in the electronic age.

The 1995 edition of the American Practical Navigator incorporates extensive changes in organization, content, and format. Recent advances in navigational electronics, communications, positioning, and other technologies have transformed the way navigation is practiced at sea, and it is clear that even more changes are forthcoming. The changes to this edition of Bowditch are intended to ensure that this publication remains the premier reference work for practical marine navigation. Concerted efforts were made to return to Nathaniel Bowditch's original intention "to put down in the book nothing I can't teach the crew." To this end, many complex formulas and equations have been eliminated, and emphasis placed on the capabilities and limitations of various navigation systems and how to use them, instead of explaining complex technical and theoretical details. This edition replaces but does not cancel former editions, which may be retained and consulted as to navigation methods not discussed therein.
The current edition (as of June 2017) is Edition 53, a two-volume, all-digital version released by NGA in 2017.

The Bicentennial Edition (2002) incorporated Volume 1 and Volume 2 into a single printed volume, with the goal of putting as much useful information before the navigator as possible in the most understandable and readable format, a single, hard-bound volume. While that edition saw widespread use in civilian, military and commercial fleets, it sacrificed some data on classical celestial navigation and on advances in satellite and electronic navigation to meet the compressed requirements of the physical form. Twenty years later, with a resurgence of interest in celestial navigation and the large-scale adoption of electronic navigation, NGA returned Pub. No. 9 to a two-volume format to encompass the expanded material. The NGA's latest printed edition is available in both two separate volumes but also offering a version where it incorporates both volumes into one book. The latest edition was issued in 2019 with freely downloadable PDFs available in the NGA's official website updated to June 2021.

In celebration of Nathaniel Bowditch and his work writing the American Practical Navigator , in his hometown of Salem , Massachusetts there is the Salem ferry, named after Bowditch, a high speed catamaran takes people to Boston and is pictured as it is approaching its dock off Blaney Street, Salem Maritime National Historic Site .

Contents [ edit ] Title page, first edition Part I Fundamentals, includes an overview of the types and phases of marine navigation and the organizations which support and regulate it. It includes chapters relating to the structure, use and limitations of nautical charts ; chart datums and their importance; and other material of a basic nature.

Part II Piloting , emphasizes the practical aspects of navigating a vessel in restricted waters.

Part III Electronic Navigation , covers the primary means of positioning of the modern navigator.  Chapters deal with each of the several electronic methods of navigation, organized by type.

Part IV Celestial Navigation , contains techniques, examples and problems and a chapter on sight reduction .

Part V Navigational Mathematics, includes chapters relating to such topics as basic navigational mathematics and computer use in the solution of navigation problems.

Part VI Navigational Safety, discusses aspects of the new distress and safety communications systems now in place or being implemented in the next several years, as well as navigation regulations, emergency navigation procedures, and distress communications.

Part VII Oceanography , contains chapters on practical oceanography of use to the mariner.

Part VIII Marine Meteorology , incorporates weather routing and forecasting methods as well as color plates of the Beaufort Sea States.

Notable users and usage [ edit ] Due to its usefulness as both a navigational tool and as a practical oceanic handbook, The American Practical Navigator was famously used by the Hornet (clipper) and the Essex (whaleship) . On the Hornet it was used to help save fourteen of the thirty-one-person manifest, after they were forced by an onboard fire to abandon ship. Crowded onto a lifeboat with a sextant and a copy of The American Practical Navigator this group of men were able to navigate their way from a thousand miles west of the Galapagos Islands to Hawaii in forty-three days.

[ 1 ] Likewise, the Essex while off the west coast of South America was attacked by a whale and its crew shipwrecked. They were fortunate enough to get into longboats with multiple compasses, quadrants, and a copy of The American Practical Navigator . As a result, they were able to navigate their way to the remote Henderson Island where they were able to find some food and water. Ultimately, many of them would die or resort to cannibalism in an attempt to reach Easter Island and a supposed rescue. The ship's captain George Pollard Jr.

would later describe The American Practical Navigator as one of "the probable instruments of our salvation." [ 2 ] Sources [ edit ] Portions of this article originated from the preface of The American Practical Navigator , a document produced by the government of the United States of America .

See also [ edit ] Geography portal Buoy English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Author: Nathaniel Bowditch Carry On, Mr. Bowditch Coast Pilots Day beacon Daymark Light List List of lights Local Notice to Mariners Notice to Mariners RACON Sailing Directions References [ edit ] ^ Brown, Alexander C., ed. (1974).

Longboat to Hawaii: An Account of the Voyage of the Clipper Ship Hornet of New York, Bound for San Francisco in 1886, as Recorded in the Journals of Captain Josiah A. Mitchell, master, Henry Ferguson, passenger, Samuel Ferguson, passenger: Together with Observations on the Burning of the Vessel by Mark Twain . Cambridge, MA: Cornell Maritime Press, Inc. p. 171.

ISBN 0870332015 .

^ Chase, Owen (1821).

Narrative of the Most Extraordinary and Distressing Shipwreck of the Whale-Ship  Essex, of Nantucket; Which was Attacked and Finally Destroyed by a Large Spermaceti-whale, in the Pacific Ocean; with an account of the Unparalleled Sufferings of the Captain and Crew During a Space of Ninety-Three Days at Sea, in Open Boats in the Years 1819 & 1820 . New York: W.B. Gilley. p. 32.

Chase, Owen.

Narrative of the Most Extraordinary and Distressing Shipwreck of the Whale-Ship Essex, of Nantucket; Which was Attacked and Finally Destroyed by a Large Spermaceti-whale, in the Pacific Ocean; with an account of the Unparalleled Sufferings of the Captain and Crew During a Space of Ninety-Three Days at Sea, in Open Boats in the Years 1819 & 1820.

New York: W.B. Gilley, 1821.

Dictionary of American History by James Truslow Adams , New York: Charles Scribner's Sons, 1940.

Brown, Alexander Crosby, ed.

Longboat to Hawaii: An Account of the Voyage of the Clipper Ship Hornet of New York, Bound for San Francisco in 1886, as Recorded in the Journals of Captain Josiah A. Mitchell, master, Henry Ferguson, passenger, Samuel Ferguson, passenger: Together with Observations on the Burning of the Vessel by Mark Twain.

Cambridge, MA: Cornell Maritime Press, Inc., 1974.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Bowditch's American Practical Navigator .

First 1802 edition at archive.org 1888 edition at archive.org 2002 edition at Wikisource Current and previous editions at National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency v t e Passage planning General references American Practical Navigator Nautical charts Chart correction Lights and buoys List of lights Geographic information Coast Pilots Sailing Directions Distances Between Ports Celestial navigation Nautical almanac Tidal information Tide tables Radio information Radio Navigational Aids Periodicals Notice to mariners Local Notice to Mariners See also Glossary of nautical terms (A–L) Glossary of nautical terms (M–Z) v t e Works about sailing Books Bowditch's American Practical Navigator Chapman Piloting Coast Pilots The Cruise of the Snark The Last Grain Race Light List Local Notice to Mariners Nautical almanac Notice to Mariners Radio Navigational Aids Sailing Alone Around the World Sailing Directions Sea Survival: A Manual Swallows and Amazons series Two Years Before the Mast Magazines Australian Sailing Blue Water Sailing Boating Life Classic Boat Lakeland Boating Vene WoodenBoat Yachting See also Glossary of nautical terms (A–L) Glossary of nautical terms (M–Z) NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9m2md
Cached time: 20250817094339
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.345 seconds
Real time usage: 0.463 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1593/1000000
Revision size: 13220/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 38031/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2755/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 31376/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.228/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9943656/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  412.542      1 -total
 19.84%   81.837      1 Template:Reflist
 19.81%   81.738      2 Template:Sister_project
 19.46%   80.266      2 Template:Side_box
 17.90%   73.858      1 Template:Wikisource
 17.33%   71.478      2 Template:Cite_book
 17.28%   71.270      1 Template:Wikisource/outer_core
 16.66%   68.719      1 Template:Wikisource/inner_core
 16.40%   67.665      1 Template:Navigation_publications
 16.26%   67.064      2 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4738431:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817094339 and revision id 1289726307. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bowditch%27s_American_Practical_Navigator&oldid=1289726307 " Categories : 1802 non-fiction books Handbooks and manuals Nautical reference works Navigation Sailing books Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2012 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 May 2025, at 12:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bowditch's American Practical Navigator 3 languages Add topic

