Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 The Art of War 3 Legacy 4 See also 5 Notes Toggle Notes subsection 5.1 Sources 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Sun Tzu 109 languages Afrikaans አማርኛ العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ქართული Kernowek Kiswahili Kurdî Ladino Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى ဘာသာမန် Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Walon 文言 Winaray 吴语 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese general (544–496 BC) "Master Sun" and "Sun Zi" redirect here. For the Three Kingdoms period state, see Eastern Wu . For other masters surnamed Sun, see Sun (surname) .

For other people named Sun Tzu, see Sun Tzu (disambiguation) .

Sun Tzu Qing-era representation of Sun Tzu Native name 孫子 Born Sun Wu 544 BC (Traditional) Qi or Wu Died 496 BC (traditional; aged 47–48) Gusu , Wu State Pen name Sun Tzu Occupation Military general, strategist, philosopher, writer Language Chinese Period Spring and Autumn Subject Military strategy Notable works The Art of War Chinese name Traditional Chinese 孫子 Simplified Chinese 孙子 Wade–Giles Sun 1 Tzu 3 Hanyu Pinyin Sūnzǐ Literal meaning "Master Sun " Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Sūnzǐ Bopomofo ㄙㄨㄣ   ㄗˇ Gwoyeu Romatzyh Suentzyy Wade–Giles Sun 1 Tzu 3 Tongyong Pinyin Sun-zǐh Yale Romanization Swūndž MPS2 Suēntž IPA [swə́n.tsɹ̩̀] Wu Suzhounese Sen-tsỳ Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Syūnjí Jyutping syun1 zi2 IPA [syn˥ tsi˧˥] Southern Min Hokkien POJ Sun-chú Tâi-lô Sun-tsú Middle Chinese Middle Chinese suən t͡sɨ X Old Chinese Baxter–Sagart (2014) * [s]ˤu[n] tsəʔ Sun Wu Traditional Chinese 孫武 Simplified Chinese 孙武 Wade–Giles Sun 1 Wu 3 Hanyu Pinyin Sūn Wǔ Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Sūn Wǔ Bopomofo ㄙㄨㄣ   ㄨˇ Gwoyeu Romatzyh Suen Wuu Wade–Giles Sun 1 Wu 3 Tongyong Pinyin Sun Wǔ Yale Romanization Swūn Wǔ MPS2 Suēn Wǔ IPA [swə́n ù] Middle Chinese Middle Chinese suən mɨo X Old Chinese Baxter–Sagart (2014) * [s]ˤu[n] m(r)aʔ Changqing Traditional Chinese 長卿 Simplified Chinese 长卿 Wade–Giles Ch'ang 2 -chʻing 1 Hanyu Pinyin Chángqīng Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Chángqīng Bopomofo ㄔㄤˊ   ㄑㄧㄥ Gwoyeu Romatzyh Charngching Wade–Giles Ch'ang 2 -chʻing 1 Tongyong Pinyin Cháng-cing Yale Romanization Chángchīng MPS2 Chángchīng IPA [ʈʂʰǎŋ.tɕʰíŋ] Middle Chinese Middle Chinese ɖɨɐŋ kʰˠiæŋ Old Chinese Baxter–Sagart (2014) * Cə-[N]-traŋ C.qʰraŋ Vietnamese name Vietnamese Tôn Vũ Tôn Tử Hán-Nôm 孫武 孫子 Korean name Hangul 손무 손자 Hanja 孫武 孫子 Transcriptions Revised Romanization Sonmu Sonja Japanese name Kanji 孫武 孫子 Hiragana そんぶ そんし Katakana ソンブ ソンシ Transcriptions Revised Hepburn Sonbu Sonshi Kunrei-shiki Sonbu Sonsi Sun Tzu ( / s uː n ˈ d z uː , s uː n ˈ s uː / ; traditional Chinese : 孫子 ; simplified Chinese : 孙子 ; pinyin : Sūnzǐ ) may have been a Chinese military general , strategist , philosopher , and writer who lived during the Eastern Zhou period (771–256 BC). Sun Tzu is traditionally credited as the author of The Art of War , a Classical Chinese text on military strategy from the Warring States period , though the earliest parts of the work probably date to at least a century after his purported death.

[ 1 ] Sun Tzu is revered in Chinese and East Asian culture as a legendary historical and military figure; however, his historical existence is uncertain. The Han dynasty historian Sima Qian and other traditional Chinese historians placed him as a minister to King Helü of Wu and dated his lifetime to 544–496 BC. The name Sun Tzu —by which he is more popularly known—is an honorific which means "Master Sun ". His birth name was said to be Sun Wu ( traditional Chinese : 孫武 ; simplified Chinese : 孙武 ) and he is posthumously known by his courtesy name Changqing ( Chinese : 長卿 ).

[ 2 ] Traditional accounts state that the general's descendant Sun Bin wrote a treatise on military tactics, also titled The Art of War . Since both Sun Wu and Sun Bin were referred to as "Sun Tzu" in classical Chinese texts, some historians believed them identical, prior to the rediscovery of Sun Bin's treatise in 1972.

Life [ edit ] Situation during the Battle of Boju , which Sima Qian credits Sun Tzu with having participated in.

The earliest account of Sun Tzu's life is a short biography written around 97 BC by Sima Qian as part of his Records of the Grand Historian ( Shiji ).

[ 3 ] Sima Qian states that Sun Tzu was born in Qi near the end of the Spring and Autumn period (776–471 BC), and that his courtesy name was "Wu." The rest of the biography consists of an account of how King Helü of Wu , having heard of Sun Wu's Art of War , summoned him to the palace and asked him to demonstrate his ability to train soldiers by training the king's harem of 180 concubines into soldiers. Sun Tzu was said to have divided them into two companies, appointing the two concubines most favored by the king as the company commanders, and proceeded to give them orders, which they ignored, instead breaking out into laughter. Over the king's protestations, Sun Tzu then had the two concubines executed, at which the rest of the "soldiers" began to behave at once, and the king appointed Sun Wu as a general. He went on to lead the state of Wu to victory against the much larger state of Chu during the Battle of Boju in 506 BC.

[ 3 ] Later accounts also associate Sun Tzu with Wu Zixu , who was credited with the authorship of the Wuzi , another ancient Chinese military text. Zixu was said to have been a refugee from Chu, and he introduced Sun Wu to King Helu.

[ 4 ] Beginning in the 12th century of the Common Era , some Chinese scholars began to doubt the historical existence of Sun Tzu.

[ 5 ] During the Song dynasty , Ye Shi (1150–1223) noticed that the Zuo Zhuan , which mentions most of the notable figures from the Spring and Autumn period, does not mention Sun Tzu at all despite the fact that Sima Qian had claimed in the Records of the Grand Historian that Sun Tzu had proved on the battlefield that his theories were effective at the Battle of Boju . The Zuo Zhuan , which was written centuries earlier than the Records of the Grand Historian and provides a much more detailed account of the Battle of Boju, does not mention Sun Tzu at all.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The name "Sun Wu" ( 孫武 ) does not appear in any text prior to the Records of the Grand Historian , [ 8 ] and may have been an invented descriptive cognomen meaning "the fugitive warrior" – the surname "Sun" can be glossed as the related term "fugitive" ( xùn 遜 ), while "Wu" is the ancient Chinese virtue of "martial, valiant" ( wǔ 武 ), or a Jianghuai dialectal synonym of 士 ; shì " knight ", [ 9 ] which corresponds to Sunzi's role as the hero's doppelgänger in the story of Wu Zixu .

[ 10 ] The Yinqueshan Han Slips unearthed in 1972 include Sun Tzu's Art of War , collection of Shandong Museum Furthermore, the earliest parts of The Art of War , the work traditionally credited to Sun Tzu, probably dates to at least a century after his death.

[ 1 ] Anachronisms in The Art of War include terms, technology (such as anachronistic crossbows ), philosophical ideas, events, and military techniques that should not have been available to Sun Wu.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Additionally, there are no records of professional generals during the Spring and Autumn period ; these are only extant from the Warring States period , so there is doubt as to Sun Tzu's rank and generalship.

[ 12 ] This caused much confusion as to when The Art of War was actually written; since the 12th century, most scholars from the Song and Qing Dynasty along with modern Chinese, Japanese and Western scholars follow Ye Shi in assigning the text to the beginning of the Warring States period .

[ 5 ] This later dating has been bolstered by the discovery of the text on bamboo slips accidentally unearthed by construction workers at Yinque Shan in Shandong in 1972, [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] which had been sealed between 134 and 118 BC.

[ 16 ] The content of the earlier text is about one-third of the chapters of the modern The Art of War , and their texts matches very closely.

[ 17 ] Another text discovered in the same collection was Sun Bin 's Military Methods , [ 15 ] a previously lost work that had been attributed to one of Sun Wu's descendants by Han dynasty bibliographies. Due to its close relationship with the Art of War , Military Methods provides important context on the body of military thought in Chinese late antiquity.

[ 18 ] In the early 20th century, the Chinese writer and reformer Liang Qichao had theorized that the text of the Art of War was actually written in the 4th century BC by this purported descendant of Sun Tzu.

[ 5 ] Although this hypothesis is no longer tenable, the Sun Bin text's material overlaps with much of the "Sun Tzu" text, and the two may be "a single, continuously developing intellectual tradition united under the Sun name".

[ 19 ] Unlike Sun Wu, Sun Bin appears to have been an actual person who was a genuine authority on military matters and may have been the inspiration for the creation of the historical figure "Sun Tzu" through a form of euhemerism .

[ 10 ] This discovery also demonstrated that much of the historical confusion about anecdotes attributed to Sun Tzu could have been due to the fact that there were two authors that could have been referred to as "Master Sun." [ 16 ] [ 10 ] The Art of War [ edit ] Main article: The Art of War Part of a series on Eastern philosophy China Confucianism Classical Confucius Mencius Xun Zi Dong Zhongshu Zheng Xuan Wang Yun Neo-Confucianism Han Yu Zhou Dunyi Zhang Zai Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Shao Yong Zhu Xi Lu Jiuyuan Wang Shouren Liu Zongzhou Li Zhi Wang Fuzhi Huang Zongxi Gu Yanwu Dai Zhen New Confucianism Kang Youwei Tan Sitong Liang Shuming Xiong Shili Feng Youlan Mou Zongsan Du Weiming Buddhism Han Buddhism Tientai Zhiyi Huayan school Fazang Guifeng Zongmi East Asian Mādhyamaka Jizang Kumārajīva Yogācāra Xuanzang Chinese Chan Bodhidharma Huineng Chinese Esoteric Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism Sakya Sakya Pandita Nyingma Longchenpa Gelug Tsongkhapa Four Tenets system Rangtong-Shentong Svatantrika-Prasaṅgika distinction Daoism Classical Laozi Zhuangzi Lie Yukou Neo-Daoism Wang Bi Ruan Ji Guo Xiang Ge Hong Cheng Xuanying Hundred Schools of Thought Legalism Guan Zhong Han Feizi Shang Yang Li Si Mohism Mozi Military and Strategy Sun Tzu Wu Qi Modern Hong Xiuquan Hong Rengan Yan Fu Zhang Taiyan Sun Yat-sen Lu Xun Dai Jitao Li Dazhao Chen Duxiu Ai Siqi Mao Zedong Liu Shaoqi Zhang Chunqiao Teng Wensheng Wang Huning Yi Junqing Zhao Tingyang Wang Hui Qin Hui Li Zehou India Āstika (orthodox) Vedic philosophy Agastya Aruni Ashtavakra Atri Vashistha Yajnavalkya Mimamsa Jaimini Vedanta Advaita Badarayana Gaudapada Adi Shankara Dvaita Madhvacharya Svābhāvika Bhedābheda Nimbarka Srinivasacharya Sri Vaishnavism Ramanuja Neo-Vedanta Vivekananda Aurobindo Samkhya Kapila Yoga Patanjali Nyaya Gotama Navya-Nyāya Gangesha Upadhyaya Vaisheshika Kanada Nāstika (heterodox) Ājīvika Charvaka Kashmir Shaivism Abhinavagupta Pratyabhijna Tantra Tamil Valluvam Valluvar Other Chanakya General topics Ahimsa Atomism Atman Ātman (Hinduism) Ātman (Buddhism) Ātman (Jainism) Artha Anekantavada Brahman Dharma Indian logic Karma Kama Maya Moksha Nondualism Samadhi Pramana Yoga Jainism Haribhadra Umaswati Buddhism The Buddha Traditions Madhyamika Nagarjuna Yogacara Vasubandhu Dharmakirti Indian logic Dignāga Topics Dukkha Anatta Anicca Maitrī Nirvana Pratītyasamutpāda Emptiness Japan Traditions Japanese Buddhism Japanese Zen Sōtō school Dogen Rinzai school Eisai Shingon Kukai Japanese Confucianism Tokugawa Mitsukuni Fujiwara Seika Hayashi Razan Nakae Tōju Itō Jinsai Ogyū Sorai Kokugaku Motoori Norinaga Modern Thought Statism Fukuzawa Yukichi Tokutomi Soho Kita Ikki Kyoto School Kitaro Nishida Hajime Tanabe Jun Tosaka Shūzō Kuki Tetsuro Watsuji Kiyoshi Miki Keiji Nishitani Shin'ichi Hisamatsu Masao Abe D. T. Suzuki liberalism and Marxism Masao Maruyama Kojin Karatani Hiroki Azuma Chizuko Ueno Korea Traditions Korean Buddhism Wonhyo Uisang Hwaeom Uicheon Cheontae Jinul Seon Korean Confucianism Persons Chŏng Tojŏn Sŏ Kyŏngdŏk Yi Ŏnjŏk Yi Hwang Yi I Yi Ik Pak Chiwŏn Chŏng Yagyong Kim Chŏnghŭi Choe Han-gi Topics Silhak , Seohak Donghak Choe Je-u Modern Thought Persons Jaegwon Kim Topics Minjung theology Juche Philosophy portal v t e The Art of War ,  traditionally ascribed to Sun Tzu, is a Classical Chinese text dating from the Warring States period . The work is composed of 13 chapters, each of which is devoted to a different set of skills or arts related to warfare and how they apply to military strategy and tactics . The book further outlines theories of battle, but it also advocates diplomacy and the cultivation of relationships with other nations as essential to the health of a state.

[ 20 ] In addition, Taoist rhetoric is a component incorporated into the Art of War . According to Steven C. Combs in "Sun-zi and the Art of War : The Rhetoric of Parsimony", [ 21 ] warfare is "used as a metaphor for rhetoric, and that both are philosophically based arts." [ 21 ] Combs writes: "Warfare is analogous to persuasion, as a battle for hearts and minds." [ 21 ] Combs compares Taoist and Aristotelian rhetoric, notably for the differences in persuasion. Taoist rhetoric in The Art of War is described as "peaceful and passive, favoring silence over speech".

[ 21 ] Frugal behavior, which is emphasized extensively in The Art of War as avoiding confrontation and being spiritual in nature, shapes basic principles in Taoism.

[ 22 ] Legacy [ edit ] A copy of The Art of War written on bamboo Sun Tzu's Art of War has influenced many notable figures and is accepted as a masterpiece on strategy. It has been frequently cited and by generals and theorists since it was first published, translated, and distributed internationally.

[ 20 ] The Art of War was one of the most widely read military treatises in the subsequent Warring States period , a time of constant war among seven ancient Chinese states— Zhao , Qi , Qin , Chu , Han , Wei , and Yan —who fought to control the vast expanse of fertile territory in Eastern China.

[ 20 ] For almost 1,500 years, it was the lead text in an anthology that was formalized as the Seven Military Classics by Emperor Shenzong of Song in 1080.

The Art of War remains the most influential strategy text in East Asian warfare [ 23 ] The Art of War appears throughout the bibliographical catalogs of the Chinese dynastic histories, but listings of its divisions and size varied widely.

[ 5 ] The strategist and warlord Cao Cao in the early 3rd century of the Common Era authored the earliest known commentary to the Art of War .

[ 5 ] Cao's preface makes clear that he edited the text and removed certain passages, but the extent of his changes were unclear historically.

[ 5 ] In the 12th century, Ji Tianbao compiled a collection of commentaries on The Art of War which included Cao Cao's commentary along with several later ones that are frequently cited, including Meng Shi (502-557), Li Quan ( c.

750 ), Jia Lin ( c.

late 8th c.

), Du You (735-812), Du Mu (803-852), Chen Hao ( c.

Tang dynasty ), Mei Yaochen (1002 - 1060), Wang Xi ( c.

1082 ), He Yanxi ( c.

late 11th c.

), and Zhang Yu ( c.

Southern Song dynasty ).

[ 24 ] Although most of these later commentaries have little value for philology or historical analysis of the original text, they attest to the continued interest in the text throughout Chinese history.

[ 24 ] Statue of Sun Tzu in Yurihama, Tottori , in Japan The Art of War was introduced into Nara Japan in the year 760 of the Common Era, and the book quickly became popular among Japanese generals. Through its later influence on the Sengoku period "Great Unifiers" of Japan, Oda Nobunaga , Toyotomi Hideyoshi , and Tokugawa Ieyasu , [ 20 ] it significantly affected the unification of Japan in the early modern era. After the Meiji Restoration , the book remained popular among the Imperial Japanese armed forces . Admiral Tōgō Heihachirō , who led Japan's forces to victory in the Russo-Japanese War , was an avid reader of Sun Tzu.

[ 25 ] The book was translated into French and published in 1772 by the French priest Jesuit Jean Joseph Marie Amiot ; it was re-published in 1782. A partial translation into English was attempted by British officer Everard Ferguson Calthrop in 1905 under the title The Book of War . The first annotated English translation was completed and published by Lionel Giles in 1910.

[ 26 ] In the twentieth century, military and political leaders such as the Chinese communist revolutionary Mao Zedong and Vietnamese general Võ Nguyên Giáp are cited along with American military generals Douglas MacArthur and Norman Schwarzkopf Jr.

as having drawn inspiration from the book.

[ 27 ] Mao Zedong partially credited his 1949 victory over Chiang Kai-shek and the Kuomintang to The Art of War . The work strongly influenced writings about warfare in Mao's Little Red Book , which further influenced communist insurgencies around the world.

[ 20 ] Ho Chi Minh translated the work for his Vietnamese officers to study. His general Võ Nguyên Giáp was likewise an avid student and practitioner of Sun Tzu's ideas.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] In Sun Tzu and the Art of Modern Warfare , Mark McNeilly writes that a modern interpretation of Sun and his importance throughout Chinese history is critical in understanding China's push to become a superpower in the twenty-first century. Modern Chinese scholars explicitly rely on historical strategy and The Art of War in developing their theories, seeing a direct relationship between their modern struggles and those of China in Sun Tzu's time. Sun Tzu's teachings and  are used regularly in developing the strategies of the Chinese state and its leaders.

[ 20 ] Some admirers of Sun Tzu's work claim that it has relevance in competitive endeavors across the modern world beyond military strategy and warfare, including espionage, culture, governance, business, and sports.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] Sun Tzu has been mentioned often in popular American culture. For example, in the 1987 film Wall Street , the protagonist Gordon Gekko frequently cites passages from The Art of War as guiding principles for his aggressive trading techniques.

[ 36 ] See also [ edit ] Sun Jian Confucius Li Shizhen Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Lewis (1999) , p. 604.

^ "孙子 – 国学网" .

guoxue.com (in Chinese). 14 May 2015 . Retrieved 26 July 2024 .

^ a b Mair 2007 , pp. 133–135.

^ Mair 2007 , pp. 12.

^ a b c d e f Gawlikowski & Loewe (1993) , p. 447.

^ Zuo Qiuming , "Duke Ding" , Zuo Zhuan (in Chinese and English), vol. XI ^ Worthington, Daryl (13 March 2015).

"The Art of War" . New Historian. Archived from the original on 3 March 2019.

13 March 2015 ^ Mair (2007) , p. 9.

^ Xu Shen 's annotation: 「 武 士也；江淮間謂士曰 武 。」 on Liu An (compiler), Huainanzi ( 淮南子 ), "Survey Obscurities" ( 覽㝠訓 ); Siku Quanshu version. Main text: 「夫死生同域，不可脅陵， 勇 武 一人，為三軍雄。」 ; English translation from John S. Major, Sarah A. Queen, Andrew Seth Meyer, and Harold D. Roth (transl.) (2010) The Huainanzi: A Guide to the Theory and Practice of Government in Early Han China . New York: Columbia University Press, 2010. p. 215. quote: "One for whom death and life are the same territory, who cannot be threatened, such a single brave warrior is the hero of the Three Armies." ^ a b c Mair (2007) , p. 10.

^ Yang, Sang.

The Art of War . Wordsworth Editions Ltd (1999). pp. 14–15.

ISBN 978-1-85326-779-6 ^ a b Szczepanski, Kallie.

"Sun Tzu and the Art of War" . Asian History. Archived from the original on 22 January 2016 . Retrieved 13 March 2016 .

4 February 2015 ^ Morrow, Nicholas (4 February 2015).

"Sun Tzu, The Art of War (c. 500–300 B.C.)" . Classics of Strategy. Archived from the original on 20 October 2017 . Retrieved 13 March 2016 .

^ Yinqueshan Han Bamboo Slips (in Chinese), Shandong Provincial Museum , 24 April 2008, archived from the original on 29 October 2013 ^ a b Clements, Jonathan (2012), The Art of War: A New Translation , Constable & Robinson Ltd, pp.

77– 78, ISBN 978-1-78033-131-7 ^ a b Gawlikowski & Loewe (1993) , p. 449.

^ Gawlikowski & Loewe (1993) , p. 448.

^ Sydney Wen-Jang Chu; Cheng-Yu Lee (16 January 2013).

"Just another Masterpiece: the Differences between Sun Tzu's the Art of War and Sun Bin's the Art of War" .

健行學報 .

33 (1).

ISSN 1817-6755 .

^ Mark Edward Lewis (2005), quoted in Mair (2007), p. 18.

^ a b c d e f McNeilly 2001 , p. 3-7.

^ a b c d Combs, Steven C. (August 2000). "Sun-zi and the Art of War: The Rhetoric of Parsimony".

Quarterly Journal of Speech .

86 (3): 276– 294.

doi : 10.1080/00335630009384297 .

S2CID 145097995 .

^ Galvany, Albert (October 2011). "Philosophy, biography, and Anecdote: On the Portrait of Sun Wu".

Philosophy East and West .

61 (4): 630– 646.

doi : 10.1353/pew.2011.0059 .

S2CID 171035936 .

^ Smith (1999) , p. 216.

^ a b Mair 2007 , p. 3.

^ Tung 2001 , p. 805.

^ Giles, Lionel The Art of War by Sun Tzu – Special Edition . Special Edition Books. 2007. p. 62.

^ Hlavatý, Jozef; Ližbetin, Ján (2021).

"The Use of the Art of War Ideas in the Strategic Decision-making of the Company" .

Transportation Research Procedia . 14th International scientific conference on sustainable, modern and safe transport.

55 : 1273– 1280.

doi : 10.1016/j.trpro.2021.07.110 .

ISSN 2352-1465 .

S2CID 238896273 .

^ "Interview with Dr. William Duiker" , Sonshi , archived from the original on 18 January 2024 , retrieved 5 February 2011 ^ McCready, Douglas M. (May–June 2003), "Learning from Sun Tzu" , Military Review , archived from the original on 29 June 2012 ^ Forbes, Andrew & Henley, David (2012), The Illustrated Art of War: Sun Tzu , Chiang Mai: Cognoscenti, ASIN B00B91XX8U ^ Scott, Wilson (7 March 2013), "Obama meets privately with Jewish leaders" , The Washington Post , Washington, D.C., archived from the original on 24 July 2013 , retrieved 22 May 2013 ^ "Obama to challenge Israelis on peace" , United Press International , 8 March 2013 , retrieved 22 May 2013 ^ Garner, Rochelle (16 October 2006), "Oracle's Ellison Uses 'Art of War' in Software Battle With SAP" , Bloomberg , archived from the original on 20 October 2015 , retrieved 18 May 2013 ^ Hack, Damon (3 February 2005), "For Patriots' Coach, War Is Decided Before Game" , The New York Times , retrieved 18 May 2013 ^ McNeilly 2001 , p. 301.

^ "Oliver Stone's Wall Street and the Market for Corporate Control" .

Economics in Popular Film (course) . Mount Holyoke. 21 November 2001. Archived from the original on 13 July 2015 . Retrieved 18 February 2021 .

Sources [ edit ] Gawlikowski, Krzysztof; Loewe, Michael (1993). " Sun tzu ping fa 孫子兵法". In Loewe, Michael (ed.).

Early Chinese Texts: A Bibliographical Guide . Berkeley: Society for the Study of Early China; Institute of East Asian Studies, University of California, Berkeley. pp.

446– 455.

ISBN 978-1-55729-043-4 .

Lewis, Mark Edward (1999). "Warring States Political History". In Loewe, Michael ; Shaughnessy, Edward (eds.).

The Cambridge History of Ancient China . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

587– 650.

ISBN 978-0-521-47030-8 .

Mair, Victor H.

(2007).

The Art of War: Sun Zi's Military Methods . New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-13382-1 .

McNeilly, Mark R. (2001), Sun Tzu and the Art of Modern Warfare , Oxford University Press, ISBN 978-0-19-513340-0 .

Smith, Kidder (1999). "The Military Texts: The Sunzi ". In de Bary, Wm. Theodore (ed.).

Sources of Chinese Tradition: From Earliest Times to 1600, Volume 1 (2nd ed.). New York: Columbia University Press. pp.

213– 224.

ISBN 978-0-231-10938-3 .

Tung, R. L. (2001), "Strategic Management Thought in East Asia", in Warner, Malcolm (ed.), Comparative Management:Critical Perspectives on Business and Management , vol. 3, Routledge .

Further reading [ edit ] Ames, Roger T.

(1993).

Sun-tzu: The Art of Warfare: The First English Translation Incorporating the Recently Discovered Yin-chʻüeh-shan Texts . New York: Ballantine Books.

ISBN 978-0-345-36239-1 .

Goldin, Paul (7 April 2020). "Sunzi".

The Art of Chinese Philosophy: Eight Classical Texts and How to Read Them . Princeton University Press. pp.

153– 165.

ISBN 978-0-691-20079-8 . Retrieved 28 May 2025 .

Graff, David A. (2002).

Medieval Chinese Warfare, 300–900 . Warfare and History. London: Routledge .

ISBN 978-0415239554 .

External links [ edit ] Sun Tzu at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Translations Works by Sun Tzu in eBook form at Standard Ebooks Works by Sun Tzu at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Sun Tzu at the Internet Archive Works by Sun Tzu at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) The Art of War Chinese-English bilingual edition, Chinese Text Project Sun Tzu and Information Warfare at the Institute for National Strategic Studies of National Defense University Sun Tzu's Art of War Resource Original translation, reviews of Art of War versions, interviews with translators The Art of War illustrated version Archived 24 February 2021 at the Wayback Machine , on Theoriq.com The Art of War on Modern World, by Edward Rico M. Tj , on r2plan.com 11 The Nine Situations | The Art of War by Sun Tzu (Animated) v t e Chinese philosophy Schools Agriculturalism Buddhism Confucianism Han learning Neo-Confucianism New Confucianism Huang–Lao Legalism Mohism Marxism School of Diplomacy School of Names Naturalism Taoism Daoxue Xuanxue Yangism Mixed School Nine Schools of Thought Hundred Schools of Thought Philosophers Eastern Zhou Bu Shang Chunyu Kun Confucius Deng Xi Duanmu Ci Gaozi Gongsun Long Guan Zhong Han Fei Hui Shi Laozi Li Kui Li Si Lie Yukou Mencius Mozi Shang Yang Shen Buhai Shen Dao Su Qin Sun Tzu Wu Qi Ximen Bao Xu Xing Xunzi Yang Zhu Yuan Xian Zhang Yi Zhuang Zhou Zichan Zisi Zou Yan Qin Han Ban Zhao Dong Zhongshu Dongfang Shuo Dou Wu Huan Tan Jia Yi Jia Kui Jing Fang Kong Anguo Liu An Lu Jia Liu Xiang Ma Rong Wang Chong Wang Fu Xun Yue Yang Xiong Three Kingdoms Jin Northern and Southern Bao Jingyan Fan Zhen Fan Ye Ge Hong Guo Xiang Fu Xuan He Yan Huiyuan Ji Kang Sengzhao Wang Su Wang Bi Xiahou Xuan Xie Daoyun Xun Can Yan Zhitui Zhi Dun Sui Tang Fu Yi Jizang Wang Tong Zhang Zhihe Han Yu Li Ao Liu Yuxi Liu Zongyuan Linji Yixuan Five Dynasties Ten Kingdoms Song Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Fan Zhongyan Hu Hong Lu Jiuyuan Shao Yong Shen Kuo Su Song Wang Anshi Wang Chongyang Wang Chuyi Ye Shi Zhang Zai Zhou Dunyi Zhu Xi Yuan Ming Chen Jiru Huang Zongxi Hong Zicheng Jiao Hong Jiao Yu Lai Zhide Li Zhi Liu Bowen Liu Zongzhou Luo Rufang Qian Dehong Wang Ji Wang Gen Wang Yangming Wu Cheng Xu Ai Zhan Ruoshui Qing Chen Hongmou Chen Menglei Dai Zhen Fang Bao Fang Lanfen Fang Quan Feng Guifen Gong Zizhen Gu Yanwu Hong Liangji Ji Yun Ma Qixi Lin Zexu Liu Yiming Pan Pingge Tan Sitong Tang Zhen Wang Fuzhi Wei Yuan Yan Yuan Yu Yue Yu Zhengxie Zhang Xuecheng Zhuang Cunyu Zeng Guofan 20th century Cai Yuanpei Carsun Chang P. C. Chang Chen Daqi Chen Duxiu Chung-ying Cheng Ch'ien Mu Chu Anping Fang Keli Feng Youlan Gan Yang Gu Su Gu Zhun He Guanghu Hu Qiaomu Hu Shih Hua Gang Ray Huang Jiang Qing Jin Yuelin Kang Youwei Lee Shui-chuen Li Shicen Li Zehou Liang Qichao Liang Shuming Lin Yutang Liu Xiaofeng Lu Xun Mao Zedong Mou Zongsan Qiu Renzong Sun Yat-sen Tang Chun-i Tang Yijie Tsang Lap Chuen Xiong Shili Xu Fuguan Yang Changji Yin Haiguang Yu Dunkang Zhang Dongsun Zhang Shenfu Zhou Guoping Zhou Zuoren Concepts Tao De Fa Jian'ai Jing Jing zuo Li Confucianism Neo-Confucianism Ming yun Qi Qing Ren Three teachings Shen Si Ti Tian Mandate of Heaven Wu wei Filial piety Xin Human nature Self-cultivation Yi Yin and yang Yong Zhengming Ziran Topics Logic Theology Metaphysics Politics Ethics Role ethics State consequentialism Ink wash Shan shui Society Epistemology Metaphilosophy Legitimacy v t e East Asia Countries and regions China Hong Kong Macau Mainland Japan Ryukyu Korea North Korea South Korea Jeju Mongolia Taiwan Ethnic groups Ainu Han Chinese subgroups Hui Japanese Yamato Koreans in China in Japan in Sakhalin Manchu Miao Mongolic Mongols in China Khalkha in Mongolia Qiang Ryukyuans Indigenous Taiwanese Tibetans Tujia Uyghurs Yi Zhuang other ethnic groups in China unrecognized historical Culture Age reckoning Architecture‎ Art Chinese Japanese Korean Taiwanese Blepharoplasty Buddhism Calligraphy Cinema Cuisine Sinosphere Dance Chinese knotting Chinese dragon Festivals Gardens Chinese characters Hip-and-gable roof Languages Literature Mādhyamaka Music Mythology Philosophy Religion Scripts Seal Sino-Xenic pronunciations Surnames Television Typography Yogācāra Chinese zodiac Environment East Asia Climate Partnership Monsoon Rainy season Flora Economy and Politics China–Japan–South Korea trilateral summit Comprehensive Economic Partnership for East Asia Capitalism East Asia Summit East Asian Bureau of Economic Research East Asian Community Four Asian Tigers Human rights in East Asia Ports Stock exchanges History Archaeology Archaeological cultures Bronze Age Iron Age Former countries Sports China–Japan–Korea Friendship Athletic Meeting East Asian Football Federation East Asian Games East Asian Judo Championships East Asian martial arts East Asian Youth Games EAFF E-1 Football Championship Education Association of East Asian Research Universities CrossAsia East Asian Economic Review East Asia Image Collection East Asia Law Review East Asian studies Journal of East Asian Studies Ludwigshafen East Asia Institute Military Horses in East Asian warfare Bansenshūkai Miyamoto Musashi Sun Tzu The Art of War The Book of Five Rings Yi Sun-sin Science and technology Needham Research Institute Printing Swords Traditional medicine v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Historicity Methodology Bayes' theorem Biblical criticism / Hadith studies ' Ilm al-rijāl Bibliography Demythologization Palaeography Philology Cognitive philology Decipherment Textual criticism Comparative linguistics Provenance Criteria Contextual credibility Dissimilarity Embarrassment Lectio difficilior potior Multiple attestation / Mutawatir Topics Texts Bible Acts of the Apostles Gospels Book of Esther Book of Joshua Book of Mormon The Iliad Quran People Abraham Bardiya / Smerdis The Buddha Caligula's horse Homer Jesus myth theory Quest Sources King Arthur King David Lei Feng Moses Muhammad Prester John Robin Hood Socrates Sun Tzu William Tell Events and places The Exodus Sources and parallels Founding of Rome Hanging Gardens of Babylon Kurukshetra War Massacre of the Innocents Geography of the Odyssey Related Apocrypha Pseudepigrapha Hadith terminology Historiography Religious studies Legends Linguistics Myth § Mythology Vaticinium ex eventu Category Portals : China Biography Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF 2 3 4 5 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Israel Finland Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sun_Tzu&oldid=1305248943 " Categories : Sun Tzu 544 BC births 496 BC deaths 6th-century BC Chinese military personnel 6th-century BC Chinese writers 5th-century BC Chinese military personnel 5th-century BC Chinese writers Ancient Chinese military writers Aphorists Buddhism in China Chinese political philosophers Confucianism in China Deified Chinese men Deities in Chinese folk religion Dream of the Red Chamber characters Journey to the West characters Military strategists Military theorists Asian people whose existence is disputed Philosophers of culture Philosophers of education Philosophers of social science Philosophers of war Political realists Taoism in China Theoretical historians Water Margin characters Generals of the Spring and Autumn period Zhou dynasty philosophers Zhou dynasty writers Hidden categories: CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2020 Pages with plain IPA Articles containing Vietnamese-language text Articles containing Korean-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Pages using Sister project links with wikidata namespace mismatch Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 10 August 2025, at 23:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sun Tzu 109 languages Add topic

