Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Individual identity 2 History of lifestyles studies Toggle History of lifestyles studies subsection 2.1 Lifestyles and social position 2.2 Lifestyles as styles of thought 2.3 Lifestyles as styles of action 3 Health 4 Class 5 Media culture 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Notes 7.2 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Lifestyle 48 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Lifestyle (social sciences) ) Interests, opinions, behaviours, and behavioural orientations of an individual, group, or culture For other uses, see Lifestyle (disambiguation) .

Lifestyle is the interests, opinions, behaviours, and behavioural orientations of an individual, group, or culture .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The term " style of life " ( German : Lebensstil ) was introduced by Austrian psychologist Alfred Adler in his 1929 book, The Case of Miss R.

, with the meaning of "a person's basic character as established early in childhood".

[ 3 ] The broader sense of lifestyle as a "way or style of living" has been documented since 1961.

[ 3 ] Lifestyle is a combination of determining intangible or tangible factors. Tangible factors relate specifically to demographic variables, i.e. an individual's demographic profile, whereas intangible factors concern the psychological aspects of an individual such as personal values, preferences, and outlooks.

A rural environment has different lifestyles compared to an urban metropolis . Location is important even within an urban scope. The nature of the neighborhood in which a person resides affects the set of lifestyles available to that person due to differences between various neighborhoods' degrees of affluence and proximity to natural and cultural environments. For example, in areas near the sea, a surf culture or lifestyle can often be present.

Individual identity A lifestyle typically reflects an individual's attitudes, way of life, values, or world view . Therefore, a lifestyle is a means of forging a sense of self and to create cultural symbols that resonate with personal identity. Not all aspects of a lifestyle are voluntary. Surrounding social and technical systems can constrain the lifestyle choices available to the individual and the symbols they are able to project to others and themself.

[ 4 ] The lines between personal identity and the everyday doings that signal a particular lifestyle become blurred in modern society.

[ 5 ] For example, " green lifestyle " means holding beliefs and engaging in activities that consume fewer resources and produce less harmful waste (i.e. a smaller ecological footprint ), and deriving a sense of self from holding these beliefs and engaging in these activities.

[ 6 ] Some commentators argue that, in modernity , the cornerstone of lifestyle construction is consumption behavior, which offers the possibility to create and further individualize the self with different products or services that signal different ways of life.

[ 7 ] Lifestyle may include views on politics, religion, health, intimacy, and more. All of these aspects play a role in shaping someone's lifestyle.

[ 8 ] In the magazine and television industries, "lifestyle" is used to describe a category of publications or programs.

History of lifestyles studies Three main phases can be identified in the history of lifestyles studies: [ 9 ] Lifestyles and social position Earlier studies on lifestyles focus on the analysis of social structure and of the individuals' relative positions inside it.

Thorstein Veblen , with his 'emulation' concept, opens this perspective by asserting that people adopt specific 'schemes of life', and in particular specific patterns of 'conspicuous consumption', depending on a desire for distinction from social strata they identify as inferior and a desire for emulation of the ones identified as superior.

Max Weber intends lifestyles as distinctive elements of status groups strictly connected with a dialectic of recognition of prestige: the lifestyle is the most visible manifestation of social differentiation, even within the same social class, and in particular it shows the prestige which the individuals believe they enjoy or to which they aspire.

Georg Simmel carries out formal analysis of lifestyles, at the heart of which can be found processes of individualisation, identification, differentiation, and recognition, understood both as generating processes of, and effects generated by, lifestyles, operating "vertically" as well as "horizontally". Finally, Pierre Bourdieu renews this approach within a more complex model in which lifestyles, made up mainly of social practices and closely tied to individual tastes, represent the basic point of intersection between the structure of the field and processes connected with the habitus.

Lifestyles as styles of thought The approach interpreting lifestyles as principally styles of thought has its roots in the soil of psychological analysis. Initially, starting with Alfred Adler , a lifestyle was understood as a style of personality, in the sense that the framework of guiding values and principles which individuals develop in the first years of life end up defining a system of judgement which informs their actions throughout their lives. Later, particularly in Milton Rokeach 's work, Arnold Mitchell 's VALS research and Lynn R. Kahle 's LOV research, lifestyles' analysis developed as profiles of values, reaching the hypothesis that it is possible to identify various models of scales of values organized hierarchically, to which different population sectors correspond. Then with Daniel Yankelovich and William Wells we move on to the so-called AIO approach in which attitudes, interests and opinions are considered as fundamental lifestyles' components, being analysed from both synchronic and diachronic points of view and interpreted on the basis of socio-cultural trends in a given social context (as, for instance, in Bernard Cathelat 's work). Finally, a further development leads to the so-called profiles-and-trends approach, at the core of which is an analysis of the relations between mental and behavioural variables, bearing in mind that socio-cultural trends influence both the diffusion of various lifestyles within a population and the emerging of different modalities of interaction between thought and action.

Lifestyles as styles of action Analysis of lifestyles as action profiles is characterized by the fact that it no longer considers the action level as a simple derivative of lifestyles, or at least as their collateral component, but rather as a constitutive element. In the beginning, this perspective focussed mainly on consumer behaviour , seeing products acquired as objects expressing on the material plane individuals' self-image and how they view their position in society. Subsequently, the perspective broadened to focus more generally on the level of daily life, concentrating – as in authors such as Joffre Dumazedier and Anthony Giddens – on the use of time, especially loisirs, and trying to study the interaction between the active dimension of choice and the dimension of routine and structuration which characterize that level of action. Finally, some authors, for instance Richard Jenkins and A. J. Veal , suggested an approach to lifestyles in which it is not everyday actions which make up the plane of analysis but those which the actors who adopt them consider particularly meaningful and distinctive.

Health A healthy or unhealthy lifestyle will most likely be transmitted across generations. According to the study done by Case et al. (2002), when a 0-3-year-old child has a mother who practices a healthy lifestyle , this child will be 27% more likely to become healthy and adopt the same lifestyle.

[ 10 ] For instance, high income parents are more likely to eat more fruit and vegetables, have time to exercise, and provide the best living condition to their children. On the other hand, low-income parents are more likely to participate in unhealthy activities such as smoking to help them release poverty-related stress and depression.

[ 11 ] Parents are the first teacher for every child. Everything that parents do will be very likely transferred to their children through the learning process.

Adults may be drawn together by mutual interest that results in a lifestyle. For example, William Dufty described how pursuing a sugar-free diet led to such associations: [ 12 ] I have come to know hundreds of young people who have found that illness or bingeing on drugs and sugar became the doorway to health. Once they reestablished their own health, we had in common our interest in food. If one can use that overworked word lifestyle, we shared a sugarfree lifestyle. I kept in touch with many of them in campuses and communes, through their travels here and abroad and everywhere. One day you meet them in Boston. The next week you run into them in Southern California.

Class Lifestyle research can contribute to the question of the relevance of the class concept.

[ 13 ] Media culture The term lifestyle was introduced in the 1950s as a derivative of that of style in art : [ 14 ] "Life-styles", the culture industry's recycling of style in art, represent the transformation of an aesthetic category, which once possessed a moment of negativity [shocking, emancipatory], into a quality of commodity consumption.

Theodor W. Adorno noted that there is a "culture industry" in which the mass media is involved, but that the term "mass culture" is inappropriate: [ 15 ] In our drafts, we spoke of "mass culture." We replaced that expression with "culture industry" in order to exclude from the outset the interpretation agreeable to its advocates: that it is a matter of something like a culture that arises spontaneously from the masses themselves, the contemporary form of popular art.

The media culture of advanced capitalism typically creates new "life-styles" to drive the consumption of new commodities: [ 14 ] Diversity is more effectively present in mass media than previously, but this is not an obvious or unequivocal gain. By the late 1950s, the homogenization of consciousness had become counterproductive for the purposes of capital expansion; new needs for new commodities had to be created, and this required the reintroduction of the minimal negativity that had been previously eliminated. The cult of the new that had been the prerogative of art throughout the modernist epoch into the period of post-war unification and stabilization has returned to capital expansion from which it originally sprang. But this negativity is neither shocking nor emancipatory since it does not presage a transformation of the fundamental structures of everyday life. On the contrary, through the culture industry capital has co-opted the dynamics of negation both diachronically in its restless production of new and "different" commodities and synchronically in its promotion of alternative "life-styles." See also Aeromobility Alternative lifestyle Intentional living Life stance Lifestyle brand Lifestyle guru Lifestyle medicine Otium Personal life Sedentary lifestyle Sustainable living Simple living Style of life Tao Anthropology References Notes ^ Lifestyle Archived 2016-03-04 at the Wayback Machine from Merriam-Webster's Dictionary ^ Lynn R. Kahle ; Angeline G. Close (2011).

Consumer Behavior Knowledge for Effective Sports and Event Marketing . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-87358-1 .

^ a b "lifestyle | Search Online Etymology Dictionary" .

www.etymonline.com .

Archived from the original on 2021-12-20 . Retrieved 2021-12-20 .

^ Spaargaren, G., and B. VanVliet (2000) "Lifestyle, Consumption and the Environment:  The Ecological Modernisation of Domestic Consumption", Environmental Politics 9 (1): 50–75.

^ Giddens, A. (1991) Modernity and self-identity: self and society in the late modern age , Cambridge: Polity Press ^ Kahle, Lynn R.

; Gurel-Atay, Eda, eds. (2014).

Communicating Sustainability for the Green Economy . New York: M.E. Sharpe.

ISBN 978-0-7656-3680-5 .

^ Ropke, I. (1999) "The Dynamics of Willingness to Consume", Ecological Economics 28: 399–420.

^ Giuffrâe, K., & DiGeronimo, T. (1999) Care and Feeding of Your Brain : How Diet and Environment Affect What You Think and Feel , Career Press.

^ Berzano L., Genova C., Lifestyles and Subcultures. History and a New Perspective , Routledge, London, 2015 (Part I).

^ Ponthiere G. (2011) "Mortality, Family and Lifestyles", Journal of Family and Economic Issues 32 (2): 175–190 ^ Case, A., Lubotsky D. & Paxson C. (2002) "Economic Status and Health in Childhood: The Origins of the Gradient", The American Economic Review 92 (5): 1308–1334 ^ William Dufty (1975) Sugar Blues , page 204 ^ Bögenhold, Dieter (2001). "Social Inequality and the Sociology of Life Style: Material and Cultural Aspects of Social Stratification".

American Journal of Economics and Sociology .

60 (4): 829– 847.

doi : 10.1111/1536-7150.00125 .

^ a b Bernstein (1991) p.23 ^ Adorno [1963] p.98 Sources Adorno, Th., "Culture Industry Reconsidered," in Adorno (1991).

Adorno, The Culture Industry – Selected essays on mass culture, Routledge, London, 1991.

Amaturo E., Palumbo M., Classi sociali. Stili di vita, coscienza e conflitto di classe. Problemi metodologici, Ecig, Genova, 1990.

Ansbacher H. L., Life style. A historical and systematic review, in "Journal of individual psychology", 1967, vol. 23, n. 2, pp. 191–212.

Bell D., Hollows J., Historicizing lifestyle. Mediating taste, consumption and identity from the 1900s to 1970s, Asghate, Aldershot-Burlington, 2006.

Bénédicte Châtel (Auteur), Jean-Luc Dubois (Auteur), Bernard Perret (Auteur), Justice et Paix-France (Auteur), François Maupu (Postface), Notre mode de vie est-il durable ? : Nouvel horizon de la responsabilité, Karthala Éditions, 2005 Bernstein, J. M. (1991) "Introduction," in Adorno (1991) Berzano L., Genova C., Lifestyles and Subcultures. History and a New Perspective, Routledge, London, 2015.

Burkle, F. M. (2004) Calvi G. (a cura di), Indagine sociale italiana. Rapporto 1986, Franco Angeli, Milano, 1987.

Calvi G. (a cura di), Signori si cambia. Rapporto Eurisko sull'evoluzione dei consumi e degli stili di vita, Bridge, Milano, 1993.

Calvi G., Valori e stili di vita degli italiani, Isedi, Milano, 1977.

Cathelat B., Les styles de vie des Français 1978–1998, Stanké, Parigi, 1977.

Cathelat B., Socio-Styles-Système. Les "styles de vie". Théorie, méthodes, applications, Les éditions d'organisation, Parigi, 1990.

Cathelat B., Styles de vie, Les éditions d'organisation, pàgiri, 1985.

Chaney D., Lifestyles, Routledge, Londra, 1996.

Fabris G., Mortara V., Le otto Italie. Dinamica e frammentazione della società italiana, Mondadori, Milano, 1986.

Faggiano M. P., Stile di vita e partecipazione sociale giovanile. Il circolo virtuoso teoria-ricerca-teoria, Franco Angeli, Milano, 2007.

Gonzalez Moro V., Los estilos de vida y la cultura cotidiana. Un modelo de investigacion, Baroja, [San Sebastian, 1990].

Kahle L., Attitude and social adaption. A person-situation interaction approach, Pergamon, Oxford, 1984.

Kahle L., Social values and social change. Adaptation to life in America, Praeger, Santa Barbara, 1983.

Leone S., Stili di vita. Un approccio multidimensionale, Aracne, Roma, 2005.

Mitchell A., Consumer values. A tipology, Values and lifestyles program, SRI International, Stanford, 1978.

Mitchell A., Life ways and life styles, Business intelligence program, SRI International, Stanford, 1973.

Mitchell A., The nine American lifestyles. Who we are and where we're going, Macmillan, New York, 1983.

Mitchell A., Ways of life, Values and lifestyles program, SRI International, Stanford, 1982.

Negre Rigol P., El ocio y las edades. Estilo de vida y oferta lúdica, Hacer, Barcelona, 1993.

Parenti F., Pagani P. L., Lo stile di vita. Come imparare a conoscere sé stessi e gli altri, De Agostini, Novara, 1987.

Patterson M. Consumption and Everyday Life, 2006 Ragone G., Consumi e stili di vita in Italia, Guida, Napoli, 1985.

Ramos Soler I., El estilo de vida de los mayores y la publicidad, La Caixa, Barcelona, [2007].

Rokeach M., Beliefs, attitudes and values, Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, 1968.

Rokeach M., The nature of human values, Free Press, New York, 1973.

Shields R., Lifestyle shopping. The subject of consumption, Routledge, Londra, 1992.

Shulman B. H., Mosak H. H., Manual for life style assessment, Accelerated Development, Muncie, 1988 (trad. it. Manuale per l'analisi dello stile di vita, Franco Angeli, Milano, 2008).

Sobel M. E., Lifestyle and social structure. Concepts, definitions and analyses, Academic Press, New York, 1981.

Soldevilla Pérez C., Estilo de vida. Hacia una teoría psicosocial de la acción, Entimema, Madrid, 1998.

Valette-Florence P., Les styles de vie. Bilan critique et perspectives. Du mythe à la réalité, Nathan, Parigi, 1994.

Valette-Florence P., Les styles de vie. Fondements, méthodes et applications, Economica, Parigi, 1989.

Valette-Florence P., Jolibert A., Life-styles and consumption patterns, Publications de recherche du CERAG, École supériore des affaires de Grenoble, 1988.

Veal A. J., The concept of lifestyle. A review, in "Leisure studies", 1993, vol. 12, n. 4, pp. 233–252.

Vergati S., Stili di vita e gruppi sociali, Euroma, Roma, 1996.

Walters G. D., Beyond behavior. Construction of an overarching psychological theory of lifestyles, Praeger, Westport, 2000.

Wells W. (a cura di), Life-style and psycographics, American marketing association, Chicago, 1974.

Yankelovich D., New criteria for market segmentation , in "Harvard Business Review", 1964, vol. 42, n. 2, pp. 83–90.

Yankelovich D., Meer D., Rediscovering market segmentation, in "Harvard Business Review", 2006, febbraio, pp. 1–10.

External links George Vrousgos, N.D. – Southern Cross University v t e Worldview Related terms Basic beliefs / Beliefs Collective consciousness / Collective unconscious Conceptual system Context Conventional wisdom Conventions Cultural movement Epic poetry / National epics / World folk-epics Facts and factoids Framing Ideology Life stance Lifestyle Memes / Memeplex Mental model Metanarrative Mindset Norms Paradigm Philosophical theory Point of view Presuppositions Primal world beliefs Reality tunnel Schemata School of thought Set Social reality Theory of everything Umwelt Value system Aspects Biases Academic Attentional Attitude polarization Belief Cognitive list Collective narcissism Confirmation Congruence Cryptomnesia Cultural Ethnocentrism Filter bubble Homophily In-group favoritism Magical thinking Media Observational error Observer-expectancy Selective exposure Selective perception Self-deception Self-fulfilling prophecy Clever Hans effect placebo effect wishful thinking Status quo Stereotyping ethnic Change and maintenance Activism Argument Argumentum ad populum Attitude change Brainwashing Censorship Charisma Circular reporting Cognitive dissonance Critical thinking Crowd manipulation Cultural dissonance Deprogramming Echo chamber Education religious values Euphemism Excommunication Fearmongering Historical revisionism negationism Ideological repression Indoctrination Manipulation (psychology) Media manipulation Media regulation Missionaries Moral entrepreneurship Persuasion Polite fiction Political engineering Propaganda Propaganda model Proselytism Psychological warfare Religious conversion forced Religious persecution Religious uniformity Revolutions Rhetoric Self-censorship Social change Social control Social engineering Social influence Social progress Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Woozle effect Culture Anthropology cultural social Calendars Ceremonies Coronations Cross-cultural psychology Cultural psychology Doctrine Employment / Serfdom / Slavery Families Funerals / Burial Games Holidays Hygiene ritual Identity (philosophy) cultural Institutions Liminality Liturgy Marriage Myth and ritual Oaths Pilgrimages Play Rites of passage secular Rituals Social class / Social status / Caste Symbols Symbolic boundaries Worship Groupthink Abilene paradox Bandwagon effect Collectives Collective behavior animal Collective effervescence Collective intelligence Conformity Consensus theory Crowd psychology Cults Culture-bound syndromes Deindividuation Doublethink Emergence Emotional contagion Entitativity False consensus effect Folie à deux Group action Group cohesiveness Group dynamics Group emotion Group polarization Groupshift Herd behavior Holism Hysterical contagion Information cascade In-group and out-group Invisible hand Lynching Majoritarianism / Mob rule Mass action Mass psychogenic illness Milieu control Mobbing Moral panic Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Political correctness Pseudoconsensus Scapegoating Self-organization Social action Social behavior Social emotions Social exclusion Social facilitation animal Social group Social proof Social psychology Sociology Spontaneous order Status quo Stigmergy Swarm behaviour System justification Viral phenomena Knowledge Axioms tacit assumptions Conceptual framework Epistemology outline Evidence anecdotal scientific Explanations Faith fideism Gnosis Intuition Meaning-making Memory Meta-knowledge Methodology Observation Observational learning Perception Reasoning fallacious logic Revelation Testimony Tradition folklore Truth consensus theory criteria World disclosure Metaphysics Ætiology Afterlife Anima mundi Causality Concepts Consciousness mind–body problem Cosmogony Cosmology religious Creation myth Deities existence Destiny Eschatology Everything / Nothing Evolution Existence Fiction / Nonfiction Free will Future History Ideas Idios kosmos Illusions Incarnation Information Intelligence Magic Matter Miracles Mythology comparative National mythoi Nature philosophical Ontology Origin myths political Otherworlds axes mundi Physics natural philosophy Problem of evil Reality Souls Spirit Supernature Teleology Theology Time Unobservables Value Aesthetic taste Aesthetic Almsgiving / Charity Altruism Autonomy Beauty Codes of conduct Comedy Common good Conscience Consent Creativity Disgust Duty Economics Ecstasy emotional religious Elegance Emotions Aesthetic Entertainment Eroticism Ethics Étiquette Family values Food and drink prohibitions unclean animals Golden Rule Guilt / Culpability Happiness Harmony Honour Human rights Judgement Justice Law jurisprudence religious Liberty political freedom Love Magnificence Maxims Meaning of life Morality public Obligations Peace Piety Praxeology Principles Punishment Qualities Repentance Reverence Rights Sexuality ethics Sin Social stigma Stewardship Styles Sublime, The Suffering Sympathy Taboo Theodicy Trust Unspoken rules Virtues and Vices Works of art Wrongdoing Examples Attitudes Misanthropy Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Economic and political ideologies Anarchism Authoritarianism Capitalism Christian democracy Collectivism Colonialism Communalism Communism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Distributism Environmentalism Extremism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Globalism Green politics Imperialism Individualism Industrialisation Intellectualism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Masculism Militarism Monarchism Nationalism Pacifism Progressivism Radicalism Reformism Republicanism Sentientism Social democracy Socialism Utilitarianism Veganism Religions African traditional religions Baháʼí Buddhism Caodaism Cheondoism Chinese folk religion Christianity Eastern Orthodox Church Ethnic religions Hinduism Hòa Hảo Islam Jainism Judaism Korean shamanism Modern paganism Rastafari Secularity / Irreligion / Agnosticism / Atheism Shinto Sikhism Spiritism Taoism Tenrikyo Unitarian Universalism Zoroastrianism Schools of philosophy Agriculturalism Aristotelianism Atomism Averroism Cartesianism Cārvāka Collectivism Confucianism / New Confucianism Critical theory Cynicism Cyrenaics Determinism Dualism Eleatics Empiricism Epicureanism Eretrian school Existentialism Fatalism Foundationalism Hedonism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Historicism / New historicism Holism Humanism / Renaissance humanism Idealism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Individualism Ionian Kantianism / Neo-Kantianism Kokugaku Legalism Logicians Materialism Megarian school Modernism / Postmodernism Mohism Monism Natural law Naturalism (Chinese) Naturalism (Western) Nihilism Peripatetic Phenomenology Platonism / Neoplatonism Pluralism Positivism Pragmatism Pre-Socratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism / Neopythagoreanism Rationalism Reductionism Scholasticism / Neo-scholasticism Sentientism Social constructionism Sophism Spinozism Stoicism Structuralism / Post-structuralism Thomism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Yangism Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Latvia Israel Other IdRef 2 Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8bkl6
Cached time: 20250817224427
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.488 seconds
Real time usage: 0.619 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1694/1000000
Revision size: 19266/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 97729/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4088/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 36423/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.311/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13880141/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  494.761      1 -total
 23.71%  117.289      1 Template:Reflist
 21.19%  104.836      1 Template:Langx
 16.69%   82.562      2 Template:Cite_book
 16.21%   80.196      1 Template:World_view
 15.70%   77.690      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 13.73%   67.915      1 Template:Short_description
  8.76%   43.351      2 Template:Pagetype
  8.32%   41.145      1 Template:Authority_control
  5.71%   28.271      1 Template:Pp-semi-indef Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:190041:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817224427 and revision id 1287524338. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lifestyle&oldid=1287524338 " Categories : Lifestyle Personal life Philosophy of life Subcultures Sociological terminology 1920s neologisms Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 26 April 2025, at 20:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lifestyle 48 languages Add topic

