Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Scope and terminology 2 History 3 Jurisdiction 4 Choice of law Toggle Choice of law subsection 4.1 Contracts 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References and further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Conflict of laws 45 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Law for cases in multiple jurisdictions Conflict of laws Preliminaries Characterisation Choice of law Conflict of laws in the United States Incidental question Judicial interpretation Renvoi Public policy doctrine Hague Conference Definitional elements Jurisdiction Procedure Forum non conveniens Lex causae Lex fori Forum shopping Lis alibi pendens Connecting factors Domicile Lex domicilii Habitual residence Nationality Lex patriae Lex loci arbitri Lex loci rei sitae Lex loci contractus Lex loci delicti commissi Lex loci actus Lex loci solutionis Lex loci protectionis Proper law Lex loci celebrationis Choice of law clause Dépeçage Forum selection clause Substantive legal areas Status Capacity Contract Tort Marriage Divorce Property Forced heirship Hague Trust Convention Law enforcement Anti-suit injunctions Enforcement of foreign judgments Revenue rule Sanctuary city v t e Conflict of laws (also called private international law ) is the set of rules or laws a jurisdiction applies to a case , transaction , or other occurrence that has connections to more than one jurisdiction.

[ 1 ] This body of law deals with three broad topics: jurisdiction , rules regarding when it is appropriate for a court to hear such a case; foreign judgments , dealing with the rules by which a court in one jurisdiction mandates compliance with a ruling of a court in another jurisdiction; and choice of law , which addresses the question of which substantive laws will be applied in such a case.

[ 2 ] These issues can arise in any private law context, [ 2 ] but they are especially prevalent in contract law [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] and tort law .

[ 11 ] Scope and terminology [ edit ] The term conflict of laws is primarily used in the United States and Canada, though it has also come into use in the United Kingdom. Elsewhere, the term private international law is commonly used, [ 1 ] for example in Switzerland , the Federal Act on Private International Law (PILA) regulates which law should be applied when a dispute has connections with more than one jurisdiction.

[ 12 ] Some scholars from countries that use conflict of laws consider the term private international law confusing because this body of law does not consist of laws that apply internationally, but rather is solely composed of domestic laws; the calculus only includes international law when the nation has treaty obligations (and even then, only to the extent that domestic law renders the treaty obligations enforceable).

[ 13 ] The term private international law comes from the private law / public law dichotomy in civil law systems .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] In this form of legal system, the term private international law does not imply an agreed upon international legal corpus , but rather refers to those portions of domestic private law that apply to international issues.

Importantly, while conflict of laws generally deals with disputes of an international nature, the applicable law itself is domestic law. This is because, unlike public international law (better known simply as international law ), conflict of laws does not regulate the relation between countries but rather how individual countries regulate internally the affairs of individuals with connections to more than one jurisdiction. To be sure, as in other contexts, domestic law can be affected by international treaties to which a country is party.

Moreover, in federal states where substantial lawmaking occurs at the subnational level, notably in the United States, issues within conflict of laws often arise in wholly domestic contexts, relating to the laws of different states (or provinces, etc.) rather than of foreign countries.

History [ edit ] Western legal systems first recognized a core underpinning of conflict of laws—namely, that "foreign law, in appropriate instances, should be applied to foreign cases"—in the twelfth century.

[ 16 ] : 9–10 Prior to that, the prevailing system was that of personal law , in which the laws applicable to each individual were dictated by the group to which he or she belonged.

[ 16 ] : 9–10 Initially, the mode of this body of law was simply to determine which jurisdiction's law would be most fair to apply; over time, however, the law came to favor more well-defined rules.

[ 16 ] : 12–13 These rules were systematically summarized by law professor Bartolus de Saxoferrato in the middle of the fourteenth century, [ 16 ] : 13 a work that came to be cited repeatedly for the next several centuries.

[ 17 ] Later, in the seventeenth century, several Dutch legal scholars, including Christian Rodenburg , Paulus Voet , Johannes Voet , and Ulrik Huber , further expounded the jurisprudence of conflict of laws.

[ 16 ] : 20–28 Their key conceptual contributions were twofold: First, nations are wholly sovereign within their borders and therefore cannot be compelled to enforce foreign law in their own courts.

[ 16 ] : 28 Second, in order for international conflicts of law to work rationally, nations must exercise comity in enforcing others' laws, because it is in their mutual interest to do so.

[ 16 ] : 30 Scholars began to consider ways to resolve the question of how and when formally equal sovereign States ought to recognize each other's authority.

[ 18 ] The doctrine of comity was introduced as one of the means to answer these questions.

[ 18 ] Comity has undergone various changes since its creation. However, it still refers to the idea that every State is sovereign; often, the most just exercise of one State's authority is by recognizing the authority of another through the recognition and enforcement of another state's laws and judgments.

[ 19 ] Many states continue to recognize the principle of comity as the underpinning of private international law such as in Canada.

[ 20 ] In some countries, such as the United States of America and Australia, the principle of comity is written into the State's constitution.

[ 21 ] In the United States, salient issues in the field of conflict of laws date back at least to the framing of the Constitution. There was concern, for example, about what body of law the newly created federal courts would apply when handling cases between parties from different states [ 22 ] (a type of case specifically assigned to the federal courts [ 23 ] ). Within the first two decades following ratification of the Constitution, over one hundred cases dealt with these issues, though the term conflict of laws was not yet used.

[ 22 ] : 235–36 The Constitution created a "plurilegal federal union" in which conflicts are inherently abundant, [ 24 ] : 6 and as a result, American judges encounter conflicts cases far more often—about 5,000 per year as of the mid-2010s—and have accumulated far more experience in resolving them than anywhere else in the world.

[ 24 ] : 10 Alongside domestic developments relating to conflict of laws, the nineteenth century also saw the beginnings of substantial international collaboration in the field. The first international meeting on the topic took place in Lima in 1887 and 1888; delegates from five South American countries attended, but failed to produce an enforceable agreement.

[ 25 ] The first major multilateral agreements on the topic of conflict of laws arose from the First South American Congress of Private International Law , which was held in Montevideo from August 1888 to February 1889.

[ 25 ] The seven South American nations represented at the Montevideo conference agreed on eight treaties, which broadly adopted the ideas of Friedrich Carl von Savigny , determining applicable law on the basis of four types of factual relations (domicile, location of object, location of transaction, location of court).

[ 25 ] Soon after, European nations gathered for a conference in The Hague organized by Tobias Asser in 1893.

[ 26 ] : 76 This was followed by successive conferences in 1894, 1900, and 1904.

[ 26 ] : 76 Like their counterparts in Montevideo, these conferences produced several multilateral agreements on various topics within conflict of laws.

[ 26 ] : 76–77 Thereafter, the pace of these meetings slowed, with the next conventions occurring in 1925 and 1928.

[ 26 ] : 77 The seventh meeting at The Hague occurred in 1951, at which point the sixteen involved states established a permanent institution for international collaboration on conflict-of-laws issues.

[ 26 ] : 77 The organization is known today as the Hague Conference on Private International Law (HCCH). As of December 2020 [update] , HCCH includes eighty-six member states.

[ 27 ] As attention to the field became more widespread in the second half of the twentieth century, the European Union began to take action to harmonize conflict of laws jurisprudence across its member states. The first of these was the Brussels Convention agreed in 1968, which addressed questions of jurisdiction for cross-border cases.

[ 28 ] This was followed in 1980 by the Rome Convention , which addressed choice-of-law rules for contract disputes within EU member states.

[ 29 ] In 2009 and 2010, respectively, the EU enacted the Rome II Regulation to address choice-of-law in tort cases [ 11 ] and the Rome III Regulation to address choice-of-law in divorce matters.

[ 30 ] Jurisdiction [ edit ] One of the key questions addressed within conflict of laws is the determination of when the legislature of a given jurisdiction may legislate, or the court of a given jurisdiction can properly adjudicate, regarding a matter that has extra-jurisdictional dimensions. This is known as jurisdiction (sometimes subdivided into adjudicative jurisdiction , the authority to hear a certain case, and prescriptive jurisdiction , the authority of a legislature to pass laws covering certain conduct).

[ 31 ] : 57–58 Like all aspects of conflict of laws, this question is in the first instance resolved by domestic law, which may or may not incorporate relevant international treaties or other supranational legal concepts.

[ 32 ] : 13–14 That said, relative to the other two main subtopics of conflicts of law (enforcement of judgements, and choice of law, which are both discussed below), the theory regarding jurisdiction has developed consistent international norms. This is perhaps because, unlike the other subtopics, jurisdiction relates to the particularly thorny question of when it is appropriate for a country to exercise its coercive power at all, rather that merely how it should do so.

[ 32 ] : 1–4 There are five bases of jurisdiction generally recognized in international law. These are not mutually exclusive; an individual or an occurrence may be subject to simultaneous jurisdiction in more than one place.

[ 32 ] : 15, 23 They are as follows: Territoriality —A country has jurisdiction to regulate whatever occurs within its territorial boundaries. Of all bases of jurisdiction, the territoriality principle garners the strongest consensus in international law (subject to various complexities relating to actions that did not obviously occur wholly in one country).

[ 31 ] : 55–56 Passive personality —A country has jurisdiction over an occurrence that harmed its national.

[ 33 ] Nationality (or active personality) —A country has jurisdiction over a wrong of which its national is the perpetrator.

[ 34 ] Protective —A country has jurisdiction to address threats to its own security (such as by pursuing counterfeiters of official documents).

[ 35 ] Universal —A country has jurisdiction over certain acts based on their intrinsic rejection by the international community (such as violent deprivations of basic human rights). This is the most controversial of the five bases of jurisdiction.

[ 35 ] Countries have also developed bodies of law for adjudicating jurisdiction disputes between subnational entities. For example, in the United States, the minimum contacts rule derived from the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth Amendment to the U.S. Constitution regulates the extent to which one state can exercise jurisdiction over people domiciled in other states, or occurrences that took place in other states.

Choice of law [ edit ] Courts faced with a choice of law issue have a two-stage process: the court will apply the law of the forum ( lex fori ) to all procedural matters (including the choice of law rules); it counts the factors that connect or link the legal issues to the laws of potentially relevant states and applies the laws that have the greatest connection, e.g. the law of nationality ( lex patriae ) or the law of habitual residence ( lex domicilii ). (See also 'European Harmonization Provisions': "The concept of habitual residence is the civil law equivalent of the common law test of lex domicilii".) The court will determine the plaintiffs' legal status and capacity . The court will determine the law of the state in which land is situated ( lex situs ) that will be applied to determine all questions of title . The law of the place where a transaction physically takes place or of the occurrence that gave rise to the litigation ( lex loci actus ) will often be the controlling law selected when the matter is substantive, but the proper law has become a more common choice.

[ 36 ] Contracts [ edit ] Many contracts and other forms of legally binding agreement include a jurisdiction or arbitration clause specifying the parties' choice of venue for any litigation (called a forum selection clause ). In the EU, this is governed by the Rome I Regulation .

Choice of law clauses may specify which laws the court or tribunal should apply to each aspect of the dispute. This matches the substantive policy of freedom of contract and will be determined by the law of the state where the choice of law clause confers its competence. Oxford Professor Adrian Briggs suggests that this is doctrinally problematic as it is emblematic of 'pulling oneself up by the bootstraps'.

[ 37 ] Judges have accepted that the principle of party autonomy allows the parties to select the law most appropriate to their transaction. This judicial acceptance of subjective intent excludes the traditional reliance on objective connecting factors; [ 38 ] it also harms consumers as vendors often impose one-sided contractual terms selecting a venue far from the buyer's home or workplace. Contractual clauses relating to consumers, employees, and insurance beneficiaries are regulated under additional terms set out in Rome I , which may modify the contractual terms imposed by vendors.

[ 39 ] See also [ edit ] Law portal A. V. Dicey Comity List of Hague Conventions on Private International Law Place of the Relevant Intermediary Approach Microsoft Corp. v. Motorola Inc.

Notes [ edit ] ^ a b "Conflict of Laws", Black's Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019).

^ a b Restatement of the Law—Conflict of Laws, §2: Subject Matter of Conflict of Laws (American Law Institute 1971).

^ Briggs (2008).

The Conflict of Laws . pp.

2– 3.

^ Clarkson; Hill (2006).

The Conflict of Laws . pp.

2– 3.

^ Collins (2006).

Dicey, Morris and Collins on The Conflict of Laws . p. 36 (paras. 1-087 et seq.).

^ Hay; Borchers; Symeonides (2010).

Conflict of Laws . pp.

1– 3.

^ McClean; Beevers (2009).

The Conflict of Laws . pp. 4–5 (para. 1-006).

^ North; Fawcett (1999).

Cheshire and North's Private International Law . pp.

13– 14.

^ Rogerson (2013).

Collier's Conflicts of Laws . pp.

3– 4.

^ Symeonides (2008).

American Private International Law . pp. 15–16 (para. 2).

^ a b Regulation (EC) No 864/2007 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11 July 2007 on the law applicable to non-contractual obligations (Rome II) .

^ SwissRights, Federal Act on Private International Law (PILA) - all articles with explanations , accessed on 9 April 2025 ^ "International Law: Private International Law", Black's Law Dictionary (11th ed. 2019).

^ Cherednychenko 2007 , p. 22.

^ Dodge, William S. (2008). "The Public-Private Distinction in the Conflict of Laws".

Duke Journal of Comparative and International Law .

18 : 371– 394.

^ a b c d e f g "Hessel E. Yntema, The Comity Doctrine , 65 Michigan Law Review 9 (1965)" .

^ J.A. Clarence Smith, Bartolo on the Conflict of Laws , 14 American Journal of Legal History 157, 157–60 (1970).

^ a b Schultz, Thomas (2019).

"The History of Comity" .

Jus Gentium – Journal of International Legal History .

4 (2): 35 – via SSRN.

^ Schultz, Thomas (2019).

"The History of Comity" .

Jus Gentium – Journal of International Legal History .

4 (2): 36 – via SSRN.

^ Morguard Investments Ltd v De Savoye, [1990] 3 SCR 1077.

^ William L. Reynolds & William M. Richman, The Full Faith and Credit Clause: A Reference Guide to the United States Constitution ( Praeger , 2005), p. xvii; Constitution of Australia, chapter 7, section 118.

^ a b Kurt H. Nadelmann, Joseph Story's Contribution to American Conflicts Law: A Comment , 5 American Journal of Legal History 230, 235 (1961).

^ U.S. Const. Art. III, §2 .

^ a b Symeonides, Symeon (2016).

Choice of Law . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780190496722 . Retrieved March 18, 2023 .

^ a b c "Ana Delić, The Birth of Modern Private International Law: The Treaties of Montevideo , Oxford Public International Law" .

^ a b c d e "Hans van Loon, The Hague Conference on Private International Law , 2 Hague Justice Journal 75 (2007)" (PDF) .

^ "HCCH, About HCCH " .

^ "1968 Brussels Convention on jurisdiction and the enforcement of judgments in civil and commercial matters" .

^ "1980 Rome Convention on the law applicable to contractual obligations" . August 13, 1998.

^ "COUNCIL REGULATION (EU) No 1259/2010" .

^ a b Cedric Ryngaert, Research Handbook on Jurisdiction and Immunities in International Law , Chapter 2: The Concept of Jurisdiction in International Law (Alexander Orakhelashvili ed. 2015).

^ a b c Alexander Orakhelashvili, Research Handbook on Jurisdiction and Immunities in International Law , Chapter 1: State Jurisdiction in International Law: Complexities of a Basic Concept (Alexander Orakhelashvili ed. 2015).

^ "Geoffrey R. Watson, The Passive Personality Principle , 28 Texas International Law Journal 1, 2" .

^ Geoffrey R. Watson, Offenders Abroad: The Case for Nationality-Based Criminal Jurisdiction , 17 Yale Journal of International Law 42 .

^ a b Dan E. Stigall, International Law and Limitations on the Exercise of Extraterritorial Jurisdiction in U.S. Domestic Law , 35 Hastings International & Comparative Law Review 323, 334 (2012).

^ Dow Jones and Company Inc v Gutnick [2002 HCA 56; 210 CLR 575; 194 ALR 433; 77 ALJR 255 (10 December 2002).] ^ Adrian Briggs, The Conflict of laws, Clarendon Law Series third edition 2013.

^ Rome I Regulation, Article 3(1). See also Macmillan v Bishopsgate Investment Trust plc [1996] 1 WLR 387 per Staughton LJ 391–392; Golden Ocean Group v Salgocar Mining Ltd [2012] EWCA Civ 542.

^ Rome I Regulation, Articles 5-8 References and further reading [ edit ] Cherednychenko, Olha (2007).

Fundamental Rights, Contract Law, and Protection of the Weaker Party . Utrecht, Netherlands: Utrecht University Institute for Legal Studies.

hdl : 1874/20945 .

American Law Institute (ed.).

Restatement of the Law, Second: Conflict of Laws . St. Paul.

Briggs, Adrian (2008).

The Conflict of Laws (Second ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Born, Gary (2009).

International Commercial Arbitration . Kluwer.

Calliess, Gralf-Peter (2010).

The Rome Regulations: Commentary on the European Rules of the Conflict of Laws . Kluwer.

CILE Studies (Center for International Legal Education – University of Pittsburgh School of Law ) Private Law, Private International Law, and Judicial cooperation in the EU-US Relationship .

Clarkson, C.M.V.; Hill, Jonathan (2006).

The Conflict of Laws (Third ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Collins, Lawrence ; Harris, Jonathan , eds. (2017).

Dicey Morris and Collins on The Conflict of Laws (Fifteenth ed.). London: Sweet & Maxwell .

Hay, Peter; Borchers, Patrick J.; Symeonides, Symeon C. (2010).

Conflict of Laws (Fifth ed.). St. Paul, Minn.: West.

McClean, David; Beevers, Kisch (2009).

The Conflict of Laws (Seventh ed.). London: Sweet & Maxwell.

North, Peter ; Fawcett, J.J. (1999).

Cheshire and North's Private International Law (13th ed.). London: Butterworths.

Reed, Alan (2003).

Anglo-American Perspectives on Private International Law . Lewiston, N.Y.: E. Mellen Press.

Rogerson, Pippa (2013).

Collier's Conflicts of Laws (Fourth ed.). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Symeonides, Symeon C.

(2008).

American Private International Law . Wolters Kluwer.

External links [ edit ] American Society of Comparative Law Official website ASIL Guide to Electronic Resources for International Law British Institute of International and Comparative Law CONFLICT OF LAWS.NET – News and Views in Private International Law EEC Rome convention 1980 European Institute for International Law and International Relations Hague Conference on Private International Law International & Foreign Law Community International Chamber of Commerce International Court of Arbitration International Institute for the Unification of Private Law (UNIDROIT) Max Planck Institute – for Comparative and International Private Law Private International Law, Research Guide Archived November 3, 2016, at the Wayback Machine , Peace Palace Library Republic of Argentina v NML Capital Ltd [2010] EWCA Civ 41 , regarding a hedge fund's enforcement of claim against Argentina United Nations Commission for International Trade Law U.S. State Department Private International Law Database Why the Hague Convention on jurisdiction threatens to strangle e-commerce and Internet free speech , by Chris Sprigman v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Czech Republic Korea Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conflict_of_laws&oldid=1303917136 " Category : Conflict of laws Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from August 2021 Articles containing potentially dated statements from December 2020 All articles containing potentially dated statements Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 21:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conflict of laws 45 languages Add topic

