Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Philosophy 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Anaxarchus 28 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français Galego Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Magyar مصرى Nederlands Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Anaxarchus ( / ˌ æ n ə ɡ ˈ z ɑːr k ə s / ; Greek : Ἀνάξαρχος ; c. 380 – c. 320 BC) was a Greek philosopher of the school of Democritus . Together with Pyrrho , he accompanied Alexander the Great into Asia. The reports of his philosophical views suggest that he was a forerunner of the Greek skeptics .

Life [ edit ] Anaxarchus was born at Abdera in Thrace . He was the companion and friend of Alexander the Great in his Asiatic campaigns. His relationship with Alexander, however, was ambiguous, owing to contradictory sources.

[ 1 ] Some paint Anarxchus as a flatterer, among them Plutarch , who tells a story that at Bactra , in 327 BC in a debate with Callisthenes , Anaxarchus advised all to worship Alexander as a god even during his lifetime. In contrast, others paint Anaxarchus as scathingly ironic towards the monarch.

[ 1 ] According to Diogenes Laertius , in response to Alexander's claim to have been the son of Zeus - Ammon , Anaxarchus pointed to his bleeding wound and remarked, "See the blood of a mortal, not ichor , such as flows from the veins of the immortal gods." [ 2 ] When Alexander was trying to show that he was divine so that the Greeks would perform proskynesis to him, Anaxarchus said that Alexander could "more justly be considered a god than Dionysus or Heracles" (Arrian, 104) Diogenes Laertius says that Anaxarchus earned the enmity of Nicocreon , the tyrant of Cyprus , with an inappropriate joke against tyrants in a banquet in Tyre in 331 BC.

[ 1 ] Later, when Anaxarchus was forced to land in Cyprus against his will, Nicocreon ordered him to be pounded to death in a mortar. The philosopher endured this torture with fortitude, taunting the king with, "just pound the bag of Anaxarchus, you do not pound Anaxarchus". When Nicocreon threatened to cut out his tongue, Anaxarchus himself bit it out and spat it in his face.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Very little is known about his philosophical views. It is thought that he represents a link between the atomism of Democritus , and the skepticism of his own apprentice Pyrrho . He also shares ethical traits with the Cynic and Cyrenaic schools.

[ 4 ] Anaxarchus is said to have studied under Diogenes of Smyrna, who in turn studied under Metrodorus of Chios , who used to declare that he knew nothing, not even the fact that he knew nothing.

[ 3 ] According to Sextus Empiricus , Anaxarchus "compared existing things to a scene-painting and supposed them to resemble the impressions experienced in sleep or madness." [ 5 ] It was under the influence of Anaxarchus that Pyrrho is said to have adopted "a most noble philosophy, . . . taking the form of agnosticism and suspension of judgement." [ 6 ] Anaxarchus is said to have praised Pyrrho's "indifference and sang-froid." [ 7 ] He is said to have possessed "fortitude and contentment in life," which earned him the epithet eudaimonikos ("fortunate").

[ 2 ] His skepticism seems to have been pragmatical, postulating that against the uncertainty of existence, the only viable stance is to pursue happiness or eudaimonia , for which it is necessary to cultivate indifference or adiaphora . According to him, the effort to differentiate truth from falseness through the senses is both useless and detrimental to happiness.

[ 4 ] He wrote a work named About the Monarchs . In it, he spouses that knowledge is useless without the ability to know when to speak and what to say in every occasion.

[ 4 ] Plutarch reports that he told Alexander the Great that there was an infinite number of worlds, causing the latter to become dejected because he had not yet conquered even one.

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Vassallo, Christian (2019).

Presocratics and Papyrological Tradition: A Philosophical Reappraisal of the Sources. Proceedings of the International Workshop held at the University of Trier (22-24 September 2016) . Walter de Gruyter. p. 473.

ISBN 9783110666106 .

^ a b Diogenes Laertius, Lives , ix. 60 ^ a b Diogenes Laertius, Lives , ix. 58 ^ a b c Pajón Leyra, I. (2019).

Anaxarco de Abdera: Adiaphoria y criterio de verdad en el umbral de la época helenística . Archai 27 ^ Sextus Empiricus, Against the Logicians , 7.88.

^ Diogenes Laertius, Lives , ix. 61 ^ Diogenes Laertius, Lives , ix. 63 ^ Plutarch, On Tranquillity of Mind 4,1 External links [ edit ] O'Keefe, Tim.

"Anaxarchus" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Diogenes Laërtius , Life of Anaxarchus , translated by Robert Drew Hicks (1925).

v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism Authority control databases International VIAF 2 WorldCat National Germany France BnF data Netherlands Poland People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anaxarchus&oldid=1305869970 " Categories : 4th-century BC Greek philosophers Abderites Ancient Greek atomist philosophers Ancient Thracian Greeks Hellenistic-era philosophers Philosophers and tutors of Alexander the Great Ancient Skeptic philosophers Ancient Greece–Ancient India relations Hidden categories: Articles containing Greek-language text Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 15:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anaxarchus 28 languages Add topic

