Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Capitalism Toggle Capitalism subsection 1.1 The Holocaust, modernity and ambivalence 1.2 Adorno and Horkheimer's definition of "enlightenment" 2 Consumption 3 Further objects of rationalization 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Rationalization (sociology) 15 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands Português தமிழ் తెలుగు Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rationality tending to replace tradition For other uses, see Rationalization (economics) and Rationalization (psychology) .

In sociology, the term rationalization was coined by Max Weber , a German sociologist, jurist, and economist.

[ 1 ] Rationalization (or rationalisation ) is the replacement of traditions, values, and emotions as motivators for behavior in society with concepts based on rationality and reason .

[ 2 ] The term rational is seen in the context of people, their expressions, and or their actions. This term can be applied to people who can perform speech or in general any action, in addition to the views of rationality within people it can be seen in the perspective of something such as a worldview or perspective (idea).

[ 2 ] For example, the implementation of bureaucracies in government is a kind of rationalization, as is the construction of high-efficiency living spaces in architecture and urban planning. A potential reason as to why rationalization of a culture may take place in the modern era is the process of globalization . Countries are becoming increasingly interlinked, and with the rise of technology, it is easier for countries to influence each other through social networking , the media and politics . An example of rationalization in place would be the case of witch doctors in certain parts of Africa. Whilst many locals view them as an important part of their culture and traditions, development initiatives and aid workers have tried to rationalize the practice in order to educate the local people in modern medicine and practice.

[ 3 ] Many sociologists, critical theorists and contemporary philosophers have argued that rationalization, falsely assumed as progress, has had a negative and dehumanizing effect on society, moving modernity away from the central tenets of Enlightenment .

[ 4 ] The founders of sociology had critical reaction to rationalization: Marx and Engels associated the emergence of modern society above all with the development of capitalism; for Durkheim it was connected in particular with industrialization and the new social division of labour which this brought about; for Weber it had to do with the emergence of a distinctive way of thinking, the rational calculation which he associated with the Protestant Ethic (more or less what Marx and Engels speak of in terms of those 'icy waves of egotistical calculation').

— John Harriss , The Second Great Transformation? Capitalism at the End of the Twentieth Century 1992 [ 5 ] Capitalism [ edit ] Rationalization formed a central concept in the foundation of classical sociology, particularly with respect to the emphasis the discipline placed – by contrast with anthropology – on the nature of modern Western societies. The term was presented by the profoundly influential German antipositivist Max Weber , though its themes bear parallel with the critiques of modernity set forth by a number of scholars. A rejection of dialectism and sociocultural evolution informs the concept.

Max Weber in 1918 Weber demonstrated rationalization in The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism , in which the aims of certain Protestant Theologies, particularly Calvinism , are shown to have shifted towards rational means of economic gain as a way of dealing with their 'salvation anxiety'. The rational consequences of this doctrine, he argued, soon grew incompatible with its religious roots, and so the latter were eventually discarded. Weber continues his investigation into this matter in later works, notably in his studies on bureaucracy and on the classifications of authority . In these works he alludes to an inevitable move towards rationalization.

[ 6 ] Weber believed that a move towards rational-legal authority was inevitable. In charismatic authority , the death of a leader effectively ends the power of that authority, and only through a rationalized and bureaucratic base can this authority be passed on.

Traditional authorities in rationalized societies also tend to develop a rational-legal base to better ensure a stable accession. (See also: Tripartite classification of authority ) What Weber depicted was not only the secularization of Western culture , but also and especially the development of modern societies from the viewpoint of rationalization. The new structures of society were marked by the differentiation of the two functionally intermeshing systems that had taken shape around the organizational cores of the capitalist enterprise and the bureaucratic state apparatus. Weber understood this process as the institutionalization of purposive-rational economic and administrative action. To the degree that everyday life was affected by this cultural and societal rationalization, traditional forms of life - which in the early modern period were differentiated primarily according to one's trade - were dissolved.

— Jürgen Habermas , Modernity's Consciousness of Time [ 4 ] Whereas in traditional societies such as feudalism governing is managed under the traditional leadership of, for example, a queen or tribal chief , modern societies operate under rational-legal systems . For example, democratic systems attempt to remedy qualitative concerns (such as racial discrimination ) with rationalized, quantitative means (for example, civil rights legislation ). Weber described the eventual effects of rationalization in his Economy and Society as leading to a "polar night of icy darkness", in which increasing rationalization of human life traps individuals in an " iron cage " (or "steel-hard casing") of rule-based, rational control.

Jürgen Habermas has argued that understanding rationalization properly requires going beyond Weber's notion of rationalization. It requires distinguishing between instrumental rationality , which involves calculation and efficiency (in other words, reducing all relationships to those of means and ends), and communicative rationality , which involves expanding the scope of mutual understanding in communication, the ability to expand this understanding  through reflective discourse about communication, and making social and political life subject to this expanded understanding.

It is clear that in The Theory of Communicative Action Weber is playing something like the role that Hegel played for Marx. Weber, for Habermas, must be not so much stood on his head (or put back the right way up) as persuaded to stand on two legs rather than one, to support his theory of modernity with more systematic and structural analyses than those of the (purposive-rational) rationalization of action ... Weber 'parts company with a theory of communicative action' when he defines action in terms of the actor attaching a subjective meaning to it. He does not elucidate "meaning" in connection with the model of speech; he does not relate it to the linguistic medium of possible understanding, but to the beliefs and intentions of an acting subject, taken to being with in isolation. This leads him to his familiar distinction between value-rational, purposive-rational, traditional and affectual action. What Weber should have done instead was to concentrate not on orientations of action but on the general structures of the lifeworld to which acting subjects belong.

— William Outhwaite , Habermas: Key Contemporary Thinkers 1988 [ 7 ] The Holocaust, modernity and ambivalence [ edit ] The railway line leading to the death camp at Auschwitz II (Birkenau) .

For Zygmunt Bauman , rationalization as a manifestation of modernity may be closely associated with the events of the Holocaust . In Modernity and Ambivalence , Bauman attempted to give an account of the different approaches modern society adopts toward the stranger. He argued that, on the one hand, in a consumer-oriented economy the strange and the unfamiliar is always enticing; in different styles of food, different fashions and in tourism it is possible to experience the allure of what is unfamiliar.

Yet this strange-ness also has a more negative side. The stranger, because he cannot be controlled and ordered, is always the object of fear; he is the potential mugger, the person outside of society's borders who is constantly threatening. Bauman's most famous book, Modernity and the Holocaust , is an attempt to give a full account of the dangers of these kinds of fears. Drawing upon Hannah Arendt and Theodor W. Adorno 's books on totalitarianism and the Enlightenment, Bauman argues that the Holocaust should not simply be considered to be an event in Jewish history, nor a regression to pre-modern barbarism. Rather, he says, the Holocaust should be seen as deeply connected to modernity and its order-making efforts. Procedural rationality, the division of labour into smaller and smaller tasks, the taxonomic categorization of different species, and the tendency to view rule-following as morally good all played their role in the Holocaust coming to pass.

For this reason, Bauman argues that modern societies have not fully taken on board the lessons of the Holocaust; it is generally viewed – to use Bauman's metaphor – like a picture hanging on a wall, offering few lessons. In Bauman's analysis, the Jews became 'strangers' par excellence in Europe; [ 8 ] the Final Solution was pictured by him as an extreme example of the attempts made by societies to excise the uncomfortable and indeterminate elements existing within them. Bauman, like the philosopher Giorgio Agamben , contended that the same processes of exclusion that were at work in the Holocaust could, and to an extent do, still come into play today.

Adorno and Horkheimer's definition of "enlightenment" [ edit ] The term enlightenment is understood to describe the widest sense of thought advancement. When reaching a sense of enlightenment an individual will be liberated of their fears and will be installed within society as 'masters'. This term in the sense of rationalization is seen to refine levels of cogency with formal logic, creating discourse in the framework of being a rational being as it no longer poses the same importance, individuals will want to reach full enlightenment rather than use full rationality.

[ 9 ] In their analysis of contemporary western society, Dialectic of Enlightenment (1944, revised 1947), Theodor W. Adorno and Max Horkheimer developed a wide and pessimistic concept of enlightenment. In their analysis, enlightenment had its dark side: while trying to abolish superstition and myths by 'foundationalist' philosophy, it ignored its own 'mythical' basis. Its strivings towards totality and certainty led to an increasing instrumentalization of reason . In their view, the enlightenment itself should be enlightened and not posed as a 'myth-free' view of the world. For Marxist philosophy in general, rationalization is closely associated with the concept of " commodity fetishism ", for the reason that not only are products designed to fulfill certain tasks, but employees are hired to fulfill specific tasks as well.

Consumption [ edit ] The sign at a McDonald's ' drive-thru '. The "over 99 billion served" statement illustrates Ritzer's idea of calculability.

Modern food consumption typifies the process of rationalization. Where food preparation in traditional societies is more laborious and technically inefficient, modern society has strived towards speed and precision in its delivery.

Fast-food restaurants , designed to maximise profit, have strived toward total efficiency since their conception, and continue to do so. A strict level of efficiency has been accomplished in several ways, including stricter control of its workers' actions, the replacement of more complicated systems with simpler, less time-consuming ones, simple numbered systems of value meals and the addition of drive-through windows.

Rationalization is also observable in the replacement of more traditional stores, which may offer subjective advantages to consumers, such as what sociologists consider a less regulated, more natural environment, with modern stores offering the objective advantage of lower prices to consumers. The case of Walmart is one strong example demonstrating this transition. While Walmarts have attracted considerable criticism for effectively displacing more traditional stores, these subjective social-value concerns have held minimal effectiveness in limiting expansion of the enterprise, particularly in more rationalized nations, [ citation needed ] due to the preferences of the public for lower prices over the advantages sociologists claim for more traditional stores.

[ 10 ] The sociologist George Ritzer has used the term McDonaldization to refer, not just to the actions of the fast food restaurant, but to the general process of rationalization. Ritzer distinguishes four primary components of McDonaldization: [ 11 ] Efficiency – the optimal method for accomplishing a task; the fastest method to get from point A to point B. Efficiency in McDonaldization means that every aspect of the organization is geared toward the minimization of time.

[ 6 ] Calculability – goals are quantifiable (i.e., sales, money) rather than subjective (i.e., taste, labour). McDonaldization developed the notion that quantity equals quality, and that a large amount of product delivered to the customer in a short amount of time is the same as a high quality product. "They run their organization in such a way that a person can walk into any McDonald's and receive the same sandwiches prepared in precisely the same way. This results in a highly rational system that specifies every action and leaves nothing to chance".

[ 6 ] Predictability – standardized and uniform services.  "Predictability" means that no matter where a person goes, they will receive the same service and receive the same product at every interaction with the corporation. This also applies to the workers in those organizations; their tasks are highly repetitive and predictable routines.

[ 6 ] Control – standardized and uniform employees, replacement of human by non-human technologies.

[ 6 ] Further objects of rationalization [ edit ] One rational tendency is towards increasing the efficiency and output of the human body. Several means can be employed in reaching this end, including trends towards regular exercise , dieting , increased hygiene , drugs , and an emphasis on optimal nutrition . As well as increasing lifespans , these allow for stronger, leaner, more optimized bodies for quickly performing tasks.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Society portal Conformity – Matching opinions and behaviors to group norms Consumerism – Acquisition of goods beyond essential needs Disenchantment – Cultural rationalization and devaluation of religion apparent in modern society Justice#Fairness – Concept of moral fairness and administration of the law Just-world fallacy – Idea that everyone faces consequence as they deserve Knowledge economy – Approach to generating value Legitimating ideology Might makes right – View that morality is, or ought to be, determined by those in power Postmodernity – Societal state after modernity Reductionism – Philosophical view explaining systems in terms of smaller parts Urbanization – Process of population movement to cities References [ edit ] ^ Weber, Max . Benezit Dictionary of Artists. Oxford University Press. 2011-10-31.

doi : 10.1093/benz/9780199773787.article.b00195194 .

^ a b Papastephanou, Marianna (November 2001).

"Modernization, Rationalization, and Education: Responding to the Other" .

Sociological Research Online .

6 (3): 105– 115.

doi : 10.5153/sro.638 .

ISSN 1360-7804 .

S2CID 144352443 .

^ de Blécourt, Willem; Davies, Owen (2018-07-30).

"Introduction" .

Witchcraft Continued . Manchester University Press.

doi : 10.7765/9781526137975.00004 .

ISBN 9781526137975 .

S2CID 240365272 . Retrieved 2022-04-14 .

^ a b Habermas, Jürgen, The Philosophical Discourse of Modernity , Polity Press (1985), ISBN 0-7456-0830-2 , p. 2 ^ Harriss, John.

The Second Great Transformation? Capitalism at the End of the Twentieth Century in Allen, T. and Thomas, Alan (eds) Poverty and Development in the 21st Century , Oxford University Press, Oxford, p. 325.

^ a b c d e Macionis, J., and Gerber, L. (2010). Sociology, 7th edition ^ Outhwaite, William, 1988 Habermas: Key Contemporary Thinkers , Polity Press (Second Edition 2009), ISBN 978-0-7456-4328-1 , p. 76.

^ Modernity and the Holocaust , p. 53.

^ Saner, Marc (2005).

"A Basic Classification of PREPs: Understood in the Widest Sense and Grouped with Conventional Tobacco Products" .

SSRN Electronic Journal .

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.1559407 .

ISSN 1556-5068 .

^ Boaz, David. (November 8, 1996). " Chrysler, Microsoft, and Industrial Policy Archived 2006-02-03 at the Wayback Machine ." Cato Institute .

Retrieved on August 17, 2006.

^ Ritzer, George (2008).

The McDonaldization of Society . Los Angeles: Pine Forge Press.

ISBN 978-0-7619-8812-0 .

^ See Michel Foucault 's The History of Sexuality (subtitle: The Care of the Self, vol. 3 ), which identifies this rationalization as emerging from capitalist ideologies  vis à vis control of workers (i.e., in this case, specifically, their bodies) for the rigors of commerce and the marketplace.

Further reading [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Rationalization (sociology) .

Adorno, Theodor.

Negative Dialectics . Translated by E.B. Ashton, London: Routledge, 1973 Bauman, Zygmunt.

Modernity and The Holocaust.

Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press 1989.

ISBN 0-8014-2397-X Green, Robert W. (ed.).

Protestantism, Capitalism, and Social Science.

Lexington, MA: Heath, 1973.

"McDonaldzation principles",  Macionis, J., and Gerber, L. (2010). Sociology, 7th edition v t e Max Weber Bibliography List of speeches Liberalism German politics Books Zur Geschichte der Handelsgesellschaften im Mittelalter (1889) Roman Agrarian History and Its Significance for Public and Private Law (1891) Condition of Farm Labour in Eastern Germany (1892) The Stock Exchange (1896) The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism (1905) The Economic Ethics of the World Religions The Religion of China (1915) The Religion of India (1916) Ancient Judaism (1921) Sociology of Religion (1920) The City (1921) Economy and Society (1922) Essays " The 'Objectivity' of Knowledge in Social Science and Social Policy " (1904) " The Protestant Sects and the Spirit of Capitalism " (1904) " The Rejection and the Meaning of the World " (1916) Lectures " Science as a Vocation " (1917) " Politics as a Vocation " (1919) General Economic History (1923) Concepts Bureaucracy Charisma Disenchantment Ethic of ultimate ends Ideal type Inner-worldly asceticism Iron cage Life chances Methodological individualism Monopoly on violence Patrimonialism Protestant work ethic Rationalisation Social action Affectional Traditional Instrumental Value-rational Three-component theory of stratification Tripartite classification of authority Charismatic Rational-legal Traditional Value-freedom Verstehen People Max Weber Sr.

(father) Alfred Weber (brother) Marianne Weber (wife) Related Verein für Socialpolitik Archiv für Sozialwissenschaft und Sozialpolitik German Sociological Association German Democratic Party Max Weber Foundation Authority control databases : National Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.canary‐666f86d675‐6lhwb
Cached time: 20250818001037
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.512 seconds
Real time usage: 0.678 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3232/1000000
Revision size: 19549/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 44693/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5005/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 48963/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.360/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17654836/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  618.064      1 -total
 29.75%  183.872     11 Template:Annotated_link
 21.36%  131.991      1 Template:Reflist
 14.61%   90.301      3 Template:Cite_book
 14.08%   87.029      1 Template:Max_Weber
 13.79%   85.211      1 Template:Navbox
  9.84%   60.803      1 Template:Short_description
  5.33%   32.955      1 Template:Authority_control
  5.30%   32.738      1 Template:Citation_needed
  5.25%   32.456      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1796242:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818001037 and revision id 1292104426. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rationalization_(sociology)&oldid=1292104426 " Categories : Max Weber Sociological terminology Sociological theories Modernity Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2011 Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 06:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rationalization (sociology) 15 languages Add topic

