Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Definition 1.2 History 1.3 Democratic socialism and social democracy 1.4 Political party 2 Economics Toggle Economics subsection 2.1 Democratic planning 2.2 Market socialism 2.3 Implementation 3 Philosophy 4 Views on the compatibility of democracy and socialism Toggle Views on the compatibility of democracy and socialism subsection 4.1 Support 4.2 Opposition 4.2.1 Non-communist opposition to Democratic Socialism 4.2.2 Communist opposition to Democratic Socialism 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Citations 6.2 Notes 6.3 Sources 6.3.1 Books 6.3.2 Encyclopedias 6.3.3 Journals 6.3.4 News 6.3.5 Speeches 6.3.6 Web 7 Bibliography 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Democratic socialism 62 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malti Bahasa Melayu नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Socialism emphasising democracy This article is about socialism emphasising democracy. For the form of democracy emphasising socialism, see Socialist democracy . For the ideology focusing on the gradual transition to socialism by democratic processes, see Social democracy .

Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e Democratic socialism is a left-wing [ 1 ] economic and political philosophy that supports political democracy and some form of a socially owned economy, [ 2 ] with a particular emphasis on economic democracy , workplace democracy , and workers' self-management [ 3 ] within a market socialist , decentralised planned , or democratic centrally planned socialist economy .

[ 4 ] Democratic socialists argue that capitalism is inherently incompatible with the values of freedom , equality , and solidarity and that these ideals can only be achieved through the realisation of a socialist society.

[ 5 ] Although most democratic socialists seek a gradual transition to socialism , [ 6 ] democratic socialism can support revolutionary or reformist politics to establish socialism.

[ 7 ] Democratic socialism was popularised by socialists who opposed the backsliding towards a one-party state in the Soviet Union and other countries during the 20th century.

[ 8 ] The history of democratic socialism can be traced back to 19th-century socialist thinkers across Europe and the Chartist movement in Britain, which somewhat differed in their goals but shared a common demand for democratic decision-making and public ownership of the means of production and viewed these as fundamental characteristics of the society they advocated for. From the late 19th to the early 20th century, democratic socialism was heavily influenced by the gradualist form of socialism promoted by the British Fabian Society and Eduard Bernstein 's evolutionary socialism in Germany.

[ 9 ] The phrase "democratic socialism" has been used in multiple senses, including a broad sense that refers to all forms of socialism which reject autocracy .

[ 10 ] In the broad sense, democratic socialism includes all anti-capitalist stances in support of democracy including reformist socialism , [ 5 ] revolutionary socialism , [ 11 ] state socialism , [ 12 ] and left-wing populism .

[ 13 ] In colloquial usage, democratic socialism may more narrowly refer to the anti-capitalist wing of social democracy (or reformist socialism), seeking to quickly move beyond the welfare state .

[ 14 ] Overview [ edit ] The fist and rose , a common symbol of democratic socialism and social democracy Democratic socialism is contrasted with Marxism–Leninism, whose opponents often view as being authoritarian, bureaucratic, and undemocratic in practice.

[ 15 ] Democratic socialists oppose the Stalinist political system and the Marxist–Leninist economic planning system, rejecting as their form of governance the administrative-command model formed in the Soviet Union and other Marxist–Leninist states during the 20th century.

[ 16 ] Democratic socialism is also distinguished from Third Way social democracy [ 17 ] [ nb 1 ] because democratic socialists are committed to the systemic transformation of the economy from capitalism to socialism, [ nb 2 ] while social democrats use capitalism to create a strong welfare state , leaving many businesses under private ownership .

[ 23 ] However, many democratic socialists also advocate for state regulations and welfare programs in order to reduce the perceived harms of capitalism and slowly transform the economic system.

[ 23 ] While having socialism as a long-term goal, [ 24 ] some moderate democratic socialists are more concerned about curbing capitalism's excesses and are supportive of progressive reforms to humanise it in the present day.

[ 25 ] In contrast, other democratic socialists believe that economic interventionism and similar policy reforms aimed at addressing social inequalities and suppressing capitalism's economic contradictions can simply exacerbate them [ 26 ] or cause them to emerge under a different guise.

[ 27 ] Those democratic socialists believe that the fundamental issues with capitalism can only be resolved by revolutionary means of replacing the capitalist mode of production with the socialist mode of production through a replacement of private ownership with collective ownership of the means of production and extending democracy to the economic sphere in the form of workplace democracy or industrial democracy .

[ 28 ] The main criticism of democratic socialism from the perspective of liberal democrats is focused on the compatibility of democracy and socialism, [ 29 ] while Marxist–Leninist criticisms are focused on the feasibility of achieving a socialist or communist society through democratic means or without suppressing counter-revolutionary forces.

[ 30 ] Several academics, political commentators, and scholars have noted that some Western countries, such as France , Sweden and the United Kingdom , have been governed by socialist parties or have social democratic mixed economies sometimes referred to as "democratic socialist".

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] However, some have argued that following the end of the Cold War , many of these countries have moved away from socialism as a neoliberal consensus replaced the social democratic consensus in the advanced capitalist world.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ disputed (for: Socialist parties still routinely come in and out of power in these countries.)  – discuss ] Democratic socialism is defined as having a socialist economy in which the means of production are socially and collectively owned or controlled [ 3 ] alongside a democratic political system of government.

[ 36 ] Democratic socialists reject most self-described socialist states , which followed Marxism–Leninism .

[ 37 ] In democratic socialism, the active participation of the population and workers in the self-management of the economy characterises socialism, [ 3 ] while administrative-command systems do not.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Nicos Poulantzas makes a similar, more complex argument.

[ 40 ] For Hal Draper , revolutionary-democratic socialism is a type of socialism from below, writing in The Two Souls of Socialism that "the leading spokesman in the Second International of a revolutionary-democratic Socialism-from-Below was Rosa Luxemburg , who so emphatically put her faith and hope in the spontaneous struggle of a free working class that the myth-makers invented for her a ' theory of spontaneity .'" [ 41 ] Similarly, he wrote about Eugene V. Debs that "'Debsian socialism' evoked a tremendous response from the heart of the people, but Debs had no successor as a tribune of revolutionary-democratic socialism." [ 42 ] Some Marxist socialists emphasise Karl Marx 's belief in democracy [ 43 ] and call themselves democratic socialists.

[ 44 ] The Socialist Party of Great Britain and the World Socialist Movement define socialism in its classical formulation as a "system of society based upon the common ownership and democratic control of the means and instruments for producing and distributing wealth by and in the interest of the community." [ 45 ] Additionally, they include classlessness, statelessness and the abolition of wage labour as characteristics of a socialist society, characterising it as a stateless , propertyless , post-monetary economy based on calculation in kind , a free association of producers , workplace democracy and free access to goods and services produced solely for use and not for exchange .

[ 46 ] Although these characteristics are usually reserved to describe a communist society, [ 47 ] this is consistent with the usage of Marx, Friedrich Engels and others, who referred to communism and socialism interchangeably.

[ 48 ] Definition [ edit ] The Democratic Socialists of America (DSA), defines democratic socialism as a decentralised socially-owned economy and rejecting both authoritarian socialism and social democracy , stating: [ 49 ] Capitalism is a system designed by the owning class to exploit the rest of us for their own profit. We must replace it with democratic socialism, a system where ordinary people have a real voice in our workplaces, neighborhoods, and society.
We believe there are many avenues that feed into [democratic socialism]. Our vision pushes further than historic social democracy and leaves behind authoritarian visions of socialism in the dustbin of history.

Tony Benn , a prominent left-wing Labour Party politician, [ 50 ] described democratic socialism as socialism that is "open, libertarian, pluralistic, humane and democratic; nothing whatever in common with the harsh, centralised, dictatorial and mechanistic images which are purposely presented by our opponents and a tiny group of people who control the mass media in Britain." [ 51 ] Some tendencies of democratic socialism advocate for a social revolution to transition to socialism , distinguishing it from some forms of social democracy .

[ 52 ] In Soviet politics, democratic socialism is the version of the Soviet Union model reformed democratically. Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev described perestroika as building a "new, humane and democratic socialism." [ 53 ] Consequently, some former communist parties have rebranded themselves as democratic socialists.

[ 54 ] This includes parties such as The Left in Germany, [ 55 ] a party succeeding the Party of Democratic Socialism , which was itself the legal successor of the Socialist Unity Party of Germany .

[ 56 ] Some uses of the term democratic socialism represent social democratic policies within capitalism instead of an ideology that aims to transcend and replace capitalism, although this is not always the case. Robert M. Page, a reader in Democratic Socialism and Social Policy at the University of Birmingham , wrote about transformative democratic socialism to refer to the politics of Labour Party Prime Minister Clement Attlee and its government ( fiscal redistribution , some degree of public ownership and a strong welfare state) and revisionist democratic socialism as developed by Labour Party politician Anthony Crosland and Labour Party Prime Minister Harold Wilson , arguing: The most influential revisionist Labour thinker, Anthony Crosland, contended that a more "benevolent" form of capitalism had emerged since the Second World War. ... According to Crosland, it was now possible to achieve greater equality in society without the need for "fundamental" economic transformation. For Crosland, a more meaningful form of equality could be achieved if the growth dividend derived from effective management of the economy was invested in "pro-poor" public services rather than through fiscal redistribution.

[ 57 ] The political scientist Lyman Tower Sargent offers a similar definition based on the practice of social democracy in Europe: Democratic socialism can be characterised as follows: Much property held by the public through a democratically elected government, including most major industries, utilities, and transportation systems A limit on the accumulation of private property Governmental regulation of the economy Extensive publicly financed assistance and pension programs Social costs and the provision of services added to purely financial considerations as the measure of efficiency Publicly held property is limited to productive property and significant infrastructure; it does not extend to personal property, homes, and small businesses. And in practice in many democratic socialist countries [sic], it has not extended to many large corporations.

[ 58 ] History [ edit ] Main article: History of democratic socialism The origins of democratic socialism can be traced back to 19th-century utopian socialist thinkers and the Chartist movement in Great Britain , which somewhat differed in their goals but shared a common demand of democratic decision making and public ownership of the means of production , and viewed these as fundamental characteristics of the society they advocated for.

[ 44 ] Democratic socialism was also heavily influenced by the gradualist form of socialism promoted by the British Fabian Society and Eduard Bernstein 's evolutionary socialism .

[ 9 ] In the 19th century, democratic socialism was repressed by many governments; countries such as Germany and Italy banned democratic socialist parties.

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] With the expansion of liberal democracy and universal suffrage during the 20th century, democratic socialism became a mainstream movement which expanded across the world. Democratic socialists played a major role in liberal democracy, [ 61 ] often forming governing parties or acting as the main opposition party (one major exception being the United States [ 62 ] ).

Democratic socialism and social democracy [ edit ] Part of a series on Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Critical theory Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Institutional abuse Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Structural abuse Structural violence Trade union Tripartism Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman İnönü Jaurès Jenkins Jumblatt Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (Wilhelm) Liebknecht (Karl) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Myrdal (Alva) Myrdal (Gunnar) Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Radbruch Reich Rustin Sánchez Sanders Savage Scholz Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists Network of Social Democracy in Asia Parties CPDS ESDP MLSTP–PSD MSZDP MSZP PES PS Andorra France PSD PSDE PSDSH PSSh S Denmark Latvia SAP SD SDE SDF SDK SDLP SDP Croatia Finland Japan Montenegro SDPI SDSM Smer SOCDEM SocDems SPD SDP BiH SPDS SP SPÖ Related Bevanism Figuerism Kirchnerism Lulism " The Internationale " Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Prior to the displacement of Keynesianism by neoliberalism and monetarism , which caused many social-democratic parties to adopt the Third Way ideology, accepting capitalism as the current status quo and powers that be , redefining socialism in a way that it maintained the capitalist structure intact, [ 20 ] social democracy has been occasionally described as a form of democratic socialism. The new version of Clause IV of the British Labour Party's constitution, first adopted by former party leader Tony Blair , uses democratic socialism to describe a modernised form of social democracy.

[ 63 ] While affirming a commitment to democratic socialism, [ 64 ] it no longer commits the party to public ownership of industry and, in its place, advocates "the enterprise of the market and the rigour of competition" along with "high quality public services ... either owned by the public or accountable to them." [ 64 ] Donald F. Busky's Democratic Socialism: A Global Survey describes social democracy as a form of democratic socialism that follows a gradual, reformist or evolutionary path to socialism rather than a revolutionary one.

[ 65 ] This tendency is captured in the statement of Labour revisionist Anthony Crosland , who argued that the socialism of the pre-war world was now becoming increasingly irrelevant.

[ 66 ] This tendency has been evoked in works such as Roy Hattersley 's Choose Freedom: The Future of Democratic Socialism , [ 67 ] Malcolm Hamilton's Democratic Socialism in Britain and Sweden , [ 68 ] and Jim Tomlinson's Democratic Socialism and Economic Policy: The Attlee Years, 1945–1951 [ 69 ] A variant of this set of definitions is Joseph Schumpeter 's argument in Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (1942) [ 70 ] that liberal democracies were evolving from liberal capitalism into democratic socialism with the growth of industrial democracy , regulatory institutions and self-management .

[ 71 ] A key difference is that social democrats are mainly concerned with practical reforms within capitalism, with socialism either relegated to the indefinite future or perceived to have abandoned it in the case of the Third Way.

[ 72 ] More radical democratic socialists want to go beyond mere meliorist reforms and advocate the systemic transformation of the mode of production from capitalism to socialism .

[ 73 ] While the Third Way has been described as a new social democracy [ 74 ] or neo-social democracy, [ 75 ] standing for a modernised social democracy [ 76 ] and competitive socialism, [ 77 ] the form of social democracy that remained committed to the gradual abolition of capitalism and social democrats opposed to the Third Way merged into democratic socialism.

[ 78 ] During the late 20th century and early 21st century, these labels were embraced, contested and rejected due to the development within the European left of Eurocommunism between the 1970s and 1980s, [ 79 ] the rise of neoliberalism in the mid to late 1970s, [ 80 ] the fall of the Soviet Union in December 1991 and of Marxist–Leninist governments between 1989 and 1992, [ 81 ] the rise and fall of the Third Way [ 20 ] between the 1970s [ 82 ] and 2010s [ 83 ] and the simultaneous rise of anti-austerity , [ 84 ] green , [ 85 ] left-wing populist [ 86 ] and Occupy [ 87 ] movements in the late 2000s and early 2010s due to the 2008 financial crisis and the Great Recession , [ 88 ] the causes of which have been widely attributed to the neoliberal shift [ 89 ] and deregulation economic policies.

[ 90 ] This latest development contributed to the rise of politicians that represent a return to the post-war consensus social democracy, such as Jeremy Corbyn in the United Kingdom and Bernie Sanders in the United States, [ 91 ] who assumed the democratic socialist label to describe their rejection of centrist politicians that supported triangulation within the Labour and Democratic parties such as with New Labour and the New Democrats , respectively.

[ 92 ] Social democracy originated as a revolutionary socialist or communist movement.

[ 93 ] One distinction to separate the modern versions of democratic socialism and social democracy is that the former can include revolutionary means.

[ 94 ] In contrast, the latter asserts that the only acceptable constitutional form of government is representative democracy under the rule of law , which is to implement social change via reformism .

[ 95 ] Many social democrats "refer to themselves as socialists or democratic socialists", and some "use or have used these terms interchangeably." [ 96 ] Others argue that "there are clear differences between the three terms, and preferred to describe their own political beliefs by using the term 'social democracy' only." [ 97 ] In political science, democratic socialism and social democracy are occasionally seen as synonymous or otherwise not mutually exclusive, [ 98 ] while they are usually sharply distinguished in journalistic use.

[ 99 ] While social democrats continue to call and describe themselves as democratic socialists or simply socialists , [ 96 ] the meaning of democratic socialism and social democracy effectively reversed.

[ 100 ] Democratic socialism originally represented socialism achieved by democratic means and usually resulted in reformism, whereas social democracy included reformist and revolutionary wings.

[ 101 ] With the association of social democracy as a policy regime [ 102 ] and the development of the Third Way, [ 20 ] social democracy became almost exclusively associated with capitalist welfare states, [ 103 ] while democratic socialism came to refer to anti-capitalist tendencies, including communism , revolutionary socialism , and reformist socialism .

[ 104 ] Political party [ edit ] While most social-democratic parties describe themselves as democratic socialists , with democratic socialism representing the theory and social democracy the practice and vice versa, political scientists distinguish between the two.

Social democratic is used for centre-left political parties, [ 105 ] "whose aim is the gradual amelioration of poverty and exploitation within a liberal capitalist society." [ 106 ] On the other hand, democratic socialist is used for left-wing socialist parties, including left-wing populist parties such as The Left , Podemos and Syriza .

[ 107 ] This is reflected at the European party level, where the centre-left social democratic parties are within the Party of European Socialists and the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats , while left-wing democratic socialist parties are within the Party of the European Left and the European United Left–Nordic Green Left .

[ 108 ] These democratic socialist groups often include communist tendencies, in contrast to social democratic groups which exclude anti-capitalist tendencies.

[ 109 ] According to Steve Ludlam, "the arrival of New Labour signalled an unprecedented and possibly final assault on the [British] Labour Party's democratic socialist tradition, that is to say the tradition of those seeking the transformation of capitalism into socialism by overwhelmingly legislative means. ... It would be a while before some of the party's social democrats—those whose aim is the gradual amelioration of poverty and exploitation within a liberal capitalist society—began to fear the same threat to Labour's egalitarian tradition as the left recognised to its socialist tradition." [ 106 ] This was reflected similarly in Labour: A Tale of Two Parties by Hilary Wainwright.

[ 110 ] According to Andrew Mathers, Hilary Wainwright's 1987 work Labour: A Tale of Two Parties provided "a different reading which contrasted the 'ameliorative, pragmatic' social democratic tradition expressed principally in the Parliamentary Labour Party with a 'transformative, visionary' democratic socialist tradition associated mainly with the grassroots members engaged closely with extra-parliamentary struggles." [ 111 ] Economics [ edit ] Democratic socialists have promoted various different models of socialism and economics , ranging from market socialism , where socially owned enterprises operate in competitive markets and are self-managed by their workforce, to non-market participatory economics based on decentralised economic planning , and democratic central planning .

[ 112 ] Democratic socialism can also be committed to a decentralised form of economic planning where productive units are integrated into a single organisation and organised based on self-management.

[ 16 ] Eugene V. Debs and Norman Thomas , both United States Presidential candidates for the Socialist Party of America , understood socialism to be an economic system structured upon production for use and social ownership in place of the for-profit system and private ownership of the means of production .

[ 113 ] Contemporary proponents of market socialism and decentralised planning have argued that rather than socialism itself, the primary reason for the economic shortcomings of Soviet-type economies was their administrative-command system and its failure to create rules and operational criteria for the efficient operation of state enterprises in their hierarchical allocation of resources and commodities.

[ 114 ] All types of democratic socialists, including those in favor of central planning, often cite the lack of democracy in the political and economic systems of Marxist–Leninist regimes as a reason for their historical or contemporary shortcomings or failures.

[ 114 ] Democratic planning [ edit ] A democratically planned economy has been proposed as a basis for socialism and variously advocated by some democratic socialists who simultaneously reject market socialism and Soviet-type economic planning .

[ 115 ] Democratic economic planning implies some process of democratic or participatory decision-making within the economy and firms in the form of industrial democracy . Supporters of democratic economic planning often reject market socialism on the basis that it fails to broadly coordinate information and resources according to social needs, and reject the Soviet model-based administrative-command system due to inefficient or undemocratic operation.

Democratic socialist proponents of decentralised planning assert that it allows for a spontaneously self-regulating system of stock control, relying solely on calculation in kind , to come about and that in turn decisively overcomes the objections raised by the economic calculation argument that any large-scale economy must necessarily resort to a system of market prices.

[ 116 ] Decentralised planning models often involve workers' councils or industrial unions , and include models proposed by anarchist economists Michael Albert and Robin Hahnel as participatory economics ; [ 117 ] [ 118 ] and economist Pat Devine as " negotiated coordination ," based on representative democracy .

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] On the other hand, democratic socialist proponents of centralised planning argue that it is better equipped to carry out economy-wide coordination and strengthen the collective power of the working class.

[ 120 ] [ 121 ] David McNally , a professor at the University of Houston , has argued in the Marxist tradition that the logic of the market inherently produces social inequality and leads to unequal exchanges , writing that Adam Smith 's moral intent and moral philosophy espousing equal exchange were undermined by the practice of the free market he championed as the development of the market economy involved coercion, exploitation and violence that Smith's moral philosophy could not counteract. McNally criticises market socialists for believing in the possibility of fair markets based on equal exchanges to be achieved by purging parasitical elements from the market economy, such as private ownership of the means of production, arguing that market socialism is an oxymoron when socialism is defined as an end to wage labour .

[ 122 ] [ 119 ] Various computer scientists and radical economists have also proposed computer-based forms of democratic economic planning and coordination between economic enterprises, based on either centralised or decentralised models.

[ 123 ] Chile explored computerised central planning from 1971 to 1973 with Project Cybersyn .

[ 123 ] [ 124 ] [ 125 ] In 1993, computer scientist Paul Cockshott and economics professor Allin Cottrell proposed in Towards a New Socialism a computerised central planning model based on direct democracy and modern technological advances.

[ 118 ] Market socialism [ edit ] Some proponents of market socialism see it as an economic system compatible with the political ideology of democratic socialism.

[ 126 ] Democratic socialist advocates of market socialism often support the development of worker cooperatives , and sometimes market-based sovereign wealth funds .

Advocates of market socialism, such as Jaroslav Vaněk , argue that genuinely free markets are impossible under private ownership of productive property . Vaněk contends that the class differences and unequal distribution of income and economic power that result from private ownership of industry enable the interests of the dominant class to skew the market in their favour, either in the form of monopoly and market power or by utilising their wealth and resources to legislate government policies that benefit their specific business interests. Additionally, Vaněk states that workers in a socialist economy based on worker-owned cooperatives have more substantial incentives to maximise productivity because they would receive a share of the profits based on the overall performance of their enterprise, plus their fixed wage or salary.

[ 127 ] The Lange–Lerner model is a model first proposed by Oskar R. Lange in 1936 in response to the socialist calculation debate and later expanded by Abba P. Lerner in 1938, which is based on public ownership of the means of production with simultaneous market-based allocation of consumer goods. While this model is typically considered a type of centrally planned economy, Lange and Lerner referred to it as a market socialist model.

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] Many pre-Marx socialists and proto-socialists were fervent anti-capitalists just as they were supporters of the free market, including the British philosopher Thomas Hodgskin , the French mutualist thinker and anarchist philosopher Pierre-Joseph Proudhon and American philosophers Benjamin Tucker and Lysander Spooner , among others.

[ 130 ] Although capitalism has been commonly conflated with the free market, there is a similar laissez-faire economic theory and system associated with socialism called left-wing laissez-faire [ 131 ] to distinguish it from laissez-faire capitalism .

[ 132 ] One example of this democratic market socialist tendency is mutualism, a democratic and libertarian socialist theory developed by Proudhon in the 18th century, from which individualist anarchism emerged. Benjamin Tucker is one eminent American individualist anarchist who adopted a laissez-faire socialist system he termed anarchistic socialism as opposed to state socialism .

[ 133 ] This tradition has been recently associated with contemporary scholars such as Kevin Carson , [ 134 ] Gary Chartier , [ 135 ] Charles W. Johnson, [ 136 ] Samuel Edward Konkin III , [ 137 ] Roderick T. Long, [ 138 ] Chris Matthew Sciabarra [ 139 ] and Brad Spangler, [ 140 ] who stress the value of radically free markets, termed freed markets to distinguish them from the common conception which these left-libertarians believe to be riddled with statism and bourgeois privileges.

[ 141 ] Sometimes referred to as left-wing market anarchists, [ 142 ] proponents of this approach strongly affirm the classical liberal ideas of self-ownership and free markets while maintaining that taken to their logical conclusions, these ideas support anti-capitalist , anti-corporatist , anti-hierarchical and pro-labour positions in economics, anti-imperialism in foreign policy and radically progressive views regarding sociocultural issues such as gender, sexuality and race.

[ 143 ] Echoing the language of these market socialists, they maintain that radical market anarchism should be seen by its proponents and by others as part of the socialist tradition because of its heritage, emancipatory goals and potential and that market anarchists can and should call themselves socialists.

[ 144 ] Critics of the free market and laissez-faire , as commonly understood, argue that socialism is fully compatible with a market economy and that a genuinely free-market or laissez-faire system would be anti-capitalist and socialist.

[ 131 ] According to its supporters, this would result in the society advocated by democratic socialists, when socialism is not understood as state socialism and conflated with self-described socialist states .

[ 145 ] The free market and laissez-faire are free from all economic privilege, monopolies and artificial scarcities.

[ 132 ] This is consistent with the classical economics view that economic rents , i.e. profits generated from a lack of perfect competition , must be reduced or eliminated as much as possible through free competition rather than free from regulation.

[ 146 ] Implementation [ edit ] While socialism is commonly used to describe Marxism–Leninism and affiliated states and governments, there have also been several anarchist and socialist societies that followed democratic socialist principles, encompassing anti-authoritarian and democratic anti-capitalism .

[ 147 ] The most notable historical examples are the Paris Commune , the various soviet republics established in the post-World War I period, early Soviet Russia before the abolition of soviet councils by the Bolsheviks , Revolutionary Catalonia as noted by George Orwell , [ 148 ] and the Federation of Rojava in Northern Syria .

[ 149 ] Other examples include the kibbutz communities in modern-day Israel , [ 150 ] Marinaleda in Spain , [ 151 ] the Zapatistas of EZLN in the region of Chiapas , [ 152 ] and to some extent, the workers' self-management policies within the Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Cuba .

[ 153 ] However, the best-known example is Chile under President Salvador Allende , [ 154 ] who was overthrown in a military coup funded and backed by the CIA in 1973.

[ 155 ] When nationalisation of large industries was relatively widespread during the Keynesian post-war consensus , it was not uncommon for some political commentators to describe several European countries as democratic socialist states seeking to move their countries towards a socialist economy .

[ 156 ] In 1956, leading British Labour Party politician Anthony Crosland claimed that capitalism had been abolished in Britain. However, others, such as Welshman Aneurin Bevan , Minister of Health in the first post-war Labour government and the architect of the National Health Service , disputed the claim that Britain was a socialist state.

[ 157 ] For Crosland and others who supported his views, Britain was a socialist state. According to Bevan, Britain had a socialist National Health Service , which opposed the hedonism of Britain's capitalist society.

[ 158 ] Although the laws of capitalism still operated entirely as in the rest of Europe and private enterprise dominated the economy, [ 159 ] several political commentators claimed that during the post-war period, when socialist parties were in power, countries such as Britain and France were democratic socialist states. The same claim is now applied to Nordic countries with the Nordic model .

[ 160 ] In the 1980s, the government of President François Mitterrand aimed to expand dirigisme by attempting to nationalise all French banks, but this attempt faced opposition from the European Economic Community , which demanded a capitalist free-market economy among its members.

[ 161 ] Nevertheless, public ownership in France and the United Kingdom during the height of nationalisation in the 1960s and 1970s never accounted for more than 15–20% of capital formation .

[ 159 ] The form of socialism practised by parties such as the Singaporean People's Action Party during its first few decades in power was pragmatic, as it its rejection of mass nationalisation characterised it. The party still claimed to be socialist , pointing out its extensive regulation of the private sector, activist intervention in the economy and social welfare policies as evidence of this claim.

[ 162 ] Singaporean Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew stated that he had been influenced by the democratic socialist factions of the British Labour Party.

[ 163 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Karl Marx , whose thought influenced the development of democratic socialism, with some endorsing it and others rejecting it [ nb 3 ] Democratic socialism involves the majority of the population controlling the economy through some democratic system , with the idea that the means of production are owned and managed by the working class .

[ 3 ] The interrelationship between democracy and socialism extends far back into the socialist movement to The Communist Manifesto ' s emphasis on winning as a first step the "battle of democracy", [ 165 ] with Karl Marx writing that democracy is "the road to socialism." [ 166 ] Socialist thinkers such as Eduard Bernstein , Karl Kautsky , Vladimir Lenin and Rosa Luxemburg [ 167 ] wrote that democracy is indispensable to realising socialism.

[ 168 ] Philosophical support for democratic socialism can be found in the works of political philosophers such as Axel Honneth and Charles Taylor . Honneth has put forward the view that political and economic ideologies have a social basis, meaning they originate from intersubjective communication between members of society. Honneth criticises the liberal state and ideology because it assumes that principles of individual liberty and private property are ahistorical and abstract when they evolved from a specific social discourse on human activity. In contrast to liberal individualism , Honneth has emphasised the intersubjective dependence between humans, namely that human well-being depends on recognising others and being recognised by them. With an emphasis on community and solidarity , democratic socialism can be seen as a way of safeguarding this dependency.

[ 169 ] While socialism is frequently used to describe socialist states and Soviet-style economies , especially in the United States due to the First and Second Red Scares , democratic socialists use socialism to refer to the tendency that rejects the ideas of authoritarian socialism and state socialism as socialism, [ 37 ] regarding them as a form of state capitalism in which the state undertakes commercial economic activity and where the means of production are organised and managed as state-owned enterprises , including the processes of capital accumulation , centralised management and wage labour .

[ 170 ] Democratic socialists include those socialists who are opposed to Marxism–Leninism and social democrats who are committed to the abolishment of capitalism in favour of socialism and the institution of a post-capitalist economy.

[ 37 ] Andrew Lipow thus wrote in 1847 the editors of the Journal of the Communist League , directly influenced by Marx and Friedrich Engels , whom Lipow describes as "the founders of modern revolutionary democratic socialism": We are not among those communists who are out to destroy personal liberty, who wish to turn the world into one huge barrack or into a gigantic workhouse. There certainly are some communists who, with an easy conscience, refuse to countenance personal liberty and would like to shuffle it out of the world because they consider that it is a hindrance to complete harmony. But we have no desire to exchange freedom for equality. We are convinced that in no social order will freedom be assured as in a society based upon communal ownership.

[ 171 ] Theoretically and philosophically, socialism itself is democratic, seen as the highest democratic form by its proponents and at one point being the same as democracy.

[ 172 ] Some argue that socialism implies democracy [ 173 ] and that democratic socialism is a redundant term.

[ 174 ] However, others, such as Michael Harrington , argue that the term democratic socialism is necessary to distinguish it from that of the Soviet Union and other self-declared socialist states. For Harrington, the primary reason for this was the perspective that viewed the Stalinist -era Soviet Union as having succeeded in usurping the legacy of Marxism and distorting it in propaganda to justify its politics.

[ 175 ] Both Leninism and Marxism–Leninism have emphasised democracy, [ 176 ] endorsing some form of democratic organisation of society and the economy whilst supporting democratic centralism , with Marxist–Leninists and others arguing that socialist states such as the Soviet Union were democratic.

[ 177 ] Marxist–Leninists also tended to distinguish socialist democracy from democratic socialism , which they associated pejoratively with "reformism" and "social democracy." [ 178 ] Ultimately, they are considered outside the democratic socialist tradition.

[ 179 ] On the other hand, anarchism (especially within its social anarchist tradition) and other ultra-left tendencies have been discussed within the democratic socialist tradition for their opposition to Marxism–Leninism and their support for more decentralised, direct forms of democracy.

[ 180 ] While both anarchists and ultra-left tendencies have rejected the label as they tend to associate it with reformist and statist forms of democratic socialism, they are considered revolutionary-democratic forms of socialism, and some anarchists have referred to democratic socialism .

[ 181 ] Some Trotskyist organisations such as the Australian Socialist Alliance , Socialist Alternative and Victorian Socialists or the French New Anticapitalist Party , Revolutionary Communist League and Socialism from below have described their form of socialism as democratic and have emphasised democracy in their revolutionary development of socialism.

[ 182 ] Similarly, several Trotskyists have emphasised Leon Trotsky 's revolutionary-democratic socialism.

[ 183 ] Some such as Hal Draper spoke of "revolutionary-democratic socialism." [ 184 ] Those third camp revolutionary-democratic socialists advocated a socialist political revolution to establish or re-establish socialist democracy in deformed or degenerated workers' states .

[ 185 ] Draper also compared social democracy and Stalinism as two forms of socialism from above , contraposed to his socialism from below as being the purer, more Marxist version of socialism.

[ 184 ] As a political tradition, democratic socialism represents a broad anti-Stalinist leftist and, in many cases, anti-Leninist strand within the socialist movement, [ 37 ] including anti-authoritarian socialism from below, [ 186 ] libertarian socialism , [ 187 ] market socialism , [ 4 ] Marxism [ 188 ] and certain left communist and ultra-left tendencies such as councilism and communisation as well as classical and libertarian Marxism .

[ 189 ] It also includes the orthodox Marxism [ 190 ] related to Karl Kautsky [ 191 ] and Rosa Luxemburg, [ 192 ] as well as the revisionism of Eduard Bernstein.

[ 193 ] In addition, democratic socialism is related to the trend of Eurocommunism originating between the 1950s and 1980s, [ 194 ] referring to communist parties that adopted democratic socialism after Nikita Khrushchev 's de-Stalinisation in 1956, [ 195 ] but also that of most communist parties since the 1990s.

[ 196 ] As a related ideology, classical social democracy is a form of democratic socialism.

[ 197 ] Social democracy underwent various major forms throughout its history and is distinguished between the early trend [ 198 ] that supported revolutionary socialism , [ 199 ] mainly related to Marx and Engels, [ 200 ] as well as other notable social-democratic politicians and orthodox Marxist thinkers such as Bernstein, [ 193 ] Kautsky, [ 191 ] Luxemburg [ 192 ] and Lenin, [ 201 ] including more democratic and libertarian interpretations of Leninism ; [ 202 ] the revisionist trend adopted by Bernstein and other reformist socialist leaders between the 1890s and 1940s; [ 203 ] the post-war trend [ 198 ] that adopted or endorsed Keynesian welfare capitalism [ 204 ] as part of a compromise between capitalism and socialism; [ 205 ] and those opposed to the Third Way .

[ 20 ] Views on the compatibility of democracy and socialism [ edit ] Support [ edit ] One of the foremost scholars who have argued that socialism and democracy are compatible is the Austrian-born American economist Joseph Schumpeter , who was hostile to socialism.

[ 206 ] In his book Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy (1942), Schumpeter emphasised that "political democracy was thoroughly compatible with socialism in its fullest sense".

[ 207 ] However, it has been noted that he did not believe that democracy was a sound political system and advocated republican values.

[ 29 ] In a 1963 All India Congress Committee address, Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru stated: "Political democracy has no meaning if it does not embrace economic democracy . And economic democracy is nothing but socialism." [ 208 ] Political historian Theodore Draper wrote: "I know of no political group which has resisted totalitarianism in all its guises more steadfastly than democratic socialists." [ 29 ] Historian and economist Robert Heilbroner argued that "[t]here is, of course, no conflict between such a socialism and freedom as we have described it; indeed, this conception of socialism is the very epitome of these freedoms", referring to open association of individuals in political and social life; the democratization and humanization of work; and the cultivation of personal talents and creativity.

[ 29 ] Bayard Rustin , a long-time member of the Socialist Party of America and National Chairman of the Social Democrats, USA , wrote: "For me, socialism has meaning only if it is democratic. Of the many claimants to socialism only one has a valid title—that socialism which views democracy as valuable per se, which stands for democracy unequivocally, and which continually modifies socialist ideas and programs in the light of democratic experience. This is the socialism of the labor, social-democratic, and socialist parties of Western Europe." [ 29 ] Economist and political theorist Kenneth Arrow argued: "We cannot be sure that the principles of democracy and socialism are compatible until we can observe a viable society following both principles. But there is no convincing evidence or reasoning which would argue that a democratic-socialist movement is inherently self-contradictory. Nor need we fear that gradual moves in the direction of increasing government intervention will lead to an irreversible move to ' serfdom .'" [ 29 ] Journalist William Pfaff wrote: "It might be argued that socialism ineluctably breeds state bureaucracy, which then imposes its own kinds of restrictions upon individual liberties. This is what the Scandinavians complain about. But Italy's champion bureaucracy owes nothing to socialism. American bureaucracy grows as luxuriantly and behaves as officiously as any other." [ 29 ] Economic anthropologist Jason Hickel and his colleague Dylan Sullivan argue that in order to transcend the problems associated with the persistent underdevelopment in the contemporary "imperialist world economy", where "continued capital accumulation may create pressures for cheapening labour" which "works against the goals of human development," and also the top-down authoritarian socialism as experienced in the Soviet Union and Maoist China, which they argue is "at odds with the socialist goals of workers’ self-management and democratic control over production," it will be necessary to adopt a "socialist strategy in the twenty-first century that is radically democratic, extending democracy to production itself." [ 209 ] Marxist theorist and revolutionary Leon Trotsky wrote that: "Socialism needs democracy like the human body needs oxygen".

[ 210 ] In particular, he believed that central planners in the Soviet Union, regardless of their intellectual capacity, operated without the input and participation of the millions of people who participate in the economy and so they would be unable to respond to local conditions quickly enough to effectively coordinate all economic activity.

[ 211 ] In the Transitional Program , which was drafted in 1938 during the founding congress of the Fourth International , Trotsky called for the legalization of the Soviet parties and worker's control of production .

[ 212 ] Opposition [ edit ] Non-communist opposition to Democratic Socialism [ edit ] Some anti-socialist politicians, economists, and theorists have argued that socialism and democracy are incompatible. According to them, history is full of instances of self-declared socialist states that at one point were committed to the values of personal liberty , freedom of speech , freedom of the press and freedom of association but then found themselves clamping down on such freedoms as they end up being viewed as inconvenient or contrary towards their political or economic goals.

[ 29 ] Chicago School economist Milton Friedman argued that a "society which is socialist cannot also be democratic" in the sense of "guaranteeing individual freedom." [ 29 ] Sociologist Robert Nisbet , a philosophical conservative who began his career as a leftist, argued in 1978 that there is "not a single free socialism to be found anywhere in the world." [ 29 ] Neoconservative Irving Kristol argued: "Democratic socialism turns out to be an inherently unstable compound, a contradiction in terms. Every social democratic party, once in power, soon finds itself choosing, at one point after another, between the socialist society it aspires to and the liberal society that lathered it." Kristol added that "socialist movements end up [in] a society where liberty is the property of the state, and is (or is not) doled out to its citizens along with other contingent 'benefits'." [ 29 ] Similarly, anti-communist academic Richard Pipes argued: "The merger of political and economic power implicit in socialism greatly strengthens the ability of the state and its bureaucracy to control the population. Theoretically, this capacity need not be exercised and need not lead to growing domination of the population by the state. In practice, such a tendency is virtually inevitable. For one thing, the socialization of the economy must lead to a numerical growth of the bureaucracy required to administer it, and this process cannot fail to augment the power of the state. For another, socialism leads to a tug of war between the state, bent on enforcing its economic monopoly, and the ordinary citizen, equally determined to evade it; the result is repression and the creation of specialized repressive organs." [ 29 ] Communist opposition to Democratic Socialism [ edit ] On the other end of the spectrum, several Marxist and communist thinkers and groups have strongly criticized democratic socialism and many of its aspects. The roots of this can be found in the writings of Marx and Engels. In The Principles of Communism , they describe democratic socialists as either "proletarians who are not yet sufficiently clear about the conditions of the liberation of their class" or "representatives of the petty bourgeoisie [...]." [ 213 ] Their criticisms of "bourgeois socialists" can also be interpreted as a critique of the same tendencies democratic socialists represent today. They described them as those who fear the inherent evils of capitalist society but seek to improve it, rather than overthrowing its foundations. Marx and Engels assert that they propose "welfare measures" or "grandiose systems of reform," which, while seemingly meant to re-organize society, [...] are in fact intended to preserve the foundations, and hence the life, of existing society. Communists must unremittingly struggle against these bourgeois socialists because they work for the enemies of communists and protect the society which communists aim to overthrow.

[ 213 ] Vladimir Lenin expanded on this critique, specifically targeting those who believe socialism can be achieved through democracy: [...] the democratic republic, the Constituent Assembly, general elections, etc., are, in practice, the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, and for the emancipation of labor from the yoke of capital there is no other way but to replace this dictatorship with the dictatorship of the proletariat.

[ 214 ] Thus, he opposed attempts to achieve socialism by electoral or democratic means, viewing democratic institutions under capitalism as instruments of capitalist class rule .

Certain contemporary communist organizations have also echoed this view, such as the International Communist Party in their article "Democratic Socialism: False Friend of the Working Class".

[ 215 ] They argue that electoral democracy "will not be enough" for the overthrow of capitalism. They call for a proletarian revolution which strips the bourgeoisie of political rights and participation, and uses its "dictatorial grip on power to abolish by force the basis for capitalist exploitation.

" [ 215 ] According to these communists, the problems caused by capitalism cannot be resolved through incremental democratic reforms or electoral victories as proposed by many democratic socialists.

[ 216 ] Instead, they claim, only a dictatorship of the proletariat and global proletarian revolution can dismantle the capitalist system and eliminate its "exploitative foundations." See also [ edit ] Democratic capitalism Democratic republic Democratic Socialist Party (disambiguation) International Group of Democratic Socialists List of anti-capitalist and communist parties with national parliamentary representation List of social democratic and democratic socialist parties that have governed List of democratic socialist parties and organizations List of democratic socialists List of Labour parties List of left-wing political parties List of social democratic parties List of social democrats Millennial socialism Popular socialism Social Democratic Party Socialist Party Soviet democracy Workers' council References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Tsakalotos 2001 , p. 26: "...

most left-wing approaches (social democratic, democratic socialist, and so on) to how the market economy works."); Brandal, Bratberg & Thorsen 2013 , Introduction: "In Scandinavia, as in the rest of the world, 'social democracy' and 'democratic socialism' have often been used interchangeably to define the part of the left pursuing gradual reform through democratic means." ^ Sinclair 1918 ; Busky 2000 , p. 7; Abjorensen 2019 , p. 115.

^ a b c d Edelstein 1993 .

^ a b Anderson & Herr 2007 , p. 448.

^ a b Alt et al. 2010 , p. 401.

^ Busky 2000 , p. 10.

^ Alt et al. 2010 , p. 401; Abjorensen 2019 , p. 115.

^ Williams 1985 , p. 289; Foley 1994 , p. 23; Eatwell & Wright 1999 , p. 80; Busky 2000 , pp. 7–8.

^ a b Bernstein 1907 ; Cole 1961 ; Steger 1997 .

^ Busky 2000 , pp. 7–8; Prychitko 2002 , p. 72.

^ "Raya Dunayevskaya's Marxist Humanism and the Alternative to Capitalism" .

jacobin.com . Retrieved 2024-05-14 .

^ Busky 2000 , p. 93.

^ Möller, Kolja (September 2023).

"From Jacobin flaws to transformative populism: Left populism and the legacy of European social democracy" .

Constellations .

30 (3): 309– 324.

doi : 10.1111/1467-8675.12698 .

ISSN 1351-0487 .

^ Hamilton 1989 ; Pierson 2005 ; Page 2007 .

^ Eatwell & Wright 1999 , p. 80; Busky 2000 , pp. 7–8; Prychitko 2002 , p. 72; Volle 2022 .

^ a b Prychitko 2002 , p. 72.

^ Whyman 2005 , pp. 1–5, 61, 215.

^ March 2008 .

^ Lewis & Surender 2004 , pp. 3–4, 16.

^ a b c d e Barrientos & Powell 2004 , pp. 9–26; Cammack 2004 , pp. 151–166; Romano 2006 ; Hinnfors 2006 ; Lafontaine 2009 ; Corfe 2010 .

^ Romano 2007 , p. 114.

^ Adams 1999 , p. 127.

^ a b Volle 2022 .

^ Roemer 1994 , pp. 25–27; Berman 1998 , p. 57; Bailey 2009 , p. 77; Lamb 2015 , pp. 415–416.

^ Eatwell & Wright 1999 , p. 80; Alt et al. 2010 , p. 401.

^ Clarke 1981 ; Bardhan & Roemer 1992 , pp. 101–116; Weisskopf 1994 , pp. 297–318.

^ Ticktin 1998 , pp. 55–80; Hinnfors 2006 ; Schweickart 2007 , p. 447.

^ Eatwell & Wright 1999 , p. 80; Anderson & Herr 2007 , p. 447; Schweickart 2007 , p. 448; Alt et al. 2010 , p. 401.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Barrett 1978 .

^ Malycha, Andreas (2000).

Die SED: Geschichte ihrer Stalinisierung 1946–1953 [ The SED: The History of its Stalinization ] (in German). Schöningh.

ISBN 978-3-506-75331-1 .

^ Barrett 1978 ; Heilbroner 1991 ; Kendall 2011 , pp. 125–127; Li 2015 , pp. 60–69.

^ a b Sanandaji, Nima (27 October 2021).

"Nordic Countries Aren't Actually Socialist" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved 2 February 2023 .

^ Caulcutt, Clea (13 January 2022).

"The end of the French left" .

Politico . Retrieved 2 February 2023 .

^ Krause-Jackson, Flavia (29 December 2019).

"Socialism declining in Europe as populism support grows" .

The Independent . Retrieved 2 February 2023 .

^ Best et al. 2011 , p. xviii.

^ Sinclair 1918 ; Busky 2000 , p. 7; Anderson & Herr 2007 , pp. 445–448; Abjorensen 2019 , p. 115.

^ a b c d Eatwell & Wright 1999 , p. 80; Busky 2000 , pp. 7–8; Prychitko 2002 , p. 72; Alt et al. 2010 , p. 401.

^ Wilhelm 1985 , pp. 118–130; Ellman 2007 , p. 22.

^ Eatwell & Wright 1999 , p. 80; Busky 2000 , pp. 7–8; Alistair & Pyper 2000 , p. 677; Prychitko 2002 , p. 72; Alt et al. 2010 , p. 401.

^ Poulantzas 1978 .

^ Draper 1966 , "The "Revisionist" Facade".

^ Draper 1966 , "The 100% American Scene".

^ Megill 1970 , p. 45; Draper 1974 , pp. 101–124; Jossa 2010 , pp. 335–354; Sarkar 2019 .

^ a b c Sargent 2008 , p. 118.

^ Barker 2019 , "Chapter V. The Aims and Policy of the Socialists".

^ Socialist Party of Great Britain (Our Object and Declaration of Principles) ; Socialist Party of Great Britain (FAQ) ; Socialist Party of Great Britain (What is Socialism?) .

^ Marx 1875 , "Part I".

^ Steele 1992 , pp. 44–45; Hudis et al. 2008 .

^ "What is Democratic Socialism?" .

Democratic Socialists of America .

^ Hall 2011 , p. 45; White 2014 .

^ Benn & Mullin 1979 .

^ Edelstein 1993 ; Alt et al. 2010 , p. 401; Abjorensen 2019 , p. 115.

^ Christensen 1990 , pp. 123–146.

^ Sargent 2008 , p. 118; Lamb 2015 , p. 415.

^ Borragan & Cini 2013 , p. 387; Nordsieck 2017 .

^ Tangian 2013 , p. 321.

^ Page 2007 .

^ Sargent 2008 , p. 117.

^ Berman 2006 , p. 52.

^ Dolack 2016 , p. 30.

^ Pierson 1995 , p. 71.

^ Foner 1984 ; Lipset & Marks 2000 .

^ Lowe 2004 ; Romano 2007 , p. 3; Ludlam & Smith 2017 , p. 3.

^ a b Adams 1998 , pp. 144–145.

^ Busky 2000 , p. 10; Heywood 2012 , p. 97.

^ Hamilton 1989 ; Pierson 2005 , pp. 145–163.

^ Hattersley 1987 .

^ Hamilton 1989 .

^ Tomlinson 1997 .

^ Schumpeter 1942 .

^ Medearis 1997 .

^ Berman 1998 , p. 57; Bailey 2009 , p. 77.

^ Eatwell & Wright 1999 , p. 80; Anderson & Herr 2007 , p. 447; Alt et al. 2010 , p. 401.

^ Gamble & Wright 1999 , p. 6; Fitzpatrick 2003 ; Bailey 2009 , pp. 14–17; Meyer & Rutherford 2011 , "The Third Way and Its Vision of Social Democracy"; Taylor 2013 , p. 133.

^ Walters 2001 , p. 66; Katseli, Milios & Pelagidis 2018 .

^ Lowe 2004 ; Romano 2006 , p. 3; Ludlam & Smith 2017 , p. 3.

^ Döring 2007 , p. 3.

^ Lafontaine 2009 .

^ Laqueur 1976 ; Boggs & Plotke 1980 ; Johari 1987 , pp. 664–694; Di Donato 2015 , pp. 193–211.

^ Palley 2004 ; Harvey 2005 ; Palley 2005 ; Johnston & Saad-Filho 2005 ; Cahill et al. 2018 ; Ratner 2019 .

^ Heilbroner 1991 , pp. 96–110; Kumar 1992 , pp. 309–356; Pierson 1995 , pp. 64–78; Tismaneanu 2009 , pp. 309–356.

^ Humphrys 2018 .

^ Guinan 2013 ; Barbieri 2017 ; Karnitschnig 2018 ; Buck 2018 ; Lawson 2018 .

^ Magstadt 2016 , p. 36; March 2016 ; Calossi 2016 ; Fuchs 2017 , p. 109; Cole 2017 .

^ Gilk 2008 .

^ Allen 2009 ; Benedetto, Hix & Mastrorocco 2019 ; Blombäck et al. 2019 ; Berman & Snegovaya 2019 ; Agustín 2020 , pp. 13–32.

^ Griffiths & Millei 2012 , p. viii; Kwok & Rieger 2013 , p. 40; Berberoglu 2018 , p. 341.

^ Dionne & Galtson 2019 ; Cassidy 2019 ; Kvitrud 2019 ; Sears 2019 , p. 243.

^ Bresser-Pereira 2010 ; Howard 2012 ; Welch 2012 ; De Vogli & Owusu 2015 ; Sitaraman 2019 .

^ Palley 2013 ; Amadeo 2019 .

^ Tarnoff 2017 .

^ Huges 2016 .

^ Ely 1883 , pp. 204–205.

^ Duignan, Kalsang Bhutia & Mahajan 2009 ; Abjorensen 2019 , p. 115.

^ Hinchman & Meyer 2007 , p. 91.

^ a b O'Reilly 2007 , p. 91; Raza 2012 , p. 86; Gage 2018 .

^ Brandal, Bratberg & Thorsen 2013 , p. 7.

^ Busky 2000 , p. 8; Sargent 2008 , p. 118; Heywood 2012 , p. 97; Hain 2015 , p. 3.

^ Qiu 2015 ; Barro 2015 ; Tupy 2016 ; Cooper 2018 ; Rodriguez 2018 ; Levitz, April 2019 .

^ Eatwell & Wright 1999 , "Social Democracy and Democratic Socialism".

^ Ely 1883 , pp. 204–205; Eatwell & Wright 1999 , "Democratic Socialism and Social Democracy"; Ludlam & Smith 2017 , p. 5.

^ Ludlam & Smith 2017 , pp. 1–15.

^ Eatwell & Wright 1999 , p. 80; Ludlam & Smith 2017 , p. 5.

^ Busky 2000 , pp. 8–10; Sargent 2008 , p. 117; Alt et al. 2010 , p. 401; Abjorensen 2019 , p. 115.

^ Considère-Charondu 2010 , p. 157; Staab 2011 , p. 67.

^ a b Ludlam 2000 , pp. 264–276.

^ Della Porta et al. 2017 .

^ Nordsieck 2019 .

^ Casier & Jongerden 2010 , p. 203; Trechsel 2013 , p. 72.

^ Wainwright 1987 .

^ Mathers 2017 , pp. 389–444.

^ Prychitko 2002 , p. 72; Anderson & Herr 2007 , p. 448.

^ Debs 1912 ; Thomas 1936 .

^ a b Gregory & Stuart 2003 , p. 152.

^ Kotz 2008 .

^ Schweickart 2007 , p. 448.

^ Albert, Michael Parecon: Life After Capitalism Archived 2008-10-16 at the Wayback Machine Chapter 19 Individuals / Society ^ a b c Legault, Frédéric; Tremblay-Pepin, Simon (April 2021).

A brief sketch of three models of democratic economic planning . Saint Paul University.

^ a b Wear, Avery (2022-11-07).

"Why we need a planned economy" .

Tempest . Retrieved 2024-01-14 .

^ Kennedy, Paul (1987).

The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers . New York: Random House. pp.

322–323 .

ISBN 0-394-54674-1 .

^ "Points of Unity" .

Red Star . 2019-02-08 . Retrieved 2024-01-14 .

^ McNally 1993 .

^ a b Lange 1979 ; Cockshott & Cottrell 1993 ; Medina 2006 , pp. 571–606.

^ "Machine of communism. Why the USSR did not create the Internet" .

^ Kharkevich, Aleksandr Aleksandrovich (1973).

Theory of information. The identification of the images. Selected works in three volumes. Volume 3 . Information and technology: Moscow: Publishing House "Nauka", 1973. – Academy of Sciences of the USSR. Institute of information transmission problems. p. 524.

^ Miller 1990 .

^ Perkins 2016 .

^ Hodgson, G. M. (1998). "Socialism against markets? A critique of two recent proposals".

Economy and Society .

27 (4): 407– 433.

doi : 10.1080/03085149800000027 .

^ Yunker, James A. (1995). "Post-Lange Market Socialism: An Evaluation of Profit-Oriented Proposals".

Journal of Economic Issues .

29 (3): 683– 717.

doi : 10.1080/00213624.1995.11505705 .

JSTOR 4226984 .

^ Braudel 1979 .

^ a b Manley 2014 (Part One) ; Manley 2014 (Part Two) .

^ a b Carson 2009 ; Chartier & Johnson 2011 .

^ Tucker 1972 ; Brown 1997 , p. 107.

^ Carson 2008 ; Carson 2010 .

^ Chartier 2009 .

^ Johnson 2008 , pp. 155–188.

^ Long 2012 , p. 227.

^ Long 2000 ; Kuskowski 2008 .

^ Sciabarra 2000 .

^ Spangler 2006 .

^ Gillis 2011 , pp. 19–20.

^ Chartier & Johnson 2011 ; Zwolinski 2013 .

^ Chartier & Johnson 2011 .

^ Chartier 2009 (Socialist Ends, Market Means) ; Chartier 2010 ; Chartier 2010 (Speech) .

^ Campbell 2009 , p. 95; Stossel 2010 ; Kristof 2011 .

^ Popper 1994 .

^ Waxman 2018 .

^ Orwell 1980 , pp. 4–6.

^ Ramnath 2019 , p. 691.

^ Goldenberg & Wekerle 1972 , pp. 224–232.

^ Hancox 2013 .

^ Esteva 2013 ; Vidal 2018 .

^ Al Jazeera 2019 .

^ Mabry 1975 ; BBC 2003 ; Patsouras 2005 , p. 265.

^ Harvey 2005 , p. 7.

^ Barrett 1978 ; Heilbroner 1991 , pp. 96–110; Kendall 2011 , p. 125; Li 2015 , p. 69.

^ Socialist Party of Great Britain 1958 ; Crosland 2006 , pp. 9, 89.

^ Bevan 1952 , p. 106.

^ a b Batson 2017 .

^ Barrett 1978 ; Heilbroner 1991 , pp. 96–110; Kendall 2011 , pp. 125–127; Li 2015 , pp. 60–69.

^ Cobham 1984 ; Cohen 2010 .

^ Morley 1993 .

^ Kerr 1999 .

^ Megill 1970 , p. 45.

^ Engels & Marx 1848 , p. 52.

^ Arora 2017 .

^ Luxemburg 1900 , "Co-operatives, Unions, Democracy", "Conquest of Political Power"; Draper 1966 , "The "Revisionist" Facade".

^ Isakhan 2015 , p. 354.

^ Honneth 1995 , pp. 231–247.

^ Chomsky 1986 ; Howard & King 2001 , pp. 110–126; Wolff 2015 .

^ Lipow 1991 , p. 1.

^ Link 1968 , pp. 559–562, "Socialism and Democracy"; Pestritto 2005 , pp. 77–78, "Socialism and Democracy"; Schweickart 2006 .

^ Socialist Party USA .

^ Sinclair 1918 ; Laclau & Mouffe 1985 ; Busky 2000 , pp. 7–8.

^ Harrington 2011 , p. 162.

^ Busky 2000 , p. 8.

^ Webb & Webb 1935 ; Sloan 1937 ; Farber 1992 ; Getzler 2002 .

^ Busky 2000 , p. 8; Panfilov 1979 .

^ Eatwell & Wright 1999 , p. 80; Busky 2000 , pp. 7–8; Prychitko 2002 , p. 72.

^ Draper 1966 , pp. 57–84; Poulantzas 1978 ; Hain 1995 ; Hain 2000 , p. 118.

^ Dongyoun 2016 , pp. 171–174.

^ Murray 2001 ; Debbaut 2007 ; Agence France-Presse 2008 ; Socialist Alternative 2015 ; Victorian Socialists 2019 .

^ Taaffe 2019 .

^ a b Draper 1966 .

^ Lipow 1991 , p. 1; LeBlanc 2014 , p. 202; Internationalist Marxist Tendency .

^ Draper 1966 , pp. 57–84.

^ Draper 1966 , pp. 57–84; Hain 1995 ; Hain 2000 , p. 118.

^ Draper 1966 ; Prychitko 2002 , p. 72.

^ Draper 1966 ; Poulantzas 1978 .

^ Bookchin 1998 , p. 284.

^ a b Muldoon 2019 ; Post 2019 ; Blanc 2019 ; Kalsang Bhutia & Veenu 2019 .

^ a b Draper 1966 , "The "Revisionist" Facade"; Starke 2020 .

^ a b Bernstein 1907 ; Steger 1997 ; Angel 2020 .

^ Timmermann 1977 , pp. 376–385; Azcárate 1978 , "What Is Eurocommunism?"; Ranadive 1978 , pp. 3–35; Devlin 1979 , pp. 81–107; Spieker 1980 , pp. 427–464.

^ Godson & Haseler 1978 ; Bracke 2013 , pp. 168–170; Kindersley 2016 .

^ Busky 2000 , p. 7; Sargent 2008 , p. 117; Bailey 2009 , p. 77.

^ Thomas 1953 ; Hattersley 1987 ; Hamilton 1989 ; Tomlinson 1997 ; Busky 2000 , pp. 7–8; Pierson 2005 ; Sargent 2008 , pp. 117–118.

^ a b Miller 1998 , p. 827.

^ Ely 1883 , pp. 204–205; Lamb 2015 , pp. 415–416.

^ Duignan, Kalsang Bhutia & Mahajan 2016 .

^ Lamb 2015 , pp. 415–416; Sunkara 2020 .

^ Lih 2003 , pp. 5–49; Brown 2004 , p. 3; Lih 2005 ; Craig 2006 ; Schulman 2016 .

^ Draper 1966 , "The "Revisionist" Facade"; Duignan, Kalsang Bhutia & Mahajan 2009 .

^ Wright 1999 , pp. 80–103; Fitzpatrick 2003 , pp. 2–3.

^ Egle et al. 2008 , p. 10; Harrington 2011 , p. 93.

^ Horwitz 1994 , p. 255.

^ Schumpeter 1942 ; Medearis 1997 .

^ Bilgrami 1965 , pp. 26–31.

^ Hickel & Sullivan 2023 .

^ Woods, Alan; Trotsky, Leon; Engels, Friedrich; Lenin, V. I.; Plekhanov, G. V. (12 November 2018).

Marxism and Anarchism . Wellred Books. pp.

1– 372.

ISBN 978-1-900007-88-7 .

^ Trotsky, Leon (1972).

Writings of Leon Trotsky. [Edited by George Breitman and Evelyn Reed: 1932–33 . Merit Publishers. p. 96.

^ Wiles, Peter (14 June 2023).

The Soviet Economy on the Brink of Reform: Essays in Honor of Alec Nove . Taylor & Francis. p. 31.

ISBN 978-1-000-88190-5 .

^ a b "The Principles of Communism" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2025-07-13 .

^ " "Democracy" and Dictatorship" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2025-07-13 .

^ a b "Democratic Socialism: False Friend of the Working Class" .

International Communist Party . 2023-09-30 . Retrieved 2025-07-13 .

^ "DSA Political Platform" .

Democratic Socialists of America (DSA) . Retrieved 2025-07-13 .

Notes [ edit ] ^ "The far left is becoming the principal challenge to mainstream social democratic parties, in large part because its main parties are no longer extreme, but present themselves as defending the values and policies that social democrats have allegedly abandoned." [ 18 ] ^ Social democratic proponents of the Third Way were more concerned about challenging the New Right to win back government power.

[ 19 ] This has resulted in analysts and critics arguing that they endorsed capitalism, even if it was due to recognising that outspoken anti-capitalism in these circumstances was politically nonviable, or that it was not only anti-socialist and neoliberal but anti-social democratic in practice.

[ 20 ] Some observers maintain this was the result of their type of reformism that caused them to administer the system according to capitalist logic, [ 21 ] while others saw it as a modern liberal form of democratic socialism within the context of market socialism, and distinguish it from classical democratic socialism.

[ 22 ] ^ "Democratic Marxism is authentic Marxism — the Marxism which emphasizes the necessity for revolutionary action. Loyalty to the movement, not loyalty to any particular doctrine, is characteristic of the orthodox democratic Marxist." [ 164 ] "There is considerable controversy among scholars regarding Marx's own attitude toward democracy, but two lines of thought developed from Marx: one emphasizing democracy and one, the dominant line, rejecting it." [ 44 ] Sources [ edit ] Books [ edit ] Abjorensen, Norman (15 June 2019).

Historical Dictionary of Democracy .

Rowman & Littlefield .

ISBN 9781538120743 .

Adams, Ian (1998).

Ideology and Politics in Britain Today . Politics Today (illustrated, reprint ed.). Manchester, England: Manchester University Press .

ISBN 9780719050565 .

Adams, Ian (1999). "Social democracy to New Labour".

Political Ideology Today . Politics Today.

Manchester University Press .

ISBN 9780719050565 .

Agustín, Óscar García (2020).

Left-Wing Populism: The Politics of the People . Emerald Group Publishing.

ISBN 9781839092039 .

Alistair, Mason; Pyper, Hugh (2000). Hastings, Adrian (ed.).

The Oxford Companion to Christian Thought .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780198600244 .

Anderson, Gary L.; Herr, Kathryn G. (2007).

Encyclopedia of Activism and Social Justice .

SAGE Publications .

ISBN 9781412918121 .

Arora, N. D. (2017).

Political Science for Civil Services Mains Examination .

McGraw-Hill Education .

ISBN 9789385965890 .

Azcárate, Manuel (1978). "What Is Eurocommunism?". In Urban, George (ed.).

Eurocommunism . Maurice Temple Smith.

ISBN 9780851171548 .

Bailey, David J. (2009).

The Political Economy of European Social Democracy: A Critical Realist Approach .

Routledge .

ISBN 9780415604253 .

Barker, J. Ellis (2019) [1908]. "Chapter V. The Aims and Policy of the Socialists".

British Socialism: An Examination of Its Doctrines, Policy, Aims and Practical Proposals . Good Press.

Barrientos, Armando; Powell, Martin (2004). "The Route Map of the Third Way". In Hale, Sarah; Leggett, Will; Martell, Luke (eds.).

The Third Way and Beyond: Criticisms, Futures and Alternatives .

Manchester University Press . pp.

9– 26.

ISBN 9780719065989 .

Benn, Tony ; Mullin, Chris (1979).

Arguments for Socialism . J. Cape.

Berberoglu, Berch (2018).

The Palgrave Handbook of Social Movements, Revolution, and Social Transformation . Springer.

ISBN 9783319923543 .

Berman, Sheri (1998).

The Social Democratic Moment: Ideas and Politics in the Making of Interwar Europe . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press .

ISBN 9780674442610 .

Berman, Sheri (2006).

The Primacy of Politics: Social Democracy and the Making of Europe's Twentieth Century . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521817998 .

Bernstein, Eduard (1907) [1899].

Evolutionary Socialism . Translated by Harvey, Edith C.

Independent Labour Party – via Marxists Internet Archive .

Best, Steven ; Kahn, Richard; Nocella, Anthony J. II; McLaren, Peter , eds. (2011).

The Global Industrial Complex: Systems of Domination .

Rowman & Littlefield .

ISBN 978-0739136980 .

Bevan, Aneurin (1952).

In Place of Fear . New York: Simon & Schuster .

Boggs, Carl ; Plotke, David (1980).

Politics of Eurocommunism .

Black Rose Books .

ISBN 9780919618312 .

Bookchin, Murray (1998).

The Third Revolution: Popular Movements in the Revolutionary Era . Vol. 2. London: Cassell.

ISBN 9780304335930 .

Borragan, Nieves Perez-Solorzano; Cini, Michelle, eds. (2013). "Glossary".

European Union Politics .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780199694754 .

Bracke, Maud (2013).

Which Socialism, Whose Détente?: West European Communism and the Czechoslovak Crisis of 1968 .

Central European University Press .

ISBN 9786155211263 .

Brandal, Nik; Bratberg, Øivind; Thorsen, Dag Einar (21 February 2013).

The Nordic Model of Social Democracy . Springer.

ISBN 9781137013279 .

Braudel, Fernand (1979).

The Wheels of Commerce: Civilization and Capitalism 15th–18th Century . Harper & Row.

Brown, Archie, ed. (2004).

The Demise of Marxism-Leninism in Russia . Springer.

ISBN 9780333651247 .

Brown, Susan Love (1997). "The Free Market as Salvation from Government".

Meanings of the Market: The Free Market in Western Culture . Berg Publishers.

Busky, Donald F.

(2000).

Democratic Socialism: A Global Survey . Westport, Connecticut: Praeger Publishers .

ISBN 9780275968861 .

Cahill, Damien; Cooper, Melinda; Konings, Martijn; Primrose, David, eds. (2018).

The SAGE Handbook of Neoliberalism .

SAGE Publications .

ISBN 9781526415974 .

Calossi, Enrico (2016).

Anti-Austerity Left Parties in the European Union. Competition, Coordination, Integration . Pisa: Pisa University Press .

ISBN 9788867416653 .

Cammack, Paul (2004). "Giddens's Way with Words". In Hale, Sarah; Leggett, Will; Martell, Luke (eds.).

The Third Way and Beyond: Criticisms, Futures and Alternatives . Manchester University Press.

ISBN 97807190-65989 .

Campbell, John (2009).

The Iron Lady: Margaret Thatcher from Grocer's Daughter to Prime Minister . Penguin Books.

ISBN 9780099540038 .

Carson, Kevin (2008).

Organization Theory: A Libertarian Perspective . Charleston, South Carolina: BookSurge.

Carson, Kevin (2010).

The Homebrew Industrial Revolution: A Low-Overhead Manifesto . Charleston, South Carolina: BookSurge.

Casier, Marlies; Jongerden, Joost (2010).

Nationalisms and Politics in Turkey: Political Islam, Kemalism and the Kurdish Issue .

Taylor & Francis .

ISBN 9780203847060 .

Chartier, Gary (2009).

Economic Justice and Natural Law . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

Chartier, Gary; Johnson, Charles W. (2011).

Markets Not Capitalism: Individualist Anarchism Against Bosses, Inequality, Corporate Power, and Structural Poverty (1st ed.). Brooklyn, New York: Minor Compositions/Autonomedia.

Clarke, Peter (1981).

Liberals and Social Democrats . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521286510 .

Cockshott, W. Paul; Cottrell, Allin (1993).

Towards a New Socialism . Nottingham, England: Spokesman.

ISBN 9780851245454 .

Cole, Margaret (1961).

The Story of Fabian Socialism . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 9780804700917 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Cole, Mike (2017). "Social Class, Marxism and Socialism".

Education, Equality and Human Rights: Issues of Gender, 'Race', Sexuality, Disability and Social Class (4th ed.). Routledge.

ISBN 9781351804141 .

Considère-Charondu, Marie-Claire (2010). "Irish MEPS in an Enlarged Europe". In Gillissen, Christophe (ed.).

Ireland: Looking East . Peter Lang.

ISBN 9789052016528 .

Corfe, Robert (2010).

The Future of Politics: With the Demise of the Left/Right Confrontational System . Bury St Edmunds, England: Arena Books.

ISBN 9781906791469 .

Crosland, Anthony (2006) [1956].

The Future of Socialism . Constable.

ISBN 9781845294854 .

Dearlove, John; Saunders, Peter (2000).

Introduction to British Politics .

Wiley-Blackwell .

ISBN 9780745620961 .

Della Porta, Donatella ; Fernández, Joseba; Kouki, Hara; Mosca, Lorenzo (2017).

Movement Parties Against Austerity .

Polity Press .

ISBN 9781509511457 .

Denitch, Bogdan (1981).

Democratic Socialism: The Mass Left in Advanced Industrial Societies .

Rowman & Littlefield Pub Inc.

ISBN 9780865980150 .

Dolack, Peter (2016).

It's Not Over: Learning from the Socialist Experiment (paperback ed.). Ropley: Zero Books.

ISBN 9781785350498 .

Dongyoun, Hwang (2016).

Anarchism in Korea: Independence, Transnationalism, and the Question of National Development, 1919–1984 .

SUNY Press .

ISBN 9781438461670 .

Döring, Daniel (2007).

Is 'Third Way' Social Democracy Still a Form of Social Democracy?

. Norderstedt, Germany: GRIN Publishing.

ISBN 9783638868327 .

Eatwell, Roger ; Wright, Anthony (1999).

Contemporary Political Ideologies (2nd ed.).

Bloomsbury Academic .

ISBN 9780826451736 .

Egle, Christoph; Henkes, Christian; Merkel, Wolfgang; Petring, Alexander (2008).

Social Democracy in Power: The Capacity to Reform . Routledge Research in Comparative Politics. London: Routledge .

ISBN 9780415438209 .

Ellman, Michael (2007). "The Rise and Fall of Socialist Planning". In Estrin, Saul; Kołodko, Grzegorz W.; Uvalić, Milica (eds.).

Transition and Beyond: Essays in Honour of Mario Nuti . New York: Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 9780230546974 .

Ely, Richard (1883).

French and German Socialism in Modern Times . New York: Harper and Brothers.

ISBN 9781104069551 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Engels, Friedrich ; Marx, Karl (1848).

The Communist Manifesto – via Marxists Internet Archive .

Fitzpatrick, Tony (2003).

After the New Social Democracy: Social Welfare for the Twenty-First Century .

Manchester University Press .

ISBN 9780719064777 .

Foley, Michael (1994).

Ideas that Shape Politics .

Manchester University Press .

ISBN 9780719038259 .

Fuchs, Christian (2017).

Social Media: A Critical Introduction (2nd ed.).

SAGE Publications .

ISBN 9781473987494 .

Gamble, Peter; Wright, Tony, eds. (1999).

The New Social Democracy .

Taylor & Francis .

ISBN 9780631217657 .

Gaus, Gerald F.; Kukathas, Chandran, eds. (2004).

Handbook of Political Theory .

SAGE Publications .

ISBN 9780761967873 .

Getzler, Israel (2002) [1982].

Kronstadt 1917–1921: The Fate of a Soviet Democracy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 9780521894425 .

Gillis, William (2011). "The Freed Market". In Chartier, Gary; Johnson, Charles W. (eds.).

Markets Not Capitalism . Brooklyn, New York: Minor Compositions/Autonomedia.

Gilk, Paul (2008).

Green Politics Is Eutopian: Essays in Anticipation of the Daughter . Wipf and Stock Publishers.

ISBN 9781621893936 .

Godson, Roy; Haseler, Stephen (1978).

'Eurocommunism': Implications for East and West . Springer.

ISBN 9781349159345 .

Gregory, Paul; Stuart, Robert (2003).

Comparing Economic Systems in the Twenty-First . South-Western College Pub.

ISBN 0618261818 .

Griffiths, Tom G.; Millei, Zsuzsa (2012).

Logics of Socialist Education: Engaging with Crisis, Insecurity and Uncertainty . Springer Science & Business Media.

ISBN 9789400747289 .

Hain, Peter (1995).

Ayes to the Left . Lawrence and Wishart.

ISBN 9780853158325 .

Hain, Peter (2015).

Back to the Future of Socialism . Policy Press.

ISBN 9781447321682 .

Hall, Duncan (2011).

A2 Government and Politics: Ideologies and Ideologies in Action . Lulu.com.

ISBN 9781447733997 .

Hamilton, Malcolm (1989).

Democratic Socialism in Britain and Sweden . St Martin's Press.

ISBN 9781349092345 .

Harrington, Michael (2011) [1989].

Socialism: Past and Future . New York: Arcade Publishing.

ISBN 9781611453355 .

Harvey, David (2005).

A Brief History of Neoliberalism . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199283279 .

Hattersley, Roy (1987).

Choose Freedom: The Future of Democratic Socialism . Harmondsworth, England: Penguin.

ISBN 9780140104943 .

Heywood, Andrew (2012).

Political Ideologies: An Introduction (5th ed.). Basingstoke, England: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 9780230367258 .

Hinchman, Lewis P.; Meyer, Thomas (2007).

The Theory of Social Democracy . Cambridge, England: Polity Press.

ISBN 9780745641133 .

Hinnfors, Jonas (2006).

Reinterpreting Social Democracy: A History of Stability in the British Labour Party and Swedish Social Democratic Party . Critical Labour Movement Studies. Manchester University Press.

ISBN 9780719073625 .

Honneth, Axel (1995). "The Limits of Liberalism: On the Political-Ethical Discussion Concerning Communitarianism". In Honneth, Axel (ed.).

The Fragmented World of the Social . Albany: State University of New York Press.

ISBN 079142300X .

Horwitz, Morton J. (1994).

The Transformation of American Law, 1870–1960: The Crisis of Legal Orthodoxy: The Crisis of Legal Orthodoxy . New York City, New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195092592 .

Hudis, Peter; Prew, Paul; Rotta, Tomás; Smith, Tony; Vidal, Matt, eds. (2008). "Marx's Concept of Socialism".

The Oxford Handbook of Karl Marx (PDF) . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780190695545.001.0001 .

ISBN 9780190695545 .

Humphrys, Elizabeth (2018).

How Labour Built Neoliberalism: Australia's Accord, the Labour Movement and the Neoliberal Project . Brill Academic Publishers.

ISBN 9789004383463 .

Isakhan, Benjamin (2015).

Edinburgh Companion to the History of Democracy . Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 9781474400145 .

Johari, J. C. (1987).

Contemporary Political Theory: New Dimensions, Basic Concepts and Major Trends . Sterling Publishers.

ISBN 9788120707184 .

Johnson, Charles W. (2008).

"Liberty, Equality, Solidarity: Toward a Dialectical Anarchism" . In Long, Roderick T.; Machan, Tibor (eds.).

Anarchism/Minarchism: Is a Government Part of a Free Country?

. Aldershot: Ashgate.

Johnston, Deborah A.; Saad-Filho, Alfredo, eds. (2005).

Neoliberalism: A Critical Reader . Pluto Press.

ISBN 9780745322995 .

Katseli, Louka T.; Milios, John; Pelagidis, Theodore, eds. (2018).

Welfare State and Democracy in Crisis: Reforming the European Model . Routledge.

ISBN 9781351788397 .

Kendall, Diana (2011).

Sociology in Our Time: The Essentials . Cengage Learning.

ISBN 9781111305505 .

Kindersley, Richard, ed. (2016).

In Search of Eurocommunism . Springer.

ISBN 9781349165810 .

Kwok, Pui-lan; Rieger, Joerg (2013).

Occupy Religion: Theology of the Multitude . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 9781442217928 .

Laclau, Ernesto ; Mouffe, Chantal (1985).

Hegemony and Socialist Strategy . Verso.

ISBN 0860910679 .

OCLC 67440480 .

Lafontaine, Oskar (2009).

Left Parties Everywhere?

. Socialist Renewal. Nottingham, England: Spokesman Books.

ISBN 9780851247649 .

LeBlanc, Paul (2014).

Marx, Lenin, and the Revolutionary Experience: Studies of Communism and Radicalism in an Age of Globalization . Routledge.

ISBN 9781317793526 .

Lewis, Jane; Surender, Rebecca, eds. (2004).

Welfare State Change: Towards a Third Way?

. Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199266722 .

Li, He (2015).

Political Thought and China's Transformation: Ideas Shaping Reform in Post-Mao China . Springer.

ISBN 9781137427816 .

Lih, Lars T. (2005).

Lenin Rediscovered: What Is to Be Done? in Context .

Brill Academic Publishers .

ISBN 9789004131200 .

Link, Arthur S., ed. (1968).

The Papers of Woodrow Wilson . Vol. 5 (1st ed.). Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press .

ISBN 9780691045870 .

Lipow, Arthur (1991).

Authoritarian Socialism in America: Edward Bellamy and the Nationalist Movement .

University of California Press .

ISBN 9780520075436 .

Lipset, Seymour Martin; Marks, Gary (2000).

It Didn't Happen Here: Why Socialism Failed in the United States (paperback ed.). New York: W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 9780393322545 .

Long, Roderick T.

(2000).

Reason and Value: Aristotle versus Rand . Washington, D.C.: Objectivist Center.

Long, Roderick T.

(2012). "Anarchism". In D'Agostino, Fred; Gaus, Gerald F. (eds.).

The Routledge Companion to Social and Political Philosophy .

Routledge .

Lowe, Rodney (2004) [1993].

The Welfare State in Britain Since 1945 (3rd, illustrated ed.). Macmillan Education UK.

ISBN 9781403911933 .

Ludlam, Steve; Smith, Martin J., eds. (7 October 2017).

Governing as New Labour: Policy and Politics Under Blair . Macmillan International Higher Education.

ISBN 9781403906786 .

Luxemburg, Rosa (1900).

"Part Two" .

Reform or Revolution – via Marxists Internet Archive .

Magstadt, Thomas M. (2016).

Understanding Politics: Ideas, Institutions, and Issues (12th ed.).

Cengage Learning .

ISBN 9781305629905 .

March, Luke (2008).

Contemporary Far Left Parties in Europe: From Marxism to the Mainstream?

(PDF) . Berlin: Friedrich-Ebert-Stiftung.

ISBN 9783868720006 . Retrieved 9 November 2021 .

March, Luke (2016).

Europe's Radical Left: From Marginality to the Mainstream?

.

Rowman & Littlefield .

ISBN 9781783485376 .

Marx, Karl (1875).

"Part I" .

Critique of the Gotha Program – via Marxists Internet Archive .

McNally, David (1993).

Against the Market: Political Economy, Market Socialism and the Marxist Critique .

Verso Books .

ISBN 9780860916062 .

Megill, Kenneth A. (1970).

The New Democratic Theory . New York: Free Press.

ISBN 9780029207901 .

Miller, David (1990).

Market, State, and Community: Theoretical Foundations of Market Socialism .

Oxford University Press .

O'Reilly, David (2007).

The New Progressive Dilemma: Australia and Tony Blair's Legacy . Springer.

ISBN 9780230625471 .

Orwell, George (1980) [1938].

"1" .

Homage to Catalonia . San Diego: Harcourt Brace & Co.

ISBN 0156421178 .

Palley, Thomas I. (2005).

From Keynesianism to Neoliberalism: Shifting Paradigms in Economics .

Pluto Press .

Palley, Thomas I. (2013).

From Financial Crisis to Stagnation: The Destruction of Shared Prosperity and the Role of Economics .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 9781107612464 .

Patsouras, Louis (2005).

Marx in Context .

Pestritto, Ronald J., ed. (2005).

Woodrow Wilson: The Essential Political Writing .

Lexington Books .

ISBN 9780691045870 .

Pierson, Cristopher (1995).

Socialism After Communism: The New Market Socialism .

Penn State Press .

ISBN 9780271014791 .

Picard, Robert (1985).

The Press and the Decline of Democracy: Democratic Socialist Response in Public Policy . Praeger.

ISBN 9780865980150 .

Popper, Karl (1994).

The Open Society and Its Enemies .

Routledge Classics.

ISBN 9780415610216 .

Prychitko, David L. (2002).

Markets, Planning, and Democracy: Essays After the Collapse of Communism . Edward Elgar Publishing.

ISBN 9781840645194 .

Ramnath, Maia (2019). "Non-Western Anarchisms and Postcolonialism". In Levy, Carl; Adams, Matthew S. (eds.).

The Palgrave Handbook of Anarchism . Springer.

ISBN 9783319756202 .

Ratner, Carl (2019). "The Neolberal Political Economy".

Neoliberal Psychology . Springer.

ISBN 9783030029821 .

Raza, Syed Ali (2012).

Social Democratic System . Global Peace Trust.

ISBN 9789699757006 .

Roemer, John E. (1994). "The long term and the short term".

A Future for Socialism .

Harvard University Press .

ISBN 9780674339460 .

Romano, Flavio (2006).

Clinton and Blair: The Political Economy of the Third Way . Routledge Frontiers of Political Economy. Vol. 75. London: Routledge .

ISBN 9780415378581 .

Romano, Flavio (7 May 2007).

Clinton and Blair: The Political Economy of the Third Way . Routledge Frontiers of Political Economy. Vol. 75. London: Routledge .

ISBN 9781134182527 .

Meyer, Henning; Rutherford, Jonathan, eds. (2011).

The Future of European Social Democracy: Building the Good Society . Springer.

ISBN 9780230355040 .

Sargent, Lyman Tower (2008).

Contemporary Political Ideologies: A Comparative Analysis (14th ed.). Wadsworth Publishing.

ISBN 9780495569398 .

Schumpeter, Joseph (1942).

Capitalism, Socialism and Democracy . New York: Harper & Brothers.

ISBN 9780061330087 .

OCLC 22556726 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Sciabarra, Chris Matthew (2000).

Total Freedom: Toward a Dialectical Libertarianism . University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press .

Sears, Kathleen (2019).

Socialism 101: From the Bolsheviks and Karl Marx to Universal Healthcare and the Democratic Socialists, Everything You Need to Know about Socialism .

Simon & Schuster .

ISBN 9781507211366 .

Sinclair, Upton (1918).

Upton Sinclair's: A Monthly Magazine: for Social Justice, by Peaceful Means If Possible .

Sloan, Pat (1937).

Soviet Democracy . London: Left Book Club.

Staab, Andreas (2011).

The European Union Explained: Institutions, Actors, Global Impact (2nd ed.).

Indiana University Press .

ISBN 9780253001641 .

Steele, David Ramsay (1992).

From Marx to Mises: Post-Capitalist Society and the Challenge of Economic Calculation . Open Court Publishing Company.

ISBN 9780875484495 .

Steger, Manfred B. (1997).

The Quest for Evolutionary Socialism: Eduard Bernstein and Social Democracy . Cambridge, United Kingdom; New York City, United States; Melbourne, Australia: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 9780521582001 .

Tangian, Andranik (2013).

Mathematical Theory of Democracy .

Springer Science+Business Media .

ISBN 9783642387241 .

Taylor, Andrew J. (2013). "Trade Unions and the Politics of Social Democratic Renewal". In Gillespie, Richard ; Paterson, William E. (eds.).

Rethinking Social Democracy in Western Europe .

Routledge .

ISBN 9781135236182 .

Thomas, Norman (1953).

Democratic Socialism: A New Appraisal . New York: League for Industrial Democracy.

ISBN 9780598691606 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Thompson, Noel W. (2006).

Political Economy and the Labour Party: The Economics of Democratic Socialism, 1884–2005 (PDF) (2nd ed.). Abingdon, England: Routledge .

ISBN 9780415328807 .

Ticktin, Hillel (1998). "The Problem is Market Socialism". In Ollman, Bertell (ed.).

Market Socialism: The Debate Among Socialists . New York: Routledge .

ISBN 9780415919661 .

Tomlinson, Jim (1997).

Democratic Socialism and Economic Policy: The Attlee Years, 1945–1951 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 9780521550956 .

Trechsel, Alexander H. (2013).

Towards a Federal Europe .

Taylor & Francis .

ISBN 9781317998181 .

Tucker, Benjamin (1972).

State Socialism and Anarchism and Other Essays: Including the Attitude of Anarchism Toward Industrial Combinations and Why I Am an Anarchist (1st ed.). Ralph Myles Pub.

ISBN 9780879260156 .

Wainwright, Hilary (1987).

Labour: A Tale of Two Parties . Hogarth Press.

ISBN 9780701207786 .

Walters, William (2001). "Governing Unemployment: Transforming "the Social"?". In Pavlich, George; Wickham, Gary (eds.).

Rethinking Law, Society and Governance: Foucault's Bequest . Hart Publishing.

ISBN 9781841132938 .

Webb, Beatrice; Webb, Sidney (1935).

Soviet Communism: A New Civilisation?

. London: Longmans.

Weisskopf, Thomas E. (1994). "Challenges to Market Socialism: A Response to Critics". In Roosevelt, Frank; Belkin, David (eds.).

Why Market Socialism? Voices from Dissent . Armonk, New York: M. E. Sharpe. pp.

297– 318.

ISBN 9781563244650 .

Whyman, Philip (2005). "Socialism".

Third Way Economics: Theory and Evaluation . Springer.

ISBN 9780230514652 .

Williams, Raymond (1985) [1976].

Keywords: A Vocabulary of Culture and Society (revised ed.). New York: Oxford University Press .

ISBN 9780195204698 .

OCLC 1035920683 .

Wright, Anthony (1999). "Social Democracy and Democratic Socialism". In Eatwell, Roger ; Wright, Anthony (eds.).

Contemporary Political Ideologies (2nd ed.). London: Continuum . pp.

80– 103.

ISBN 9781855676053 .

Encyclopedias [ edit ] Alt, James E.; Chambers, Simone; Garrett, Geoffrey; Kurian, George Thomas; Levi, Margaret; McClain, Paula D. (2010).

The Encyclopedia of Political Science Set .

CQ Press .

ISBN 9781933116440 .

Lamb, Peter (2015). "Social democracy".

Historical Dictionary of Socialism . Historical Dictionaries of Religions, Philosophies, and Movements (3rd ed.).

Rowman & Littlefield .

ISBN 9781442258266 .

Miller, David (1998). "Social Democracy". In Craig, Edward (ed.).

Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Vol. 8.

Routledge . p. 827.

ISBN 9780415187138 .

Panfilov, E. G. (1979). "Democratic Socialism".

The Great Soviet Encyclopedia (3rd ed.).

Schweickart, David (2007).

"Democratic Socialism" . In Anderson, Gary L.; Herr, Kathryn G. (eds.).

Encyclopedia of Activism and Social Justice . Vol. 1. Thousand Oaks, California: SAGE Publications .

ISBN 9781412918121 .

Tsakalotos, Euclid (2001). "European Employment Policies: A New Social Democratic Model for Europe". In Arestis, Philip; Sawyer, Malcolm C. (eds.).

The Economics of the Third Way: Experiences from Around the World . Edward Elgar Publishing. pp.

26– 45.

ISBN 9781843762836 .

Volle, Adam (6 October 2022).

"Democratic socialism" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2 February 2023 .

Journals [ edit ] Allen, Christopher S. (1 September 2009). " 'Empty Nets': Social Democracy and the 'Catch-All Party Thesis' in Germany and Sweden".

Party Politics .

15 (5): 635– 653.

doi : 10.1177/1354068809336389 .

hdl : 11858/00-001M-0000-0012-4547-7 .

ISSN 1354-0688 .

S2CID 144281202 .

Bardhan, Pranab; Roemer, John E. (1992).

"Market Socialism: A Case for Rejuvenation" .

journal of Economic Perspectives .

6 (3): 101– 116.

doi : 10.1257/jep.6.3.101 .

ISSN 0895-3309 .

Batson, Andrew (March 2017).

"The State of the State Sector" (PDF) . Gavekal Dragonomics.

Benedetto, Giacomo; Hix, Simon; Mastrorocco, Nicola (1 July 2019).

"The Rise and Fall of Social Democracy, 1918–2017" (PDF) .

Trinity Economics Papers : 1– 43. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 February 2020 . Retrieved 29 November 2019 .

Berman, Sheri; Snegovaya, Maria (10 July 2019).

"Populism and the Decline of Social Democracy" .

Journal of Democracy .

30 (3): 5– 19.

doi : 10.1353/jod.2019.0038 .

S2CID 199293070 . Retrieved 29 November 2019 .

Bilgrami, S. Jafar Raza (1965). "Problems of Democratic Socialism".

Indian Journal of Political Science .

26 (4): 26– 31.

JSTOR 41854084 .

Blombäck, Sofie; Demker, Marie; Hagevi, Magnus; Hinnfors, Jonas; Loxbo, Karl (2019). "The Decline of Western European Social Democracy: Exploring the Transformed Link Between Welfare State Generosity and the Electoral Strength of Social Democratic Parties, 1975–2014".

Party Politics .

27 (3): 1– 12.

doi : 10.1177/1354068819861339 .

ISSN 1354-0688 .

S2CID 199148173 .

Bresser-Pereira, Luiz Carlos (Spring 2010).

"The Global Financial Crisis, Neoclassical Economics, and the Neoliberal Years of Capitalism" .

Institutions, Régulation et économie du Développement .

7 (2).

doi : 10.4000/regulation.7729 .

Chomsky, Noam (1986).

"The Soviet Union Versus Socialism" .

New Generation (Spring/Summer) . Retrieved 29 January 2020 .

Christensen, Paul T. (1990). "Perestroika and the Problem of Socialist Renewal".

Social Text (27): 123– 146.

doi : 10.2307/466310 .

JSTOR 466310 .

Cobham, David (November 1984). "The Nationalisation of the Banks in Mitterand's France: Rationalisations and Reasons".

Journal of Public Policy .

4 (4): 351– 358.

doi : 10.1017/S0143814X00002798 .

JSTOR 3998375 .

S2CID 154543259 .

Debs, Eugene V.

(1912).

"The Socialist Party's Appeal" .

The Independent . Retrieved 27 January 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

Devlin, Kevin (Spring 1979). "Eurocommunism: Between East and West".

International Security .

3 (4). The MIT Press : 81– 107.

doi : 10.2307/2626764 .

JSTOR 2626764 .

S2CID 154422176 .

De Vogli, Roberto; Owusu, Jocelynn T. (January 2015). "The Causes and Health Effects of the Great Recession: From Neoliberalism to 'Healthy De-Growth' ".

Critical Public Health .

25 (1): 15– 31.

doi : 10.1080/09581596.2014.957164 .

S2CID 154798840 .

Di Donato, Michele (May 2015).

"The Cold War and Socialist Identity: The Socialist International and the Italian 'Communist Question' in the 1970s" .

Contemporary European History .

24 (2).

Cambridge University Press : 193– 211.

doi : 10.1017/S0960777315000053 .

Draper, Hal (1966).

"The Two Souls of Socialism" .

New Politics .

5 (1): 57– 84 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

Draper, Hal (1974).

"Marx on Democratic Forms of Government" .

Socialist Register : 101– 124 . Retrieved 8 February 2020 – via Marxists Internet Archive .

Edelstein, David J. (January 1993) [1990].

"Social Democracy Versus Revolutionary Democratic Socialism" .

The Alternative Orange .

2 (3).

Syracuse University . Archived from the original on 25 December 2007 . Retrieved 7 February 2020 .

Farber, Samuel (1992). "Before Stalinism: The Rise and Fall of Soviet Democracy".

Studies in Soviet Thought .

44 (3): 229– 230.

Foner, Eric (Spring 1984).

"Why is there no socialism in the United States" (PDF) .

History Workshop Journal .

17 (1): 57– 80.

doi : 10.1093/hwj/17.1.57 .

JSTOR 4288545 .

Goldenberg, Sheldon; Wekerle, Gerda R. (September 1972). "From utopia to total institution in a single generation: the kibbutz and Bruderhof".

International Review of Modern Sociology .

2 (2): 224– 232.

JSTOR 41420450 .

Guinan, Joe (2013). "Returns to Capital".

The Good Society .

22 (1): 44– 60.

doi : 10.5325/goodsociety.22.1.0044 .

JSTOR 10.5325/goodsociety.22.1.0044 .

Hain, Peter (July–August 2000).

"Rediscovering our libertarian roots" .

Chartist . Archived from the original on 21 June 2013.

Howard, M. C.; King, J. E. (2001).

" 'State Capitalism' in the Soviet Union" (PDF) .

History of Economics Review .

34 (1): 110– 126.

doi : 10.1080/10370196.2001.11733360 .

S2CID 42809979 .

Howard, Stein (2012).

"The Neoliberal Policy Paradigm and the Great Recession" .

Panoeconomicus .

59 (4): 421– 440.

doi : 10.2298/PAN1204421S .

Jossa, Bruno (July–September 2010). "The Democratic Road to Socialism".

Rivista Internazionale di Scienze Sociali .

118 (3): 335– 354.

JSTOR 41624957 .

Kumar, Krishan (June 1992). "The Revolutions of 1989: Socialism, Capitalism, and Democracy".

Theory and Society .

21 (3). Springer: 309– 356.

doi : 10.1007/bf00993452 .

JSTOR 657580 .

S2CID 143945611 .

Lih, Lars T. (2003). "How a Founding Document Was Found, or One Hundred Years of Lenin's What is to Be Done?".

Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History .

4 (1): 5– 49.

doi : 10.1353/kri.2003.0008 .

S2CID 162307936 .

Ludlam, Steve (1 June 2000). "New Labour: What's Published Is What Counts".

British Journal of Politics and International Relations .

2 (2): 264– 276.

doi : 10.1111/1467-856X.00037 .

S2CID 144902773 .

Mathers, Andrew (6 October 2017).

"Book reviews" (PDF) .

Interface .

9 (2).

Royal Society : 389– 444.

doi : 10.1111/1467-856X.00037 .

S2CID 144902773 .

Medearis, John (1997). "Schumpeter, the New Deal, and Democracy".

American Political Science Review .

91 (4): 819– 832.

doi : 10.2307/2952166 .

JSTOR 2952166 .

S2CID 144892143 .

Medina, Eden (August 2006). "Designing Freedom, Regulating a Nation: Socialist Cybernetics in Allende's Chile".

Journal of Latin American Studies .

38 (3). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Cambridge University Press : 571– 606.

doi : 10.1017/S0022216X06001179 .

S2CID 26484124 .

Page, Robert M. (2007). "Without a Song in their Heart: New Labour, the Welfare State and the Retreat from Democratic Socialism".

Journal of Social Policy .

36 (1): 19– 37.

doi : 10.1017/S0047279406000353 .

S2CID 145103604 .

Pierson, Chris (2005).

"Lost property: What the Third Way lacks" .

Journal of Political Ideologies .

10 (2): 145– 163.

doi : 10.1080/13569310500097265 .

S2CID 144916176 .

Poulantzas, Nicos (May–June 1978).

"Towards a Democratic Socialism" .

New Left Review .

I (109).

Ranadive, B. T. (October 1978). "Carrillo's "Eurocommunism and the State".

Social Scientist .

7 (3): 3– 35.

doi : 10.2307/3516648 .

JSTOR 3516648 .

Schulman, Jason (Winter 2016).

"What Is This Thing Called Leninism?" .

New Politics .

XV (4/60) . Retrieved 9 February 2020 .

Spieker, Manfred (October 1980). "How the Eurocommunists Interpret Democracy".

The Review of Politics .

42 (4).

Cambridge University Press : 427– 464.

doi : 10.1017/S0034670500031958 .

JSTOR 1406636 .

S2CID 144763103 .

Socialist Party of Great Britain (January 1958).

"The Managerial Society Part Three – Fabian Version" .

Socialist Standard (641).

Socialist Party of Great Britain . Archived from the original on 2016-03-03 . Retrieved 22 July 2019 .

Taaffe, Peter (1 March 2019).

"New introduction to Trotsky's classic work, 'In Defence of Marxism' " .

Socialist World . Committee for a Workers' International/Socialist Party Scotland . Retrieved 5 May 2020 .

Timmermann, Heinz (October 1977). "Eurocommunism: Moscow's Reaction and the Implications for Eastern Europe".

The World Today .

33 (10). Royal Institute of International Affairs: 376– 385.

JSTOR 40394953 .

Tismaneanu, Vladimir (August 2009).

"The Revolutions of 1989: Causes, Meanings, Consequences" .

Contemporary European History . Revisiting 1989: Causes, Course and Consequences.

18 (3).

Cambridge University Press : 271– 288.

doi : 10.1017/s0960777309005049 .

JSTOR 40542827 .

Welch, Levin (Autumn 2012). "Neoliberalism, Economic Crisis, and the 2008 Financial Meltdown in the United States".

International Review of Modern Sociology .

38 (2). International Journals: 221– 257.

JSTOR 43499898 .

Wilhelm, John Howard (1985). "The Soviet Union Has an Administered, Not a Planned, Economy".

Europe-Asia Studies .

37 (1): 118– 130.

doi : 10.1080/09668138508411571 .

News [ edit ] Agence France-Presse (29 June 2008).

"Le Nouveau parti anticapitaliste d'Olivier Besancenot est lancé" [Olivier Besancenot's New Anti-Capitalist Party is launched] (in French).

Agence France-Presse . Archived from the original on 13 February 2012 . Retrieved 17 September 2018 .

Al Jazeera (26 February 2019).

"Cubans approve new constitution affirming role of socialism" .

Al Jazeera . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

"Kibbutz reinvents itself after 100 years of history" .

Taipei Times .

Associated Press . 16 November 2010. Archived from the original on 29 November 2010 . Retrieved 10 February 2020 .

Barbieri, Pierpaolo (25 April 2017).

"The Death and Life of Social Democracy" .

Foreign Affairs . Retrieved 15 November 2019 .

Barrett, William, ed. (1 April 1978).

"Capitalism, Socialism, and Democracy: A Symposium" .

Commentary . Retrieved 26 March 2020 .

Barro, Josh (20 October 2015).

"Bernie Sanders, Democratic Socialist Capitalist" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 26 March 2019 .

BBC (8 September 2003).

"Profile of Salvador Allende" .

BBC News . Retrieved 12 July 2019 .

Blanc, Eric (2 April 2019).

"Why Kautsky Was Right (and Why You Should Care)" .

Jacobin . Retrieved 20 June 2019 .

Buck, Tobias (17 October 2018).

"How social democracy lost its way: a report from Germany" .

Financial Times . Retrieved 29 November 2019 .

Cassidy, John (18 June 2019).

"Why Socialism Is Back" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 10 April 2020 .

Cohen, Paul (Winter 2010).

"Lessons from the Nationalization Nation: State-Owned Enterprises in France" .

Dissident . Retrieved 10 April 2020 .

Cooper, Ryan (10 January 2018).

"Bernie Sanders and the rise of American social democracy" .

The Week . Retrieved 26 March 2019 .

Debbaut, Karl (June 2007).

"Has France moved to the right?" .

Socialism Today . No. 110 . Retrieved 7 January 2020 .

Gage, Beverly (17 July 2018).

"America Can Never Sort Out Whether 'Socialism' Is Marginal or Rising" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 10 April 2020 .

Hancox, Dan (19 October 2013).

"Marinaleda: Spain's communist model village" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0029-7712 . Retrieved 16 June 2019 .

Heilbroner, Robert L. (Winter 1991).

"From Sweden to Socialism: A Small Symposium on Big Questions" .

Dissident . Barkan, Joanne; Brand, Horst; Cohen, Mitchell; Coser, Lewis; Denitch, Bogdan; Fehèr, Ferenc; Heller, Agnès; Horvat, Branko; Tyler, Gus. pp.

96– 110 . Retrieved 10 April 2020 .

Huges, Laura (24 February 2016).

"Tony Blair admits he can't understand the popularity of Jeremy Corbyn and Bernie Sanders" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 11 January 2022 . Retrieved 14 May 2019 .

Karnitschnig, Matthew (2 March 2018).

"Who killed European social democracy?" .

Politico . Retrieved 29 November 2019 .

Kristof, Nicholas (27 October 2011).

"Crony Capitalism Comes Home" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 1 March 2020 .

Kvitrud, Erlend (29 June 2019).

"What the Right Gets Wrong About Socialism" .

Foreign Policy . Retrieved 10 April 2020 .

Laqueur, Walter Z. (August 1976).

"Eurocommunism" and Its Friends" .

Commentary . Retrieved 10 April 2020 .

Lawson, Neal (20 December 2018).

"Averting the death of social democracy" .

Social Europe . Retrieved 29 November 2019 .

Levitz, Eric (23 April 2019).

"Bernie Sanders: 'Democratic Socialist' Is Just a Synonym for New Deal Liberal" .

New York . Retrieved 24 January 2020 .

Morley, James W. (1993).

Driven by Growth: Political Change in the Asia-Pacific Region . Armonk, New York: M. E. Sharpe.

ISBN 978-0-7656-3344-6 .

Muldoon, James (5 January 2019).

"Reclaiming the Best of Karl Kautsky" .

Jacobin . Retrieved 20 June 2019 .

Perkins, Albert (15 November 2016).

"Cooperative Economics: An Interview with Jaroslav Vanek" .

New Renaissance Magazine . Retrieved 8 February 2020 .

Post, Charlie (9 March 2019).

"The "Best" of Karl Kautsky Isn't Good Enough" .

Jacobin . Retrieved 20 June 2019 .

Rodriguez, Jesus (23 October 2018).

"White House report hits Marx, the Soviet Union and 'Medicare for All' " .

Politico . Retrieved 24 January 2020 .

Sarkar, Binay (6 July 2019).

"Road-Map To Socialism -Democracy is the road to socialism" .

Countercurrents . Retrieved 8 February 2020 .

Sitaraman, Ganesh (23 December 2019).

"The Collapse of Neoliberalism" .

The New Republic . Retrieved 10 April 2020 .

Stossel, John (14 January 2010).

"Let's Take the "Crony" Out of "Crony Capitalism" .

Reason . Reason Foundation . Retrieved 1 March 2020 .

Sunkara, Bhaskar (15 January 2020).

"The Long Shot of Democratic Socialism Is Our Only Shot" .

Jacobin . Retrieved 14 February 2020 .

Tarnoff, Ben (12 July 2017).

"How social media saved socialism" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 14 May 2019 .

Tupy, Marian (1 March 2016).

"Bernie Is Not a Socialist and America Is Not Capitalist" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 26 March 2019 .

Vidal, John (17 February 2018).

"Mexico's Zapatista rebels, 24 years on and defiant in mountain strongholds" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 16 June 2019 .

Waxman, Olivia B. (24 October 2018).

"Socialism Was Once America's Political Taboo. Now, Democratic Socialism Is a Viable Platform. Here's What to Know" .

Time . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

White, Michael (14 March 2014).

"Tony Benn: the establishment insider turned leftwing outsider" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 4 January 2020 .

Wolff, Richard D. (27 June 2015).

"Socialism Means Abolishing the Distinction Between Bosses and Employees" .

Truthout . Archived from the original on 11 March 2018 . Retrieved 29 January 2020 .

Speeches [ edit ] Chartier, Gary (13 April 2010).

Free-Market Anti-Capitalism?

(Speech). Cæsar's Palace, Las Vegas: Association of Private Enterprise Education.

Esteva, Gustavo (October 2013).

Liberty According to the Zapatistas (Speech). Lecture at the Bridgeport Free Skool. Bridgeport, Connecticut.

Thomas, Norman (2 February 1936).

Is the New Deal Socialism?

(Speech). Chicago Democratic Socialists of America. Archived from the original on 12 July 2010 . Retrieved 28 January 2016 .

Web [ edit ] Amadeo, Kimberly (14 December 2019).

"What Caused 2008 Global Financial Crisis" .

The Balance . Retrieved 10 April 2020 .

Angel, Pierre Robert (2 January 2020).

"Eduard Bernstein" .

Encyclopædia Britannica Online . Retrieved 29 February 2020 .

Carson, Kevin (19 June 2009).

"Socialism: A Perfectly Good Word Rehabilitated" . Center for a Stateless Society . Retrieved 8 February 2020 .

Chartier, Gary (September 2009).

"Socialist Ends, Market Means: Five Essays" (PDF) .

Center for a Stateless Society . Tulsa Alliance of the Libertarian Left . Retrieved 8 February 2020 .

Chartier, Gary (19 January 2010).

"Advocates of Freed Markets Should Embrace 'Anti-Capitalism' " . Center for a Stateless Society . Retrieved 8 February 2020 .

Craig, Joe (10 November 2006).

"Review – 'Lenin Rediscovered: What is to be Done? In Context' by Lars T. Lih" . Socialist Democracy . Retrieved 8 February 2020 .

Democratic Socialists of America.

"About us" . Democratic Socialists of America . Retrieved 17 May 2019 .

Democratic Socialists of America.

"What is Democratic Socialism?" (PDF) . Democratic Socialists of America. Archived from the original on 1 July 2009 . Retrieved 5 December 2017 .

Dionne, E. J.; Galtson, William (13 May 2019).

"Socialism: A Short Primer" . Brookings Institution . Retrieved 10 April 2020 .

Duignan, Brian; Kalsang Bhutia, Thinley; Mahajan, Deepti (21 January 2009).

"Social democracy" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 29 February 2020 .

Duignan, Brian; Kalsang Bhutia, Thinley; Mahajan, Deepti (20 December 2016).

"Social democracy" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 29 February 2020 .

Hickel, Jason; Sullivan, Dylan (July 1, 2023).

"Capitalism, Global Poverty, and the Case for Democratic Socialism" .

Monthly Review . Retrieved August 8, 2023 .

Internationalist Marxist Tendency.

"Deformed Workers' States" .

In Defence of Marxism . Internationalist Marxist Tendency . Retrieved 5 May 2020 .

Kalsang Bhutia, Thinley Kalsang; Veenu, Setia (13 October 2019).

"Karl Kautsky" .

Encyclopædia Britannica Online . Retrieved 29 February 2020 .

Kerr, Roger (9 December 1999).

"Optimism for the New Millennium" . Rotary Club of Wellington North. Archived from the original on 7 March 2006 . Retrieved 10 May 2006 .

Kotz, David (March 2008).

"What Economic Structure for Socialism?" (PDF) . University of Massachusetts Amherst . Retrieved 9 April 2020 .

Kuskowski, Jędrzej (4 January 2008).

"An Interview With Roderick Long" .

Liberalis . Retrieved 8 February 2020 .

Lange, Oskar (1979).

"The Computer and the Market" .

Calculemus . Retrieved 9 April 2020 .

Mabry, Don (1975).

"Chile: Allende's Rise and Fall" . Historical Text Archive. Archived from the original on 30 October 2006 . Retrieved 12 July 2019 .

Manley, Nick (7 May 2014).

"Brief Introduction To Left-Wing Laissez Faire Economic Theory: Part One" . Center for a Stateless Society . Retrieved 8 February 2020 .

Manley, Nick (9 May 2014).

"Brief Introduction To Left-Wing Laissez Faire Economic Theory: Part Two" . Center for a Stateless Society . Retrieved 8 February 2020 .

Murray, Peter (October 2001).

"Socialist Alliance lifts off!: Founding represents historic moment for left electoral unity" . Freedom Socialist Party . Retrieved 5 May 2020 .

Nordsieck, Wolfram (2017).

"Germany" .

Parties and Elections in Europe . Retrieved 19 June 2019 .

Nordsieck, Wolfram (2019).

"European Union" .

Parties and Elections in Europe . Retrieved 28 March 2020 .

Palley, Thomas I. (5 May 2004).

"From Keynesianism to Neoliberalism: Shifting Paradigms in Economics" .

Foreign Policy in Focus . Institute for Policy Studies . Retrieved 10 April 2020 .

Qiu, Linda (26 August 2015).

"Bernie Sanders – socialist or democratic socialist?" .

PolitiFact . Retrieved 26 March 2019 .

Schweickart, David (24 March 2006).

"Democratic Socialism" . Loyola University Chicago. Archived from the original (PDF) on 17 June 2012 . Retrieved 6 August 2020 .

Smitha, Frank E.

"The Optimism of Socialists" . fsmitha.com . Retrieved 26 March 2020 .

[ permanent dead link ] Socialist Alternative (4 June 2015).

"Statement of Principles" .

Socialist Alternative . Retrieved 5 May 2020 .

Socialist Party of Great Britain .

"Our Object and Declaration of Principles" .

Socialist Party of Great Britain . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

Socialist Party of Great Britain .

"Questions and Answers about Socialism" .

Socialist Party of Great Britain . Archived from the original on 29 January 2020 . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

Socialist Party of Great Britain .

"What is Socialism?" .

Socialist Party of Great Britain . Retrieved 15 June 2019 .

Socialist Party USA .

"Socialism as Radical Democracy" .

Socialist Party USA . Retrieved 5 May 2020 .

Spangler, Brad (15 September 2006).

"Market Anarchism as Stigmergic Socialism" .

Ozarkia.net . Retrieved 10 May 2010 .

Starke, Helmut Dietmar (11 January 2020).

"Rosa Luxemburg" .

Encyclopædia Britannica Online . Retrieved 29 February 2020 .

Luxemburg developed a humanitarian theory of Marxism, stressing democracy and revolutionary mass action to achieve international socialism.

Victorian Socialists (14 January 2019).

"Constitution of the Victorian Socialists" (PDF) .

Australian Electoral Commission . Retrieved 5 May 2020 .

Zwolinski, Matt (9 January 2013).

"Markets Not Capitalism | Matt Zwolinski" .

fee.org .

Bibliography [ edit ] Barrow, Logie; Bullock, Ian (1996).

Democratic Ideas and the British Labour Movement, 1880–1914 . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521560429 .

Benn, Tony (1980).

Arguments for Socialism .

Penguin Books .

ISBN 9780140054897 .

Dorrien, Gary (2019).

Social Democracy in the Making: The Political and Religious Roots of European Socialism .

Yale University Press .

ISBN 9780300236026 .

Harrington, Michael (1989).

Socialism: Past and Future . Arcade Publishing.

ISBN 9781559700009 .

Hatterlsey, Roy (1987).

Choose Freedom: The Future of Democratic Socialism .

Penguin Books .

ISBN 0140104941 .

Doherty, James C.; Lamb, Peter (2006).

Historical Dictionary of Socialism (2nd ed.). The Scarecrow Press .

ISBN 9780810855601 .

Miliband, Ralph (1994).

Socialism for a Sceptical Age . London, United Kingdom: Polity Press .

ISBN 9780745614274 .

Reisman, Reidsman, ed. (1996).

Democratic Socialism in Britain: Classic Texts in Economic and Political Thought, 1825–1952 . Chatto and Pickering.

ISBN 9781851962853 .

Further reading [ edit ] Day, Meagan (1 August 2018).

"Democratic socialism, explained by a democratic socialist" .

Vox . Retrieved 28 March 2020 .

Democratic Socialists of America .

"What is Democratic Socialism?" .

Democratic Socialists of America . Retrieved 28 March 2020 .

Kamat, Vikas.

"Democratic Socialism in India" . Kamat. Archived from the original on 8 October 2014 . Retrieved 28 March 2020 .

Liebman, Marcel; Miliband, Ralph (1985).

"Beyond Social Democracy" .

The Socialist Register ( 1986– 1987): 476– 489 . Retrieved 28 March 2020 .

Schwartz, Joseph; Schulman, Jason (21 December 2012).

"Towards Freedom: The Theory and Practice of Democratic Socialism" . Democratic Socialists of America . Retrieved 28 March 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Democratic socialism .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Democratic socialism .

Library resources about Democratic socialism Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Democratic socialism at the Encyclopædia Britannica v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal v t e Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Marxist Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Trade union Tripartisme Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Ambedkar Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blair Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Chávez Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman Jaurès Jenkins Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (father) Liebknecht (son) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Morales Myrdal Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Rustin Sanders Savage Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Woodsworth Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Party of European Socialists Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists By region Austria Germany United States Related Communism " The Internationale " Socialism Types of socialism Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal Portals : Economics Philosophy Politics Society Socialism NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5cf665967b‐tgcs4
Cached time: 20250818153251
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.754 seconds
Real time usage: 3.988 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 25610/1000000
Revision size: 153740/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 740076/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17166/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 905466/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.634/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 10133190/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3345.999      1 -total
 29.90% 1000.620    165 Template:Cite_book
 12.34%  412.883     50 Template:Cite_web
  9.57%  320.348    116 Template:Sfnm
  9.55%  319.484     47 Template:Cite_journal
  9.40%  314.572      2 Template:Reflist
  8.08%  270.210    117 Template:Sfn
  7.72%  258.248     40 Template:Cite_news
  4.02%  134.354      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  3.85%  128.877      1 Template:Socialism_sidebar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:38443580:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818153251 and revision id 1305687258. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Democratic_socialism&oldid=1305687258 " Categories : Democratic socialism Anti-capitalism Anti-fascism Anti-Stalinist left Democracy Economic ideologies History of socialism Left-wing ideologies Liberal socialism Market socialism Mixed economies Social democracy Socialism Syncretic political movements Types of democracy Types of socialism Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from November 2021 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from November 2023 CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 French-language sources (fr) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2021 Articles with permanently dead external links Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica links This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 14:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Democratic socialism 62 languages Add topic

