Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geography 2 Gallery 3 Central regions defined by organizations 4 Geographic center of the United States 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References Toggle the table of contents Central United States 9 languages Български 한국어 日本語 Português Simple English Slovenčina Svenska اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 40°N 98°W ﻿ / ﻿ 40°N 98°W ﻿ / 40; -98 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geographical region of the United States Not to be confused with Central America ; Geographic center of the United States ; or Central, United States .

40°N 98°W ﻿ / ﻿ 40°N 98°W ﻿ / 40; -98 This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Central United States" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This video was taken by the crew of Expedition 29 on board the ISS . The pass begins over Canada and ends in the Caribbean Sea , covering the entire Central United States.

The Central United States is sometimes conceived as between the Eastern and Western as part of a three-region model, roughly coincident with the U.S. Census Bureau 's definition of the Midwestern United States plus the western and central portions of the U.S. Census's definition of the Southern United States . The Central States are typically considered to consist of North Dakota , South Dakota , Nebraska , Kansas , Oklahoma , Texas , Minnesota , Iowa , Missouri , Arkansas , Louisiana , Wisconsin , Illinois , Michigan , Indiana , Ohio , Kentucky , Tennessee , West Virginia , Mississippi and Alabama .

[ citation needed ] Geography [ edit ] Chicago is the area's largest city and metropolitan area; other large cities with large metropolitan areas include New Orleans , Houston , Dallas , Fort Worth , San Antonio , Austin , Oklahoma City , Tulsa , Kansas City , Kansas and Kansas City , Missouri , Topeka , Wichita , Omaha, Nebraska and Lincoln , Minneapolis and St. Paul , Madison and Milwaukee , St. Louis , Louisville , Lexington , Detroit and Grand Rapids , Cincinnati , Cleveland , Columbus , Toledo , Dayton , Rockford , Peoria , Indianapolis , Evansville , Fort Wayne and South Bend .

[ citation needed ] Four of nine Census Bureau Divisions have names containing "Central", though they are not grouped as a region. They include 20 states and 39.45% of the U.S. population as of July 1, 2007.

[ 1 ] Almost all of the area is in the Gulf of Mexico drainage basin and most of that is in the Mississippi basin . Small waterways near the Great Lakes drain into the Great Lakes , and eventually the St. Lawrence River . The Red River Valley is centered on the North Dakota - Minnesota border and drains to Hudson Bay . Floods have been a problem for the region during the 20th and early 21st century.

[ 2 ] The Central Time Zone includes portions of the Florida panhandle , upper portions of Michigan , parts of Indiana , western Kentucky , western Tennessee , all of Texas except El Paso , and extends to the westernmost fringes of Great Plains states.

[ citation needed ] Gallery [ edit ] Central United States in 1908 from The Harmsworth atlas and Gazetter Census Bureau Divisions with "Central" in their name include the West North Central and East North Central in the Midwest . Along with the West South Central and East South Central in the South .

Map of U.S. time zones between April 2, 2006, and March 11, 2007. The current time zone now has Pulaski County, Indiana in the Eastern Time Zone and no longer in the Central Time Zone .

Continental divides in North America .

Central regions defined by organizations [ edit ] Different organizations define the central regions of the United States in a variety of ways: YPO Only 6 central states of the Midwest, [ a ] plus KY CERI All of Midwest and South [ a ] including MD, DE NOAA Midwest [ a ] minus OH, plus KY, CO, WY HSUS Midwest [ a ] minus ND, SD, KS, plus KY USGS West North Central States , South Central United States , 4 eastern Mountain states Adventure Camp Midwest plus South [ a ] minus Atlantic states, AL, WV Geography of the Interior United States MLB 's National League Central Division, members in PA, OH, WI, IL, MO; TX through 2012 MLB's American League Central Division, members in OH, MI, IL, MN, MO NBA 's Central Division , members in OH, MI, IN, IL, WI, former members from NC, FL, GA, LA and Ontario (Canada) NHL 's Central Division , members in CO, MN, TN, TX, IL, MO and Manitoba (Canada), former members in MI, AZ, OH and Ontario (Canada) The NFL 's former National Football Conference Central Division , members in FL, MI, IL, WI, and MN The NFL's former American Football Conference Central Division , members in MD, PA, FL, OH, TN, former member from TX Geographic center of the United States [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Geographic center of the United States § Contiguous United States .

[ edit ] The geographic center of the 48 contiguous or conterminous United States , determined in a 1918 survey, is located at , about 2.6 miles (4.2 km) northwest of the center of Lebanon, Kansas , approximately 12 miles (19 km) south of the Kansas – Nebraska border.

[ 3 ] The determination is accurate to about 20 miles (32 km).

[ 4 ] While any measurement of the exact center of a land mass will always be imprecise due to changing shorelines and other factors, the NGS coordinates are recognized in a historical marker in a small park at the intersection of AA Road and K-191 . It is accessible by a turn-off from U.S. Route 281 .

See also [ edit ] Central Canada Gulf Coast of the United States Great Lakes region Heartland (United States) – Central area of the US that is culturally associated with traditional values List of regions of the United States Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e See Census definition References [ edit ] ^ "U.S. Census website" . Retrieved 2008-05-20 .

^ Iman Mallakpour & Gabriele Villarini (29 September 2014). "The changing nature of flooding across the central United States".

Nature Climate Change .

5 (3). Nature: 250– 254.

doi : 10.1038/nclimate2516 .

^ "Geographical Centers of the United States" (PDF) .

USGS Publications Warehouse . U.S. Department of the Interior Geological Survey. 1964 . Retrieved 13 May 2015 .

^ "The Geographical Center of the Lower 48 United States, at Lebanon, Kansas" . Archived from the original on August 25, 2006 . Retrieved June 1, 2006 .

The actual center is about a half mile away in the center of a former hog farm.

v t e Regions of the United States Administrative Units U.S. state District of Columbia Territory Insular area Minor Outlying Island Tribal domestic dependent nations Maritime territory Time zones Chamorro Samoa Hawaii–Aleutian Alaska Pacific Mountain Central Eastern Atlantic Census West Pacific Mountain Midwest E N Central W N Central Northeast New England Middle Atlantic South S Atlantic E S Central W S Central Courts of appeals 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th Physical Physiographic Pacific Mountain Intermontane Plateaus Rocky Mountains Laurentian Upland Interior Plains Interior Highlands Appalachian Highlands Atlantic Plain Tidewater Coastal Arctic West Great Lakes Gulf East Historical Acquisitions Thirteen Colonies Northwest Territory Southwest Territory Louisiana Purchase Gadsden Purchase Treaty of 1818 Adams–Onís Treaty Texas annexation Oregon Treaty Mexican Cession Alaska Purchase Newlands Resolution Acquisition of Puerto Rico and Guam Cession of Tutuila Cession of Manu'a Annexation of the Indian Territory Treaty of the Danish West Indies Acquisition of the Northern Mariana Islands Civil War Union Border states Confederacy Old South Dixie Slave states and free states Divided Atlantic Northeast The Californias Columbia District Oregon Country Pacific Northwest Prairie Pothole Samoan Islands Sonoran Desert Virgin Islands Other Appalachia Central Eastern Four Corners Great Plains High Plains Intermountain International border states Mariana Islands Northern Northwestern Cascadia Red states and blue states Southeastern Southern Deep Mid New Solid Upland Southwestern Upper Midwest Western List Category Commons v t e United States History By period 1776–1789 1789–1815 1815–1849 1849–1865 1865–1917 1917–1945 1945–1964 1964–1980 1980–1991 1991–2016 2016–present By event Pre-colonial era Colonial era Stamp Act Congress Thirteen Colonies Continental Congress Continental Association United Colonies military history Founding Fathers Halifax Resolves Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence American Revolution War Treaty of Paris Articles of Confederation Perpetual Union Confederation period American frontier Constitution drafting and ratification Bill of Rights Federalist Era War of 1812 Territorial evolution Mexican–American War Civil War Reconstruction era Indian Wars Native genocide Gilded Age Progressive Era Women's suffrage Civil rights movement 1865–1896 1896–1954 1954–1968 Spanish–American War Imperialism World War I Roaring Twenties Great Depression World War II home front American Century Cold War Korean War Space Race Feminist Movement LGBTQ Movement Vietnam War Post-Cold War (1991–2016) September 11 attacks War on Terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Great Recession COVID-19 pandemic By topic Outline of U.S. history Demographic Discoveries Economic Inventions Military Postal Technological and industrial Geography Territory Contiguous United States counties federal district federal enclaves Indian reservations insular zones minor outlying islands populated places states Earthquakes Extreme points Islands Mountains peaks ranges Appalachian Rocky Sierra Nevada National Park Service National Parks Regions East Coast West Coast Great Plains Gulf Mid-Atlantic Midwestern New England Pacific Central Eastern Northern Northeastern Northwestern Southern Southeastern Southwestern Western Longest rivers Arkansas Colorado Columbia Mississippi Missouri Red (South) Rio Grande Yukon Time Water supply and sanitation World Heritage Sites Politics Federal Executive President of the United States powers Executive Office Vice President Cabinet Executive departments Independent agencies Intelligence Community Director of National Intelligence Central Intelligence Agency National Security Agency National Reconnaissance Office Law enforcement ATF CBP Diplomatic Security DEA FBI ICE Marshals Secret Service TSA Inspector generals Civil service Public policy Legislative House of Representatives current members Speaker Senate current members President pro tempore President Capitol Police Library of Congress Congressional Budget Office Government Accountability Office Government Publishing Office Judicial Supreme Court Chief Justice Associate Justices list Courts of appeals list of judges District courts / Territorial courts list of courts list of judges Other tribunals U.S. attorney Law Bill of Rights civil liberties Code of Federal Regulations Constitution federalism preemption separation of powers civil rights United States Code Uniformed Armed Forces Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard National Guard NOAA Corps Public Health Service Corps State , Federal District , and Territorial Executive Governor list Lieutenant governor list Secretary of state Attorney general Treasurer Auditor/Comptroller Agriculture commissioner Insurance commissioner Public utilities commission State police list Legislative List of legislatures List of legislators Judicial Supreme courts Chief justices District attorney list Law State constitutions Statutory codes Uniform act Comparison of governments Tribal Tribal sovereignty Native American recognition in the United States Federally recognized tribes Federally recognized Alaska Native tribes State-recognized tribes Indian reservation list Hawaiian home land Local County List of counties and county equivalents County executive Sheriff Clerk Cities Consolidated city-county Independent city Coterminous municipality Charter Mayor–council government Council–manager government City commission government Mayor City manager City council Minor divisions Township Town meeting Special district School district list Corruption Democratic backsliding Elections Electoral College Red states and blue states Foreign relations foreign policy Imperial presidency Ideologies Anti-Americanism exceptionalism nationalism Parties Democratic Republican Third parties Scandals Economy By sector Agriculture Banking Communications Companies Energy Insurance Manufacturing Mining Science and technology Tourism Trade by state Currency Exports Federal budget Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States Federal Reserve System Financial position Labor unions Public debt Social welfare programs Taxation Unemployment Wall Street Transport Aviation Driving Public transportation Rail transportation Transportation policy Transportation safety Trucking industry Society Culture Americana Architecture Cinema Crime Cuisine Dance Demographics Economic issues affluence eviction homeownership household income income inequality middle class personal income poverty standard of living wealth working class Education attainment literacy Family Fashion Flag list Folklore Holidays Federal holidays Homelessness Housing Human rights Languages American English Indigenous languages ASL Literature Media journalism internet newspapers radio television Music Names National anthem National symbols Columbia Mount Rushmore Statue of Liberty Uncle Sam People Philosophy Political ideologies Race Religion Sexuality Social class Society Sports history Theater Transportation Video games Visual art Social class Affluence American Dream Educational attainment Homelessness Homeownership Household income Income inequality Middle class Personal income Poverty Standard of living Health Aging Healthcare Abortion Birth control Prenatal care Hospice care Immigrant health care Rationing Health care finance Health insurance costs Health care prices Prescription drug prices Disability Health insurance Food safety Physician shortage Poverty and health Race and health Obesity Medical deserts Women's reproductive health Life expectancy Issues Capital punishment Crime incarceration Criticism of government Discrimination affirmative action antisemitism intersex rights Islamophobia LGBTQ rights racism Native American African American Energy policy Environmental issues Environmental movement Climate change Gun politics Mass shootings Hunger Smoking Human rights Immigration illegal National security Terrorism Opioid epidemic Separation of church and state Xenophobia Outline Index Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐hg8mh
Cached time: 20250817183508
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.597 seconds
Real time usage: 0.766 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2383/1000000
Revision size: 7512/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 138861/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3417/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 42059/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.380/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23926383/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  601.910      1 -total
 17.88%  107.647      2 Template:Reflist
 15.80%   95.115      1 Template:Anli
 13.84%   83.289      3 Template:Cite_web
 13.52%   81.383      1 Template:Excerpt
 13.22%   79.562      4 Template:Navbox
 12.64%   76.060      1 Template:Regions_of_the_United_States
 10.38%   62.507      1 Template:United_States_topics
  9.29%   55.914      1 Template:Short_description
  7.80%   46.924      1 Template:More_citations_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2031425:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817183508 and revision id 1303311721. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Central_United_States&oldid=1303311721 " Category : Central United States Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2009 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Articles with excerpts Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 06:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Central United States 9 languages Add topic

