Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 References 3 Resources 4 References Toggle the table of contents Sa'ad al-Dawla 7 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català فارسی עברית 日本語 Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Jewish physician and statesman This article is about the 13th-century Jewish physician of Persia. For the 10th-century Hamdanid ruler of Aleppo, see Sa'd al-Dawla .

Saʿd al-Dawla ibn Ṣafī ibn Hibatullāh ibn Muhassib al-Dawla al-Abharī ( Arabic : سعد الدولة بن هبة الله بن محاسب ابهري ) (c. 1240 – March 5, 1291) was a Jewish physician and statesman in thirteenth-century Persia ( Iran ).

[ 1 ] Biography [ edit ] Originally from the town of Abhar in western Iran, [ 1 ] he was grand vizier from 1289 to 1291 under the Mongolian Ilkhan in Persia, Arghun Khan . According to Abu al-Faraj , Sa'ad was the father-in-law of the prefect of Baghdad . Sa'ad held a position in the treasury department, where he so distinguished himself that the Mongolian governor was jealous and recommended him to court as a physician. Here Sa'ad made a friend of Ordu Kia , a powerful general, and through his influence was sent to collect the arrears of taxes in Baghdad. He was so successful in raising money that Arghun appointed him assistant ( musharrif ) in the department of finances at Baghdad, Ordu Kia being appointed military governor, or emir , of that province. The historian Wassaf says that Sa'ad cured Arghun of an illness, and, having thus gained his confidence, informed the Ilkhan of the corruption among the officials at Baghdad. At the same time he impressed Arghun with his ability, his knowledge of the Mongolian and Turkish languages , and by his intimate acquaintance with the conditions existing in the province. He was soon made general controller of the finances of Baghdad, and then of the whole empire, becoming grand vizier. "Thus," remarks Abu al-Faraj, "were the Muslims reduced to having a Jew in the place of honor," a situation which they greatly resented. Arghun, as a Lamaist Buddhist , had no such compunctions.

The administration of Sa'ad al-Daulah ( Arabic for "Felicity of the Empire," an honorific name which he took as vizier) appears to have been wise and just, although Von Hammer calls it "sanguinary and golden." He instituted regulations which, although strict, were wise and aimed at a sure increase of the revenue. The taxes were on a fixed basis, and no extraordinary requisitions—of food or animals—were allowed. He employed only Jews and Christians in office, and, as was natural, a large share of the positions fell into the hands of his own relatives. Under him the Jews enjoyed a short period of prosperity, and Abu al-Faraj says they flocked to Baghdad from all parts of the world. It is possible that Sa'ad was instrumental in establishing diplomatic relations with Europe . Besides, he patronized the arts and literature; and a collection of poems and eulogies dedicated to him was made and circulated in Baghdad. On account of this work, mentioned by Wassaf, Heinrich Grätz identifies Sa'ad with Mordecai ibn al-Kharbiya , who is described in a poem (still extant) dedicated to him in terms that might well apply to Sa'ad (Grätz, "Gesch." vii, note 10).

Sa'ad had many enemies. The Mongolian officials hated him because they could no longer divert the revenues to their own use; and the Muslims felt it a degradation to have a Jew placed over them. Sa'ad had also made an enemy of Arghun's favorites and was himself proud and haughty in his bearing. False reports were circulated about him; and no opportunity was lost of maligning him to Arghun, although without effect. It was said that Sa'ad was trying to introduce a new religion at the head of which was to be the Ilkhan. Finally Arghun fell ill, and Sa'ad's enemies took advantage of the opportunity to get rid of the Jew. He was killed, as stated above, on March 5, 1291; his goods were confiscated; and his family and the Jews in general were persecuted. Arghun died soon after.

References [ edit ] ^ a b Amitai, Reuven (2010).

"Saʿd al-Dawla" . In Norman A. Stillman (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Jews in the Islamic World . Brill Online.

Resources [ edit ] Jacobs, Joseph and Mary W. Montgomery. "Sa'd al-Daulah".

Jewish Encyclopedia . Funk and Wagnalls, 1901–1906, which gives the following bibliography: Abu al-Faraj , Chronicon Syriacum , pp. 610, 624–625, Leipzig, 1789; Hammer-Purgstall, Gesch. der Ilchane , i.377 et seq., Darmstadt, 1842; Howorth, History of the Mongols , iii.331 et seq., London, 1888; Grätz, Gesch.

vii.173, 183–186; Weill, Gesch. der Chalifen, iv.146 et seq.

References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Jacobs, Joseph ; Montgomery, Mary W. (1905).

"Sa'd al-Daulah" . In Singer, Isidore ; et al. (eds.).

The Jewish Encyclopedia . Vol. 10. New York: Funk & Wagnalls. pp.

629– 630.

v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine v t e High-ranking ministers and commanders of the Mongol Empire and its divisions Early empire Muqali Yelü Chucai Shigi Qutuqu Mahmud Yalavach Subutai Masud Beg Chinqai Khadag Bala Bulghai Arghun Aqa Yuan dynasty Ahmad Fanakati Bayan Baarin Aju Sengga Bolad Dawlat Shah El Temür Bayan Merkid Toqto'a Ilkhanate Shams al-Din Juvayni Buqa Sa'ad al-Dawla Rashid al-Din Hamadani Demasq Kaja Ghiyath al-Din Muhammad Chupan Golden Horde Kuremsa Nevruy Negudar Boroldai Nogai Khan Mamai Edigu Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sa%27ad_al-Dawla&oldid=1294934988 " Categories : Jewish viziers Medieval Jewish physicians of Persia 1240s births 1291 deaths 13th-century Iranian physicians 13th-century Jews Jews from the Ilkhanate Viziers of the Ilkhanate People from Abhar Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia without a Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1906 Jewish Encyclopedia Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 10 June 2025, at 17:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sa'ad al-Dawla 7 languages Add topic

