Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Risks posed by gases in livestock manure 2 Hydrogen sulfide Toggle Hydrogen sulfide subsection 2.1 Sources of hydrogen sulfide exposure 2.2 Effects 2.2.1 Acute 2.2.2 Chronic 2.3 Regulations for exposures 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Manure management 4 languages Català Deutsch Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Agricultural practice Manure management In Hawaii. using nut husks as a part of a manure management system Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Manure management refers to capture, storage, treatment, and utilization of animal manures in an environmentally sustainable manner.   It can be retained in various holding facilities. Animal manure (also referred to as animal waste) can occur in a liquid, slurry, or solid form.  It is utilized by distribution on fields in amounts that enrich soils without causing water pollution or unacceptably high levels of nutrient enrichment.  Manure management is a component of nutrient management .

In confined spaces the gasses from manure can lethally asphyxiate humans.

[ 1 ] There is also a drowning danger.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Risks posed by gases in livestock manure [ edit ] Livestock manure produces several gases including four main toxic gases, hydrogen sulfide , methane, ammonia and carbon dioxide.

[ 4 ] In animal housing it is very common in swine and beef breeding to have manure storage under the building's floor. In this setup low concentrations of these toxic gases are commonly noted throughout the year.

[ 4 ] The highest concentrations of these gases are noted during manure agitation, stirring the manure to homogenize the manure for pumping out of the storage. During these times the concentrations easily approach levels that can pose health issues to the workers and animals in the facilities.

[ 4 ] Four-gas monitors are ideal for situations involving manure, where simultaneous exposure to any or all of hydrogen sulfide, methane, ammonia, and carbon dioxide (CO 2 ) is possible. Four-gas monitors typically do not directly detect carbon dioxide, but this gas is minimally toxic on its own. It is important to note that four-gas monitors alone do not guarantee an individual’s safety when working with manure. Thus, four-gas monitors should always be used in conjunction with other prevention measures, including: proper ventilation (e.g., positive-pressure ventilation system or a windy day); use of a breathing apparatus and harness when entering a manure pit; removal of persons and animals from building where manure is being agitated; consideration of proper storage conditions; clear signage to denote hazardous areas and exclusion zones as well as fencing around manure lagoons; and an operation-level written protocol for entering permit-required confined spaces.

[ 5 ] Hydrogen sulfide [ edit ] Hydrogen Sulfide ( H 2 S ), is a naturally occurring gas that is flammable, colorless and poisonous.

[ 6 ] H 2 S has a characteristic rotten egg smell, though pungent at first it quickly deadens the sense of smell.

[ 7 ] People are typically only able to smell H 2 S at low concentrations.

[ 6 ] H 2 S is heavier than air causing the gas to travel close to the ground and collect in low-lying areas.

[ 6 ] Common names for hydrogen sulfide include hydrosulfuric acid (the product of it reacting with water), stink damp and sewer gas.

[ 6 ] Sources of hydrogen sulfide exposure [ edit ] Hydrogen sulfide naturally occurs in hot springs, crude petroleum and natural gas.

[ 7 ] H 2 S is also produced from the bacterial breakdown of animal and human wastes and organic materials in the absence of oxygen ( anaerobic digestion ).

[ 6 ] H 2 S is also a common metabolic end product of sulfate reducing bacteria which convert sulfates and hydrocarbons into carbon dioxide and hydrogen sulfide in the absence of free oxygen. There are multiple industrial sources of hydrogen sulfide. Such sources include: natural gas/petroleum drilling and refining, wastewater treatment, coke ovens, tanneries and paper mills.

[ 7 ] Hydrogen sulfide is found in hydrocarbons both directly as an impurity and is produced by sulfate reducing microorganisms which can "eat" methane or other hydrocarbons, using sulfate as the electron receptor, similar to how aerobic metabolism uses oxygen. Other non-industrial sources of H 2 S include emissions from livestock facilities and the land applications of animal manure.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] During the agitation or mixing of swine manure in a deep pit storage system the concentration of hydrogen sulfide was observed in one study at levels exceeding 300 ppm inside the barn.

[ 9 ] In a study examining the concentration of hydrogen sulfide in a residential cohort during manure application, it was reported the levels never exceeded the Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry acute exposure MRL of 70 ppb and only 14 readings at 1-minute intervals reported levels above the intermediate exposure MRL of 20 ppb.

[ 8 ] There are currently strong recommendations from both Pork Producer Associations and Land Grant Universities that suggest having two employees in a barn during agitation and pumping, maintain proper ventilation levels during agitation and pumping of manure, and to not enter a manure storage without proper equipment and training.

[ 10 ] Effects [ edit ] Acute [ edit ] Hydrogen sulfide is most commonly inhaled, though through prolonged exposure skin and eye irritations resulting in painful dermatitis and burning eyes can occur.

[ 11 ] Symptoms of acute exposure include nausea, headaches, disturbed equilibrium, tremors, convulsions and skin and eye irritations.

[ 11 ] At high levels, inhalation of hydrogen sulfide will result in unconsciousness and death due to its effect on the body resulting in the lack of oxygen use in the cells.

[ 11 ] the typical odor threshold for H 2 S is 0.01 to 1.5 ppm with the loss of smell occurring at levels around levels of 100 to 150 ppm.

[ 12 ] Concentrations of 500 to 700 ppm can result in death within 30 to 60 minutes, 700 to 1000 ppm result in death within minutes, while death is nearly instantaneous at levels of 1000 to 2000 ppm.

[ 12 ] Chronic [ edit ] Chronic exposure to hydrogen sulfide can cause several long term health issues, though H 2 S does not accumulate in the body.

[ 12 ] Repeated or prolonged exposures have been reported to cause low blood pressure, headache, loss of appetite, chronic cough, inflammation of the eye membrane, weight loss and ataxia.

[ 12 ] Regulations for exposures [ edit ] The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) and National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) have set recommended exposure limits (REL NIOSH) and permissible exposure limits (PEL OSHA) for H 2 S exposure in the workplace.

[ 12 ] NIOSH's REL for a 10-minute maximum exposure is 10 ppm, OSHA's PEL for general industry, i.e. agriculture, construction, etc., is 20 ppm and OSHA's PEL levels are enforceable.

[ 12 ] NIOSH also reports an IDLH or immediately dangerous to life and health, at 100 ppm, this is the level at which the effects of exposure would interfere with a person's ability to escape.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Manure Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation Animal feeding operation Slurry pit Atmospheric methane References [ edit ] ^ "Farm Owner and Son Asphyxiated in Manure Waste Pit--Minnesota" .

cdc.gov . October 15, 2014.

^ Mike Hellgren (May 24, 2012).

"Man, 2 Sons Found Dead In Kent County Manure Pit" .

^ David Groves.

"Another dairy worker drowns in manure pit" .

The Stand .

^ a b c "National Ag Safety Database - National Ag Safety Database" .

nasdonline.org . Retrieved 2017-12-04 .

^ Hanschu, Jakob A.; and Bendixsen, Casper G. (2025).

"Assessment of a Gas Monitor Distribution Program in Rural Wisconsin" .

Journal of Agromedicine .

30 (3): 558– 566.

doi : 10.1080/1059924X.2025.2468401 .

ISSN 1059-924X .

PMID 39980183 .

^ a b c d e Pubchem.

"hydrogen sulfide" .

pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov . Retrieved 2017-12-04 .

^ a b c OSHA (October 2005).

"OSHA Fact Sheet: Hydrogen Sulfide" (PDF) .

OSHA . Retrieved October 25, 2017 .

^ a b Hoff, Steven J.; Harmon, Jay D.; Bundy, Dwaine S.; and Zelle, Brian C., "Hydrogen Sulfide and Ammonia Receptor Concentrations in a Community of Multiple Swine Emission Sources: Preliminary Study" (2008).

Agricultural and Biosystems Engineering Publications . 86.

http://lib.dr.iastate.edu/abe_eng_pubs/86 ^ a b Muhlbauer, Ross V.; Swestka, Randy John; Burns, Robert T.; Xin, Hongwei; Hoff, Steven J.; and Li, Hong, "Development and Testing of a Hydrogen Sulfide Detection System for Use in Swine Housing" (2008).

Agricultural and Biosystems Engineering Conference Proceedings and Presentations . 145.

http://lib.dr.iastate.edu/abe_eng_conf/145 ^ "Use Caution When Pumping Manure From Deep-pits | Iowa State University Extension and Outreach" .

www.extension.iastate.edu . Retrieved 2017-12-04 .

^ a b c "ATSDR - Medical Management Guidelines (MMGs): Hydrogen Sulfide Carbonyl Sulfide" .

www.atsdr.cdc.gov . Retrieved 2017-12-04 .

^ a b c d e f g "Safety and Health Topics | Hydrogen Sulfide - Hazards | Occupational Safety and Health Administration" .

www.osha.gov . Retrieved 2017-12-04 .

Report for Congress: Agriculture: A Glossary of Terms, Programs, and Laws, 2005 Edition External links [ edit ] Animal Manure Management on http://eXtension.org Animal Manure Management on http://eXtension.org Animal Manure Nutrient Management on http://eXtension.org Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Manure_management&oldid=1305875609 " Categories : Agricultural soil science Feces Organic fertilizers Livestock Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles using infobox templates with no data rows Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 15:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Manure management 4 languages Add topic

