Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Marxism–Leninism Toggle Marxism–Leninism subsection 1.1 Leninism 1.2 Stalinism 1.3 De-Stalinization 2 Concepts Toggle Concepts subsection 2.1 Dictatorship of the proletariat 2.2 Anti-imperialism 2.3 Peaceful coexistence 2.4 Socialism in one country 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Footnotes 4.2 Bibliography 4.2.1 Articles and journal entries 4.2.2 Books Toggle the table of contents Ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union 6 languages العربية Bahasa Indonesia پښتو Português Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Manifestation of Marxism–Leninism "Soviet communism" redirects here. For the form of communism based around workers' councils ( soviets ), see Council communism .

"Soviet Marxism" redirects here. For the book, see Soviet Marxism: A Critical Analysis .

Politics of the Soviet Union Leadership Leaders President list Vice President Collective leadership State Council Presidential Council Communist Party Congress Central Committee History General Secretary Politburo Secretariat Orgburo Legislature Congress of Soviets Central Executive Committee Supreme Soviet Soviet of the Union Soviet of Nationalities Presidium Congress of People's Deputies Speaker 1989 Legislative election Governance Constitution Official names 1924 1936 1977 Government Ministries State Committees Cabinets Premiership First Deputy Premier Deputy Premier Administrator of Affairs Judiciary Law Supreme Court Military Collegium People's Court Procurator General Ideology Soviet democracy Marxism–Leninism Leninism Stalinism Khrushchevism De-Stalinization Perestroika Glasnost Society Economy Agriculture Consumer goods Five-Year Plan Kosygin reform New Economic Policy Science and technology Era of Stagnation Material balance planning Transport War communism Culture Demographics Education Family Phraseology Religion Repression Censorship Censorship of images Great Purge Gulag system Collectivization Human rights Ideological repression Political abuse of psychiatry Political repression Population transfer Propaganda Suppressed research Red Terror Soviet Empire Soviet Union portal Other countries v t e Before the perestroika reforms of Mikhail Gorbachev that promoted a more liberal form of socialism, the formal ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) was Marxism–Leninism , a form of socialism consisting of a centralised command economy with a vanguardist one-party state that aimed to realize the dictatorship of the proletariat . The Soviet Union 's ideological commitment to achieving communism included the national communist development of socialism in one country and peaceful coexistence with capitalist countries while engaging in anti-imperialism to defend the international proletariat , combat the predominant prevailing global system of capitalism and promote the goals of Bolshevism . The state ideology of the Soviet Union – and thus Marxism–Leninism – derived and developed from the theories, policies, and political praxis of Karl Marx , Friedrich Engels , Vladimir Lenin , and Joseph Stalin .

Marxism–Leninism [ edit ] Part of a series on Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type Collective farming Collective leadership Commanding heights of the economy Democratic centralism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Intensification of the class struggle under socialism Labor aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism New Soviet man One-party state Partiinost' Popular front Proletarian internationalism Protracted people's war Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Yugoslav State socialist Soviet republic Totalitarianism Theory of the productive forces Third Period Vanguardism Wars of national liberation Unified power Variants Browderism Camilism Fidelismo Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kádárism Kaysone Phomvihane Thought Khrushchevism Machelism Maoism Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Prachanda Path Sankarism Socialism with Chinese characteristics Stalinism Neo- Titoism Politicians Lenin Stalin Foster Dimitrov Thälmann Hồ Pollitt Browder Rákosi Nosaka Bierut Tito Togliatti Ulbricht Kaganovich Mao Khrushchev Choibalsan Díaz Ibárruri Gottwald Thorez Chervenkov Gheorghiu-Dej Zachariadis Deng Gomułka Brezhnev Hoxha Namboodiripad Hall Giáp Zhivkov Bakdash Kim Kádár Honecker Husák Koliševski Qasim Taraki Ceaușescu Barre Adhikari Kaysone Neto Jaruzelski Aidit Mugabe Chin Pot Habash Castro Jiang (Zemin) Guevara Lara Garang Gorbachev Kérékou Machel Mengistu Bains Brar Wijeweera Bishop Zyuganov Ortega Cano Kaypakkaya Sankara Xi Dahal Intellectuals Marx Engels Lukács Roy Bukharin Dutt Haywood Chen Trường Bettelheim Dutta Hinton Camilo Parenti Hirschman Guzmán Badiou Andreyeva Sison Losurdo Newton Avakian Davis Trọng Ghandy Dean Jiang (Shigong) Li Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism (1924) Dialectical and Historical Materialism (1938) The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) (1938) Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR (1951) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism (1960) Guerrilla Warfare (1961) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) President Ho Chi Minh's Testament (1969) The Governance of China (2014) History Soviet Union 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War World War II Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Revolution China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Korean War Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency Revolutions of 1989 Nepalese Civil War By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia 1975–79 1979–92 China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia Czechia Slovakia East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia South Yemen Soviet Union Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan Vietnam Yugoslavia Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia Organizations Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam French Communist Party IMCWP Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Party of Labour of Albania Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Workers' Front (Spain) Workers' Party of Korea Related topics All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism Mass killings Bolshevism Crimes against humanity under communist regimes Mass killings Criticism of communist party rule Cult of personality Intercommunalism Leninism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism New class Post-communism Red fascism Red Scare Second Second World State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union State capitalism State socialism Tankie Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Trotskyism Communism portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Main article: Marxism–Leninism Marxism–Leninism was the ideological basis for the Soviet Union.

[ 1 ] It explained and legitimized the CPSU's right to rule, while explaining its role as a vanguard party .

[ 1 ] For instance, the ideology explained that the CPSU's policies, even if they were unpopular, were correct because the party was enlightened.

[ 1 ] It was represented to be the only truth in Soviet society, and with it rejected the notion of multiple truths.

[ 1 ] In short, it was used to justify CPSU Leninism as being a means to an end.

[ 1 ] The relationship between ideology and decision-making was at best ambivalent, with most policy decisions taken in the light of the continued, permanent development of Marxism–Leninism, [ 2 ] which, as the only truth, could not by its very nature become outdated.

[ 2 ] Despite having evolved over the years, Marxism–Leninism had several central tenets.

[ 3 ] The main tenet was the party's status as sole ruling party.

[ 3 ] The 1977 Constitution referred to the party as the "leading and guiding force of Soviet society, and the nucleus of its political system, of all state and public organizations, is the Communist Party of the Soviet Union." [ 3 ] State socialism was essential, and from Joseph Stalin until Mikhail Gorbachev official discourse considered private social and economic activity such as capitalism as "retarding" the development of Russian collective consciousness and of the Soviet economy.

[ 4 ] Gorbachev supported privatization to a degree, but based his policies on Vladimir Lenin 's and Nikolai Bukharin 's view on the New Economic Policy of the 1920s, and supported complete state ownership over the commanding heights of the economy .

[ 4 ] Unlike liberalism , Marxism–Leninism stressed not the importance of the individual , but rather the role of the individual as a member of a collective .

[ 4 ] Thus defined, individuals had only the right to freedom of expression if it safeguarded the interests of the collective.

[ 4 ] For instance, in the 1977 Constitution Marxism–Leninism it was stated that every person had the right to express their opinion, but that opinion could only be expressed if it was in accordance with the "general interests of Soviet society." [ 4 ] In short, the number of rights granted to an individual was decided by the state , and could be taken away by the state as it saw fit.

[ 4 ] Soviet Marxism–Leninism justified nationalism , and the media portrayed every victory of the Soviet Union as a victory for the communist movement as a whole.

[ 4 ] In large parts, Soviet nationalism was based upon ethnic Russian nationalism .

[ 4 ] Marxism–Leninism stressed the importance of the worldwide conflict between capitalism and socialism, and the Soviet press talked about progressive and reactionary forces, while claiming that socialism was on the verge of victory; that the "correlations of forces" were in the Soviet Union's favour.

[ 4 ] Until its late years of the USSR , the ideology had professed state atheism , and party members were formerly not allowed to be religious.

[ 5 ] The state professed a belief in the feasibility of total communist mode of production , and all policies were seen as justifiable if it contributed to the Soviet Union's reaching that stage.

[ 6 ] Leninism [ edit ] Main article: Leninism Part of a series on Leninism Schools of thought Bolshevism Bordigism Marxism–Leninism Nkrumaism Right communism Trotskyism Workerism Concepts Anti-imperialism Collective leadership Democratic centralism Dialectical materialism Dual power Labor aristocracy Liquidationism National liberation Proletarian internationalism Revolutionary defeatism Revolutionary situation Self-determination Socialist state Soviet democracy Vanguardism World revolution People Lenin Trotsky Bukharin Kamenev Stalin Zinoviev Rykov Bubnov Sokolnikov Lukács Bordiga Hồ Gramsci Nkrumah Negri Theoretical works The Development of Capitalism in Russia (1899) What Is to Be Done?

(1902) Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1917) The State and Revolution (1917) The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky (1918) "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder (1920) Foundations of Leninism (1924) Leninism: Introduction to the Study of Leninism (1925) History Russian Social Democratic Labour Party 2nd Congress Prague Conference Bolsheviks RSDLP (Bolsheviks) Russian Revolution February Revolution October Revolution History of Soviet Russia RSFSR Collective leadership Civil War Red Army War communism Red Terror National delimitation Anti-religious campaign New Economic Policy Soviet Union Death and funeral of Lenin Comintern Joseph Stalin's rise to power Related topics 26 Baku Commissars Anti-Leninist left De-Leninization Jacobinism Marxism Libertarian Luxemburgism Left communism Mensheviks Orthodox Marxism Proletkult Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e In Marxist philosophy , Leninism is the body of political theory for the democratic organisation of a revolutionary vanguard party , and the achievement of a dictatorship of the proletariat , as political prelude to the establishment of the socialist mode of production , developed by Lenin.

[ 7 ] Since Karl Marx barely, if ever wrote about how the socialist mode of production would look like or function, these tasks were left for later scholars like Lenin to solve.

[ 7 ] His main contribution to Marxist thought is the concept of the vanguard party of the working class .

[ 7 ] The vanguard party was conceived to be a highly-knit centralised organization which was led by intellectuals , rather than by the working class itself.

[ 7 ] The party was open only to a small number of the workers, the reason being that the workers in Russia still had not developed class consciousness and therefore needed to be educated to reach such a state.

[ 7 ] Lenin believed that the vanguard party could initiate policies in the name of the working class even if the working class did not support them, since the vanguard party would know what was best for the workers, since the party functionaries had attained consciousness.

[ 7 ] Lenin, in light of the Marx's theory of the state (which views the state as an oppressive organ of the ruling class), had no qualms of forcing change upon the country.

[ 7 ] He viewed the dictatorship of the proletariat , in contrast to the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie , as the dictatorship of the majority.

[ 7 ] The repressive powers of the state were to be used to transform the country, and to strip of the former ruling class of their wealth.

[ 7 ] Lenin believed that the transition from the capitalist mode of production to the socialist mode of production would last for a long period.

[ 8 ] According to some authors, Leninism was by definition authoritarian.

[ 7 ] In contrast to Karl Marx , who believed that the socialist revolution would be composed of and led by the working class alone, Lenin argued that a socialist revolution did not necessarily need to be led  by or composed of the working class alone, instead contending that a revolution needed to be led by the oppressed classes of society, which in the case of Russia was the peasant class.

[ 9 ] Stalinism [ edit ] Main article: Stalinism Part of a series on Stalinism Concepts Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Anti-revisionism Collectivization Cult of personality Five-year plans Great Break Korenizatsiia Marxism–Leninism New Soviet man Popular front Self-criticism Socialism in one country Socialist realism Soviet patriotism Stakhanovite Transformation of nature Vanguardism People Stalin Andreyeva Andreyev Berman Bierut Beria Ceaușescu Chervenkov Choibalsan Dimitrov Dugin Firin Foster Frinovsky Frenkel Kaganovich Kalinin Kim Kirov Khrulyov Khrushchev Kolmogorov Kotkin Kosygin Kryuchkov Kuybyshev Malenkov Merkulov Molotov Ochab Ordzhonikidze Petrovsky Pollitt Raikhman Rákosi Rosengolts Serov Sholokhov Thälmann Ulbricht Vyshinsky Voznesensky Yagoda Yenukidze Yezhov Yaroslavsky Zyuganov Theoretical works About the anti-Soviet elements Dialectical and Historical Materialism Dizzy with Success Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR Falsifiers of History Foundations of Leninism History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Marxism and the National Question History Stalinist Era First five-year plan Great Break Collectivisation Industrialisation Great Purge Moscow trials Azerbaijan repressions Mongolia repressions Spanish Civil War World War II Soviet atomic bomb project Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Cominform Chinese Communist Revolution First Indochina War Korean War Doctors' plot Death and funeral of Stalin De-Stalinization 20th Congress of the Communist Party Khrushchev Thaw Parties Communist Party of Great Britain (Marxist–Leninist) All-Union Communist Party Bolsheviks Albanian Party of Labour Communist Party of Germany Communist Party of Greece Italian Marxist–Leninist Party CARC Party Communist Party of New Zealand Romanian Communist Party Workers' Party of Korea Communist Party of the Russian Federation National Bolshevik Party The Other Russia Stalin Bloc – For the USSR American Communist Party (2024) Related topics Anti-Stalinist left Joseph Stalin's rise to power Stalin and antisemitism Stalin Society Stalinist architecture Neo-Stalinism Anti-Soviet agitation Authoritarian socialism Comparison to Nazism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Juche Maoism National communism Red fascism Sino–Albanian split Sino–Soviet split Soviet–Albanian split Soviet–Yugoslav split Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal Soviet Union portal v t e While not an ideology per se , Stalinism refers to the thoughts and policies of Stalin Stalinism, while not an ideology per se , refers to Stalin's thoughts and policies.

[ 10 ] Stalin's introduction of the concept " Socialism in One Country " in 1924 was a major turning point in Soviet ideological discourse.

[ 10 ] The Soviet Union did not need a socialist world revolution to construct a socialist society , Stalin claimed.

[ 10 ] Four years later, Stalin initiated his "Second Revolution" with the introduction of state socialism and central planning .

[ 10 ] In the early-1930s, he initiated collectivization of Soviet agriculture , by de-privatizing agriculture, but not turning it under the responsibility of the state, per se , instead creating peasant cooperatives.

[ 10 ] With the initiation of his "Second Revolution", Stalin launched a " Cult of Lenin " and a cult of personality centered upon himself .

[ 10 ] For instance, the name of the city of Petrograd was changed to Leningrad , the town of Lenin's birth was renamed Ulyanov (Lenin's birth-name), the Order of Lenin became the highest state award and portraits of Lenin were hung up everywhere; in public squares, factories and offices etc.

[ 11 ] The increasing bureaucracy which followed after the introduction of a state socialist economy was at complete odds with the Marxist notion of "the withering away of the state".

[ 12 ] Stalin tried to explain the reasoning behind it at the 16th Congress (held in 1930); [ 12 ] We stand for the strengthening of the dictatorship of the proletariat, which represents the mightiest and most powerful authority of all forms of State that have ever existed. The highest development of the State power for the withering away of State power —this is the Marxian formula. Is this "contradictory"? Yes, it is "contradictory." But this contradiction springs from life itself and reflects completely Marxist dialectic.

[ 12 ] The idea that the state would wither away was later abandoned by Stalin at the 18th Congress (held in 1939), in which he expressed confidence that the state would exist, even if the Soviet Union reached communism, as long as it was encircled by capitalism.

[ 13 ] Two key concepts were created in the latter half of his rule; the "two camp" theory and that of "capitalist encirclement".

[ 12 ] The threat of capitalism was used to strengthen Stalin's personal powers, and Soviet propaganda began making a direct link with Stalin and stability in society, claiming that the country would crumble without the leader.

[ 12 ] Stalin deviated greatly from classical Marxism when it came to "subjective factors", claiming that party members, whatever rank, had to profess fanatic adherence to the party's line and ideology, and that otherwise those policies would fail.

[ 12 ] De-Stalinization [ edit ] Main article: De-Stalinization After Stalin died and once the ensuing power struggle subsided, a period of de-Stalinization developed, as Soviets debated what Marxism–Leninism would be in the absence of its de facto enforced equivalence with Stalinism. During the Khrushchev Thaw , the answer that emerged was that it would continue to involve central planning to the nearly complete exclusion of market mechanisms , as well as the totalitarian version of collectivism and continuing xenophobia, but that it would no longer involve the extreme degree of state terror seen during the Great Purge era. This ideological viewpoint maintained the secular apotheosis of Lenin, treating the terror aspect of Stalinism as a perversion that had been belatedly corrected, rather than admitting that Lenin himself had built a legacy of state terror. This storyline persisted into the Gorbachev era and even mostly survived glasnost . As Soviet military officer and Lenin biographer Dmitri Volkogonov described it, " Lenin was the last bastion to fall.

" [ 14 ] Concepts [ edit ] Dictatorship of the proletariat [ edit ] Main article: Dictatorship of the proletariat Either the dictatorship of the landowners and capitalists, or the dictatorship of the proletariat [...] There is no middle course [...] There is no middle course anywhere in the world, nor can there be.

—Lenin, claiming that people had only two choices; a choice between two different, but distinct class dictatorships.

[ 15 ] Lenin, according to his interpretation of Marx's theory of the state , believed democracy to be unattainable anywhere in the world before the proletariat seized power.

[ 15 ] According to Marxist theory, the state is a vehicle for oppression and is headed by a ruling class , [ 15 ] an "organ of class rule".

[ 16 ] He believed that by his time, the only viable solution was dictatorship since the war was heading into a final conflict between the "progressive forces of socialism and the degenerate forces of capitalism".

[ 17 ] The Russian Revolution of 1917 was already a failure according to its original aim, which was to act as an inspiration for a world revolution.

[ 17 ] As a result, the initial anti-statist posture and the active campaigning for direct democracy was replaced with dictatorship.

[ 17 ] From the perspective of the Bolsheviks, the rationale for this change was Russia's lack of development, its status as the sole socialist state in the world, its encirclement by imperialist powers, and its internal encirclement by the peasantry.

[ 18 ] Marx, similar to Lenin, considered it fundamentally irrelevant whether a bourgeois state was ruled according to a republican , parliamentarian or constitutionally monarchic political system because this did not change the mode of production itself.

[ 19 ] These systems, regardless of whether they are ruled by an oligarchy or by mass participation, were ultimately all a dictatorship of the bourgeoisie by definition because the bourgeoisie, by the very condition of their class and its interests, would promote and implement policies in their class interests and thus in defense of capitalism.

[ 20 ] There was a difference, though; Lenin, after the failures of the world revolutions , argued that this did not necessarily have to change under the dictatorship of the proletariat.

[ 21 ] The reasoning came from wholly practical considerations: the majority of the country's inhabitants were not communists and the party could not introduce parliamentary democracy since that was inconsistent with their ideology and would lead to the party losing power.

[ 21 ] He therefore concluded that "[t]he form of government has absolutely nothing to do with" the nature of the dictatorship of the proletariat.

[ 21 ] Bukharin and Trotsky agreed with Lenin, both claiming that the revolution had only destroyed the old, but failing completely in creating anything sort of new.

[ 22 ] Lenin had now concluded that the dictatorship of the proletariat would not alter the relationship of power between persons, but rather "transform their productive relations so that, in the long run, the realm of necessity could be overcome and, with that, genuine social freedom realised".

[ 23 ] It was in the period of 1920–1921 that Soviet leaders and ideologists began differentiating between socialism and communism; hitherto the two terms had been used to describe similar conditions.

[ 23 ] From then, the two terms developed separate meanings. According to Soviet ideology, Russia was in the transition from capitalism to communism 
(referred to interchangeably under Lenin as the dictatorship of the proletariat), socialism being the intermediate stage to communism, with the latter being the final stage which follows after socialism.

[ 23 ] By now, the party leaders believed that universal mass participation and true democracy could only take form in the last stage, if only because of Russia's current conditions at the time.

[ 23 ] [Because] the proletariat is still so divided, so degraded, so corrupted in parts [...] that an organization taking in the whole proletariat cannot directly exercise proletarian dictatorship. It can be exercised only by a vanguard that has absorbed the revolutionary energy of the class.

— Lenin, explaining the increasingly dictatorial nature of the regime.

[ 24 ] In early Bolshevik discourse, the term "dictatorship of the proletariat" was of little significance; the few times it was mentioned, it was likened to the form of government which had existed in the Paris Commune .

[ 23 ] With the ensuing Russian Civil War and the social and material devastation that followed, however, its meaning was transformed from communal democracy to disciplined totalitarian rule.

[ 25 ] By now, Lenin had concluded that only a proletarian regime as oppressive as its opponents could survive in this world.

[ 26 ] The powers previously bestowed upon the soviets were now given to the Council of People's Commissars ; the central government was in turn to be governed by "an army of steeled revolutionary Communists [by Communists he referred to the Party]".

[ 24 ] In a letter to Gavril Myasnikov , Lenin in late 1920 explained his new reinterpretation of the term "dictatorship of the proletariat"; [ 27 ] Dictatorship means nothing more nor less than authority untrammelled by any laws, absolutely unrestricted by any rules whatever, and based directly on force. The term 'dictatorship' has no other meaning but this .

[ 27 ] Lenin justified these policies by claiming that all states were class states by nature, and that these states were maintained through class struggle .

[ 27 ] This meant that the dictatorship of the proletariat in the Soviet Union could only be "won and maintained by the use of violence against the bourgeoisie".

[ 27 ] The main problem with this analysis is that the Party came to view anyone opposing or holding alternate views of the party as bourgeoisie.

[ 27 ] The worst enemy remained the moderates, however, which were "objectively" considered to be "the real agents of the bourgeoisie in the working class movement, the labour lieutenants of the capitalist class".

[ 28 ] Consequently, "bourgeoisie" became synonymous with "opponent" and with people who disagreed with the party in general.

[ 29 ] These oppressive measures led to another reinterpretation of the dictatorship of the proletariat and socialism in general; it was now defined as a purely economic system.

[ 30 ] Slogans and theoretical works about democratic mass participation and collective decision-making were now replaced with texts which supported authoritarian management.

[ 30 ] Considering the situation, the party believed it had to use the same powers as the bourgeoisie to transform Russia, for there was no other alternative.

[ 31 ] Lenin began arguing that the proletariat, similar to the bourgeoisie, did not have a single preference for a form of government, and because of that dictatorship was acceptable to both the party and the proletariat.

[ 32 ] In a meeting with party officials, Lenin stated—in line with his economist view of socialism—that "[i]ndustry is indispensable, democracy is not", further arguing that "we do not promise any democracy or any freedom".

[ 32 ] Anti-imperialism [ edit ] Main article: Imperialism Imperialism is capitalism at a stage of development at which the dominance of monopolies and finance-capital is established; in which the export of capital has acquired pronounced importance; in which the division of the world among the international trusts has begun; in which the divisions of all territories of the globe among the biggest capitalist powers has been completed.

—Lenin, citing the main features of capitalism in the age of imperialism in Imperialism: the Highest Stage of Capitalism .

[ 33 ] The Marxist theory on imperialism was conceived by Lenin in his book, Imperialism: the Highest Stage of Capitalism (published in 1917).

[ 34 ] It was written in response to the theoretical crisis within Marxist thought, which occurred due to capitalism's recovery in the 19th century.

[ 34 ] According to Lenin, imperialism was a specific stage of development of capitalism; a stage he referred to as state monopoly capitalism .

[ 34 ] The Marxist movement was split on how to solve capitalism's resurgence and revitalisation after the great depression of the late-19th century.

[ 35 ] Eduard Bernstein , from the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SDP), considered capitalism' revitalisation as proof that capitalism was evolving into a more humane system, further adding that the basic aims of socialists were not to overthrow the state, but rather to take power through elections.

[ 35 ] On the other hand, Karl Kautsky , from the SDP, held a highly dogmatic view, claiming that there was no crisis within Marxist theory.

[ 35 ] Both of them, however, denied or belittled the role of class contradictions in society after the crisis.

[ 35 ] In contrast, Lenin believed that capitalism' resurgence was the beginning of a new phase of capitalism; this stage being created because of a strengthening of class contradiction, not because of its reduction.

[ 35 ] Lenin did not know when the imperialist stage of capitalism began, and claimed it would be foolish to look for a specific year, however he did assert it began at the beginning of the 20th century (at least in Europe).

[ 33 ] Lenin believed that the economic crisis of 1900 accelerated and intensified the concentration of industry and banking, which led to the transformation of the finance capital connection to industry into the monopoly of large banks." [ 36 ] In Imperialism: the Highest Stage of Capitalism , Lenin wrote; "the twentieth century marks the turning-point from the old capitalism to the new, from the domination of capital in general to the domination of finance capital." [ 36 ] Lenin's defines imperialism as the monopoly stage of capitalism.

[ 37 ] Despite radical anti-imperialism being an original core value of Bolshevism, the Soviet Union from 1939 onward was widely viewed as a de facto imperial power whose ideology could not allow it to admit its own imperialism. Through the Soviet ideological viewpoint, pro-Soviet factions in each country were the only legitimate voice of "the people" regardless of whether they were minority factions. All other factions were simply class enemies of "the people", inherently illegitimate rulers regardless of whether they were majority factions. Thus, in this view, any country that became Soviet or a Soviet ally naturally did so via a legitimate voluntary desire, even if the requesters needed Soviet help to accomplish it. The principal examples were the Soviet invasion of Finland yielding the annexation of Finnish parts of Karelia , the Soviet invasion of Poland , the Soviet occupation of the Baltic states , and the postwar de facto dominance over the satellite states of the Eastern Bloc under a pretense of total independence. In the post-Soviet era even many Ukrainians, Georgians, and Armenians feel that their countries were forcibly annexed by the Bolsheviks, but this has been a problematic view because the pro-Soviet factions in these societies were once sizable as well. Each faction felt that the other did not represent the true national interest. This civil war –like paradox has been seen in the annexation of Crimea by the Russian Federation , as pro-Russian Crimeans have been viewed as illegitimate by pro-Ukrainian Crimeans, and vice versa.

Peaceful coexistence [ edit ] Main article: Peaceful coexistence The loss by imperialism of its dominating role in world affairs and the utmost expansion of the sphere in which the laws of socialist foreign policy operate are  a distinctive feature of the present stage of social development. The main direction of this development is toward even greater changes in the correlation of forces in the world arena in favour of socialism." — Nikolay Inozemtsev , a Soviet foreign policy analyst, referring to series of events (which he believed) would lead to the ultimate victory of socialism.

[ 38 ] "Peaceful coexistence" was an ideological concept introduced under Khrushchev's rule.

[ 39 ] While the concept has been interpreted by fellow communists as proposing an end to the conflict between the systems of capitalism and socialism, Khrushchev saw it instead as a continuation of the conflict in every area with the exception in the military field.

[ 40 ] The concept claimed that the two systems were developed "by way of diametrically opposed laws", which led to "opposite principles in foreign policy." [ 38 ] The concept was steeped in Leninist and Stalinist thought.

[ 38 ] Lenin believed that international politics were dominated by class struggle , and Stalin stressed in the 1940s the growing polarization which was occurring in the capitalist and socialist systems.

[ 38 ] Khrushchev's peaceful coexistence was based on practical changes which had occurred; he accused the old "two camp" theory of neglecting the non-aligned movement and the national liberation movements .

[ 38 ] Khrushchev considered these "grey areas", in which the conflict between capitalism and socialism would be fought.

[ 38 ] He still stressed that the main contradiction in international relations were those of capitalism and socialism.

[ 38 ] The Soviet Government under Khrushchev stressed the importance of peaceful coexistence, claiming it had to form the basis of Soviet foreign policy.

[ 38 ] Failure to do, they believed, would lead to nuclear conflict .

[ 38 ] Despite this, Soviet theorists still considered peaceful coexistence as a continuation of the class struggle between the capitalist and socialist worlds, just not one based on armed conflict.

[ 38 ] Khrushchev believed that the conflict, in its current phase, was mainly economical.

[ 38 ] The emphasise on peaceful coexistence did not mean that the Soviet Union accepted a static world, with clear lines.

[ 38 ] They continued to upheld the creed that socialism was inevitable, and they sincerely believed that the world had reached a stage in which the "correlations of forces" were moving towards socialism.

[ 38 ] Also, with the establishment of socialist regimes in Eastern Europe and Asia, Soviet foreign policy-planners believed that capitalism had lost its dominance as an economic system.

[ 38 ] Socialism in one country [ edit ] Main article: Socialism in One Country The concept of "socialism in one country" was conceived by Stalin in his struggle against Leon Trotsky and his concept of permanent revolution .

[ 41 ] In 1924, Trotsky published his pamphlet Lessons of October in which he stated that socialism in the Soviet Union would fail because of the backward state of economic development unless a world revolution began.

[ 41 ] Stalin responded to Trotsky's pamphlet with his article, " October and Comrade Trotsky's Theory of Permanent Revolution ".

[ 42 ] In it, Stalin stated, that he did not believe an inevitable conflict between the working class and the peasants would take place, further adding that "socialism in one country is completely possible and probable".

[ 42 ] Stalin held the view common amongst most Bolsheviks at the time; there was possibility of real success for socialism in the Soviet Union despite the country's backwardness and international isolation.

[ 42 ] While Grigoriy Zinoviev , Lev Kamenev and Nikolai Bukharin , together with Stalin, opposed Trotsky's theory of permanent revolution, they diverged on how socialism could be built.

[ 42 ] According to Bukharin, Zinoviev and Kamenev supported the resolution of the 14th Conference (held in 1925) which stated that "we cannot complete the building of socialism due to our technological backwardness." [ 42 ] Despite the rather cynical attitude, Zinoviev and Kamenev did believe that a defective form of socialism could be constructed.

[ 42 ] At the 14th Conference, Stalin reiterated his position, claiming that socialism in one country was feasible despite the capitalist blockade of the country.

[ 43 ] After the conference, Stalin wrote " Concerning the Results of the XIV Conference of the RCP(b) ", in which he stated that the peasantry would not turn against the socialist system because he believed they had a self-interest in preserving.

[ 43 ] The contradictions which would arise with the peasantry during the socialist transition, Stalin surmised, could "be overcome by our own efforts".

[ 43 ] He concluded that the only viable threat to socialism in the Soviet Union was a military intervention.

[ 44 ] In late 1925, Stalin received a letter from a party official which stated that his position of "Socialism in One Country" was in contradiction with Friedrich Engels own writings on the subject.

[ 44 ] Stalin countered, stating that Engels' writings 'reflected' "the era of pre-monopoly capitalism, the pre-imperialist era when there were not yet the conditions of an uneven, abrupt development of the capitalist countries." [ 44 ] From 1925 onwards, Bukharin began writing extensively on the subject, and in 1926, Stalin wrote On Questions of Leninism , which contained his best-known writings on the subject.

[ 44 ] Trotsky, with the publishing of Leninism , began countering Bukharin's and Stalin's arguments, claiming that socialism in one country was possible, but only in the short-run, and claimed that without a world revolution it would be impossible to safeguard the Soviet Union from the "restoration of bourgeoisie relations".

[ 44 ] Zinoviev on the other hand, disagreed with both Trotsky and Bukharin and Stalin, holding instead steadfast to Lenin's own position from 1917 to 1922, and continued to claim that only a defecting form of socialism could be constructed in the Soviet Union without a world revolution.

[ 45 ] Bukharin, by now, began arguing for the creation of an autarkic economic model, while Trotsky, in contrast, claimed that the Soviet Union had to participate in the international division of labour to develop.

[ 46 ] In contrast to Trotsky and Bukharin, Stalin did not believe a world revolution was possible, claiming in 1938 that a world revolution was in fact impossible, and claiming that Engels was wrong on the matter.

[ 13 ] At the 18th Congress , Stalin took the theory to its inevitable conclusion, claiming that the communist mode of production could be conceived in one country.

[ 13 ] He rationalised this by claiming that the state could exist in a communist society, as long as the Soviet Union was encircled by capitalism.

[ 13 ] However, surprisingly, with the establishment of satellite states in Eastern Europe , Stalin claimed that socialism in one country was only possible in a large country like the Soviet Union, and that the other states, in order to survive, had to follow the Soviet line.

[ 47 ] See also [ edit ] Bolshevism Brezhnev Doctrine Ideology of the Chinese Communist Party Ideology of the Workers' Party of Korea Ho Chi Minh Thought Kadarism Politics of Fidel Castro Ceaușism Real socialism References [ edit ] Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Sakwa 1990 , p. 206.

^ a b Sakwa 1990 , p. 212.

^ a b c Smith 1991 , p. 81.

^ a b c d e f g h i Smith 1991 , p. 82.

^ Smith 1991 , p. 83.

^ Sakwa 1990 , pp. 206–212.

^ a b c d e f g h i j Smith 1991 , p. 76.

^ Smith 1991 , p. 77.

^ Smith 1991 , p. 767.

^ a b c d e f Smith 1991 , p. 78.

^ Smith 1991 , pp. 78–79.

^ a b c d e f Smith 1991 , p. 79.

^ a b c d van Ree 2003 , p. 133.

^ Volkogonov 1999 , Introduction.

^ a b c Harding 1996 , pp. 154–155.

^ Lenin, Vladimir (1918).

"Class Society and the State" .

The State and Revolution . Vol. 25 (Collected Works).

Marxists Internet Archive (published 1999) . Retrieved 10 February 2018 .

^ a b c Harding 1996 , p. 155.

^ Harding 1996 , p. 156.

^ Harding 1996 , pp. 155–156.

^ Harding 1996 , pp. 157–158.

^ a b c Harding 1996 , p. 158.

^ Harding 1996 , pp. 158–159.

^ a b c d e Harding 1996 , p. 159.

^ a b Harding 1996 , p. 161.

^ Harding 1996 , p. 160.

^ Harding 1996 , pp. 160–161.

^ a b c d e Harding 1996 , p. 162.

^ Harding 1996 , pp. 162–163.

^ Harding 1996 , p. 163.

^ a b Harding 1996 , p. 165.

^ Harding 1996 , pp. 165–166.

^ a b Harding 1996 , p. 166.

^ a b McDonough 1995 , p. 352.

^ a b c McDonough 1995 , p. 339.

^ a b c d e McDonough 1995 , pp. 344–347.

^ a b McDonough 1995 , p. 353.

^ McDonough 1995 , p. 354.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Evans 1993 , p. 72.

^ Evans 1993 , p. 71.

^ Evans 1993 , pp. 71–72.

^ a b van Ree 2003 , p. 126.

^ a b c d e f van Ree 2003 , p. 127.

^ a b c van Ree 2003 , p. 128.

^ a b c d e van Ree 2003 , p. 129.

^ van Ree 2003 , pp. 129–130.

^ van Ree 2003 , p. 130.

^ van Ree 2003 , pp. 134–135.

Bibliography [ edit ] Articles and journal entries [ edit ] McDonough, Terrence (1995). "Lenin, Imperialism, and the Stages of Capitalist Development".

Science & Society . Vol. 59, no. 3.

Guilford Press . pp.

339– 367.

JSTOR 40403507 .

Books [ edit ] Boer, Roland (2017).

Stalin: From Theology to the Philosophy of Socialism in Power = CITEREFBoer2017 .

Springer Singapore .

ISBN 9789811063664 .

Brown, Archie (1996).

The Gorbachev Factor .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 978-0192880529 .

Eaton, Katherine Bliss (2004).

Daily Life in the Soviet Union .

Greenwood Publishing Group .

ISBN 978-0313316289 .

Eisen, Jonathan (1990).

The Glasnost Reader .

University of Michigan .

ISBN 978-0453006958 .

Evans, Alfred (1993).

Soviet Marxism–Leninism: The Decline of an Ideology .

ABC-CLIO .

ISBN 978-0275947637 .

Fainsod, Merle ; Hough, Jerry F.

(1979).

How the Soviet Union is Governed .

Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0674410305 .

Gill, Graeme (2002).

The Origins of the Stalinist Political System .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0674410305 .

Harding, Neil (1996).

Leninism .

Macmillan Publishers .

ISBN 978-0333664827 .

Harris, Jonathan (2005).

Subverting the System: Gorbachev's Reform of the Party's Apparat 1986–1991 .

Rowman & Littlefield .

ISBN 978-0742526785 .

Kenez, Peter (1985).

The Birth of the Propaganda State: Soviet Methods of Mass Mobilization, 1917–1929 .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0521313988 .

Lenoe, Matthew Edward (2004).

Closer to the Masses: Stalinist Culture, Social Revolution, and Soviet Newspapers .

Harvard University Press .

ISBN 978-0674013193 .

Lowenhardt, John; van Ree, Erik; Ozinga, James (1992).

The Rise and Fall of the Soviet Politburo .

St Martin's Press .

ISBN 978-0312047849 .

Matthews, Marvyn (1983).

Education in the Soviet Union: Policies and Institutions since Stalin .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0043701140 .

Sakwa, Richard (1990).

Soviet politics: an Introduction .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0415005067 .

Sakwa, Richard (1998).

Soviet politics in Perspective .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0415071536 .

Smith, Gordon (1988).

Soviet Politics: Continuity and Contradictions .

St. Martin's Press .

ISBN 978-0312007959 .

Smith, Gordon (1991).

Soviet Politics: Continuity and Contradictions (2nd ed.).

St. Martin's Press .

ISBN 978-0333535769 .

Swain, Geoff (2006).

Trotsky .

Pearson Education .

ISBN 978-0582771901 .

van Ree, Erik (2003).

The Political Thought of Joseph Stalin: A Study in Twentieth Century Revolutionary Patriotism .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-1-135-78604-5 .

Volkogonov, Dmitri (1999).

Autopsy for an Empire : The Seven Leaders Who Built the Soviet Regime . Free Press.

ISBN 978-0684834207 .

Williams, Simons (1984).

The Party Statutes of the Communist World .

BRILL Publishers .

ISBN 978-9024729753 .

Zimmerman, William (1977). Dallin, Alexander (ed.).

The Twenty-fifth Congress of the CPSU: Assessment and Context .

Stanford University .

Hoover Press .

ISBN 978-0817968434 .

v t e Soviet Union topics Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War Bibliography of Stalinism and the Soviet Union Bibliography of the Post Stalinist Soviet Union History Index of Soviet Union–related articles Outline Russian Revolution February October Russian Civil War Russian SFSR Creation treaty New Economic Policy Stalinism Great Purge Great Patriotic War (World War II) Evacuation The Holocaust Cold War Khrushchev thaw Sino-Soviet split Soviet space program Caribbean Crisis Stagnation Soviet–Afghan War Perestroika Glasnost Chernobyl disaster Revolutions of 1989 August Coup Parade of sovereignties Dissolution Transition period and cessation of the existence Succession, continuity and legacy Post-Soviet states Nostalgia Geography Subdivisions Republics Autonomous Krais Oblasts Autonomous Autonomous okrugs Closed city Regions Baltic States Caspian Sea Caucasus Mountains Central Asia Crimea European Russia North Caucasus Russian Far East Siberia Transcaucasia Ural Mountains Volga Region West Siberian Plain Politics General Conscription Constitution 1924 1936 1977 Elections Foreign relations Brezhnev Doctrine Gun control Government List Ministries State Committees Human rights LGBT Law Capital punishment Leaders Collective leadership National delimitation Passport system Propiska Political parties State ideology Marxism–Leninism Leninism Stalinism Soviet anti-Zionism Bodies Communist Party organisation Congress Central Committee Presidium/Politburo Secretariat General Secretary Congress of Soviets (1922–1936) Supreme Soviet (1938–1991) Congress of People's Deputies (1989–1991) Supreme Court Military Collegium All-Union Central Council of Trade Unions Creative unions Offices Heads of state President Premier Deputy Premier First Deputy Premier Security services Cheka GPU NKVD Destruction battalions MVD Militsiya MGB KGB Chairmen Soviet Border Troops Soviet Armed Forces Soviet Army / Spetsnaz GRU • Soviet Navy • Soviet Air Forces / Soviet Airborne Forces Political repression Red Terror Collectivization Great Purge Population transfer Forced labor Foreign forced labor POW labor Gulag List Holodomor Political abuse of psychiatry Anti-abuse struggle War crimes Atrocities against prisoners of war Ideological repression Persecution of Christians Eastern Catholics Science Censorship Censorship of images Economy Agriculture Banking Central Bank State Labor Savings Banks System Economic planning Energy policy Enterprises Five-year plans Industrialization Internet domain Inventions Net material product OGAS Economic reforms 1956–1962 Wage reform 1957 1965 1973 1979 Rouble (currency) Monetary reforms 1947 1961 1991 Automotive industry Construction Transport Ministry of Railways Railway system Rail transport Railway electrification List of metro systems Vehicle registration plates Science Communist Academy Cybernetics Academy of Sciences Academy of Medical Sciences Lenin All-Union Academy of Agricultural Sciences Sharashkas Naukograds List Society Antisemitism Crime Demographics Soviet people Working class 1989 census Drug policy Ethnic conflicts Family Languages Linguistics Cyrillisation Prohibition Racism Culture Ballet Cinema Fashion Literature Music Opera Phraseology Printed media Propaganda Publishing houses Religion Islam Sports Stalinist architecture Broadcasting Radio Television Opposition Anti-Soviet agitation Soviet dissidents and their groups List Symbols Anthem Republics Emblem Republics Flag Republics Hammer and sickle Soviet Union portal Category v t e Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Anti-imperialism Anti-fascism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type economic planning Commanding heights of the economy Developed socialism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Labour aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism Partiinost' People's democracy People's democratic revolution Popular front Proletarian internationalism Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Theory of the productive forces Third Period Wars of national liberation State forms People's democratic state National democratic state Socialist state State of socialist orientation Socialist state of the whole people Class system Dictatorship of the proletariat People's democratic dictatorship Political system Party Central committee General Secretary of the Communist Party Politburo Secretariat Vanguardism State Permanent organ of the supreme state organ of power Special committees of the supreme state organ of power Supreme executive and administrative organ Supreme state organ of power Leading role of the party Transmission belt Unified power Unified state apparatus Hybrid Civilian control of the military Collective leadership Cult of personality Democratic centralism Variants Cuban ( Fidelismo Guevarism ) Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche ( Songun Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism Kimjongunism ) Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism ( Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Naxalism Prachanda Path Mao-spontex Islamic Maoism Pantherism ( Intercommunalism ) New Synthesis Mulelism ) Kaysone Phomvihane Thought National Pol Potism African ( Sankarism Machelism Nkrumaism ) Socialism with Chinese characteristics ( Dengism Three Represents Scientific Outlook on Development Xi Jinping Thought ) Stalinism ( Neo-Stalinism ) People's Multiparty Democracy American ( Bill of Rights socialism Browderism Marcyism New Communism ) Dubčekism Zachariadism Brezhnevism Taistoism Titoism ( Đilasism Rankovićism ) People Joseph Stalin Mao Zedong John Maclean James Connolly Ernst Thälmann Khorloogiin Choibalsan Ehmetjan Qasim José Díaz Maurice Thorez Palmiro Togliatti Dolores Ibárruri Harry Pollitt Rajani Palme Dutt Ho Chi Minh Võ Nguyên Giáp Earl Browder Nikita Khrushchev Walter Ulbricht Josip Broz Tito Mátyás Rákosi Lazar Kaganovich Georgi Dimitrov Bolesław Bierut Willie Gallacher Valko Chervenkov Klement Gottwald Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej Enver Hoxha Kaysone Phomvihane Khalid Bakdash Leonid Brezhnev Deng Xiaoping Pol Pot Nikos Zachariadis Che Guevara Fidel Castro Agostinho Neto Mengistu Haile Mariam Kim Il Sung Chin Peng Sanzō Nosaka Nicolae Ceaușescu Gustáv Husák János Kádár Maurice Bishop Erich Honecker Władysław Gomułka Samora Machel Thomas Sankara Mathieu Kérékou Siad Barre Nur Muhammad Taraki Alfonso Cano Pushpa Kamal Dahal Rohana Wijeweera Abimael Guzmán Gus Hall Gennady Zyuganov Xi Jinping Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism Dialectical and Historical Materialism The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Britain's Road to Socialism Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR A Critique of Soviet Economics Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism Guerrilla Warfare History Soviet Union ( 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 ) Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Communist Revolution China ( 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present ) Tito–Stalin split Korean War De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Albanian–Soviet split Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black Power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency New People's Army rebellion Maoist insurgency in Turkey Sino-Albanian split Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Revolutions of 1989 By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia ( Democratic Kampuchea People's Republic of Kampuchea ) China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia ( Czechia Slovakia ) East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia Soviet Union ( Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan ) Vietnam Yemen Yugoslavia ( Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia ) Organizations Albanian Party of Labour Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Brazil Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of India (Marxist) Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Philippines Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam Communist Party of Malaya Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Shining Path ( Militarized Communist Party of Peru ) Workers' Party of Korea Portuguese Communist Party Related topics Bolshevism Leninism Trotskyism See also All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism ( Mass killings ) Cold War Crimes against humanity under Marxist–Leninist regimes ( Mass killings ) Criticism of Marxist–Leninist party rule MAGA Communism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism New class Post-Marxism–Leninism Red fascism Red Scare ( Second ) Second World State capitalism State socialism State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Socialism portal Communism portal Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ideology_of_the_Communist_Party_of_the_Soviet_Union&oldid=1299247110 " Categories : Ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of the Soviet Union State ideologies Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2022 Use British English from May 2022 This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 08:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union 6 languages Add topic

