Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Naming 2 History 3 Legislative branch Toggle Legislative branch subsection 3.1 Makeup of Congress 3.1.1 House of Representatives 3.1.2 Senate 3.1.3 Separate powers 3.1.4 Impeachment of federal officers 3.1.5 Congressional procedures 3.2 Powers of Congress 3.2.1 Congressional oversight 4 Executive branch Toggle Executive branch subsection 4.1 President 4.1.1 Executive powers and duties 4.1.2 Election, succession, and term limits 4.1.3 Veto power, impeachment, and other issues 4.2 Vice president 4.3 Cabinet, executive departments, and agencies 5 Judicial branch Toggle Judicial branch subsection 5.1 Overview of the federal judiciary 5.2 Relationships between state and federal courts 6 Budget 7 Employees 8 Elections and voting 9 State, tribal, and local governments 10 See also Toggle See also subsection 10.1 President 10.2 Courts 10.3 Law 10.4 Agencies 10.5 States and territories 10.6 Works and websites 11 Notes 12 References 13 Further reading 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Federal government of the United States 57 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Latina Latviešu मैथिली مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikinews Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Government of the United States ) "American Government" redirects here. For the textbook, see American Government (textbook) .

"Government of the United States" redirects here. For governments of individual U.S. states, see State governments of the United States .

"USFG" redirects here. For the Italian football club, see USD Follonica Gavorrano .

United States federal government Coat of arms Formation 1789 ; 236 years ago ( 1789 ) Founding document United States Constitution Jurisdiction United States Website usa.gov Legislative branch Legislature Congress Meeting place Capitol Executive branch Leader President Appointer Electoral College Headquarters White House Main organ Cabinet Departments 15 Judicial branch Court Supreme Court Seat Supreme Court Building This article is part of a series on the Politics of the United States Federal government Constitution of the United States Laws Treaties Legislature United States Congress House of Representatives Speaker Mike Johnson (R) Majority Leader Steve Scalise (R) Minority Leader Hakeem Jeffries (D) Congressional districts ( list ) Non-voting members Senate President JD Vance (R) President Pro Tempore Chuck Grassley (R) Majority Leader John Thune (R) Minority Leader Chuck Schumer (D) Executive President of the United States Donald Trump (R) Vice President of the United States JD Vance (R) Cabinet Federal agencies Executive Office Judiciary Supreme Court of the United States Chief Justice John Roberts Thomas Alito Sotomayor Kagan Gorsuch Kavanaugh Barrett Jackson Inferior Courts of the United States Courts of appeals District courts ( list ) Court of International Trade Alien Terrorist Removal Court Judicial Panel on Multidistrict Litigation Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court of Review Other tribunals Elections National elections Presidential elections Midterm elections Off-year elections Primary elections Presidential primary Elections by state and territory Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming American Samoa Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico U.S. Virgin Islands Elections in the District of Columbia ( List of elections ) Political parties Democratic Republican Third parties Constitution Green Libertarian List of political parties Political ideologies Conservatism Black Fiscal Liberal Neo- Paleo- Social Traditionalist Trumpism Liberalism Classical Conservative Modern Neo- Third Way Progressivism Abolitionism Constitutionalism Environmentalism Feminism Libertarianism Anarchism Capitalist Individualist Conservative Paleo- Minarchist Objectivism Monarchism Nationalism Nativism Populism Protectionism Republicanism Socialism Political culture Political polarization Federalism State and territorial government Governors Legislatures ( list ) Courts Local government District of Columbia government District Council Mayor Superior Court Foreign relations Department of State Secretary of State : Marco Rubio Diplomatic missions of / in the United States Nationality law Passports Visa requirements Visa policy United States and the United Nations United Nations Security Council P5 NATO G20 G7 Russia China India Japan Canada United Kingdom European Union Latin America Arab League United States portal Politics portal v t e The federal government of the United States ( U.S. federal government or U.S. government ) [ a ] is the national government of the United States .

[ 2 ] The U.S. federal government is composed of three distinct branches: legislative , executive , and judicial . Powers of these three branches are defined and vested by the U.S. Constitution , which has been in continuous effect since May 4, 1789.

[ 3 ] The powers and duties of these branches are further defined by Acts of Congress , including the creation of executive departments and courts subordinate to the U.S. Supreme Court .

In the federal division of power, the federal government shares sovereignty with each of the 50 states in their respective territories. U.S. law recognizes Indigenous tribes as possessing sovereign powers , while being subject to federal jurisdiction.

Naming A diagram of the political system of the United States The full name of the republic is the "United States of America". No other name appears in the Constitution , and this is the name that appears on money, in treaties, and in legal cases to which the nation is a party. The terms "Government of the United States of America" or "United States Government" are often used in official documents to represent the federal government as distinct from the states collectively.

In casual conversation or writing, the term "Federal Government" is often used, and the term "U.S. Government" is sometimes used. The terms "Federal" and "National" in government agency or program names generally indicate affiliation with the federal government; for instance, the Federal Bureau of Investigation , National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration , and National Park Service . Because the seat of government is in Washington, D.C.

, "Washington" is sometimes used as a metonym for the federal government.

History Main article: History of the United States government Thomas Jefferson , the principal author of the Declaration of Independence , largely wrote the Declaration's first draft in isolation between over a period of two weeks in June 1776 from the second floor of a three-story home he was renting at 700 Market Street in Philadelphia ; the document was then reviewed and ultimately unanimously adopted by each of the 56 delegates to the Second Continental Congress .

The U.S. government was established in a series of initiatives in the late 18th century, starting with its decision to establish the Continental Army and appoint George Washington as its commander. The Continental Army resisted the British during the American Revolutionary War , which began in 1775. The following year, in July 1776, delegates to the Second Continental Congress , gathered at present-day Independence Hall in the colonial capital of Philadelphia , unanimously adopted the United States Declaration of Independence with each of the 56 colonial-era delegates signing it. In September 1783, the Thirteen Colonies ultimately prevailed over the British in the Revolutionary War, establishing the United States as an independent nation. On March 4, 1789, again gathered in Philadelphia, the colonies ratified and adopted the Constitution of the United States , which established the nation's federal rule of law and was largely based on federalism , republicanism and democracy .

Under the U.S. Constitution, the power of the U.S. federal government is shared between its executive, legislative, and judicial branches, state governments , and the people. It is a mixed system, neither pure republic nor pure democracy, and often described as a democratic republic , representative democracy , or constitutional republic .

The interpretation and execution of these principles, including what powers the federal government should have and how those powers can be exercised, have been debated ever since the adoption of the Constitution. Some make a case for expansive federal powers while others argue for a more limited role for the central government in relation to individuals, the states, or other recognized entities.

Since the American Civil War , the powers of the federal government have expanded greatly, although there have been periods since that time when the legislative branch was more powerful, including the decades immediately following the Civil War, or when states' rights proponents have succeeded in limiting federal power through legislative action, executive prerogative or by a constitutional interpretation by the courts.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] One of the theoretical pillars of the U.S. Constitution is the idea of " checks and balances " among the powers and responsibilities of the three branches of American government: the executive, the legislative, and the judiciary. For example, while Congress , the federal government's legislative branch, has the power to create laws, the executive branch under the president can veto legislation, an act which, in turn, can be overridden by Congress.

[ 6 ] The president nominates judges to the nation's highest judiciary authority, the Supreme Court (as well as to lower federal courts), but those nominees must be approved by Congress. The Supreme Court, in turn, can invalidate unconstitutional laws passed by the Congress.

Legislative branch Main article: United States Congress Seal of the United States Congress The United States Congress , under Article I of the Constitution, is the legislative branch of the federal government. It is bicameral , comprising the House of Representatives and the Senate .

Makeup of Congress House of Representatives The 435 seats of the U.S. House of Representatives grouped by state The U.S. House of Representatives is made up of 435 voting members, each of whom represents a congressional district in a state from where they were elected. Apportionment of seats among the 50 states is determined by state populations, and it is updated after each decennial U.S. Census. Each member serves a two-year term.

In order to be elected as a representative, an individual must be at least 25 years of age, must have been a U.S. citizen for at least seven years, and must live in the state that they represent.

In addition to the 435 voting members, there are six non-voting members, consisting of five delegates and one resident commissioner . There is one delegate each from Washington, D.C.

, Guam , the Virgin Islands , American Samoa , the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands , and a resident commissioner from Puerto Rico .

[ 7 ] Unlike the U.S. Senate , all members of the U.S. House must be elected and cannot be appointed. In the case of a vacancy, the seat must be filled through a special election, as required under Article 1 of the U.S. Constitution.

[ 8 ] Senate In contrast, the Senate is made up of two senators from each state, regardless of population. There are currently 100 senators (2 from each of the 50 states), who each serve six-year terms. Approximately one-third of the Senate stands for election every two years.

If a vacancy occurs, the state governor appoints a replacement to complete the term or to hold the office until a special election can take place.

[ 9 ] Separate powers The House and Senate each have particular exclusive powers. For example, the Senate must approve (give " advice and consent " to) many important presidential appointments, including cabinet officers, federal judges (including nominees to the Supreme Court), department secretaries (heads of federal executive branch departments), U.S. military and naval officers, and ambassadors to foreign countries. All legislative bills for raising revenue must originate in the House of Representatives. The approval of both chambers is required to pass all legislation, which then may only become law by being signed by the president (or, if the president vetoes the bill, both houses of Congress then re-pass the bill, but by a two-thirds majority of each chamber, in which case the bill becomes law without the president's signature). The powers of Congress are limited to those enumerated in the Constitution; all other powers are reserved to the states and the people.

The Constitution also includes the Necessary and Proper Clause , which grants Congress the power to "make all laws which shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing powers". Members of the House and Senate are elected by first-past-the-post voting in every state except Louisiana and Georgia , which have runoffs , and Maine and Alaska , which use ranked-choice voting .

Impeachment of federal officers Main article: Federal impeachment in the United States Congress has the power to remove the president, federal judges, and other federal officers from office. The House of Representatives and Senate have separate roles in this process. The House must first vote to impeach the official. Then, a trial is held in the Senate to decide whether the official should be removed from office. As of 2023 [update] , three presidents have been impeached: Andrew Johnson , Bill Clinton , and Donald Trump (twice). None of the three were removed from office following trial in the Senate.

[ 10 ] Congressional procedures Article I, Section 2, paragraph 2 of the U.S. Constitution gives each chamber the power to "determine the rules of its proceedings". From this provision were created congressional committees , which do the work of drafting legislation and conducting congressional investigations into national matters. The 118th Congress (2023–2025) has 20 standing committees in the House [ 11 ] and 19 in the Senate, [ 12 ] plus 4 joint permanent committees with members from both houses overseeing the Library of Congress , printing, taxation, and the economy. In addition, each house may name special, or select, committees to study specific problems. Today, much of the congressional workload is borne by the subcommittees, of which there are around 150.

Powers of Congress Main article: Article One of the United States Constitution The United States Capitol , the seat of government for Congress , the legislative branch of the U.S. government The Constitution grants numerous powers to Congress. Enumerated in Article I, Section 8, these include the powers to levy and collect taxes ; to coin money and regulate its value; provide for punishment for counterfeiting; establish post offices and roads, issue patents, create federal courts inferior to the Supreme Court , combat piracies and felonies , declare war , raise and support armies , provide and maintain a navy , make rules for the regulation of land and naval forces, provide for, arm and discipline the militia , exercise exclusive legislation in the District of Columbia , regulate interstate commerce , and to make laws necessary to properly execute powers. Over the two centuries since the United States was formed, many disputes have arisen over the limits on the powers of the federal government. These disputes have often been the subject of lawsuits that have ultimately been decided by the United States Supreme Court .

Congressional oversight Main article: Congressional oversight Congressional oversight is intended to prevent waste and fraud, protect civil liberties and individual rights, ensure executive compliance with the law, gather information for making laws and educating the public, and evaluate executive performance.

[ 13 ] It applies to cabinet departments, executive agencies, regulatory commissions, and the presidency.

Congress's oversight function takes many forms: Committee inquiries and hearings Formal consultations with and reports from the president Senate advice and consent for presidential nominations and for treaties House impeachment proceedings and subsequent Senate trials House and Senate proceedings under the 25th Amendment if the president becomes disabled or if the office of the vice president falls vacant Informal meetings between legislators and executive officials Congressional membership: each state is allocated a number of seats based on its representation (or ostensible representation, in the case of D.C.) in the House of Representatives. Each state is allocated two senators regardless of its population. As of November 2023 [update] , the District of Columbia elects a non-voting representative to the House of Representatives along with American Samoa, the U.S. Virgin Islands, Guam, Puerto Rico, and the Northern Mariana Islands.

[ 14 ] Executive branch See also: Article Two of the United States Constitution and List of United States federal executive orders Donald Trump 47th president JD Vance 50th vice president since January 20, 2025 President Main articles: President of the United States and Powers of the president of the United States The seal of the president of the United States The White House includes the office of the U.S. president , known as the Oval Office , and the offices of key presidential advisors and staff .

Executive powers and duties The executive branch is established in Article Two of the United States Constitution , which vests executive power in the president of the United States .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] The president is both the head of state (performing ceremonial functions) and the head of government (the chief executive).

[ 17 ] The Constitution directs the president to " take care that the laws be faithfully executed " [ 16 ] and requires the president to swear or affirm to "preserve, protect and defend the Constitution of the United States." [ 18 ] Legal scholars William P. Marshall and Saikrishna B. Prakash write of the Clause: "the President may neither breach federal law nor order their subordinates to do so, for defiance cannot be considered faithful execution. The Constitution also incorporates the English bars on dispensing or suspending the law, with some supposing that the Clause itself prohibits both." [ 19 ] Many presidential actions are undertaken via executive orders , presidential proclamations , and presidential memoranda .

[ 20 ] The president is the commander-in-chief of the armed forces .

[ 16 ] [ 21 ] Under the Reception Clause , the president is empowered to "receive Ambassadors and other public Ministers"; the president has broad authority to conduct foreign relations, is generally considered to have the sole power of diplomatic recognition , [ 16 ] [ 22 ] and is the United States' chief diplomat, [ 22 ] although the Congress also has an important role in legislating on foreign affairs, [ 16 ] [ 22 ] and can, for example, "institute a trade embargo, declare war upon a foreign government that the President had recognized, or decline to appropriate funds for an embassy in that country." [ 22 ] The president may also negotiate and sign treaties, but ratifying treaties requires the consent of two-thirds of the Senate.

[ 23 ] Article II's Appointments Clause provides that the president "shall nominate, and by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, shall appoint Ambassadors, other public Ministers and Consuls, Judges of the supreme Court, and all other Officers of the United States " while providing that "Congress may by Law vest the Appointment of such inferior Officers, as they think proper, in the President alone, in the Courts of Law, or in the Heads of Departments." [ 24 ] These appointments delegate "by legal authority a portion of the sovereign powers of the federal government." [ 25 ] The Constitution grants the president the "Power to grant Reprieves and Pardons for Offences against the United States , except in Cases of Impeachment"; this clemency power includes the power to issue absolute or conditional pardons, and to issue commute sentences , to remit fines, and to issue general amnesties .

[ 26 ] The presidential clemency power extends only to federal crimes, and not to state crimes.

[ 27 ] The president has informal powers beyond their formal powers. For example, the president has major agenda-setting powers to influence lawmaking and policymaking, [ 28 ] and typically has a major role as the leader of their political party .

[ 29 ] Election, succession, and term limits Further information: United States presidential election The president and vice president are normally elected as running mates by the Electoral College ; each state has a number of electoral votes equal to the size of its Congressional delegation ( i.e.

, its number of Representatives in the House plus its two senators). The District of Columbia has a number of electoral votes "equal to the whole number of Senators and Representatives in Congress to which the District would be entitled if it were a State, but in no event more than the least populous State".

[ 15 ] [ 30 ] A President may also be seated by succession . As originally drafted, there was no limit to the time a President could serve, however the Twenty-second Amendment, ratified in 1951, originally limits any president to serving two four-year terms (8 years); the amendment specifically "caps the service of a president at 10 years" by providing that "if a person succeeds to the office of president without election and serves less than two years, he may run for two full terms; otherwise, a person succeeding to office of president can serve no more than a single elected term." [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Veto power, impeachment, and other issues Uncle Sam , a common personification of the U.S. federal government, depicted in an early 20th century illustration Under the Presentment Clause of Article I, a bill that passes both chambers of Congress shall be presented to the president, who may sign the bill into law or veto the bill by returning it to the chamber where it originated.

[ 33 ] If the president neither signs nor vetoes a bill "within ten Days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him" it becomes a law without the president's signature, "unless the Congress by their Adjournment prevent its Return in which Case it shall not be a Law" (called a pocket veto ).

[ 33 ] A presidential veto may be overridden by a two-thirds vote in both houses of Congress; [ 33 ] this occurs relatively infrequently.

[ 34 ] The president may be impeached by a majority in the House and removed from office by a two-thirds majority in the Senate for " treason , bribery , or other high crimes and misdemeanors ".

The president may not dissolve Congress , but has the power to adjourn Congress whenever the House and Senate cannot agree when to adjourn; no president has ever used this power.

[ 19 ] The president also has the constitutional power to, "on extraordinary Occasions, convene both Houses, or either of them"; this power has been used "to consider nominations, war, and emergency legislation." [ 19 ] This Section invests the President with the discretion to convene Congress on "extraordinary occasions"; this special session power that has been used to call the chambers to consider urgent matters.

[ 19 ] Vice president Main article: Vice President of the United States Seal of the vice president of the United States The vice president is the second-highest official in rank of the federal government. The vice president's duties and powers are established in the legislative branch of the federal government under Article 1, Section 3, Clauses 4 and 5 as the president of the Senate ; this means that they are the designated presiding officer of the Senate. In that capacity, the vice president has the authority ( ex officio , for they are not an elected member of the Senate) to cast a tie-breaking vote . Pursuant to the Twelfth Amendment , the vice president presides over the joint session of Congress when it convenes to count the vote of the Electoral College . As first in the U.S. presidential line of succession , the vice president's duties and powers move to the executive branch when becoming president upon the death, resignation, or removal of the president, which has happened nine times in U.S. history. Lastly, in the case of a Twenty-fifth Amendment succession event, the vice president would become acting president, assuming all of the powers and duties of president, except being designated as president. Accordingly, by circumstances, the Constitution designates the vice president as routinely in the legislative branch, or succeeding to the executive branch as president, or possibly being in both as acting president pursuant to the Twenty-fifth Amendment . Because of circumstances, the overlapping nature of the duties and powers attributed to the office, the title of the office and other matters, such has generated a spirited scholarly dispute regarding attaching an exclusive branch designation to the office of vice president.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Cabinet, executive departments, and agencies Main articles: Cabinet of the United States , United States federal executive departments , and List of federal agencies in the United States Article II, Section 2 of the Constitution sets forth the creation of a presidential Cabinet. The role of the Cabinet is to advise the president and carry out the programs and laws of the federal government. The Cabinet is composed of the vice president and the leaders of 15 executive departments. Those executive departments are the Departments of State, Treasury, Defense, Justice, Interior, Agriculture, Commerce, Labor, Health and Human Services, Housing and Urban Development, Transportation, Energy, Education, Veterans Affairs, and Homeland Security.

[ 37 ] Additionally, there are seven other members of the Cabinet who are appointed by the president. These are the White House Chief of Staff, Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, Director of the Office of Management & Budget, United States Trade Representative, U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, and Administrator of the Small Business Administration.

[ 38 ] The heads of the 15 departments are chosen by the president and approved with the "advice and consent" of the U.S. Senate. Once confirmed, these "Cabinet secretaries" serve at the pleasure of the president.

In addition to the executive departments, a number of staff organizations are grouped into the Executive Office of the President (EOP), which was created in 1939 by President Franklin D. Roosevelt.

[ 38 ] The EOP is overseen by the White House Chief of Staff. The EOP includes the White House staff, the National Security Council , the Office of Management and Budget , the Council of Economic Advisers , the Council on Environmental Quality , the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative , the Office of National Drug Control Policy , and the Office of Science and Technology Policy .

Outside of the EOP and the executive departments are a number of independent agencies . These include the United States Postal Service (USPS), NASA , the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA), the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), and the United States Agency for International Development (USAID). In addition, there are government-owned corporations , including the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the National Railroad Passenger Corporation .

Judicial branch Main article: Federal judiciary of the United States Further information: Supreme Court of the United States See also: Article Three of the United States Constitution The Judiciary, under Article III of the Constitution, explains and applies the laws. This branch does this by hearing and eventually making decisions on various legal cases.

Overview of the federal judiciary Seal of the U.S. Supreme Court Article III section I of the Constitution establishes the Supreme Court of the United States and authorizes the United States Congress to establish inferior courts as their need shall arise. Section I also establishes a lifetime tenure for all federal judges and states that their compensation may not be diminished during their time in office. Article II section II establishes that all federal judges are to be appointed by the president and confirmed by the United States Senate.

The Judiciary Act of 1789 subdivided the nation jurisdictionally into judicial districts and created federal courts for each district. The three tiered structure of this act established the basic structure of the national judiciary: the Supreme Court, 13 courts of appeals, 94 district courts, and two courts of special jurisdiction. Congress retains the power to re-organize or even abolish federal courts lower than the Supreme Court.

The U.S. Supreme Court decides cases and controversies , which include matters pertaining to the federal government, disputes between states, and interpretation of the United States Constitution, and, in general, can declare legislation or executive action made at any level of the government as unconstitutional , nullifying the law and creating precedent for future law and decisions. The United States Constitution does not specifically mention the power of judicial review , which is the power to declare a law unconstitutional. There have been instances in the past where such declarations have been ignored by the other two branches. Below the U.S. Supreme Court are the United States Courts of Appeals , and below them in turn are the United States District Courts , which are the general trial courts for federal law, and for certain controversies between litigants who are not deemed citizens of the same state, known as diversity jurisdiction .

There are three levels of federal courts with general jurisdiction, which are courts that handle both criminal and civil suits between individuals. Other courts, such as the bankruptcy courts and the U.S. Tax Court , are specialized courts handling only certain kinds of cases, known as subject matter jurisdiction . The Bankruptcy Courts are supervised by the district courts, and, as such, are not considered part of the Article III judiciary. As such, their judges do not have lifetime tenure, nor are they Constitutionally exempt from diminution of their remuneration.

[ 39 ] [ circular reference ] The Tax Court is an Article I Court, not an Article III Court.

[ 40 ] [ circular reference ] The district courts are the trial courts wherein cases that are considered under the Judicial Code (Title 28, United States Code) consistent with the jurisdictional precepts of federal question jurisdiction , diversity jurisdiction, and pendent jurisdiction can be filed and decided. The district courts can also hear cases under removal jurisdiction , wherein a case brought in a state court meets the requirements for diversity jurisdiction, and one party litigant chooses to "remove" the case from state court to federal court.

The United States Courts of Appeals are appellate courts that hear appeals of cases decided by the district courts, and some direct appeals from administrative agencies, and some interlocutory appeals. The U.S. Supreme Court hears appeals from the decisions of the courts of appeals or state supreme courts, and in addition has original jurisdiction over a few cases.

The judicial power extends to cases arising under the Constitution, an Act of Congress ; a U.S.

treaty ; cases affecting ambassadors , ministers and consuls of foreign countries in the U.S.; cases and controversies to which the federal government is a party; controversies between states (or their citizens) and foreign nations (or their citizens or subjects); and bankruptcy cases (collectively "federal-question jurisdiction"). The Eleventh Amendment removed from federal jurisdiction cases in which citizens of one state were the plaintiffs and the government of another state was the defendant. It did not disturb federal jurisdiction in cases in which a state government is a plaintiff and a citizen of another state the defendant.

The power of the federal courts extends both to civil actions for damages and other redress, and to criminal cases arising under federal law. The interplay of the Supremacy Clause and Article III has resulted in a complex set of relationships between state and federal courts. Federal courts can sometimes hear cases arising under state law pursuant to diversity jurisdiction , state courts can decide certain matters involving federal law, and a handful of federal claims are primarily reserved by federal statute to the state courts. Both court systems have exclusive jurisdiction in some areas and concurrent jurisdiction in others.

The U.S. Constitution safeguards judicial independence by providing that federal judges shall hold office "during good behavior"; in practice, this usually means they serve until they die, retire, or resign. A judge who commits an offense while in office may be impeached in the same way as the president or other officials of the federal government. U.S. judges are appointed by the president, subject to confirmation by the Senate. Another Constitutional provision prohibits Congress from reducing the pay of any present Article III judge. However, Congress is able to set a lower salary for all future judges who take office after such a pay reduction is passed by Congress.

Relationships between state and federal courts Separate from, but not entirely independent of, this federal court system are the court systems of each state, each dealing with, in addition to federal law when not deemed preempted, a state's own laws, and having its own court rules and procedures. Although state governments and the federal government are legally dual sovereigns , the Supreme Court of the United States is in many cases the appellate court from the State Supreme Courts (e.g., absent the Court countenancing the applicability of the doctrine of adequate and independent State grounds ). The Supreme Courts of each state are by this doctrine the final authority on the interpretation of the applicable state's laws and Constitution. Many state constitution provisions are equal in breadth to those of the U.S. Constitution, but are considered "parallel" (thus, where, for example, the right to privacy pursuant to a state constitution is broader than the federal right to privacy, and the asserted ground is explicitly held to be "independent", the question can be finally decided in a State Supreme Court—the U.S. Supreme Court will decline to take jurisdiction).

A State Supreme Court, other than of its own accord, is bound only by the U.S. Supreme Court's interpretation of federal law, but is not bound by interpretation of federal law by the federal court of appeals for the federal circuit in which the state is included, or even the federal district courts located in the state, a result of the dual sovereigns concept. Conversely, a federal district court hearing a matter involving only a question of state law (usually through diversity jurisdiction ) must apply the substantive law of the state in which the court sits, a result of the application of the Erie Doctrine ; however, at the same time, the case is heard under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure , the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure and the Federal Rules of Evidence instead of state procedural rules (that is, the application of the Erie Doctrine only extends to a requirement that a federal court asserting diversity jurisdiction apply substantive state law, but not procedural state law, which may be different). Together, the laws of the federal and state governments form U.S. law .

Budget Main article: United States federal budget Federal revenue and spending of the U.S. federal government as of 2021 The financial ratio of federal debt to federal revenue from 1996 through 2022 The budget document often begins with the president 's proposal to Congress recommending funding levels for the next fiscal year , beginning October 1 and ending on September 30 of the year following. The fiscal year refers to the year in which it ends.

For fiscal year (FY) 2018, the federal government spent $4.11 trillion. Spending equaled 20.3% of gross domestic product (GDP), equal to the 50-year average.

[ 41 ] The deficit equaled $779 billion, 3.8 percent of GDP. Tax revenue amounted to $3.33 trillion, with receipt categories including individual income taxes ($1,684B or 51%), Social Security/Social Insurance taxes ($1,171B or 35%), and corporate taxes ($205B or 6%).

[ 41 ] Employees Main article: United States federal civil service The United States federal government had about 2,260,000 civilian employees in FY2023, with about 160,000 of those in the District of Columbia (not counting the United States Postal Service ).

[ 42 ] Elections and voting Main article: Elections in the United States Diagram of the Federal Government and American Union in 1862 Suffrage , known as the ability to vote, has changed significantly over time. In the early years of the United States, voting was considered a matter for state governments, and was commonly restricted to white men who owned land. Direct elections were mostly held only for the U.S. House of Representatives and state legislatures, although what specific bodies were elected by the electorate varied from state to state. Under this original system, both senators representing each state in the U.S. Senate were chosen by a majority vote of the state legislature. Since the ratification of the Seventeenth Amendment in 1913, members of both houses of Congress have been directly elected. Today, U.S. citizens have almost universal suffrage under equal protection of the laws from the age of 18 , regardless of race , gender , or wealth . The only significant exception to this is the disenfranchisement of convicted felons , and in some states former felons as well.

Under the U.S. Constitution, the representation of U.S. territories and the federal district of District of Columbia in Congress is limited : while residents of the District of Columbia are subject to federal laws and federal taxes, their only congressional representative is a non-voting delegate ; however, they have participated in presidential elections since March 29, 1961.

[ 43 ] Residents of Puerto Rico other than federal employees do not pay federal personal income taxes on income that has its source in Puerto Rico, [ 44 ] [ 45 ] and do not pay most federal excise taxes (for example, the federal gasoline tax ); [ 45 ] however, Puerto Ricans pay all other federal taxes, including the federal payroll taxes that fund Social Security and Medicare ; the FUTA tax; and business, gift , and estate taxes .

[ 45 ] [ 44 ] Puerto Rico is represented in the Congress by a nonvoting Resident Commissioner , a nonvoting delegate.

[ 46 ] State, tribal, and local governments Main articles: State governments of the United States , Tribal sovereignty in the United States , and Local government in the United States The states of the United States as divided into counties (or, in Louisiana and Alaska , parishes and boroughs , respectively). Alaska and Hawaii are not to scale and the Aleutian and uninhabited Northwestern Hawaiian Islands have been omitted.

State governments have the greatest influence over most Americans' daily lives. The Tenth Amendment prohibits the federal government from exercising any power not delegated to it by the Constitution; as a result, states handle the majority of issues most relevant to individuals within their jurisdiction. Because state governments are not authorized to print currency, they generally have to raise revenue through either taxes or bonds. As a result, state governments tend to impose severe budget cuts or raise taxes any time the economy is faltering.

[ 47 ] Each state has its own written constitution, government and code of laws. The Constitution stipulates only that each state must have, "a Republican Government". Therefore, there are often great differences in law and procedure between individual states, concerning issues such as property, crime, health and education, amongst others. The highest elected official of each state is the Governor , with below him being the Lieutenant Governor . Each state also has an elected state legislature ( bicameralism is a feature of every state except Nebraska ), whose members represent the voters of the state. Each state maintains its own state court system. In some states, supreme and lower court justices are elected by the people; in others, they are appointed, as they are in the federal system.

As a result of the Supreme Court case Worcester v. Georgia , American Indian tribes are considered "domestic dependent nations" that operate as sovereign governments subject to federal authority but, in some cases, outside of the jurisdiction of state governments. Hundreds of laws, executive orders and court cases have modified the governmental status of tribes vis-à-vis individual states, but the two have continued to be recognized as separate bodies. Tribal governments vary in robustness, from a simple council used to manage all aspects of tribal affairs, to large and complex bureaucracies with several branches of government. Tribes are currently encouraged to form their own governments, with power resting in elected tribal councils, elected tribal chairpersons, or religiously appointed leaders (as is the case with pueblos ). Tribal citizenship and voting rights are typically restricted to individuals of native descent, but tribes are free to set whatever citizenship requirements they wish.

The institutions that are responsible for local government within states are typically counties , municipalities , and special-purpose districts , which make laws that affect their particular area. These laws concern issues such as traffic, the sale of alcohol and the keeping of animals. A county is an administrative or political subdivision of a state, while Louisiana and Alaska have county-equivalent subdivisions called parishes and boroughs , respectively. The specific governmental powers of counties vary widely between the states, with those in Connecticut , Rhode Island , and some parts of Alaska and Massachusetts having little or no power, existing only as geographic distinctions. In other areas, county governments have more power, such as to collect taxes and maintain law enforcement agencies. Twenty states further divide their counties into civil townships . Population centers may be organized into incorporated municipalities of several types, including the city , town , borough , and village . These municipal entities also vary from state to state, and typically subordinate to the government of a county or civil township. However, many rural and suburban regions are in unincorporated areas that have no municipal government below the county or civil township level. Certain cities have consolidated with their county government to form consolidated city-counties , or have been legally separated from counties altogether to form independent cities . States may also create special-purpose districts that perform a single function or a set of related functions within an area inside one or more counties or municipalities, like school districts , water management districts, fire management districts, and library districts.

See also President Executive Office Line-item veto Courts District courts Federal courts Federal judicial circuit Law U.S. Code Agencies Federal agencies United States portal Politics portal States and territories Political divisions U.S. territory Works and websites Business.gov Copyright status of work by the U.S. government USA.gov Criticism of the United States government Notes ^ The U.S. Government Publishing Office specifies the capitalization of Federal Government , in regards to the national government of the United States, as a proper noun .

[ 1 ] References ^ "3" (PDF) .

U.S. Government Publishing Office Style Manual (2016 ed.).

U.S. Government Publishing Office . 2016. p. 32.

ISBN 978-0-16-093601-2 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on July 29, 2018 . Retrieved July 29, 2018 .

^ Zimmermann, Joseph F. (2008).

Contemporary American Federalism: The Growth of National Power (2nd ed.). Albany: State University of New York Press. pp.

4– 12.

ISBN 9780791475966 . Retrieved May 17, 2025 .

^ "Government structure" .

USAFacts . Retrieved February 10, 2024 .

^ Ford, Henry Jones (1908). "The Influence of State Politics in Expanding Federal Power".

Proceedings of the American Political Science Association .

5 : 53– 63.

doi : 10.2307/3038511 .

JSTOR 3038511 .

^ "Judge: Governor must OK Guard unit closure" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on July 18, 2011.

^ "The Legislative Branch" .

whitehouse.gov .

Archived from the original on January 29, 2022 . Retrieved January 20, 2013 – via National Archives .

^ "Member Web Site Listing (by State)" .

U.S. House . Archived from the original on August 28, 2008 . Retrieved August 17, 2008 .

^ "Article I. Constitution of the United States of America" .

Illinois General Assembly . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ "Appointed Senators (1913-Present)" .

United States Senate . Retrieved February 23, 2023 .

^ "Trump impeachment: A very simple guide" .

BBC News . December 19, 2019.

Archived from the original on December 19, 2019 . Retrieved February 11, 2022 .

^ "Committees" .

house.gov . Retrieved November 23, 2023 .

^ "Committees" .

U.S. Senate . Retrieved November 23, 2023 .

^ Kaiser, Frederick M. (January 3, 2006).

"Congressional Oversight" (PDF) . Congressional Research Service.

Archived (PDF) from the original on July 25, 2008 . Retrieved July 30, 2008 .

^ "Directory of Representatives" .

house.gov . Retrieved November 23, 2023 .

^ a b "Constitution of the United States of America" . 1787. Article II – via Wikisource.

^ a b c d e "Nature and Scope of Presidential Power" .

U.S. Constitution Annotated . Congressional Research Service.

Archived from the original on January 23, 2021 . Retrieved February 15, 2021 – via Cornell Law School, Legal Information Institute.

^ Daniel W. Drezner (August 4, 2019).

"America's head of state, M.I.A." Washington Post .

Archived from the original on December 16, 2020 . Retrieved February 15, 2021 .

^ "Article 2, Section I, Clause 8: Oath of Office" .

U.S. Constitution Annotated . Congressional Research Service.

Archived from the original on February 10, 2021 . Retrieved February 15, 2021 – via Cornell Law School, Legal Information Institute.

^ a b c d William P. Marshall & Saikrishna B. Prakash , Article II, Section 3: Common Interpretation Archived February 17, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , National Constitution Center (2021).

^ "Executive Order, Proclamation, or Executive Memorandum?" .

Executive Orders: A Beginner's Guide . Library of Congress Research Guide. 2020.

Archived from the original on February 7, 2021 . Retrieved February 15, 2021 .

^ "ArtII.S2.C1.1.2 Commander in Chief Power: Doctrine and Practice" .

Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation . Congressional Research Service.

Archived from the original on January 6, 2021 . Retrieved February 15, 2021 .

^ a b c d Wilfred E. Binkley (1959).

The Man in the White House: His Powers and Duties (paperback 2009 ed.). Johns Hopkins University Press. pp.

247– 57.

^ "ArtII.S2.C2.1 The Treaty Making Power" .

Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation . Congressional Research Service.

Archived from the original on January 31, 2021 . Retrieved February 15, 2021 .

^ "ArtII.S2.C2.2.1.1 Appointing Ambassadors, Ministers, and Consuls" .

Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation . Congressional Research Service.

Archived from the original on February 27, 2021 . Retrieved February 15, 2021 .

^ Steven G. Bradbury (April 16, 2007).

Offices of the United States Within the Meaning of the Appointments Clause (PDF) . United States Department of Justice Office of Legal Counsel .

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 21, 2021 . Retrieved February 15, 2021 .

^ "ArtII.S2.C1.3.1.1 Scope of the Pardon Power" .

Constitution of the United States of America: Analysis and Interpretation . Congressional Research Service.

Archived from the original on January 27, 2021 . Retrieved February 15, 2021 .

^ Lauren-Brooke Eisen, Hernandez Stroud & Josh Bell (January 9, 2021).

"Explainer: Presidential Pardon Power Explained" . Brennan Center for Justice.

Archived from the original on February 3, 2021 . Retrieved February 15, 2021 .

^ Paul E. Rutledge; Heather A. Larsen (August 2014).

"The President as Agenda Setter-in-Chief: The Dynamics of Congressional and Presidential Agenda Setting" .

Policy Studies Journal .

42 (3): 443– 464.

doi : 10.1111/psj.12068 .

^ James W. Davis (1992).

The President as Party Leader . Praeger.

^ 23rd Amendment to the United States Constitution – via Wikisource .

^ Twenty-second Amendment to the United States Constitution – via Wikisource .

^ Michael Levy, Twenty-second Amendment: United States Constitution Archived April 16, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , Encyclopædia Britannica (2010).

^ a b c "U.S. Constitution, Article I, Section 7, Clauses 1–3: The Legislative Process" .

Legal Information Institute .

Archived from the original on January 22, 2021 . Retrieved February 15, 2021 .

^ "Presidential Vetoes: Washington to Biden" .

American Presidency Project . University of California, Santa Barbara. January 8, 2021.

Archived from the original on February 27, 2021 . Retrieved February 15, 2021 .

^ Goldstein, Joel K. (1995). "The New Constitutional Vice Presidency".

Wake Forest Law Review .

30 (505).

^ Reynolds, Glenn Harlan (2007). "Is Dick Cheney Unconstitutional?".

Northwestern University Law Review Colloquy .

102 (110).

^ "The Cabinet" .

White House . December 9, 2014 . Retrieved March 1, 2023 .

^ a b "The Executive Branch" .

The White House . Retrieved March 1, 2023 .

^ Federal tribunals in the United States ^ United States Tax Court ^ a b "CBO Monthly Budget Review-November 2018" . November 7, 2018.

Archived from the original on December 5, 2018 . Retrieved December 6, 2018 .

^ "FedScope Federal Human Resources Data" . U.S. Office of Personnel Management . Retrieved March 11, 2024 .

^ Twenty-third Amendment to the United States Constitution ^ a b Alexia Fernández Campbell, Puerto Rico pays taxes. The US is obligated to help it just as much as Texas and Florida.

Archived April 16, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , Vox (October 4, 2017).

^ a b c David L. Brumbaugh, U.S. Federal Taxes in Puerto Rico Archived April 15, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , Congressional Research Service (October 30, 2000).

^ Christopher M. Davis, Parliamentary Rights of the Delegates and Resident Commissioner from Puerto Rico Archived February 24, 2021, at the Wayback Machine , Congressional Research Service (October 16, 2019).

^ "A brief overview of state fiscal conditions and the effects of federal policies on state budgets" (PDF) . Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. May 12, 2004.

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 18, 2009 . Retrieved July 30, 2008 .

Further reading Greenstein, Fred I.

; Larry Berman; Alvin S. Felzenberg .

Evolution of the modern presidency : a bibliographical survey (1977) bibliography and annotation of 2500 scholarly books and articles.

online 4 Wood, Gordon S.

(1998).

The creation of the American Republic, 1776–1787 . Gordon S. Wood, Institute of Early American History and Culture (Williamsburg, Va.). p. 653.

ISBN 978-0-8078-2422-1 .

External links Wikiquote has quotations related to Federal government of the United States .

Wikiversity has learning resources about School:Political science Wikiversity has learning resources about Topic:American government Official website (Portal of the U.S. Federal government of the United States) Government v t e Politics and government Overviews State Nation Empire Central government Unitary state Federal government National unity government Levels: Local government County government Administrative division Municipality Township Systems Lists: Govt systems Countries by system Systems: Anarchy Aristocracy Bureaucracy Capitalism Confederation Colonialism Communism Electocracy Ergatocracy Federalism Feudalism Geniocracy Kleptocracy Meritocracy Military dictatorship Monarchy Oligarchy Plutocracy Republicanism Socialism Statism Technocracy Theocracy Totalitarianism Democracy : Parliamentary system Presidential system Cellular Collaborative Consensus Conservative Cosmopolitan Direct democracy Representative democracy Republic Philosophies Agrarianism Anarchism Authoritarianism Centrism Christian democracy Collectivism Communalism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Corporatism Distributism Egalitarianism Environmentalism Extremism Familialism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Liberalism Progressivism Theoreticians: John Locke Functions Social insurance Law enforcement Unemployment benefits National healthcare Public education Military Espionage Regulation: Environmental regulation Banking regulation Food inspection Municipal: Traffic lights Sanitation Street cleaning Components Documents Constitution Charter Uncodified constitution Roles: Head of state Head of government Monarch President Prime minister Bodies: Cabinet Ministry Judiciary Legislature Legislative bodies Congress Parliament Council Assembly Legislative council Governance processes Process: Hearing Committee Town meeting Outcomes: Legislation Regulation Zoning Law : Precedent Politics Elections : Voting Campaigns Groups: Political parties Advocacy groups Issues: Civil rights Environmentalism Academic Fields of study Political science Urban planning Sociology History Overviews: Political history of the world History of political thought Reforms Suffrage Documents: Magna Carta U.S. Constitution International Diplomacy Embassy Treaty International law World: World government United Nations European Union World Court Related Human history History of philosophy Civilization Templates: {{ Political ideologies }} {{ Political culture }} {{ Political spectrum }} {{ Social and political philosophy }} {{ liberalism }} {{ Conservatism navbox }} {{ aspects of capitalism }} {{ Western culture }} {{ Autonomous types of first-tier administration }} {{ World government }} Categories Forms of government Types of democracy Political parties v t e Common types of government ministers and ministries Leadership President Vice president Prime minister Deputy prime minister First minister Deputy First Minister Premier Office of the president Cabinet department / Office of the prime minister Speaker / President of the assembly Minister Titles Secretary of state Minister of state Deputy minister Undersecretary Assistant minister/Parliamentary secretary Associate Minister Defence / foreign affairs / public safety Ministry of defence Ministry of foreign affairs Immigration minister Interior minister Interior ministry International development minister Europe Economics/ infrastructure Commerce minister Ministry of the economy Ministry of finance Minister of industry Ministry of infrastructure Ministry of trade and industry Ministry of transport Environment / natural resources Energy minister Ministry of energy Environment minister Ministry of electricity Ministry of petroleum Ministry of water resources Social Culture minister Ministry of culture Education minister Ministry of education and culture Health minister Ministry of health Information minister Housing minister Ministry of housing Ministry of justice Minister of labour Ministry of labour Regional minister Ministry of sports Tourism minister Ministry of home affairs Ministry of religious affairs Ministry of science Ministry of social affairs Ministry of social security Minister for Veterans Ministry of women Minister for women Other Minister without portfolio Lists Presidents Vice presidents Prime ministers Deputy prime ministers Presidents of assembly Agriculture ministries Climate change ministers Communications ministries Defence ministers Education ministries Environment ministers Environment ministries Finance ministers Foreign ministers Forest ministries Health ministries ( mental health ) Interior ministers Public works ministries Government ministers by portfolio Ministries by portfolio v t e Public services Municipalization Nationalization Progressive tax Concepts Common good Free-culture movement Free newspaper Product sample Public administration Public bad Public domain Public good (economics) Public health Public interest Public land Public ownership Public policy Public rights Public sphere Public procurement Public trust Public value Universal access to education Universal basic services Basic services Civil service Fire department Housing First Law enforcement Postal service Savings system Public broadcasting Public transport Universal basic services Public utility Electric utility Oil & gas Telecommunication Municipal broadband Public infrastructure Public water system Waste management Public works Drinking fountain Drug checking Free clinic Free education Infrastructure Needle and syringe programmes Public art Public bank Public bookcase Public computer Public hospital Public library Public open space Public school Public space Public toilet Public university Reagent testing Supervised injection site Urban park Social services Publicly funded health care Public housing Job creation Job guarantee Single-payer health care National health insurance Social insurance Social pension Social security Youth services See also Commons Free public transport Government auction Public float Public holiday Public offering Public sector Public security Public use Public viewing area Category Commons v t e United States History By period 1776–1789 1789–1815 1815–1849 1849–1865 1865–1917 1917–1945 1945–1964 1964–1980 1980–1991 1991–2016 2016–present By event Pre-colonial era Colonial era Stamp Act Congress Thirteen Colonies Continental Congress Continental Association United Colonies military history Founding Fathers Halifax Resolves Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence American Revolution War Treaty of Paris Articles of Confederation Perpetual Union Confederation period American frontier Constitution drafting and ratification Bill of Rights Federalist Era War of 1812 Territorial evolution Mexican–American War Civil War Reconstruction era Indian Wars Native genocide Gilded Age Progressive Era Women's suffrage Civil rights movement 1865–1896 1896–1954 1954–1968 Spanish–American War Imperialism World War I Roaring Twenties Great Depression World War II home front American Century Cold War Korean War Space Race Feminist Movement LGBTQ Movement Vietnam War Post-Cold War (1991–2016) September 11 attacks War on Terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Great Recession COVID-19 pandemic By topic Outline of U.S. history Demographic Discoveries Economic Inventions Military Postal Technological and industrial Geography Territory Contiguous United States counties federal district federal enclaves Indian reservations insular zones minor outlying islands populated places states Earthquakes Extreme points Islands Mountains peaks ranges Appalachian Rocky Sierra Nevada National Park Service National Parks Regions East Coast West Coast Great Plains Gulf Mid-Atlantic Midwestern New England Pacific Central Eastern Northern Northeastern Northwestern Southern Southeastern Southwestern Western Longest rivers Arkansas Colorado Columbia Mississippi Missouri Red (South) Rio Grande Yukon Time Water supply and sanitation World Heritage Sites Politics Federal Executive President of the United States powers Executive Office Vice President Cabinet Executive departments Independent agencies Intelligence Community Director of National Intelligence Central Intelligence Agency National Security Agency National Reconnaissance Office Law enforcement ATF CBP Diplomatic Security DEA FBI ICE Marshals Secret Service TSA Inspector generals Civil service Public policy Legislative House of Representatives current members Speaker Senate current members President pro tempore President Capitol Police Library of Congress Congressional Budget Office Government Accountability Office Government Publishing Office Judicial Supreme Court Chief Justice Associate Justices list Courts of appeals list of judges District courts / Territorial courts list of courts list of judges Other tribunals U.S. attorney Law Bill of Rights civil liberties Code of Federal Regulations Constitution federalism preemption separation of powers civil rights United States Code Uniformed Armed Forces Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard National Guard NOAA Corps Public Health Service Corps State , Federal District , and Territorial Executive Governor list Lieutenant governor list Secretary of state Attorney general Treasurer Auditor/Comptroller Agriculture commissioner Insurance commissioner Public utilities commission State police list Legislative List of legislatures List of legislators Judicial Supreme courts Chief justices District attorney list Law State constitutions Statutory codes Uniform act Comparison of governments Tribal Tribal sovereignty Native American recognition in the United States Federally recognized tribes Federally recognized Alaska Native tribes State-recognized tribes Indian reservation list Hawaiian home land Local County List of counties and county equivalents County executive Sheriff Clerk Cities Consolidated city-county Independent city Coterminous municipality Charter Mayor–council government Council–manager government City commission government Mayor City manager City council Minor divisions Township Town meeting Special district School district list Corruption Democratic backsliding Elections Electoral College Red states and blue states Foreign relations foreign policy Imperial presidency Ideologies Anti-Americanism exceptionalism nationalism Parties Democratic Republican Third parties Scandals Economy By sector Agriculture Banking Communications Companies Energy Insurance Manufacturing Mining Science and technology Tourism Trade by state Currency Exports Federal budget Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States Federal Reserve System Financial position Labor unions Public debt Social welfare programs Taxation Unemployment Wall Street Transport Aviation Driving Public transportation Rail transportation Transportation policy Transportation safety Trucking industry Society Culture Americana Architecture Cinema Crime Cuisine Dance Demographics Economic issues affluence eviction homeownership household income income inequality middle class personal income poverty standard of living wealth working class Education attainment literacy Family Fashion Flag list Folklore Holidays Federal holidays Homelessness Housing Human rights Languages American English Indigenous languages ASL Literature Media journalism internet newspapers radio television Music Names National anthem National symbols Columbia Mount Rushmore Statue of Liberty Uncle Sam People Philosophy Political ideologies Race Religion Sexuality Social class Society Sports history Theater Transportation Video games Visual art Social class Affluence American Dream Educational attainment Homelessness Homeownership Household income Income inequality Middle class Personal income Poverty Standard of living Health Aging Healthcare Abortion Birth control Prenatal care Hospice care Immigrant health care Rationing Health care finance Health insurance costs Health care prices Prescription drug prices Disability Health insurance Food safety Physician shortage Poverty and health Race and health Obesity Medical deserts Women's reproductive health Life expectancy Issues Capital punishment Crime incarceration Criticism of government Discrimination affirmative action antisemitism intersex rights Islamophobia LGBTQ rights racism Native American African American Energy policy Environmental issues Environmental movement Climate change Gun politics Mass shootings Hunger Smoking Human rights Immigration illegal National security Terrorism Opioid epidemic Separation of church and state Xenophobia Outline Index Category v t e State governments of the United States States Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Federal district Washington, D.C.

Territories American Samoa Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico U.S. Virgin Islands v t e Constitution of the United States Articles Preamble I II III IV V VI VII Amendments Bill of Rights 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1795–1804 11 12 Reconstruction 13 14 15 20th century 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 Unratified Congressional Apportionment Titles of Nobility Corwin Amendment Child Labor Equal Rights District of Columbia Voting Rights Proposed Balanced budget Blaine amendment Bricker amendment Campaign finance reform Christian amendment Crittenden Compromise Electoral College abolition Equal Opportunity to Govern Federal Marriage Flag Desecration Human Life "Liberty" amendment Ludlow amendment Parental Rights amendment School Prayer Single subject Victims' Rights Convention to propose amendments State ratifying conventions Formation History Articles of Confederation Mount Vernon Conference Annapolis Convention Philadelphia Convention Virginia Plan New Jersey Plan Connecticut Compromise Three-fifths Compromise Committee of Detail List of Framers Signing Printing Independence Hall Syng inkstand The Federalist Papers Anti-Federalist Papers Massachusetts Compromise Virginia Ratifying Convention New York Circular Letter Hillsborough Convention Fayetteville Convention Rhode Island ratification Drafting and ratification timeline Clauses Admission to the Union Appointments Appropriations Assemble and Petition Clause Assistance of Counsel Case or Controversy Citizenship Commerce Compact Compulsory Process Confrontation Congressional enforcement Contingent Elections Contract Copyright and Patent Double Jeopardy Due Process Elections Engagements Equal Protection Establishment Exceptions Excessive Bail Ex Post Facto Extradition Free Exercise Freedom of the Press Freedom of Speech Fugitive Slave Full Faith and Credit General Welfare Guarantee House Apportionment Impeachment Import-Export Ineligibility Militia Natural-born citizen Necessary and Proper No Religious Test Oath or Affirmation Original Jurisdiction Origination Pardon Postal Presentment Presidential Electors Presidential succession Privileges and Immunities Privileges or Immunities Recess appointment Recommendation Self-Incrimination Speech or Debate Speedy Trial State of the Union Supremacy Suspension Take Care Takings Taxing and Spending Territorial Title of Nobility ( Foreign Emoluments ) Treaty Trial by Jury Vesting ( Legislative / Executive / Judicial ) Vicinage War Powers Interpretation Balance of powers Concurrent powers Constitutional law Criminal procedure Criminal sentencing Dormant Commerce Clause Enumerated powers Equal footing Executive privilege Implied powers Incorporation of the Bill of Rights Judicial review Nondelegation doctrine Plenary power Preemption Reserved powers Saxbe fix Separation of church and state Separation of powers Symmetric federalism Taxation power Unitary executive theory Signatories Convention President George Washington New Hampshire John Langdon Nicholas Gilman Massachusetts Nathaniel Gorham Rufus King Connecticut William Samuel Johnson Roger Sherman New York Alexander Hamilton New Jersey William Livingston David Brearley William Paterson Jonathan Dayton Pennsylvania Benjamin Franklin Thomas Mifflin Robert Morris George Clymer Thomas Fitzsimons Jared Ingersoll James Wilson Gouverneur Morris Delaware George Read Gunning Bedford Jr.

John Dickinson Richard Bassett Jacob Broom Maryland James McHenry Daniel of St. Thomas Jenifer Daniel Carroll Virginia John Blair James Madison North Carolina William Blount Richard Dobbs Spaight Hugh Williamson South Carolina John Rutledge Charles Cotesworth Pinckney Charles Pinckney Pierce Butler Georgia William Few Abraham Baldwin Convention Secretary William Jackson Related Notes of Debates in the Federal Convention of 1787 Jacob Shallus William Lambert Bibliography of the United States Constitution Founding Fathers of the United States Display and legacy National Archives Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom Independence Mall Constitution Day and Citizenship Day Constitution Gardens Constitution Week National Constitution Center Scene at the Signing of the Constitution (painting) A More Perfect Union (film) Worldwide influence v t e Law of the United States Constitutional law and legislation Federalism Separation of powers Civil rights Act of Congress Bill (United States Congress) United States Code Courts of the United States Federal courts Supreme Appeals District ( list ) Bankruptcy Claims International Trade Tax State courts State supreme Education Pre-law Law School Admission Test Law school Reading law Bar exam Admission to the bar Master of Laws Doctor of Juridical Science Types of law Abortion Administrative law Antitrust Child custody Child sexual abuse Civil procedure Conflict of laws Constitutional Contract Copyright Property Corporate Criminal Procedure Energy Environmental Gun Human rights Juvenile Labor Martial Obscenity Patent Privacy State Financial Race Sports State Tort Defamation Trademark Trust Water Groundwater v t e Governments of North America Sovereign states Antigua and Barbuda Bahamas Barbados Belize Canada Costa Rica Cuba Dominica Dominican Republic El Salvador Grenada Guatemala Haiti Honduras Jamaica Mexico Nicaragua Panama Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Trinidad and Tobago United States Dependencies and other territories Anguilla Aruba Bermuda Bonaire British Virgin Islands Cayman Islands Curaçao Greenland Guadeloupe Martinique Montserrat Puerto Rico Saint Barthélemy Saint Martin Saint Pierre and Miquelon Saba Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten Turks and Caicos Islands United States Virgin Islands Authority control databases International ISNI National Germany United States Israel Artists MusicBrainz Other MusicBrainz label Te Papa (New Zealand) Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐d69s7
Cached time: 20250817182711
Cache expiry: 1229581
Reduced expiry: true
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.345 seconds
Real time usage: 1.664 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 7380/1000000
Revision size: 65586/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 458176/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 50550/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 38/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 253316/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.687/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9835395/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1188.084      1 -total
 30.56%  363.022      2 Template:Reflist
 11.52%  136.901     27 Template:Cite_web
  9.74%  115.750      1 Template:Politics_of_the_United_States
  8.89%  105.594      6 Template:Cite_book
  7.32%   86.947      1 Template:Government
  7.13%   84.675      1 Template:Navboxes
  7.12%   84.585      1 Template:Short_description
  5.93%   70.434      1 Template:United_States_topics
  4.95%   58.801     13 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:195149:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817182711 and revision id 1300883324. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Federal_government_of_the_United_States&oldid=1300883324 " Categories : Federal government of the United States 1789 establishments in the United States Federalism in the United States Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use American English from April 2015 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from January 2023 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2023 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from November 2023 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from August 2024 This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 22:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Federal government of the United States 57 languages Add topic

