Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Differing political viewpoints 2 Theory Toggle Theory subsection 2.1 Outline of the concept 2.2 Different types 2.2.1 Formal equality of opportunity 2.2.1.1 Meritocracy 2.2.2 Substantive equality 2.2.2.1 Luck egalitarianism 2.2.2.2 Equality of fair opportunity 2.2.2.3 Level playing field 2.3 Moral senses 3 Practical considerations Toggle Practical considerations subsection 3.1 Difficulties with implementation 3.2 Measures 3.2.1 Difficulties with measurement 3.3 Marketplace considerations 3.4 History 4 Criticism 5 See also 6 References 7 External links 8 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Equal opportunity 31 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Lëtzebuergesch Magyar Македонски Монгол Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 پښتو Polski Português Română Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia State of fairness in which individuals are all treated the same (with justified exceptions) Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Equal opportunity is a state of fairness in which individuals are treated similarly, unhampered by artificial barriers, prejudices , or preferences, except when particular distinctions can be explicitly justified.

[ 1 ] For example, the intent of equal employment opportunity is that the important jobs in an organization should go to the people who are most qualified – persons most likely to perform ably in a given task – and not go to persons for reasons deemed arbitrary or irrelevant, such as circumstances of birth, upbringing, having well-connected relatives or friends , [ 2 ] religion , sex , [ 3 ] ethnicity, [ 3 ] race , caste , [ 4 ] or involuntary personal attributes such as disability , age .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] According to proponents of the concept, chances for advancement should be open to everybody without regard for wealth, status, or membership in a privileged group.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] The idea is to remove arbitrariness from the selection process and base it on some "pre-agreed basis of fairness , with the assessment process being related to the type of position" [ 2 ] and emphasizing procedural and legal means.

[ 4 ] Individuals should succeed or fail based on their efforts and not extraneous circumstances such as having well-connected parents.

[ 8 ] It is opposed to nepotism [ 2 ] and plays a role in whether a social structure is seen as legitimate .

[ 2 ] [ 4 ] [ 9 ] The concept is applicable in areas of public life in which benefits are earned and received such as employment and education , although it can apply to many other areas as well. Equal opportunity is central to the concept of meritocracy .

[ 10 ] There are two major types of equality: [ 11 ] formal equality , the individual merit-based comparison of opportunity, and substantive equality , which moves away from individual merit-based comparison towards group equality of outcomes .

Differing political viewpoints [ edit ] Equal opportunity for all: "We fight God when our Social System dooms the brilliant clever child of a poor man to the same level as his father", British Admiral Jacky Fisher , Records (1919) People with differing political viewpoints often view the concept differently.

[ 12 ] The meaning of equal opportunity is debated in fields such as political philosophy, sociology and psychology . It is being applied to increasingly wider areas beyond employment, [ 13 ] including lending, [ 14 ] housing, college admissions, voting rights, and elsewhere.

[ 1 ] In the classical sense, equality of opportunity is closely aligned with the concept of equality before the law and ideas of meritocracy .

[ 15 ] Generally, the terms equality of opportunity and equal opportunity are interchangeable, with occasional slight variations; the former has more of a sense of being an abstract political concept while "equal opportunity" is sometimes used as an adjective, usually in the context of employment regulations, to identify an employer, a hiring approach, or the law. Equal opportunity provisions have been written into regulations and have been debated in courtrooms.

[ 16 ] It is sometimes conceived as a legal right against discrimination .

[ 4 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] It is an ideal which has become increasingly widespread [ 19 ] in Western nations during the last several centuries and is intertwined with social mobility , most often with upward mobility and with rags to riches stories: The coming President of France is the grandson of a shoemaker. The actual President is a peasant's son. His predecessor again humbly began life in the shipping business. There is surely equality of opportunity under the new order in the old nation.

[ 20 ] Theory [ edit ] Outline of the concept [ edit ] In a factory setting, equality of opportunity is often seen as a procedural fairness along the lines of "if you assemble twice as many lamps, you'll be paid double" and in this sense the concept is in contrast to the concept of equality of outcome , which might require that all workers be paid similarly regardless of how many lamps they made.

According to the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , the concept assumes that society is stratified with a diverse range of roles, some of which are more desirable than others.

[ 2 ] The benefit of equality of opportunity is to bring fairness to the selection process for coveted roles in corporations , associations , nonprofits , universities and elsewhere.

[ 21 ] According to one view, there is no "formal linking" between equality of opportunity and political structure, in the sense that there can be equality of opportunity in democracies , autocracies and in communist nations , [ 2 ] although it is primarily associated with a competitive market economy [ 2 ] and embedded within the legal frameworks of democratic societies.

[ 22 ] People with different political perspectives see equality of opportunity differently: liberals disagree about which conditions are needed to ensure it and many "old-style" conservatives see inequality and hierarchy in general as beneficial out of a respect for tradition.

[ 23 ] It can apply to a specific hiring decision, or to all hiring decisions by a specific company, or rules governing hiring decisions for an entire nation. The scope of equal opportunity has expanded to cover more than issues regarding the rights of minority groups, but covers practices regarding "recruitment, hiring, training, layoffs, discharge, recall, promotions, responsibility, wages, sick leave, vacation, overtime, insurance, retirement, pensions, and various other benefits".

[ 21 ] The concept has been applied to numerous aspects of public life, including accessibility of polling stations, [ 24 ] care provided to HIV patients, [ 25 ] whether men and women have equal opportunities to travel on a spaceship, [ 26 ] bilingual education , [ 27 ] skin color of models in Brazil , [ 28 ] television time for political candidates, [ 29 ] army promotions, [ 30 ] admittance to universities [ 31 ] and ethnicity in the United States .

[ 32 ] The term is interrelated with and often contrasted with other conceptions of equality such as equality of outcome and equality of autonomy . Equal opportunity emphasizes the personal ambition and talent and abilities of the individual, rather than his or her qualities based on membership in a group, such as a social class or race or extended family.

[ 4 ] Further, it is seen as unfair if external factors that are viewed as being beyond the control of a person significantly influence what happens to him or her.

[ 4 ] Equal opportunity then emphasizes a fair process whereas in contrast equality of outcome emphasizes an equal outcome.

[ 4 ] In sociological analysis, equal opportunity is seen as a factor correlating positively with social mobility , in the sense that it can benefit society overall by maximizing well-being.

[ 4 ] Different types [ edit ] There are different concepts lumped under equality of opportunity.

[ 33 ] [ 19 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] Formal equality of opportunity describes equal opportunities based only on merit but these opportunities should not depend on your identity such as gender or race. Formal equality does not guarantee equal outcomes for groups or equal representation of groups, but requires that deliberate discrimination be only meritocratic.

[ 11 ] For instance, job interviews should only discriminate against applicants based on job competence. Meritocratic universities should not accept a less-capable applicant instead of a more-capable applicant who cannot pay tuition. Formal equality can be called racial color blindness and gender blindness .

[ 36 ] Substantive equality describes equal outcomes for groups or equal representation of identities such as gender or race. Substantive does not guarantee equality of opportunity based only on merit. For instance, substantive equality includes that jobs are distributed according to the race and gender proportions of the whole population.

[ 11 ] Equality before the law describes where the law does not discriminate explicitly based on protected identity such as gender or race. Equality before the law does not imply Formal equality of opportunity or substantive equality. If firing any pregnant employee is legal, it would meet Equality before the law but would violate both Formal equality of opportunity and substantive equality.

Formal equality of opportunity is often more difficult to measure.

[ 37 ] A political party that formally allows anyone to join, but meets in a non-wheelchair-accessible building far from public transit, substantively discriminates against both young and old members as they are less likely to be able-bodied car-owners. However, if the party raises membership dues in order to afford a better building, it discourages poor members instead. A workplace in which it is difficult for persons with special needs and disabilities to perform can considered as a type of substantive inequality, although job restructuring activities can be done to make it easier for disabled persons to succeed. Grade-cutoff university admission is formally fair, but if in practice it overwhelmingly picks women and graduates of expensive user-fee schools, it is substantively unfair to men and the poor. The unfairness has already taken place and the university can choose to try to counterbalance it, but it likely can not single-handedly make pre-university opportunities equal.

Social mobility and the Great Gatsby curve are often used as an indicator of substantive equality of opportunity.

[ 38 ] Both equality concepts say that it is unfair and inefficient if extraneous factors rule people's lives. Both accept as fair inequality based on relevant, meritocratic factors. They differ in the scope of the methods used to promote them. The difference between the two equality concepts is also referred to as Dilemma of Difference .

[ 39 ] Formal equality of opportunity [ edit ] Formal equality of opportunity [ 33 ] [ 40 ] is sometimes referred to as the nondiscrimination principle [ 41 ] or described as the absence of direct discrimination, [ 33 ] or described in the narrow sense as equality of access.

[ 33 ] [ 42 ] It is characterized by: Open call. Positions bringing superior advantages should be open to all applicants [ 19 ] and job openings should be publicized in advance giving applicants a "reasonable opportunity" to apply. Further, all applications should be accepted.

[ 2 ] Fair judging. Applications should be judged on their merits, [ 2 ] with procedures designed to identify those best-qualified.

[ 19 ] The evaluation of the applicant should be in accord with the duties of the position and for the job opening of choir director, for example, the evaluation may judge applicants based on musical knowledge rather than some arbitrary criterion such as hair color.

[ 2 ] Blind auditions and blind interviews have been shown to improve equal opportunity.

[ 43 ] An application is chosen. The applicant judged as "most qualified" is offered the position while others are not. There is agreement that the result of the process is again unequal, in the sense that one person has the position while another does not, but that this outcome is deemed fair on procedural grounds.

The formal approach is limited to the public sphere as opposed to private areas such as the family , marriage , or religion .

[ 4 ] What is considered "fair" and "unfair" is spelled out in advance.

[ 44 ] An expression of this version appeared in The New York Times : "There should be an equal opportunity for all. Each and every person should have as great or as small an opportunity as the next one. There should not be the unfair, unequal, superior opportunity of one individual over another." [ 45 ] The formal conception focuses on procedural fairness during the competition: are the hurdles the same height? (photo: athletes Ulrike Urbansky and Michelle Carey in Osaka) This sense was also expressed by economists Milton and Rose Friedman in their 1980 book Free to Choose .

[ 46 ] The Friedmans explained that equality of opportunity was "not to be interpreted literally" since some children are born blind while others are born sighted, but that "its real meaning is ... a career open to the talents".

[ 46 ] This means that there should be "no arbitrary obstacles" blocking a person from realizing their ambitions: "Not birth, nationality, color, religion, sex, nor any other irrelevant characteristic should determine the opportunities that are open to a person – only his abilities".

[ 46 ] It is a relatively straightforward task for legislators to ban blatant efforts to favor one group over another and encourage equality of opportunity as a result.

Japan banned gender-specific job descriptions in advertising as well as sexual discrimination in employment as well as other practices deemed unfair, [ 47 ] although a subsequent report suggested that the law was having minimal effect in securing Japanese women high positions in management.

[ 48 ] [ needs update ] In the United States , the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission sued a private test preparation firm, Kaplan , for unfairly using credit histories to discriminate against African Americans in terms of hiring decisions.

[ 16 ] According to one analysis, it is possible to imagine a democracy which meets the formal criteria (1 through 3), but which still favors wealthy candidates who are selected in free and fair elections.

[ 49 ] Meritocracy [ edit ] Main article: Meritocracy There is some overlap among these different conceptions with the term meritocracy which describes an administrative system which rewards such factors as individual intelligence , credentials , education , morality , knowledge or other criteria believed to confer merit. Equality of opportunity is often seen as a major aspect of a meritocracy.

[ 33 ] [ 2 ] One view was that equality of opportunity was more focused on what happens before the race begins while meritocracy is more focused on fairness at the competition stage.

[ 37 ] The term meritocracy can also be used in a negative sense to refer to a system in which an elite hold themselves in power by controlling access to merit (via access to education, experience, or bias in assessment or judgment).

Therein lies the problem with the idea of equal opportunity for all. Some people are simply better placed to take advantage of opportunity.

— Deborah Orr in The Guardian , 2009 [ 50 ] Substantive equality [ edit ] Main article: Substantive equality The Great Gatsby Curve shows that countries with more equality of wealth also have more social mobility, which indicates that equality of wealth and equality of opportunity go together: [ 38 ] If higher inequality makes intergenerational mobility more difficult, it is likely because opportunities for economic advancement are more unequally distributed among children.

[ 51 ] Substantive equality of opportunity, sometimes called fair equality of opportunity, [ 19 ] is a somewhat broader [ 4 ] and more expansive concept than the more limiting formal equality of opportunity and it deals with what is sometimes described as indirect discrimination.

[ 33 ] It goes farther and is more controversial [ 4 ] than the formal variant; [ 4 ] and has been described as "unstable", [ 19 ] particularly if the society in question is unequal to begin with in terms of great disparity of wealth.

[ 52 ] The substantive equality embraced by Court of Justice of the European Union focuses on equality of outcomes for group characteristics and group outcomes.

[ 11 ] Indirect discrimination rests upon the cardinal assumption that a formally neutral measure is suspicious when it has substantive disadvantages for a formally protected group.

[ 11 ] Substantive equality has been identified as more of a left-leaning political position, [ 53 ] but this is not a hard-and-fast rule. The substantive model is advocated by people who see limitations in formal equality. In the substantive approach, the starting point before the race begins is unfair since people have had differing experiences before even approaching the competition. The substantive approach examines the applicants themselves before applying for a position and judges whether they have equal abilities or talents; and if not, then it suggests that authorities (usually the government) take steps to make applicants more equal before they get to the point where they compete for a position and fixing the before-the-starting-point issues has sometimes been described as working towards "fair access to qualifications".

[ 19 ] The success of this approach is evaluated by equality of outcome for disadvantaged and marginalized people and groups.

[ 54 ] According to John Hills, children of wealthy and well-connected parents usually have a decisive advantage over other types of children and he notes that "advantage and disadvantage reinforce themselves over the life cycle, and often on to the next generation" so that successful parents pass along their wealth and education to succeeding generations, making it difficult for others to climb up a social ladder.

[ 55 ] However, so-called positive action efforts to bring an underprivileged person up to speed before a competition begins are limited to the period of time before the evaluation begins. At that point, the "final selection for posts must be made according to the principle the best person for the job", that is, a less qualified applicant should not be chosen over a more qualified applicant.

[ 33 ] Regardless of the nuances, the overall idea is still to give children from less fortunate backgrounds more of a chance, [ 55 ] or to achieve at the beginning what some theorists call equality of condition.

[ 33 ] Writer Ha-Joon Chang expressed this view: We can accept the outcome of a competitive process as fair only when the participants have equality in basic capabilities; the fact that no one is allowed to have a head start does not make the race fair if some contestants have only one leg.

[ 56 ] In a sense, substantive equality of opportunity moves the "starting point" further back in time. Sometimes it entails the use of affirmative action policies to help all contenders become equal before they get to the starting point, perhaps with greater training, or sometimes redistributing resources via restitution or taxation to make the contenders more equal. It holds that all who have a "genuine opportunity to become qualified" be given a chance to do so and it is sometimes based on a recognition that unfairness exists, hindering social mobility , combined with a sense that the unfairness should not exist or should be lessened in some manner.

[ 57 ] One example postulated was that a warrior society could provide special nutritional supplements to poor children, offer scholarships to military academies and dispatch "warrior skills coaches" to every village as a way to make opportunity substantively more fair.

[ 2 ] The idea is to give every ambitious and talented youth a chance to compete for prize positions regardless of their circumstances of birth.

[ 2 ] The substantive approach tends to have a broader definition of extraneous circumstances which should be kept out of a hiring decision. One editorial writer suggested that among the many types of extraneous circumstances which should be kept out of hiring decisions was personal beauty, sometimes termed " lookism ": Lookism judges individuals by their physical allure rather than abilities or merit. This naturally works to the advantage of people perceived to rank higher in the looks department. They get preferential treatment at the cost of others. Which fair, democratic system can justify this? If anything, lookism is as insidious as any other form of bias based on caste, creed, gender and race that society buys into. It goes against the principle of equality of opportunity.

[ 58 ] The substantive position was advocated by Bhikhu Parekh in 2000 in Rethinking Multiculturalism , in which he wrote that "all citizens should enjoy equal opportunities to acquire the capacities and skills needed to function in society and to pursue their self-chosen goals equally effectively" and that "equalising measures are justified on grounds of justice as well as social integration and harmony".

[ 33 ] [ 59 ] Affirmative action programs usually fall under the substantive category.

[ 4 ] The idea is to help disadvantaged groups get back to a normal starting position after a long period of discrimination . The programs involve government action, sometimes with resources being transferred from an advantaged group to a disadvantaged one and these programs have been justified on the grounds that imposing quotas counterbalances the past discrimination [ 2 ] as well as being a "compelling state interest" in diversity in society.

[ 4 ] For example, there was a case in São Paulo in Brazil of a quota imposed on the São Paulo Fashion Week to require that "at least 10 percent of the models to be black or indigenous" as a coercive measure to counteract a "longstanding bias towards white models".

[ 28 ] It does not have to be accomplished via government action: for example, in the 1980s in the United States, President Ronald Reagan dismantled parts of affirmative action, but one report in the Chicago Tribune suggested that companies remained committed to the principle of equal opportunity regardless of government requirements.

[ 60 ] In another instance, upper-middle-class students taking the Scholastic Aptitude Test in the United States performed better since they had had more "economic and educational resources to prepare for these test than others".

[ 4 ] The test itself was seen as fair in a formal sense, but the overall result is seen as unfair in a substantive sense. In India , the Indian Institutes of Technology found that to achieve substantive equality of opportunity the school had to reserve 22.5 percent of seats for applicants from "historically disadvantaged schedule castes and tribes".

[ 4 ] [ 61 ] Elite universities in France began a special "entrance program" to help applicants from "impoverished suburbs".

[ 4 ] Luck egalitarianism [ edit ] Luck egalitarianism views the unequal outcomes that are connected to bad luck of unchosen circumstances as unjust, but just if when connected to circumstances chosen by the individual and that weighing matters such as personal responsibility was important.

[ 19 ] A somewhat different view was expressed by John Roemer , who used the term nondiscrimination principle to mean that "all individuals who possess the attributes relevant for the performance of the duties of the position in question be included in the pool of eligible candidates, and that an individual's possible occupancy of the position be judged only with respect to those relevant attributes".

[ 41 ] Matt Cavanagh argued that race and sex should not matter when getting a job, but that the sense of equality of opportunity should not extend much further than preventing straightforward discrimination.

[ 62 ] Equality of fair opportunity [ edit ] Philosopher John Rawls offered this variant of substantive equality of opportunity and explained that it happens when individuals with the same "native talent and the same ambition" have the same prospects of success in competitions.

[ 2 ] [ 63 ] [ 64 ] [ 65 ] Gordon Marshall offers a similar view with the words "positions are to be open to all under conditions in which persons of similar abilities have equal access to office".

[ 23 ] An example was given that if two persons X and Y have identical talent, but X is from a poor family while Y is from a rich one, then equality of fair opportunity is in effect when both X and Y have the same chance of winning the job.

[ 2 ] It suggests the ideal society is "classless" without a social hierarchy being passed from generation to generation, although parents can still pass along advantages to their children by genetics and socialization skills.

[ 2 ] One view suggests that this approach might advocate "invasive interference in family life".

[ 2 ] Marshall posed this question: Does it demand that, however unequal their abilities, people should be equally empowered to achieve their goals? This would imply that the unmusical individual who wants to be a concert pianist should receive more training than the child prodigy.

[ 23 ] Economist Paul Krugman agrees mostly with the Rawlsian approach in that he would like to "create the society each of us would want if we didn't know in advance who we'd be".

[ 66 ] Krugman elaborated: "If you admit that life is unfair, and that there's only so much you can do about that at the starting line, then you can try to ameliorate the consequences of that unfairness".

[ 66 ] Level playing field [ edit ] The match's outcome is deemed legitimate if there is a level playing field and rules do not favor either player or team arbitrarily. (photo: Cesc Fàbregas duels with Anderson in a football match in 2008) Some theorists have posed a level playing field conception of equality of opportunity, [ 2 ] [ 19 ] similar in many respects to the substantive principle (although it has been used in different contexts to describe formal equality of opportunity) [ citation needed ] and it is a core idea regarding the subject of distributive justice espoused by John Roemer [ 41 ] [ 67 ] [ 68 ] and Ronald Dworkin [ 69 ] [ 70 ] and others. Like the substantive notion, the level playing field conception goes farther than the usual formal approach.

[ 41 ] The idea is that initial "unchosen inequalities" – prior circumstances over which an individual had no control, but which impact his or her success in a given competition for a particular post – these unchosen inequalities should be eliminated as much as possible, according to this conception. According to Roemer, society should "do what it can to level the playing field so that all those with relevant potential will eventually be admissible to pools of candidates competing for positions".

[ 41 ] Afterwards, when an individual competes for a specific post, he or she might make specific choices which cause future inequalities – and these inequalities are deemed acceptable because of the previous presumption of fairness.

[ 71 ] This system helps undergird the legitimacy of a society's divvying up of roles as a result in the sense that it makes certain achieved inequalities "morally acceptable", according to persons who advocate this approach.

[ 2 ] This conception has been contrasted to the substantive version among some thinkers and it usually has ramifications for how society treats young persons in such areas as education and socialization and health care , but this conception has been criticized as well.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] John Rawls postulated the difference principle which argued that "inequalities are justified only if needed to improve the lot of the worst off, for example by giving the talented an incentive to create wealth".

[ 33 ] [ 23 ] [ 70 ] Moral senses [ edit ] There is general agreement that equality of opportunity is good for society, although there are diverse views about how it is good since it is a value judgement .

[ 23 ] It is generally viewed as a positive political ideal in the abstract sense.

[ 2 ] In nations where equality of opportunity is absent, it can negatively impact economic growth , according to some views and one report in Al Jazeera suggested that Egypt , Tunisia and other Middle Eastern nations were stagnating economically in part because of a dearth of equal opportunity.

[ 75 ] Practical considerations [ edit ] Difficulties with implementation [ edit ] There is general agreement that programs to bring about certain types of equality of opportunity can be difficult and that efforts to cause one result often have unintended consequences or cause other problems.

[ weasel words ] A government policy that requires equal treatment can pose problems for lawmakers. A requirement for the government to provide equal health care services for all citizens can be prohibitively expensive.

[ according to whom?

] [ disputed – discuss ] If the government seeks equality of opportunity for citizens to get health care by rationing services using a maximization model to try to save money, new difficulties might emerge. For example, trying to ration health care by maximizing the "quality-adjusted years of life" might steer monies away from disabled persons even though they may be more deserving, according to one analysis.

[ 2 ] [ 76 ] In another instance, BBC News questioned whether it was wise to ask female army recruits to undergo the same strenuous tests as their male counterparts since many women were being injured as a result.

[ 77 ] [ non sequitur ] Age discrimination can present vexing challenges for policymakers trying to implement equal opportunity.

[ 2 ] [ 78 ] [ 79 ] According to several studies, attempts to be equally fair to both a young and an old person are problematic because the older person has presumably fewer years left to live and it may make more sense for a society to invest greater resources in a younger person's health.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] Treating both persons equally while following the letter of the equality of opportunity seems unfair from a different perspective.

[ weasel words ] Efforts to achieve equal opportunity along one dimension can exacerbate unfairness in other dimensions.

[ according to whom?

] For example, public bathrooms: If for the sake of fairness the physical area of men's and women's bathrooms is equal, the overall result may be unfair since men can use urinals, which require less physical space.

[ 82 ] In other words, a more fair arrangement may be to allot more physical space for women's restrooms. The sociologist Harvey Molotch explained: "By creating men's and women's rooms of the same size, society guarantees that individual women will be worse off than individual men." [ 82 ] Another difficulty is that it is hard for a society to bring substantive equality of opportunity to every type of position or industry. If a nation focuses efforts on some industries or positions, then people with other talents may be left out. For example, in an example in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , a warrior society might provide equal opportunity for all kinds of people to achieve military success through fair competition, but people with non-military skills such as farming may be left out.

[ 2 ] Lawmakers have run into problems trying to implement equality of opportunity. In 2010 in Britain , a legal requirement "forcing public bodies to try to reduce inequalities caused by class disadvantage" was scrapped after much debate and replaced by a hope that organizations would try to focus more on "fairness" than "equality" as fairness is generally seen as a much unclear concept than equality, [ 83 ] but easier for politicians to manage if they are seeking to avoid fractious debate. In New York City , mayor Ed Koch tried to find ways to maintain the "principle of equal treatment" while arguing against more substantive and abrupt transfer payments called minority set-asides.

[ 84 ] Cultural diversity of lifestyles, value systems, traditions, and beliefs [ 85 ] [ 86 ] can explain differences in outcomes between subgroups.

[ 87 ] Measures [ edit ] Many economists measure the degree of equal opportunity with measures of economic mobility . For instance, Joseph Stiglitz asserts that with five economic divisions and full equality of opportunity, "20 percent of those in the bottom fifth would see their children in the bottom fifth. Denmark almost achieves that – 25 percent are stuck there. Britain, supposedly notorious for its class divisions, does only a little worse (30 percent). That means they have a 70 percent chance of moving up. The chances of moving up in America, though, are markedly smaller (only 58 percent of children born to the bottom group make it out), and when they do move up, they tend to move up only a little". Similar analyses can be performed for each economic division and overall. They all show how far from the ideal all industrialized nations are and how correlated measures of equal opportunity are with income inequality and wealth inequality .

[ 88 ] Equal opportunity has ramifications beyond income; the American Human Development Index, rooted in the capabilities approach pioneered by Amartya Sen , is used to measure opportunity across geographies in the U.S. using health, education, and standard of living outcomes.

[ 89 ] There is little income mobility – the notion of America as a land of opportunity is a myth.

— Joseph E. Stiglitz, 2012 [ 90 ] Difficulties with measurement [ edit ] The consensus view is that trying to measure equality of opportunity is difficult [ 37 ] whether examining a single hiring decision or looking at groups over time.

Single instance. It is possible to reexamine the procedures governing a specific hiring decision, see if they were followed, and re-evaluate the selection by asking questions such as "Was it fair? Were fair procedures followed? Was the best applicant selected?". This is a judgment call and biases may enter into the minds of decision-makers. The determination of equality of opportunity in such an instance is based on mathematical probability : if equality of opportunity is in effect, then it is seen as fair if each of two applicants has a 50 percent chance of winning the job, that is, they both have equal chances to succeed (assuming of course that the person making the probability assessment is unaware of all variables – including valid ones such as talent or skill as well as arbitrary ones such as race or gender). However, it is hard to measure whether each applicant had a 50 percent chance based on the outcome.

Groups. When assessing the equal opportunity for a type of job or company or industry or nation, then statistical analysis is often done by looking at patterns and abnormalities, [ 2 ] typically comparing subgroups with larger groups on a percentage basis. Averaging opportunities over subgroups allows to determine if there are statistically significant differences in outcomes between subgroups. For factors where blinded experiments are feasible, the equality or lack of equality of opportunity due to this factor can be determined up to statistical significance.

[ 91 ] While substantive equality for group outcomes can be measured by comparing statistically significant differences in subgroup outcomes, formal equality of opportunities does not require equal outcomes between groups. If equality of opportunity is violated, perhaps by discrimination which affects a subgroup or population over time, it is possible to make this determination using statistical analysis, but there are numerous difficulties involved.

[ 2 ] Nevertheless, entities such as city governments [ 92 ] and universities [ 93 ] have hired full-time professionals with knowledge of statistics to ensure compliance with equal opportunity regulations. For example, Colorado State University requires the director of its Office of Equal Opportunity to maintain extensive statistics on its employees by job category as well as minorities and gender .

[ 94 ] In Britain, Aberystwyth University collects information including the "representation of women, men, members of racial or ethnic minorities and people with disabilities amongst applicants for posts, candidates interviewed, new appointments, current staff, promotions and holders of discretionary awards" to comply with equal opportunity laws.

[ 95 ] It is difficult to prove unequal treatment although statistical analysis can provide indications of problems, it is subject to conflicts over interpretation and methodological issues. For example, a study in 2007 by the University of Washington examined its treatment of women . Researchers collected statistics about female participation in numerous aspects of university life, including percentages of women with full professorships (23 percent), enrollment in programs such as nursing (90 percent), engineering (18 percent).

[ 96 ] There is wide variation in how these statistics might be interpreted. For example, the 23 percent figure for women with full professorships could be compared to the total population of women (presumably 50 percent) perhaps using census data, [ 97 ] or it might be compared to the percentage of women with full professorships at competing universities. It might be used in an analysis of how many women applied for the position of full professor compared to how many women attained this position. Further, the 23 percent figure could be used as a benchmark or baseline figure as part of an ongoing longitudinal analysis to be compared with future surveys to track progress over time.

[ 95 ] [ 98 ] In addition, the strength of the conclusions is subject to statistical issues such as sample size and bias . For reasons such as these, there is considerable difficulty with most forms of statistical interpretation.

A computerized statistical analysis suggested nepotism and practice of unequal opportunity within Italy's academic community. (photo: University of Bari ) [ 99 ] Statistical analysis of equal opportunity has been done using sophisticated examinations of computer databases. An analysis in 2011 by University of Chicago researcher Stefano Allesina examined 61,000 names of Italian professors by looking at the "frequency of last names", doing one million random drawings and he suggested that Italian academia was characterized by violations of equal opportunity practices as a result of these investigations.

[ 99 ] The last names of Italian professors tended to be similar more often than predicted by random chance.

[ 99 ] The study suggested that newspaper accounts showing that "nine relatives from three generations of a single-family (were) on the economics faculty" at the University of Bari were not aberrations, but indicated a pattern of nepotism throughout Italian academia.

[ 99 ] Substative equality is typically measured by the criteria of equality of outcome for groups, [ 100 ] although with difficulty. In one example, an analysis of relative equality of opportunity was done based on outcomes, such as a case to see whether hiring decisions were fair regarding men versus women – the analysis was done using statistics based on average salaries for different groups.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] In another instance, a cross-sectional statistical analysis was conducted to see whether social class affected participation in the United States Armed Forces during the Vietnam War : a report in Time by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology suggested that soldiers came from a variety of social classes and that the principle of equal opportunity had worked, [ 103 ] possibly because soldiers had been chosen by a lottery process for conscription . In college admissions, equality of outcome can be measured directly by comparing offers of admission given to different groups of applicants: for example, there have been reports in newspapers of discrimination against Asian Americans regarding college admissions in the United States which suggest that Asian American applicants need higher grades and test scores to win admission to prestigious universities than other ethnic groups.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] Marketplace considerations [ edit ] Equal opportunity of opportunity has been described as a fundamental basic notion in business and commerce and described by economist Adam Smith as a basic economic precept.

[ 1 ] There has been research suggesting that "competitive markets will tend to drive out such discrimination" since employers or institutions which hire based on arbitrary criteria will be weaker as a result and not perform as well as firms that embrace equality of opportunity.

[ 2 ] Firms competing for overseas contracts have sometimes argued in the press for equal chances during the bidding process, such as when American oil corporations wanted equal shots at developing oil fields in Sumatra ; [ 106 ] and firms, seeing how fairness is beneficial while competing for contracts, can apply the lesson to other areas such as internal hiring and promotion decisions. A report in USA Today suggested that the goal of equal opportunity was "being achieved throughout most of the business and government labor markets because major employers pay based on potential and actual productivity".

[ 101 ] Fair opportunity practices include measures taken by an organization to ensure efficiency effectiveness and fairness in the employment process. A basic definition of equality is the idea of equal treatment and respect. In job advertisements and descriptions, the fact that the employer is an equal opportunity employer is sometimes indicated by the abbreviations EOE or MFDV, which stands for Minority, Female, Disabled, Veteran. Analyst Ross Douthat in The New York Times suggested that equality of opportunity depends on a rising economy which brings new chances for upward mobility and he suggested that greater equality of opportunity is more easily achieved during "times of plenty".

[ 107 ] Efforts to achieve equal opportunity can rise and recede, sometimes as a result of economic conditions or political choices.

[ 108 ] Empirical evidence from public health research also suggests that equality of opportunity is linked to better health outcomes in the United States and Europe.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] History [ edit ] According to professor David Christian of Macquarie University, an underlying Big History trend has been a shift from seeing people as resources to exploiting towards a perspective of seeing people as individuals to empower. According to Christian, in many ancient agrarian civilizations, roughly nine of every ten persons was a peasant exploited by a ruling class. In the past thousand years, there has been a gradual movement in the direction of greater respect for equal opportunity as political structures based on generational hierarchies and feudalism broke down during the late Middle Ages and new structures emerged during the Renaissance .

Monarchies were replaced by democracies : kings were replaced by parliaments and congresses.

Slavery was also abolished generally. The new entity of the nation state emerged with highly specialized parts, including corporations , laws, and new ideas about citizenship as well as values about individual rights found expression in constitutions, laws, and statutes.

African-American civil rights lawyer Thurgood Marshall fought numerous battles in the courts for equal opportunity for all races in the United States; argued the 1954 Brown v. Board of Education case and won, and in 1967 was appointed to the Supreme Court .

In the United States, one legal analyst suggested that the real beginning of the modern sense of equal opportunity was in the Fourteenth Amendment which provided "equal protection under the law".

[ 21 ] The amendment did not mention equal opportunity directly, but it helped undergird a series of later rulings which dealt with legal struggles, particularly by African Americans and later women, seeking greater political and economic power in the growing republic. In 1933, a congressional "Unemployment Relief Act" forbade discrimination "based on race, color, or creed".

[ 21 ] The Supreme Court 's 1954 Brown v. Board of Education decision furthered government initiatives to end discrimination.

[ 21 ] In 1961, President John F. Kennedy signed Executive Order 10925 which enabled a presidential committee on an equal opportunity, [ 21 ] which was soon followed by President Lyndon B. Johnson 's Executive Order 11246 .

[ 111 ] The Civil Rights Act of 1964 became the legal underpinning of equal opportunity in employment.

[ 21 ] Businesses and other organizations learned to comply with the rulings by specifying fair hiring and promoting practices and posting these policy notices on bulletin boards, employee handbooks, and manuals as well ain s training sessions and films.

[ 21 ] Courts dealt with issues about equal opportunities, such as the 1989 Wards Cove decision, the Supreme Court ruled that statistical evidence by itself was insufficient to prove racial discrimination. The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission was established, sometimes reviewing charges of discrimination cases which numbered in the tens of thousands annually during the 1990s.

[ 21 ] Some law practices specialized in employment law . The conflict between formal and substantive approaches manifested itself in backlashes, sometimes described as reverse discrimination , such as the Bakke case when a white male applicant to medical school sued based on being denied admission because of a quota system preferring minority applicants.

[ 4 ] [ 112 ] In 1990, the Americans with Disabilities Act prohibited discrimination against disabled persons, including cases of equal opportunity. In 2008, the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act prevents employers from using genetic information when hiring , firing , or promoting employees.

[ 113 ] Equal opportunity issues are discussed at an army roundtable in Alabama .

Many countries have specific bodies tasked with looking at equality of opportunity issues. In the United States, for example, it is the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ; [ 16 ] [ 114 ] in Britain , there is the Equality of Opportunity Committee [ 24 ] as well as the Equality and Human Rights Commission; [ 44 ] in Canada , the Royal Commission on the Status of Women has "equal opportunity as its precept"; [ 115 ] and in China , the Equal Opportunities Commission handles matters regarding ethnic prejudice.

[ 116 ] In addition, there have been political movements pushing for equal treatment, such as the Women's Equal Opportunity League which in the early decades of the twentieth century, pushed for fair treatment by employers in the United States.

[ 117 ] One of the group's members explained: I am not asking for sympathy but for an equal right with men to earn my own living in the best way open and under the most favorable conditions that I could choose for myself.

[ 117 ] Global initiatives such as the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 5 and Goal 10 are also aimed at ensuring equal opportunities for women at all levels of decision making, and reducing inequalities of outcome.

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] Criticism [ edit ] There is agreement that the concept of equal opportunity lacks a precise definition.

[ 2 ] [ 120 ] While it generally describes "open and fair competition" with equal chances for achieving sought-after jobs or positions [ 4 ] as well as an absence of discrimination , [ 4 ] [ 13 ] [ 121 ] the concept is elusive with a "wide range of meanings".

[ 62 ] Formal equality is hard to measure, and implementation of substantive equality poses problems [ 2 ] as well as disagreements about what to do.

[ 19 ] There have been various criticisms directed at both the substantive and formal approaches. One account suggests that left-leaning thinkers who advocate equality of outcome fault even formal equality of opportunity because it "legitimates inequalities of wealth and income".

[ 19 ] John W. Gardner suggested several views: (1) that inequalities will always exist regardless of trying to erase them; (2) that bringing everyone "fairly to the starting line" fails to deal with the "destructive competitiveness that follows"; (3) that any equalities achieved will entail future inequalities.

[ 122 ] Substantive equality of opportunity has led to concerns that efforts to improve fairness "ultimately collapses into the different one of equality of outcome or condition".

[ 19 ] Economist Larry Summers advocated an approach of focusing on equality of opportunity and not equality of outcomes and that the way to strengthen equal opportunity was to bolster public education .

[ 123 ] A contrasting report in The Economist criticized efforts to contrast equality of opportunity and equality of outcome as being opposite poles on a hypothetical ethical scale, such that equality of opportunity should be the "highest ideal" while equality of outcome was "evil".

[ 124 ] Rather, the report argued that any difference between the two types of equality was illusory and that both terms were highly interconnected.

[ 124 ] According to this argument, wealthier people have greater opportunities – wealth itself can be considered as "distilled opportunity" – and children of wealthier parents have access to better schools, health care, nutrition and so forth.

[ 124 ] Accordingly, people who endorse equality of opportunity may like the idea of it in principle, yet at the same time, they would be unwilling to take the extreme steps or "titanic interventions" necessary to achieve real intergenerational equality.

[ 124 ] A slightly different view in The Guardian suggested that equality of opportunity was merely a "buzzword" to sidestep the thornier political question of income inequality.

[ 125 ] There is speculation that since equality of opportunity is only one of sometimes competing "justice norms", there is a risk that following equality of opportunity too strictly might cause problems in other areas.

[ 2 ] [ 126 ] A hypothetical example was suggested: suppose wealthier people gave excessive amounts of campaign contributions; suppose further that these contributions resulted in better regulations, and then laws limiting such contributions based on equal opportunity for all political participants may have the unintended long term consequence of making political decision-making lackluster and possibly hurting the groups that it was trying to protect.

[ 2 ] Philosopher John Kekes makes a similar point in his book The Art of Politics in which he suggests that there is a danger to elevating any one particular political good – including equality of opportunity – without balancing competing goods such as justice, property rights and others.

[ 127 ] Kekes advocated having a balanced perspective, including a continuing dialog between cautionary elements and reform elements.

[ 127 ] A similar view was expressed by Ronald Dworkin in The Economist : It strikes us as wrong – or not right – that some people starve while others have private jets. We are uncomfortable when university professors earn less, for example than junior lawyers. But equality appears to pull against other important ideals such as liberty and efficiency.

[ 70 ] Economist Paul Krugman sees equality of opportunity as a "non-Utopian compromise" which works and is a "pretty decent arrangement" which varies from country to country.

[ 66 ] However, there are differing views such as by Matt Cavanagh , who criticised equality of opportunity in his 2002 book Against Equality of Opportunity .

[ 62 ] Cavanagh favored a limited approach of opposing specific kinds of discrimination as steps to help people get greater control over their lives.

[ 128 ] Conservative thinker Dinesh D'Souza criticized equality of opportunity on the basis that "it is an ideal that cannot and should not be realized through the actions of the government" and added that "for the state to enforce equal opportunity would be to contravene the true meaning of the Declaration and to subvert the principle of a free society".

[ 129 ] D'Souza described how his parenting undermined equality of opportunity: I have a five-year-old daughter. Since she was born ... my wife and I have gone to great lengths in the Great Yuppie Parenting Race. ... My wife goes over her workbooks. I am teaching her chess. Why are we doing these things? We are, of course, trying to develop her abilities so that she can get the most out of life. The practical effect of our actions, however, is that we are working to give our daughter an edge – that is, a better chance to succeed than everybody else's children. Even though we might be embarrassed to think of it this way, we are doing our utmost to undermine equal opportunity. So are all the other parents who are trying to get their children into the best schools [ 129 ] Equal opportunity theorists generally agree that once the race begins, who wins is a function of talent, hard work, and competitive drive. (photo: runner Billy Mills crossing the finish line in the 1964 Olympics ) D'Souza argued that it was wrong for the government to try to bring his daughter down, or to force him to raise other people's children, [ 129 ] but a counterargument is that there is a benefit to everybody, including D'Souza's daughter, to have a society with less anxiety about downward mobility, less class resentment, and less possible violence.

[ 129 ] An argument similar to D'Souza's was raised in Anarchy, State, and Utopia by Robert Nozick , who wrote that the only way to achieve equality of opportunity was "directly worsening the situations of those more favored with opportunity, or by improving the situation of those less well-favored".

[ 130 ] Nozick gave an argument of two suitors competing to marry one "fair lady": X was plain while Y was better looking and more intelligent. If Y did not exist, then "fair lady" would have married X, but Y exists and so she marries Y. Nozick asks: "Does suitor X have a legitimate complaint against Y based on unfairness since Y did not earn his good looks or intelligence?".

[ 131 ] Nozick suggests that there are no grounds for complaint. Nozick argued against equality of opportunity because it violates the rights of property since the equal opportunity maxim interferes with an owner's right to do what he or she pleases with a property.

[ 2 ] Property rights were a major component of the philosophy of John Locke and are sometimes referred to as "Lockean rights".

[ 2 ] The sense of the argument is along these lines: equal opportunity rules regarding, say, a hiring decision within a factory, made to bring about greater fairness, violate a factory owner's rights to run the factory as he or she sees best; it has been argued that a factory owner's right to property encompasses all decision-making within the factory as being part of those property rights. That some people's "natural assets" were unearned is irrelevant to the equation according to Nozick and he argued that people are nevertheless entitled to enjoy these assets and other things freely given by others.

[ 23 ] Friedrich Hayek felt that luck was too much of a variable in economics, such that one can not devise a system with any kind of fairness when many market outcomes are unintended.

[ 23 ] By sheer chance or random circumstances, a person may become wealthy just by being in the right place and time and Hayek argued that it is impossible to devise a system to make opportunities equal without knowing how such interactions may play out.

[ 23 ] Hayek saw not only equality of opportunity, but all of social justice as a "mirage".

[ 23 ] Some conceptions of equality of opportunity, particularly the substantive and level playing field variants, have been criticized on the basis that they make assumptions to the effect that people have similar genetic makeups.

[ 2 ] Other critics have suggested that social justice is more complex than mere equality of opportunity.

[ 2 ] Nozick made the point that what happens in society can not always be reduced to competition for a coveted position and in 1974 wrote that "life is not a race in which we all compete for a prize which someone has established", that there is "no unified race" and there is not someone person "judging swiftness".

[ 131 ] See also [ edit ] Affirmative action in the United States Asset-based egalitarianism Bona fide occupational qualifications Civil liberties Egalitarianism Equal employment opportunity Ethnic penalty Free education Inclusion (education) Law of equal liberty Polarization (economics) Procedural rights Simultaneous recruiting of new graduates Title IX Universal access Universal access to education Women and children first Substantive equality References [ edit ] ^ a b c Paul de Vries (September 12, 2011), "equal opportunity" , Blackwell Reference , retrieved September 12, 2011 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai Richard Arneson (August 29, 2008).

"Equality of Opportunity" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

(Fall 2008 Edition) ^ a b Yo Jackson, ed. (2006), Encyclopedia of multicultural psychology , Sage Publications, ISBN 1-4129-0948-1 , retrieved September 12, 2011 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u Nicole Richardt; Torrey Shanks (2008), Equal Opportunity , International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences , retrieved September 12, 2011 , via Encyclopedia.com ^ Kamarck, Kristy N.

"Diversity, Inclusion, and Equal Opportunity in the Armed Services: Background and Issues for Congress" (PDF) .

eCommons . Cornell University Library. p. 42 . Retrieved November 7, 2021 .

^ John W. Gardner (1984), Excellence: Can we be equal and excellent too?

, Norton, p. 47, ISBN 0-393-31287-9 , retrieved September 8, 2011 ^ "Gender Equality" .

www.un.org . December 16, 2015 . Retrieved October 4, 2020 .

^ Valentino Dardanoni, University of Palermo, Gary S. Fields, Cornell University, John E. Roemer, Yale University, Maria Laura Sánchez Puerta, The World Bank (2006), "How Demanding Should Equality of Opportunity Be, and How Much Have We Achieved?" , Cornell University – Digital Commons ILR , retrieved July 24, 2012 , Agreement is widespread that equality of opportunity holds in a society if the chances that individuals have to succeed depend only on their efforts and not on extraneous circumstances.

{{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Marjorie Conley (September 9, 2003).

"Sciences Po – an elite institution's introspection on its power, position and worth in French society" . portfolio . Retrieved September 12, 2011 .

created new entrance criteria for students coming from less economically favored social strata.

^ Crossman, Ashley.

"Understanding Meritocracy From a Sociological Perspective" .

ThoughtCo . Retrieved October 4, 2020 .

^ a b c d e De Vos, M. (2020). "The European Court of Justice and the march towards substantive equality in European Union anti-discrimination law." International Journal of Discrimination and the Law , 20(1), 62–87.

^ Ricardo Paes de Barros. Francisco H. G. Ferreira, Jose R. Molinas Vega, and Jaime Saavedra Chanduvi (2009), Measuring inequality of opportunity in Latin America and the Caribbean , Palgrave Macmillan and the World Bank, ISBN 978-0-8213-7745-1 , retrieved September 8, 2011 , page xvii {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Carol Kitman (September 12, 2011), equal opportunity , Merriam-Webster Dictionary , retrieved September 12, 2011 ^ Swire, Peter P. "Equality of opportunity and investment in creditworthiness. (Symposium – Shaping American Communities: Segregation, Housing & the Urban Poor)".

University of Pennsylvania Law Review . University of Pennsylvania, Law School. 1995.

Highbeam Research article September 12, 2012.

^ Young, Michael (1963) [1958].

The Rise of the Meritocracy . Great Britain: Penguin Books. p. 129.

ISBN 1-56000-704-4 . Retrieved January 12, 2011 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b c Steven Greenhouse (December 21, 2010).

"E.E.O.C. Sues Kaplan Over Hiring" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission sued the Kaplan Higher Education Corporation ^ Hill, Gerald N.; Hill, Kathleen (1997).

Real life dictionary of the law: taking the mystery out of legal language . Los Angeles: General Pub. Group.

ISBN 9781575440545 .

^ equal opportunity , Merriam-Webster , retrieved September 8, 2011 ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Mark Bevir, ed. (2010), Encyclopedia of Political Theory , Sage Publications, ISBN 9781412958653 , retrieved September 12, 2011 , (see pp. 452–453) ^ The Montreal Gazette (January 20, 1906).

"Equal Opportunity" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

The coming President of France is the grandson of a shoemaker.

^ a b c d e f g h i Boyd Childress (September 12, 2011), Equal Opportunity , Encyclopedia of Business , retrieved September 12, 2011 ^ Jenkins, John Michael; Pigram, J. J. J., eds. (2005), Encyclopedia of leisure and outdoor recreation , Routledge, p. 141, ISBN 0-203-67317-4 , retrieved September 12, 2011 ^ a b c d e f g h i Gordon Marshall (1998), Social justice , Encyclopedia.com , retrieved September 12, 2011 , John Rawls's famous 'difference principle' ... (see his A Theory of Justice, 1972) ^ a b staff writers (September 21, 2010).

"Equality of opportunity committee" . BBC . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ staff writers (November 30, 2009).

"The Royal College of Nursing has called for an increase in the number of specialist nurses working with HIV patients" .

BBC News . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Takao Ikeuchi; Kaori Saito (April 17, 2010).

"Space mom wants equal opportunity for all" .

The Japan Times . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Robert Garcia (August 18, 1989).

"Bilingual Education Means Equal Opportunity (letter to the editor)" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ a b "Brazil fashion week goes equal opportunity" .

The Daily Telegraph . June 20, 2009 . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Howard Klieman (September 12, 2011).

"Equal Time Rule: U.S. Broadcasting Regulatory Rule" . Museum of Broadcast Communications. Archived from the original on May 16, 2013 . Retrieved September 12, 2011 .

^ "Army Promotion Process Is Held Unconstitutional by U.S. Judge" .

The New York Times . March 5, 2002 . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ "Illiterate Americans (opinion)" .

The New York Times . September 14, 1993 . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Celia W. Dugger (February 29, 1992).

"U.S. Study Says Asian-Americans Face Widespread Discrimination" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Laura, Laubeová (2000), Encyclopedia of The World's Minorities , Fitzroy Dearborn Publishers, archived from the original on January 13, 2012 , retrieved September 12, 2011 , This complex and contested concept ...

^ Barbara Bagihole, Equal Opportunities and Social Policy: Issues of gender, race and disability, (pp. 37–39, 183–84)London: Longman, 1997 ^ Mark Bevir, ed. (2010), Encyclopedia of Political Theory , Sage Publications, ISBN 9781412958653 , retrieved September 12, 2011 ^ Hubbard, Dianne. "Ideas about equality: Gender, sexuality and the law." Unravelling Taboos (2007): 86.

^ a b c Ricardo Paes de Barros. Francisco H. G. Ferreira, Jose R. Molinas Vega, and Jaime Saavedra Chanduvi (2009), Measuring inequality of opportunity in Latin America and the Caribbean , Palgrave Macmillan and the World Bank, ISBN 978-0-8213-7745-1 , retrieved September 8, 2011 , (p. 32 Box 1.1) {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ a b Corak, Miles (August 1, 2013).

"Income Inequality, Equality of Opportunity, and Intergenerational Mobility" (PDF) .

Journal of Economic Perspectives .

27 (3): 79– 102.

doi : 10.1257/jep.27.3.79 .

S2CID 11052119 . Retrieved November 11, 2022 .

^ Minow, Martha. "Learning to live with the dilemma of difference: Bilingual and special education." Law and Contemporary Problems 48.2 (1985): 157–211.

^ Arneson, Richard (2015), "Equality of Opportunity" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2015 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved October 4, 2020 ^ a b c d e John E. Roemer (1998), Equality of Opportunity (book title) , Harvard College, ISBN 0-674-25991-2 , retrieved September 8, 2011 , (see pp. 1, 2) ^ Cashmore, Ellis, Dictionary of Race and Ethnic Relations , London: Routledge, 1996 [ page needed ] ^ Miller, Claire Cain (February 25, 2016).

"Is Blind Hiring the Best Hiring?" .

The New York Times .

^ a b Research Machines (2009).

"equal-opportunity policy" . Farlex . Retrieved September 12, 2011 .

^ Leonard K. Hirshberg (December 30, 1917).

"What 'Equal Opportunity to All' Really Means" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ a b c Milton Friedman; Rose D. Friedman (1980), Free to choose: a personal statement , Harcourt, ISBN 0547539754 , retrieved September 8, 2011 ^ Akemi Nakamura (March 31, 1999).

"New equal opportunity law called a start" .

The Japan Times . Archived from the original on October 15, 2012 . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Martin Fackler (August 6, 2007).

"Career Women In Japan Find A Blocked Path, Despite Equal Opportunity Law" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Christiano, Thomas (1996).

The Rule of the Many: Fundamental Issues in Democratic Theory . Boulder: Westview Press.

ISBN 0813314542 .

[ page needed ] ^ Deborah Orr (November 5, 2009).

"The problem with equal opportunity for all: Some people are better placed to take advantage of equal opportunity in our schools" .

The Guardian . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

Therein lies the problem with the idea of equal opportunity for all. Some people are simply better placed to take advantage of opportunity ^ Inequality of Opportunity, Income Inequality and Economic Mobility: Some International Comparisons , Paolo Brunori, University of Bari, Francisco H. G. Ferreira, World Bank and IZA, Vito Peragine, University of Bari, Discussion Paper No. 7155, January 2013.

^ Daron Acemoglu (January 23, 2011).

"How does inequality matter? (letter to the editor)" .

The Economist . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

equality of opportunity may be harder to achieve in an unequal society ^ "Socialism And Social Democracy" . Encyclopedia69.com. 2011 . Retrieved September 12, 2011 .

^ Cusack, Simone, Ball, Rachel (2009) "Eliminating Discrimination and Ensuring Substantive Equality". Public Interest Law Clearing House and Human Rights Law Resource Centre Ltd.

^ a b John Hills (January 27, 2010).

"Equality of opportunity remains a distant ideal" .

The Guardian . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Ha-Joon Chang (August 30, 2010).

"We lost sight of fairness in the false promise of wealth: Acceptance of inequality rests on assumptions that 'free markets' make us all richer in the end. Growth figures tell it differently" .

The Guardian . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Paul Krugman (January 10, 2011).

"Economics and Morality" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

Access to good schools, good health care, and job opportunities depends on lot on choosing the right parents.

^ "For Equality of Opportunity" .

The Times of India . September 8, 2011. Archived from the original on October 25, 2012 . Retrieved July 24, 2012 .

^ Parekh, Bhikhu, "Rethinking Multiculturalism".

Cultural Diversity and Political Theory , pp. 210–211, 240, London: Macmillan Press, 2000 ^ Carol Kleiman (January 19, 1986).

"Equal Opportunity: It's Good Business" .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Kanta Murali (February 1–14, 2003).

"The IIT Story: Issues and Concerns" . Frontline. Archived from the original on March 26, 2006 . Retrieved September 12, 2011 .

Volume 20 – Issue 03 ^ a b c Matt Cavanagh (2002).

"Against equality of opportunity" . Oxford.

ISBN 9780191584046 . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ John Rawls (1971).

"A Theory of Justice" . Harvard College.

ISBN 9780674042605 . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Rawls, John, 1999, A Theory of Justice, revised edition, Cambridge: Harvard University Press ^ Rawls, John, 2001, Justice as Fairness: A Restatement, ed. by Erin Kelly, Cambridge, Harvard University Press.

^ a b c Paul Krugman (January 11, 2011).

"More Thoughts on Equality of Opportunity" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Roemer, John, 1995, "Equality and Responsibility", Boston Review , April–May issue, pp. 3–7.

^ Roemer, John, 1998, Equality of Opportunity, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

^ Dworkin, Ronald, 2000, Sovereign Virtue , Cambridge: Harvard University Press, chapters 1–3.

^ a b c staff writer (September 21, 2000).

"Forgotten value" .

The Economist . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

(reviews of books by Dworkin and Cohen) ^ Richard Arneson (October 8, 2002).

"4. The Level Playing Field Conception" . Stanford University . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Anderson, Elizabeth , 1999, "What Is the Point of Equality?", Ethics 109, pp. 287–337.

^ Pogge, Thomas W., 2000, "Justice for People with Disabilities: the Semiconsequentialist Approach", in Leslie Pickering Francis and Anita Silvers. eds., Americans with Disabilities: Exploring Implications of the Law for Individuals and Institutions , New York and London: Routledge, pp. 34–53.

^ Buchanan, Allen, Brock, Dan W., Daniels, Norman, and Wikler, Daniel, 2000, From Chance to Choice – Genetics and Justice , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, chapters 3, 4 and 7.

^ "Exaggerated hopes for Mideast prosperity?" . Al Jazeera. March 24, 2011 . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

Tunisia: Advances without equal opportunity ... Egypt: Stagnation without equal opportunity ^ Brock, Dan W., 2000, "Health Care Resource Prioritization and Discrimination against Persons with Disabilities", in Leslie Pickering Francis and Anita Silvers, eds., Americans with Disabilities: Exploring Implications of the Law for Individuals and Institutions , New York and London: Routledge, pp. 223–235.

^ "Are equal opportunity policies right for every profession?" .

BBC News . January 7, 2002 . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Daniels, Norman, 1985, Just Health Care, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press ^ McKerlie, Dennis, 1989, "Equality and Time", Ethics 99, pp. 475–491 ^ McKerlie, Dennis, 1999, "Justice Between the Young and the Old", Philosophy & Public Affairs 30, pp. 152–17 ^ Temkin, Larry S., 1993, Inequality, New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, chapter 8 ^ a b Molotch, Harvey (1988).

"The Rest Room and Equal Opportunity" .

Sociological Forum .

3 (1): 128– 132.

doi : 10.1007/BF01115127 .

JSTOR 684625 .

^ Amelia Gentleman (November 17, 2010).

"Theresa May Scraps Legal Requirement to Reduce Inequality" .

The Guardian . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Edward I. Koch (February 20, 1989).

"Equal Opportunity – Without Minority Set-Asides" . Opinion.

The New York Times . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Stamatopoulou, Elsa (2007).

Cultural Rights in International Law: Article 27 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and Beyond . Leiden: B)till. pp.

77– 79.

ISBN 978-90-04-15752-1 .

^ Garner, Ben (2011). "Globalisation, Cultural Diversity and the Search for a New Global Ethics". In Garner, Ben; Pavlenko, Sonia; Shaheen, Salma; Wolanski, Alison (eds.).

Cultural and Ethical Turns: Interdisciplinary Reflections on Culture, Politics and Ethics (PDF) . Oxford: Inter-Disciplinary Press. pp.

26– 27.

OCLC 1289758860 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 19, 2023 . Retrieved May 22, 2023 .

^ Tung, Lai Lai; Quaddus, M.A. (2002).

"Cultural differences explaining the differences in results in GSS: Implications for the next decade" .

Decision Support Systems .

33 (2): 177– 199.

doi : 10.1016/S0167-9236(01)00143-9 .

^ Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2012).

The Price of Inequality: How Today's Divided Society Endangers Our Future (pp. 18–19). Norton. Kindle Edition.

^ "Measure of America - Human Development" .

^ Stiglitz, Joseph E. (2012).

The Price of Inequality: How Today's Divided Society Endangers Our Future (p. 25). Norton. Kindle Edition.

^ Lippens, Louis, Siel Vermeiren, and Stijn Baert. "The state of hiring discrimination: A meta-analysis of (almost) all recent correspondence experiments." European Economic Review 151 (2023): 104315.

^ Job Description: Equal Opportunity Programs Assistant , City of Phoenix, September 16, 2011, archived from the original on April 2, 2012 , retrieved September 16, 2011 , (job description:) Performs statistical research and analysis (required knowledge ...) ^ 1690 Equal Opportunity Specialist , Missouri State University, 2011 , retrieved September 16, 2011 , Skills: ... Strong quantitative and statistical analysis skills are required.

^ Affirmative Action Program – IV. Utilization Analyses/Workforce Analyses , Colorado State University, 2010, archived from the original on January 25, 2012 , retrieved September 16, 2011 , Note: Colorado State university keeps separate counts for each type of position for these categories ^ a b "General: Guidelines to Policy Implementation" . Aberystwyth university. December 21, 2004 . Retrieved September 16, 2011 .

Aberystwyth University will assemble statistical information concerning the composition of its staff and student body [ permanent dead link ] ^ Ben Schock (December 4, 2007).

"Study Finds Women Underrepresented In Some Fields" .

The Daily of the University of Washington . Archived from the original on March 28, 2012 . Retrieved September 16, 2011 .

The study notes that women are genuinely equitably represented as compared to men ^ (UW) President's Advisory Committee on Women (2007).

"Term Definitions" . University of Washington. Archived from the original on October 15, 2011 . Retrieved September 16, 2011 .

Utilization analysis – These data are calculated based on the comparative hiring pool.

^ Marcia Killien (2007), PACW's 2007 Report on Women at UW – Executive Summary , University of Washington, archived from the original on October 15, 2011 , retrieved September 16, 2011 ^ a b c d staff writer; Stefano Allesina (researcher) (August 3, 2011), Italian academia is a family business, statistical analysis reveals , The University of Chicago Medical Center , retrieved September 16, 2011 , University of Chicago researcher Stefano Allesina found the pattern to be incompatible with unbiased, equal opportunity hiring.

{{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Anne Phillips (2004).

"Defending Equality of Outcome" . Journal of Political Philosophy. pp.

1– 19 . Retrieved July 15, 2011 .

^ a b Don Raiff (May 18, 2011).

"Roundup: Average pay comparisons misleading" .

USA Today . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Susie O'Brien (March 8, 2011).

"Equal opportunity still a way off because 'men don't get it' " .

The Daily Telegraph . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

WOMEN earn 16 percent less than men on average for the same work.

^ "Equal Opportunity War" .

Time . November 9, 1992. Archived from the original on August 12, 2010 . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

A new study ... shows that the 58,000 Americans who died in the war represented a good cross-section of the nation.

^ "Some Asians' college strategy: Don't check 'Asian' " .

USA Today . Associated Press. December 4, 2011 . Retrieved December 12, 2011 .

^ Kara Miller (February 8, 2010).

"Do colleges redline Asian-Americans?" .

Boston Globe . Retrieved January 2, 2011 .

^ "Hughes Demands Equal Opportunity In Dutch Oil Field" .

The New York Times . April 30, 1921 . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

a vigorous note has been delivered to the Dutch Government ^ Ross Douthat (April 10, 2011).

"Budgeting for Opportunity" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

In times of plenty, they can budget for upward mobility and equality of opportunity.

^ Claudia H. Deutsch (January 4, 1987).

"The Ax Falls On Equal Opportunity" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Venkataramani, Atheendar S.; Chatterjee, Paula; Kawachi, Ichiro; Tsai, Alexander C. (March 2016).

"Economic Opportunity, Health Behaviors, and Mortality in the United States" .

American Journal of Public Health .

106 (3): 478– 484.

doi : 10.2105/AJPH.2015.302941 .

PMC 4758869 .

PMID 26691108 .

^ Gugushvili, Alexi; Kaiser, Caspar (November 5, 2019).

"Equality of opportunity is linked to lower mortality in Europe" .

Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health .

74 (2): jech-2019-212540.

doi : 10.1136/jech-2019-212540 .

PMC 6993020 .

PMID 31690589 .

^ The Executive Order 11246 , United States Department of Labor, September 12, 2011, archived from the original on September 4, 2011 , retrieved September 12, 2011 , The Executive Order 11246 (E.O 11246) ... requires covered contractors to take affirmative action to ensure that equal opportunity is provided in all aspects of their employment.

^ Dreyfuss, Joel (1979).

The Bakke Case: the Politics of Inequality . New York and London: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

^ Statement of Administration policy , Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, April 27, 2007 ^ Robin Finn (October 5, 2007).

"An Equal Opportunity Enemy of Bias" .

The New York Times . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

Equal Employment Opportunity Commission ... a workplace free of discrimination that becomes a reality for everybody regardless of race, gender or disability is my mission.

^ Peter Bregg (February 3, 1967).

"Equality First: The Royal Commission on the Status of Women" . CBC Digital Archives . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Timothy Chui (June 18, 2010).

"EOC: Discrimination cases warrant special tribunal" .

China Daily . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

The Equal Opportunities Commission (EOC) ... there is a need for a simplified process for adjudication of equal opportunity cases.

^ a b "Women's Work Limited By-Law; Equal Opportunity League Fighting Legislation Which Restricts Their Hours of Labor A Case In Point" .

The New York Times . January 18, 1920 . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ "Sustainable Development Goal 5: Gender equality" .

UN Women . Retrieved September 23, 2020 .

^ "Goal 10 targets" .

UNDP . Archived from the original on November 27, 2020 . Retrieved September 23, 2020 .

^ Rabe, Johan. 2001. Equality, Affirmative Action, and Justice. Books on Demand. p. 83 ^ The American Heritage dictionary (5th, Dell mass market ed.). New York: Dell. 2012.

ISBN 9780553583229 .

^ John William Gardner (1984).

"Excellence: Can we be equal and excellent too?" . Norton.

ISBN 0-393-31287-9 . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

^ Lawrence Summers (July 15, 2012).

"Focus on equality of opportunity, not outcomes" .

Reuters . Archived from the original on July 20, 2012 . Retrieved July 24, 2012 .

Perhaps the focus of debate and policy needs to shift from a focus on inequality in outcomes, where attitudes divide sharply and there are limits to what can be done, to a focus on inequalities in opportunity.

^ a b c d "Inequality and mobility: Against equality of opportunity" .

The Economist . April 20, 2012 . Retrieved July 24, 2012 .

The distinction between equality of outcome and equality of opportunity is mostly illusory.

^ Daniel Knowles (May 21, 2012).

" 'Equality of opportunity is a buzzword designed to get around talking about inequality of income" .

The Guardian . Archived from the original on May 23, 2012 . Retrieved July 24, 2012 .

But it does seem likely that there is a direct link between how much money your parents have and how well you do.

^ Estlund, David, 2000, "Political Quality", Social Philosophy and Policy 17, pp. 127–160.

^ a b Collin May (book reviewer) John Kekes (author of the book) (June 22, 2009).

"Review: 'The Art of Politics: The New Betrayal of America and How to Resist It' " .

c2c Journal . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

Kekes contrasts what he calls the 'balanced view' with the ideological.

{{ cite news }} : |author= has generic name ( help ) ^ Against Equality of Opportunity | Matt Cavanagh | Review by The Spectator Archived May 4, 2011, at the Wayback Machine ^ a b c d Timothy Noah (October 10, 2000).

"Dinesh D'Souza vs. 'Equality of Opportunity' " .

Slate . Retrieved September 8, 2011 .

(review of D'Souza's book The Virtue of Prosperity ) ^ Robert Nozick (1974), Anarchy, State, and Utopia , Basic Books, ISBN 0-465-00270-6 , retrieved September 8, 2011 , (p. 235) ^ a b Robert Nozick (1974), Anarchy, State, and Utopia , Basic Books, ISBN 0-465-00270-6 , retrieved September 8, 2011 , (see page 235) External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Equal opportunity .

United Kingdom UK Government Women & Equality Unit United States U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) (US) – the branch of the U.S. government that enforces equal opportunity laws in workplaces Department of the Interior Office for Equal Opportunity (US) Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy entry on Equality of Opportunity Further reading [ edit ] Dias Pereira, Rita (2022). " Genetic Advantage and Equality of Opportunity in Education: Two Definitions and an Empirical Illustration ." Tinbergen Institute Discussion Paper , No. TI 2021-108/V, Tinbergen Institute, Amsterdam and Rotterdam.

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.4116304 v t e Employment Classifications Academic tenure Casual Contingent work Full-time job Gig worker Job sharing Part-time job Self-employment Side job Skilled worker Journeyman Technician Tradesperson Independent contractor Labour hire Temporary work Laborer Wage labour Hiring Application Background check Business networking Cover letter Curriculum vitae Drug testing Employment contract Employment counsellor Executive search list Induction programme Job fair Job fraud Job hunting Job interview Letter of recommendation Onboarding Overqualification Person–environment fit Personality–job fit theory Personality hire Probation Realistic job preview Recruitment Résumé Simultaneous recruiting of new graduates Underemployment Work-at-home scheme Roles Cooperative Employee Employer Internship Job Labour hire Permanent employment Supervisor Volunteering Working class Blue-collar Green-collar Grey-collar Pink-collar Precariat White-collar Red-collar New-collar No-collar Orange-collar Scarlet-collar Black-collar Gold-collar Career and training Apprenticeship Artisan Master craftsman Avocation Career assessment Career counseling Career development Coaching Creative class Education Continuing education E-learning Employability Further education Graduate school Induction training Knowledge worker Licensure Lifelong learning Overspecialization Practice-based professional learning Professional association Professional certification Professional development Professional school Reflective practice Retraining Vocational education Vocational school Vocational university Mentorship Occupational Outlook Handbook Practice firm Profession Operator Professional Tradesman Vocation Attendance Break Break room Career break Furlough Gap year Leave of absence Long service leave No call, no show Sabbatical Sick leave Stress leave Time clock Schedules 35-hour workweek Four-day week Eight-hour day 996 working hour system Flextime On-call Overtime Remote work Six-hour day Shift work Working time Workweek and weekend Wages and salaries Frisch elasticity of labor supply Global labor arbitrage Labour economics Labor share Labour supply Living wage Maximum wage National average salary World Europe Minimum wage Canada Hong Kong Europe United States Price elasticity of demand Progressive wage Singapore Overtime rate Paid time off Performance-related pay Remuneration Salary cap Benefits Annual leave Casual Friday Child care Disability insurance Health insurance Life insurance Marriage leave Parental leave Pension By country Sick leave United States Take-home vehicle Taxes Payroll tax Tax bracket Income tax Negative Disposable income Salary packaging Unreported employment Safety and health Crunch Epilepsy and employment Human factors and ergonomics Karoshi List of countries by rate of fatal workplace accidents Occupational burnout Occupational disease Occupational exposure limit Occupational health psychology Occupational injury Occupational noise Occupational stress Personal protective equipment Repetitive strain injury Right to sit United States Sick building syndrome Work accident Occupational fatality Workers' compensation Workers' right to access the toilet Workplace health promotion Workplace phobia Workplace wellness Equal opportunity Affirmative action Discrimination Equal pay for equal work Gender pay gap Glass ceiling Infractions Corporate collapses and scandals Accounting scandals Control fraud Corporate behaviour Corporate crime Exploitation of labour Dress code Employee handbook Employee monitoring Evaluation Labour law Sexual harassment Sleeping while on duty Wage theft Whistleblower Workplace bullying Workplace harassment Workplace incivility Willingness Boreout Careerism Civil conscription Conscription Critique of work Dead-end job Job satisfaction McJob Organizational commitment Refusal of work Slavery Bonded labour Human trafficking Labour camp Penal labour Peonage Truck wages Unfree labour Wage slavery Work ethic Work–life interface Downshifting Slow living Workaholic Termination At-will employment Dismissal Banishment room Constructive dismissal Wrongful dismissal Employee offboarding Exit interview Layoff Notice period Pink slip Resignation Letter of resignation Restructuring Retirement Mandatory retirement Microretirement Retirement planning Retirement spend-down Severance package Golden handshake Golden parachute Turnover Unemployment Barriers to entry Discouraged worker Economic depression Great Depression Long Depression Frictional unemployment Full employment Graduate unemployment Involuntary unemployment Jobless recovery Phillips curve Recession Great Recession Job losses caused by the Great Recession Lists of recessions Recession-proof job Reserve army of labour Structural unemployment Technological unemployment Types of unemployment Unemployment benefits Unemployment Convention, 1919 Unemployment extension List of countries by unemployment rate Employment-to-population ratio List Wage curve Youth unemployment Public programs Workfare Unemployment insurance Make-work job Job creation program Job creation index Job guarantee Employer of last resort Guaranteed minimum income Right to work Historical: U.S.A.: Civil Works Administration Works Progress Administration Comprehensive Employment and Training Act See also Bullshit job Busy work Credentialism and educational inflation Emotional labor Evil corporation Going postal Kiss up kick down Labor rights Make-work job Narcissism in the workplace Post-work society Presenteeism Psychopathy in the workplace Sunday scaries Slow movement (culture) Toxic leader Toxic workplace Wage compression Working poor Workhouse See also templates Aspects of corporations Aspects of jobs Aspects of occupations Aspects of organizations Aspects of workplaces Corporate titles Critique of work Organized labor Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐26kt6
Cached time: 20250816114008
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.454 seconds
Real time usage: 1.667 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9763/1000000
Revision size: 102312/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 320305/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14264/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 437909/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.842/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8134675/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1329.340      1 -total
 57.86%  769.126      1 Template:Reflist
 21.99%  292.301     54 Template:Cite_news
 16.89%  224.503     26 Template:Citation
 10.86%  144.316      1 Template:Liberalism_sidebar
 10.64%  141.383      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  5.68%   75.501      1 Template:Short_description
  4.93%   65.530      6 Template:Fix
  3.21%   42.628      2 Template:Pagetype
  3.05%   40.574      1 Template:Excerpt Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:355849:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816114008 and revision id 1303793619. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Equal_opportunity&oldid=1303793619 " Categories : Discrimination Disability rights Anti-racism Equality rights Egalitarianism Liberalism Social inequality Right-wing politics Identity politics Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 errors: ISBN date Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2024 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 errors: generic name Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from August 2017 Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles in need of updating from May 2017 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2022 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from October 2021 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from October 2021 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2021 This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 02:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Equal opportunity 31 languages Add topic

