Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Responses 3 Relationship to other proposed Fermi paradox solutions 4 References Toggle the table of contents Berserker hypothesis 5 languages Català Español Français Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Idea that any intelligent life is destroyed by aliens The Berserker hypothesis , also known as the deadly probes scenario , is the idea that humans have not yet detected intelligent alien life in the universe because it has been systematically destroyed by a series of lethal Von Neumann probes .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The hypothesis is named after the Berserker series of novels (1963–2005) written by Fred Saberhagen .

[ 1 ] The hypothesis has no single known proposer, and instead is thought to have emerged over time in response to the Hart–Tipler conjecture , the idea that an absence of detectable Von Neumann probes is contrapositive evidence that no intelligent life exists outside of the Sun's Solar System .

[ 3 ] According to the Berserker hypothesis, an absence of such probes is not evidence of life's absence, since interstellar probes could "go berserk" and destroy other civilizations, before self-destructing.

In his 1983 paper "The Great Silence", astronomer David Brin summarized the implications of the Berserker hypothesis: it is entirely compatible with all the facts and logic of the Fermi paradox , but would mean that there exists no intelligent life left to be discovered. In the worst-case scenario, humanity has already alerted others to its  existence, and is next in line to be destroyed.

[ 4 ] There is no need to struggle to suppress the elements of the Drake equation in order to explain the Great Silence, nor need we suggest that no [intelligent aliens] anywhere would bear the cost of interstellar travel. It need only happen once for the results of this scenario to become the equilibrium conditions in the Galaxy. We would not have detected extra-terrestrial radio traffic – nor would any [intelligent aliens] have ever settled on Earth – because all were killed shortly after discovering radio.

— David Brin , "The Great Silence", Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society , Vol. 24, No.3, p.283-309 (1983) Background [ edit ] Main article: Fermi paradox There is no reliable or reproducible evidence that aliens have visited Earth .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] No transmissions or evidence of intelligent extraterrestrial life have been observed anywhere other than Earth in the Universe . This runs counter to the knowledge that the Universe is filled with a very large number of planets, some of which likely hold the conditions hospitable for life. Life typically expands until it fills all available niches.

[ 7 ] These contradictory facts form the basis for the Fermi paradox , of which the Berserker hypothesis is one proposed solution.

Responses [ edit ] A key component of the hypothesis is that Earth's solar system has not yet been visited by a Berserker probe. In a 2013 analysis by Anders Sandberg and Stuart Armstrong at the Future of Humanity Institute at University of Oxford , they predicted that even a slowly replicated set of Berserker probes, if it were able to destroy civilizations elsewhere, would also very likely have already encountered (and destroyed) humanity.

[ 1 ] Relationship to other proposed Fermi paradox solutions [ edit ] The Berserker hypothesis is distinct from the dark forest hypothesis in that under the latter, many alien civilizations could still exist provided they keep silent. The dark forest hypothesis can be viewed as a special case of the Berserker hypothesis, if the 'deadly Berserker probes' are (e.g. due to resource scarcity) only sent to star systems that show signs of intelligent life.

[ 8 ] The Great Filter hypothesis is a more general counterpart to the Berserker hypothesis, which posits that a great event or barrier prevents early-stage extraterrestrial life from developing into intelligent space-faring civilizations. In the Berserker hypothesis framing, the filter would exist between the industrial age and widespread space colonization .

[ 1 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Williams, Matt (23 August 2020).

"Beyond "Fermi's Paradox" VI: What is the Berserker Hypothesis?" .

Universe Today . Retrieved 18 October 2022 .

^ Wall, Mike (9 November 2018).

"Where Are All the Aliens? 'Out There' Book Excerpt" .

Space.com . Retrieved 18 October 2022 .

^ Webb, Stephen (2002).

If the universe is teeming with aliens ... where is everybody? : fifty solutions to the Fermi paradox and the problem of extraterrestrial life . New York: Copernicus Books in association with Praxis Pub.

doi : 10.1007/b97464 .

ISBN 0387955011 . Retrieved 18 October 2022 .

^ Brin, G. D. (1 September 1983).

"The Great Silence - the Controversy Concerning Extraterrestrial Intelligent Life" .

Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society .

24 : 283– 309.

Bibcode : 1983QJRAS..24..283B .

ISSN 0035-8738 . Retrieved 18 October 2022 .

^ Tingay, Steven.

"Is there evidence aliens have visited Earth? Here's what's come out of US congress hearings on 'unidentified aerial phenomena' " .

The Conversation . Retrieved 27 October 2022 .

^ Kolbert, Elizabeth (14 January 2021).

"Have We Already Been Visited by Aliens?" .

The New Yorker . Retrieved 27 October 2022 .

^ "Are We All Alone, or could They be in the Asteroid Belt" by Michael D. Papagiannis, Quarterly Journal of the Royal Astronomical Society , Vol. 19, p.277 ^ Williams, Matt (7 January 2021).

"Beyond "Fermi's Paradox" XVI: What is the "Dark Forest" Hypothesis?" .

Universe Today . Retrieved 18 October 2022 .

v t e Astrobiology Disciplines Astrochemistry Astrophysics Atmospheric sciences Biochemistry Evolutionary biology Exoplanetology Geomicrobiology Microbiology Paleontology Planetary oceanography Planetary science Main topics Abiogenesis Allan Hills 84001 Biomolecule Biosignature Drake equation Earliest known life forms Earth analog Extraterrestrial life Extraterrestrial sample curation Extremophiles Hypothetical types of biochemistry List of microorganisms tested in outer space Ocean planet Panspermia Planetary protection Search for extraterrestrial intelligence (SETI) Yamato meteorite Planetary habitability Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems Habitable zone for complex life List of potentially habitable exoplanets Tholin Superhabitable planet Space missions Earth orbit BIO BIOCORE Biolab Bion BIOPAN Biosatellite program E-MIST ERA Eu:CROPIS EXOSTACK EXPOSE Lunar Micro Ecosystem O/OREOS OREOcube Tanpopo VEGGIE Mars Beagle 2 Fobos-Grunt Mars Science Laboratory Curiosity rover Mars 2020 Perseverance rover Phoenix Tianwen-1 Zhurong rover Trace Gas Orbiter Viking Comets and asteroids Hayabusa2 OSIRIS-REx Rosetta Heliocentric BioSentinel Planned Dragonfly Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover Proposed Breakthrough Enceladus BRUIE CAESAR Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder‎ Enceladus Life Signatures and Habitability Enceladus Orbilander Europa Lander ExoLance Explorer of Enceladus and Titan Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Mars sample return mission Oceanus THEO Trident Cancelled and undeveloped Astrobiology Field Laboratory Beagle 3 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection Kazachok Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Astrobiology Explorer-Cacher MELOS Northern Light Red Dragon Terrestrial Planet Finder Institutions and programs Astrobiology Society of Britain Astrobiology Science and Technology for Exploring Planets Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Breakthrough Starshot Carl Sagan Institute Center for Life Detection Science European Astrobiology Network Association NASA Astrobiology Institute Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Ocean Worlds Exploration Program Spanish Astrobiology Center‎ Category Commons v t e Interstellar communications Programs Active SETI Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence Search for extraterrestrial intelligence Messages List of interstellar radio messages A Message from Earth Across the Universe Arecibo message Bracewell probe Cosmic Call CosmicOS Hello from Earth Pioneer plaque Teen Age Message Voyager Golden Record People Frank Drake Ann Druyan Hans Freudenthal Sebastian von Hoerner Nikolai Kardashev Jon Lomberg Carl Sagan Linda Salzman Sagan Iosif Shklovsky Aleksandr Zaitsev Other Alien language Archaeology, Anthropology, and Interstellar Communication Astrobiology Astrolinguistics Drake equation Extraterrestrial life Lincos Fermi paradox Prix Guzman San Marino Scale Category Space Portal v t e Extraterrestrial life Events and objects Shergotty meteorite (1865) Nakhla meteorite (1911) Murchison meteorite (1969) Viking lander biological experiments (1976) Allan Hills 77005 (1977) Allan Hills 84001 (1984) Yamato 000593 (2000) CI1 fossils (2011) Signals of interest Misidentified CP 1919 (misidentified pulsar) CTA-102 (misidentified quasar) Stars KIC 8462852 (unusual light fluctuations) EPIC 204278916 (unusual light fluctuations) VVV-WIT-07 (unusual light fluctuations) HD 164595 signal (unknown origin) Other SHGb02+14a (radio source) Wow! signal (inconclusive) Fast radio burst (unknown origin) BLC1 (radio signal) Life in the Universe Earliest known life forms Planetary habitability in the Solar System Life on Venus Life on Mars Life on Titan Planetary habitability Catalog of Nearby Habitable Systems Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems List of potentially habitable exoplanets Planetary habitability Superhabitable planet Tholin Space missions Beagle 2 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection BioSentinel Curiosity rover Darwin Dragonfly Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover ExoLance EXPOSE Foton-M3 Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Geyser Hopper Mars sample-return mission Mars 2020 Northern Light Opportunity rover Perseverance rover SpaceX Red Dragon Spirit rover Tanpopo Titan Mare Explorer Venus In Situ Explorer Viking 1 Viking 2 Interstellar communication Active SETI Allen Telescope Array Arecibo message Arecibo Observatory Berkeley SETI Research Center Bracewell probe Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence Gauss's Pythagorean right triangle proposal Astrolinguistics Lincos language NIROSETI Pioneer plaque Project Cyclops Project Ozma Project Phoenix SERENDIP Search for extraterrestrial intelligence SETI@home setiQuest Voyager Golden Record Water hole Xenolinguistics Types of alleged extraterrestrial beings Energy beings Grey aliens Insectoids Little green men Nordic aliens Reptilian humanoids Hypotheses Cosmic pluralism Directed panspermia Drake equation Extraterrestrial hypothesis Fermi paradox Hypothetical types of biochemistry Interplanetary contamination Kardashev scale Mediocrity principle Non-planetary abiogenesis Panspermia Fermi paradox solutions Aestivation hypothesis Berserker hypothesis Dark forest hypothesis Firstborn hypothesis Great Filter Hart–Tipler conjecture Neocatastrophism Planetarium hypothesis Rare Earth hypothesis Zoo hypothesis Related topics Ancient astronauts Astrobiology Astroecology Biosignature Brookings Report Exotheology Extraterrestrials in fiction Extremophile Hemolithin History of the extraterrestrial life debate Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Noogenesis Planetary protection Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact Post-detection policy San Marino Scale Technosignature UFO religion Xenoarchaeology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Berserker_hypothesis&oldid=1244047112 " Categories : Astrobiology Hypotheses Astronomical hypotheses Astronomical controversies Search for extraterrestrial intelligence Fermi paradox Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 4 September 2024, at 19:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Berserker hypothesis 5 languages Add topic

