Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition Toggle Definition subsection 1.1 Sustainable land management 2 Purposes 3 In climate change context 4 Methods 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Land management 17 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Bahasa Melayu Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Slovenčina Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Processes of managing land Land management is the process of managing the use and development of land resources. Those resources are used for a variety of purposes for example agriculture , forestry , water resource management , human settlements and tourism . One aim of land management is to prevent or reverse land degradation . Another aim is to ensure water security by increasing soil moisture availability, decreasing surface runoff , and decreasing soil erosion .

[ 1 ] Unsustainable land managements leads to land being over- or misused which in turn degrades the land, reduces productivity and disrupts natural equilibriums.

[ 2 ] Sustainable land management ( SLM ) is the set of practices and technologies that aim to integrate the management of land, water , and other environmental resources to meet human needs while ensuring long-term sustainability , ecosystem services , biodiversity , and livelihoods.

[ 3 ] : 2924 Sustainable forest management is a sub-category of sustainable land management.

[ 4 ] : 23 Definition [ edit ] The IPCC Sixth Assessment Report describes land management as "The sum of land-use practices (e.g., sowing , fertilising , weeding , harvesting , thinning and clear-cutting ) that take place within broader land-use categories." [ 3 ] : 2914 Land use itself is "The total of arrangements, activities and inputs applied to a parcel of land."  Land use categories include: forest land , cropland ( agricultural land ), grassland , wetlands , settlements and other lands .

[ 3 ] : 2914 The United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE) applies the term land management in a wide context. Besides agriculture and forestry, they include the mineral extraction sector, property and estate management: "Land management is the process by which the resources of land are put to good effect. It covers all activities concerned with the management of land as a resource both from an environmental and from an economic perspective. It can include farming, mineral extraction, property and estate management, and the physical planning of towns and the countryside.

[ 5 ] : 13 Sustainable land management [ edit ] Sustainable land management (SLM) is a process in a charged environment between environmental protection and the guarantee claim of ecosystem services on the one hand. On the other hand, it is about productivity of agriculture and forestry with respect to demographic growth and increasing pressure in land use .

SLM has been defined in various reports as follows: By IPCC in 2022: "The stewardship and use of land resources, including soils, water, animals and plants, to meet changing human needs, while simultaneously ensuring the long-term productive potential of these resources and the maintenance of their environmental functions".

[ 3 ] : 2924 This wording is very similar to the longer wording used by the United Nations (UN) 1992 Rio Earth Summit in 1992: "The use of land resources, including soils, water, animals and plants, for the production of goods to meet changing human needs, while simultaneously ensuring the long-term productive potential of these resources and the maintenance of their environmental functions." [ 1 ] By World Bank in 2006: "SLM is defined as a knowledge-based procedure that helps integrate land, water, biodiversity, and environmental management (including input and output externalities) to meet rising food and fiber demands while sustaining ecosystem services and livelihoods.

[ 6 ] : xiv Purposes [ edit ] One aim of sustainable land management is to prevent or reverse land degradation . Another aim is to ensure water security by increasing soil moisture availability, decreasing surface runoff , and decreasing soil erosion .

[ 1 ] The IPCC stated that sustainable land management can play a role in climate change mitigation and adaptation .

[ 4 ] : 23 This takes place at various scales, at scales, namely "from individual farms to entire watersheds ".

[ 4 ] : 23 A World Bank report in 2006 explained: "SLM is necessary to meet the requirements of a growing population. Improper land management can lead to land degradation and a significant reduction in the productive and service (biodiversity niches, hydrology , carbon sequestration ) functions of watersheds and landscapes." [ 6 ] : xiv In climate change context [ edit ] The IPCC's Special Report on Climate Change and Land (SRCCL) explains the linkages between sustainable land management and climate change mitigation . The full title of the report is the "Special Report on climate change , desertification , land degradation , sustainable land management, food security , and greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems".

[ 7 ] [ 4 ] The report's summary for policy makers explains that, "Many sustainable land management technologies and practices are profitable within three to 10 years (medium confidence). While they can require upfront investment, actions to ensure sustainable land management can improve crop yields and the economic value of pasture.

Land restoration and rehabilitation measures improve livelihood systems and provide both short-term positive economic returns and longer-term benefits in terms of climate change adaptation and mitigation, biodiversity and enhanced ecosystem functions and services ." [ 4 ] : 35 Methods [ edit ] Land management options exist to focus on healthy soils and to "reduce vulnerability to soil erosion and nutrient loss". Examples include "growing green manure crops and cover crops, crop residue retention, reduced/zero tillage, and maintenance of ground cover through improved grazing management".

[ 4 ] : 23 There are also land management options for farmers that build soil carbon and therefore provide important climate change mitigation benefits through carbon sequestration : " agroforestry , perennial pasture phases and use of perennial grains ". All these methods reduce soil erosion and nutrient leaching.

[ 4 ] : 23 Land management options that "do not require land use change and do not create demand for more land conversion" include: [ 4 ] : 20 improved management of cropland and grazing lands, sustainable forest management , and increased soil organic carbon content.

For example in Ethiopia , "over 85% of the land is estimated to be moderately to severely degraded".

[ 8 ] The current practices of sustainable land management (SLM) involve a variety of structural and nonstructural elements integrated at the catchment scale, providing different roles in managing water resources .

[ 1 ] The structural measures (soil bunds, contour trenches, etc.) significantly improve infiltration and water storage potential of the agricultural landscapes. On the other hand, the nonstructural measures, such as the elimination of open grazing on communal grazing land and the abandonment of postharvest grazing on cultivated land, help improve the water retention capacity of the soils and reduce nonproductive evaporative water losses.

[ 1 ] In addition, the current practices of SLM attempts to sustain diverse land use mosaics at the catchment scale, including protected areas (gullied lands and communal grazing lands), cultivated land and home gardens, with the aim of harnessing potential uses, services, and values from a catchment.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Environment portal Agenda 21 – United Nations action plan, 1992 Carbon farming Conservation grazing – Use of animals to graze areas like nature reserves to maintain habitats Economics of Land Degradation Initiative – Global initiative for sustainable land management Special Report on Climate Change and Land – IPCC report References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Dagnachew, Melku; Gebrehiwot, Solomon Gebreyohanis; Bewket, Woldeamlak; Alamirew, Tena; Charles, Katrina; Zeleke, Gete (2024).

"Ensuring sustainable water security through sustainable land management: Research evidences for policy" .

World Water Policy .

doi : 10.1002/wwp2.12209 .

ISSN 2639-541X .

Text was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License ^ Foley, J. A.; Defries, R.; Asner, G. P.; Barford, C.; Bonan, G.; Carpenter, S. R.; Chapin, F. S.; Coe, M. T.; Daily, G. C.; Gibbs, H. K.; Helkowski, J. H.; Holloway, T.; Howard, E. A.; Kucharik, C. J.; Monfreda, C.; Patz, J. A.; Prentice, I. C.; Ramankutty, N.; Snyder, P. K. (2005).

"Global Consequences of Land Use" .

Science .

309 (5734): 570– 574.

Bibcode : 2005Sci...309..570F .

doi : 10.1126/science.1111772 .

PMID 16040698 .

S2CID 5711915 .

^ a b c d IPCC, 2022: Annex II: Glossary [Möller, V., R. van Diemen, J.B.R. Matthews, C. Méndez, S. Semenov, J.S. Fuglestvedt, A. Reisinger (eds.)]. In: Climate Change 2022: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Sixth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [H.-O. Pörtner, D.C. Roberts, M. Tignor, E.S. Poloczanska, K. Mintenbeck, A. Alegría, M. Craig, S. Langsdorf, S. Löschke, V. Möller, A. Okem, B. Rama (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK and New York, NY, US, pp. 2897–2930, doi:10.1017/9781009325844.029.

^ a b c d e f g h IPCC, 2019: Summary for Policymakers . In: Climate Change and Land: an IPCC special report on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems [P.R. Shukla, J. Skea, E. Calvo Buendia, V. Masson-Delmotte, H.- O. Pörtner, D. C. Roberts, P. Zhai, R. Slade, S. Connors, R. van Diemen, M. Ferrat, E. Haughey, S. Luz, S. Neogi, M. Pathak, J. Petzold, J. Portugal Pereira, P. Vyas, E. Huntley, K. Kissick, M. Belkacemi, J. Malley, (eds.)]. https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009157988.001 ^ "Land Administration Guideline. With Special Reference to Countries in Transition" (PDF) . UN Economic Commission for Europe, Geneva, ECE/HBP/96. 1996.

^ a b Anderson, Jonathan; Blackie, Malcolm J.; Burcroff, Richard; Ceesay, Mustapha M.; Esikuri, Enos E.; Fernandes, Erick C.M.; Gillison, Andrew Napier; Sanginga, Emmanuel Nteranya; Smaling, Eric; Styger, Erika Dorothea (2006) Sustainable land management : challenges, opportunities, and trade-offs .

Agriculture and rural development Washington, D.C. : World Bank Group.

^ Special Report on climate change, desertification, land degradation, sustainable land management, food security, and greenhouse gas fluxes in terrestrial ecosystems (SRCCL) .

IPCC (Report) . Retrieved 2019-08-09 .

^ REACH (2023) Improving water security through Sustainable Land Management Story of change: Key findings & emerging impacts v t e Land use General Degradation Development/Conversion Planning Conflict Land management Landscaping Integrated landscape management Land grabbing Land consumption Land loss Habitat destruction Illegal construction Land reclamation Land rehabilitation Landscape ecology Rangeland management Environmental planning Leopold matrix Watertable control Developed environments Built-up area Locally unwanted land use Property Property Subdivision (land) Real estate development Land development bank Land (economics) Customary land Related fields Soil Soil science Soil compaction Soil contamination Alkali soil Pollution Deforestation Urban planning Agriculture Drainage system (agriculture) Land change modeling Categories: Land use v t e Management Outline of management Index of management articles By type of organization Academic Association Business Restaurant Court Healthcare Intelligence Military Public Reputation By focus, within an organization On scope Strategic (top-level) Capability Capital Change Communication Financial Innovation Legal Performance Risk Systems On component Facility Product Product lifecycle Brand Project Construction Program On activity or department managed Line Marketing Operations / production Process Quality Sales Staff Accounting Office Records On aspect or relationship Customer relationship Engineering Logistics Perception Supply chain Talent On problem Conflict Crisis Stress On resource Environmental resource Field inventory Human resources Information Information technology Knowledge Land Materials Skills Technology Time Positions Interim Middle Senior Methods, approaches Adhocracy Collaborative method Distributed Earned value management Evidence-based management Full range leadership model Management by objectives Management style Macromanagement Micromanagement Scientific management Social entrepreneurship Sustainable management Team building Virtual management Skills, activities Decision-making Forecasting Leadership Pioneers, scholars Peter Drucker Eliyahu M. Goldratt Oliver E. Williamson Education Business school Certified Business Manager Chartered Management Institute Critical management studies Degrees Bachelor of Business Administration Master of Business Administration PhD in management Doctor of Business Administration Other Administration Collaboration Corporate governance Executive compensation Management consulting Management control Management cybernetics Management development Management fad Management system Managerial economics Managerial psychology Managerialism Organization development Organizational behavior management Pointy-haired Boss Systems science portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Land_management&oldid=1275364993 " Categories : Land management Management by type Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 February 2025, at 16:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Land management 17 languages Add topic

