Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theories of causes Toggle Theories of causes subsection 1.1 Primordialist accounts 1.2 Instrumentalist accounts 1.3 Constructivist accounts 2 History 3 Study in the post-Cold War world 4 Public goods provision 5 Ethnic conflict amplification Toggle Ethnic conflict amplification subsection 5.1 Online social media 6 Ethnic conflict resolution Toggle Ethnic conflict resolution subsection 6.1 Institutional ethnic conflict resolution 6.1.1 Consociationalism 6.1.2 Federalism 6.1.3 Non-territorial autonomy 6.1.4 Cultural rights 6.2 Ethnic conflict resolution outside formal institutions 6.2.1 Informal inter-ethnic engagement 6.2.2 Formal inter-ethnic associations 7 Examples of ethnic conflicts Toggle Examples of ethnic conflicts subsection 7.1 1910s 7.2 1980s 7.3 1990s 7.4 2010s 7.5 2020s 8 See also 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Ethnic conflict 40 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Cymraeg Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Lietuvių မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Русский සිංහල Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Conflict between ethnic groups "Race War" redirects here. For the 1993 comic book storyline, see Race War (Predator) .

"Чеченская молитва" ( Chechen's prayer ) by Mikhail Evstafiev depicts a Chechen man praying during the battle of Grozny in 1995.

A refugee camp for displaced Rwandans in Zaire following the Rwandan genocide of 1994 Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e An ethnic conflict is a conflict between two or more ethnic groups .  While the source of the conflict may be political , social, economic or religious, the individuals in conflict must expressly fight for their ethnic group's position within society. This criterion differentiates ethnic conflict from other forms of struggle.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Academic explanations of ethnic conflict generally fall into one of three schools of thought: primordialist , instrumentalist or constructivist . Recently, some have argued for either top-down or bottom-up explanations for ethnic conflict. Intellectual debate has also focused on whether ethnic conflict has become more prevalent since the end of the Cold War , and on devising ways of managing conflicts, through instruments such as consociationalism and federalisation .

Theories of causes [ edit ] It is argued that rebel movements are more likely to organize around ethnicity because ethnic groups are more apt to be aggrieved, better able to mobilize, and more likely to face difficult bargaining challenges compared to other groups.

[ 3 ] The causes of ethnic conflict are debated by political scientists and sociologists . Official academic explanations generally fall into one of three schools of thought: primordialist, instrumentalist, and constructivist. More recent scholarship draws on all three schools.

Primordialist accounts [ edit ] Proponents of primordialist accounts argue that "[e]thnic groups and nationalities exist because there are traditions of belief and action towards primordial objects such as biological features and especially territorial location".

[ 4 ] Primordialist accounts rely on strong ties of kinship among members of ethnic groups.

Donald L. Horowitz argues that this kinship "makes it possible for ethnic groups to think in terms of family resemblances".

[ 5 ] Clifford Geertz , a founding scholar of primordialism, asserts that each person has a natural connection to perceived kinsmen. In time and through repeated conflict, essential ties to one's ethnicity will coalesce and will interfere with ties to civil society. Ethnic groups will consequently always threaten the survival of civil governments but not the existence of nations formed by one ethnic group.

[ 6 ] Thus, when considered through a primordial lens, ethnic conflict in multi-ethnic society is inevitable.

A number of political scientists argue that the root causes of ethnic conflict do not involve ethnicity per se but rather institutional, political, and economic factors.  These scholars argue that the concept of ethnic war is misleading because it leads to an essentialist conclusion that certain groups are doomed to fight each other when in fact the wars between them that occur are often the result of political decisions.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Moreover, primordial accounts  do not account for the spatial and temporal variations in ethnic violence. If these "ancient hatreds" are always simmering under the surface and are at the forefront of people's consciousness, then ethnic groups should constantly be ensnared in violence. However, ethnic violence occurs in sporadic outbursts. For example, Varshney points out that although Yugoslavia broke up due to ethnic violence in the 1990s, it had enjoyed a long peace of decades before the USSR collapsed. Therefore, some scholars claim that it is unlikely that primordial ethnic differences alone caused the outbreak of violence in the 1990s.

[ 7 ] Primordialists have reformulated the "ancient hatreds" hypothesis and have focused more on the role of human nature. Petersen argues that the existence of hatred and animosity does not have to be rooted in history for it to play a role in shaping human behavior and action: "If 'ancient hatred' means a hatred consuming the daily thoughts of great masses of people, then the 'ancient hatreds' argument deserves to be readily dismissed. However, if hatred is conceived as a historically formed 'schema' that guides action in some situations, then the conception should be taken more seriously." [ 9 ] Instrumentalist accounts [ edit ] Anthony Smith notes that the instrumentalist account "came to prominence in the 1960s and 1970s in the United States, in the debate about (white) ethnic persistence in what was supposed to have been an effective melting pot".

[ 10 ] This new theory sought explained persistence as the result of the actions of community leaders, "who used their cultural groups as sites of mass mobilization and as constituencies in their competition for power and resources, because they found them more effective than social classes".

[ 10 ] In this account of ethnic identification, ethnicity and race are viewed as instrumental means to achieve particular ends.

[ 11 ] Whether ethnicity is a fixed perception or not is not crucial in the instrumentalist accounts. Moreover, the scholars of this school generally do not oppose the view that ethnic difference plays a part in many conflicts. They simply claim that ethnic difference is not sufficient to explain conflicts.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Mass mobilization of ethnic groups can only be successful if there are latent ethnic differences to be exploited, otherwise politicians would not even attempt to make political appeals based on ethnicity and would focus instead on economic or ideological appeals. For these reasons, it is difficult to completely discount the role of inherent ethnic differences. Additionally, ethnic entrepreneurs, or elites, could be tempted to mobilize ethnic groups in order to gain their political support in democratizing states.

[ 14 ] Instrumentalist theorists especially emphasize this interpretation in ethnic states in which one ethnic group is promoted at the expense of other ethnicities.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] Furthermore, ethnic mass mobilization is likely to be plagued by collective action problems, especially if ethnic protests are likely to lead to violence. Instrumentalist scholars have tried to respond to these shortcomings. For example, Russell Hardin argues that ethnic mobilization faces problems of coordination and not collective action. He points out that a charismatic leader acts as a focal point around which members of an ethnic group coalesce. The existence of such an actor helps to clarify beliefs about the behavior of others within an ethnic group.

[ 17 ] Constructivist accounts [ edit ] A third, constructivist, set of accounts stress the importance of the socially constructed nature of ethnic groups, drawing on Benedict Anderson 's concept of the imagined community . Proponents of this account point to Rwanda as an example because  the Tutsi / Hutu distinction was codified by the Belgian colonial power in the 1930s on the basis of cattle ownership, physical measurements and church records. Identity cards were issued on this basis, and these documents played a key role in the genocide of 1994.

[ 18 ] Some argue that constructivist narratives of historical master cleavages are unable to account for local and regional variations in ethnic violence. For example, Varshney highlights that in the 1960s "racial violence in the USA was heavily concentrated in northern cities; southern cities though intensely politically engaged, did not have riots".

[ 9 ] A constructivist master narrative is often a country level variable whereas studies of incidences of ethnic violence are often done at the regional and local level.

Scholars of ethnic conflict and civil wars have introduced theories that draw insights from all three traditional schools of thought. In The Geography of Ethnic Violence , Monica Duffy Toft shows how ethnic group settlement patterns, socially constructed identities, charismatic leaders, issue indivisibility, and state concern with precedent setting can lead rational actors to escalate a dispute to violence, even when doing so is likely to leave contending groups much worse off.

[ 19 ] Such research addresses empirical puzzles that are difficult to explain using primordialist, instrumentalist, or constructivist approaches alone. As Varshney notes, "pure essentialists and pure instrumentalists do not exist anymore".

[ 9 ] History [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( October 2022 ) Study in the post-Cold War world [ edit ] Map highlighting the current zones of conflict in Myanmar One of the most debated issues relating to ethnic conflict is whether it has become more or less prevalent in the post–Cold War period. Even
though a decline in the rate of new ethnic conflicts was evident in the late 1990s, ethnic conflict remains the most common form of
armed intrastate conflict today.

[ 20 ] At the end of the Cold War, academics including Samuel P. Huntington and Robert D. Kaplan predicted a proliferation of conflicts fueled by civilisational clashes , tribalism , resource scarcity and overpopulation .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] The violent ethnic conflicts in Nigeria , Mali , Sudan and other countries in the Sahel region have been exacerbated by droughts, food shortages, land degradation , and population growth.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] However, some theorists contend that this does not represent a rise in the incidence of ethnic conflict, because many of the proxy wars fought during the Cold War as ethnic conflicts were actually  hot spots of the Cold War. Research shows that the fall of Communism and the increase in the number of capitalist states were accompanied by a decline in total warfare, interstate wars, ethnic wars, revolutionary wars, and the number of refugees and displaced persons .

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Indeed, some scholars have questioned whether the concept of ethnic conflict is useful at all.

[ 29 ] Others have attempted to test the "clash of civilisations" thesis, finding it to be difficult to operationalise and that civilisational conflicts have not risen in intensity in relation to other ethnic conflicts since the end of the Cold War.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] A key question facing scholars who attempt to adapt their theories of interstate violence to explain or predict large-scale ethnic violence is whether  ethnic groups could be considered "rational" actors.

[ 32 ] Prior to the end of the Cold War, the consensus among students of large-scale violence was that ethnic groups should be considered irrational actors, or semi-rational at best. If true, general explanations of ethnic violence would be impossible. In the years since, however, scholarly consensus has shifted to consider that ethnic groups may in fact be counted as rational actors, and the puzzle of their apparently irrational actions (for example, fighting over territory of little or no intrinsic worth) must therefore be explained in some other way.

[ 19 ] [ 32 ] As a result, the possibility of a general explanation of ethnic violence has grown, and collaboration between comparativist and international-relations sub-fields has resulted in increasingly useful theories of ethnic conflict.

Public goods provision [ edit ] A major source of ethnic conflict in multi-ethnic democracies is over the access to state patronage. Conflicts over state resources between ethnic groups can increase the likelihood of ethnic violence. In ethnically divided societies, demand for public goods decreases as each ethnic group derives more utility from benefits targeted at their ethnic group in particular.

[ 33 ] These benefits would be less valued if all other ethnic groups had access to them. Targeted benefits are more appealing because ethnic groups can solidify or heighten their social and economic status relative to other ethnic groups whereas broad programmatic policies will not improve their relative worth. Politicians and political parties in turn, have an incentive to favor co-ethnics in their distribution of material benefits. Over the long run, ethnic conflict over access to state benefits is likely to lead to the ethnification of political parties and the party system as a whole where the political salience of ethnic identity increase leading to a self-fulfilling equilibrium: If politicians only distribute benefits on an ethnic basis, voters will see themselves primarily belonging to an ethnic group and view politicians the same way. They will only vote for the politician belonging to the same ethnic group. In turn, politicians will refrain from providing public goods because it will not serve them well electorally to provide services to people not belonging to their ethnic group. In democratizing societies, this could lead to ethnic outbidding and lead to extreme politicians pushing out moderate co-ethnics.

[ 14 ] Patronage politics and ethnic politics eventually reinforce each other, leading to what Chandra terms a "patronage democracy".

[ 34 ] The existence of patronage networks between local politicians and ethnic groups make it easier for politicians to mobilize ethnic groups and instigate ethnic violence for electoral gain since the neighborhood or city is already polarized along ethnic lines. The dependence of ethnic groups on their co-ethnic local politician for access to state resources is likely to make them more responsive to calls of violence against other ethnic groups.

[ 35 ] Therefore, the existence of these local patronage channels generates incentives for ethnic groups to engage in politically motivated violence.

[ 35 ] While the link between ethnic heterogeneity and under provision of public goods is generally accepted, there is little consensus around the causal mechanism underlying this relationship. To identify possible causal stories, Humphreys and Habyarimana ran a series of behavioral games in Kampala, Uganda, that involved several local participants completing joint tasks and allocating money amongst them.

[ 36 ] Contrary to the conventional wisdom, they find that participants did not favor the welfare of their co-ethnics disproportionately. It was only when anonymity was removed and everyone's ethnicity was known did co-ethnics decide to favor each other. Humphreys and Habyarimana argue that cooperation among co-ethnics is primarily driven by reciprocity norms that tend to be stronger among co-ethnics.

[ 36 ] The possibility of social sanctions compelled those who would not otherwise cooperate with their co-ethnics to do so. The authors find no evidence to suggest that co-ethnics display a greater degree of altruism towards each other or have the same preferences. Ethnic cooperation takes place because co-ethnics have common social networks and therefore can monitor each other and can threaten to socially sanction any transgressors.

[ 36 ] Ethnic conflict amplification [ edit ] Online social media [ edit ] In the early twenty-first century, the online social networking service Facebook has played a role in amplifying ethnic violence in the Rohingya genocide that started in October 2016 [ 37 ] and in ethnic violence in Ethiopia during 2019–2020.

[ 38 ] The United Nations Human Rights Council described Facebook as having been "a useful instrument for those seeking to spread hate" and complained that Facebook was unable to provide data on the extent of its role in the genocide.

[ 37 ] During 2019–2020, posts on Facebook dominated the Internet in Ethiopia and played a major role in encouraging ethnic violence.

[ 38 ] An October 2019 Facebook post led to the deaths of 70 people in Ethiopia.

[ 39 ] In mid-2020, ethnic tensions in Ethiopia were amplified by online hate speech on Facebook that followed the 29 June assassination of Hachalu Hundessa . The Hachalu Hundessa riots , in which mobs "lynched, beheaded, and dismembered their victims", took place with "almost-instant and widespread sharing of hate speech and incitement to violence on Facebook, which whipped up people's anger", according to David Gilbert writing in Vice . People "call[ed] for genocide and attacks against specific religious or ethnic groups" and "openly post[ed] photographs of burned-out cars, buildings, schools and houses", according to Network Against Hate Speech , an Ethiopian citizens' group. Berhan Taye of Access Now stated that in Ethiopia, offline violence quickly leads to online "calls for ethnic attacks, discrimination, and destruction of property [that] goes viral". He stated, "Facebook's inaction helps propagate hate and polarization in a country and has a devastating impact on the narrative and extent of the violence." [ 38 ] Ethnic conflict resolution [ edit ] Institutional ethnic conflict resolution [ edit ] A number of scholars have attempted to synthesize the methods available for the resolution , management or transformation of their ethnic conflict.

John Coakley , for example, has developed a typology of the methods of conflict resolution that have been employed by states, which he lists as: indigenization , accommodation, assimilation , acculturation , population transfer , boundary alteration, genocide and ethnic suicide.

[ 40 ] John McGarry and Brendan O'Leary have developed a taxonomy of eight macro-political ethnic conflict regulation methods, which they note are often employed by states in combination with each other.

[ 41 ] They include a number of methods that they note are clearly morally unacceptable.

With increasing interest in the field of ethnic conflict, many policy analysts and political scientists theorized potential resolutions and tracked the results of institutional policy implementation. As such, theories often focus on which Institutions are the most appropriate for addressing ethnic conflict.

Consociationalism [ edit ] Consociationalism is a power sharing agreement which coopts the leaders of ethnic groups into the central state's government. Each nation or ethnic group is represented in the government through a supposed spokesman for the group. In the power sharing agreement, each group has veto powers to varying degrees, dependent on the particular state. Moreover, the norm of proportional representation is dominant: each group is represented in the government in a percentage that reflects the ethnicity's demographic presence in the state.

[ 42 ] Another requirement for Arend Lijphart is that the government must be composed of a "grand coalition" of the ethnic group leaders which supposes a top-down approach to conflict resolution.

[ 43 ] In theory, this leads to self governance and protection for the ethnic group. Many scholars [ 15 ] [ 44 ] maintain that since ethnic tension erupts into ethnic violence when the ethnic group is threatened by a state, then veto powers should allow the ethnic group to avoid legislative threats. Switzerland is often characterized as a successful consociationalist state.

[ 42 ] A recent example of a consociational government is the post-conflict Bosnian government that was agreed upon in the Dayton Accords in 1995. A tripartite presidency was chosen and must have a Croat, a Serb, and a Bosniak. The presidents take turns acting as the forefront executive in terms of 8 months for 4 years.

[ 43 ] Many have credited this compromise of a consociational government in Bosnia for the end of the violence and the following long-lasting peace.

[ 43 ] In contrast to Lijphart, several political scientists and policy analysts have condemned consociationalism.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] One of the many critiques is that consociationalism locks in ethnic tensions and identities. This assumes a primordial stance that ethnic identities are permanent and not subject to change.

[ 46 ] Furthermore, this does not allow for any "others" that might want to partake in the political process.

[ 46 ] As of 2012 a Jewish Bosnian is suing the Bosnian government for precluding him from running for presidential office since only a Croat, Serb, or Bosniak can run under the consociational government.

[ 47 ] Determining ethnic identities in advance and implementing a power sharing system on the basis of these fixed identities is inherently discriminatory against minority groups that might be not be recognized.

[ 7 ] Moreover, it discriminates against those who do not choose to define their identity on an ethnic or communal basis. In power sharing-systems that are based on pre-determined identities, there is a tendency to rigidly fix shares of representation on a permanent basis which will not reflect changing demographics over time.

[ 7 ] The categorization of individuals in particular ethnic groups might be controversial anyway and might in fact fuel ethnic tensions.

The inherent weaknesses in using pre-determined ethnic identities to form power sharing systems has led Ljiphart to argue that adopting a constructivist approach to consociationalism can increase its likelihood of success.

[ 7 ] The self-determination of ethnic identities is more likely to be "non-discriminatory, neutral, flexible and self-adjusting".

[ 7 ] For example, in South Africa, the toxic legacy of apartheid meant that successful consociation could only be built on the basis of the self-determination of groups. Ljiphart claims that because ethnic identities are often "unclear, fluid and flexible," [ 7 ] self-determination is likely to be more successful than pre-determination of ethnic groups.  A constructivist approach to consociational theory can therefore strengthen its value as a method to resolve ethnic conflict.

Another critique points to the privileging of ethnic identity over personal political choice.

[ 45 ] Howard has deemed consociationalism as a form of ethnocracy and not a path to true pluralistic democracy.

[ 45 ] Consociationalism assumes that a politician will best represent the will of his co-ethnics above other political parties. This might lead to the polarization of ethnic groups and the loss of non-ethnic ideological parties.

[ 48 ] Horowitz has argued that a single transferable vote system could prevent the ethnification of political parties because voters cast their ballots in order of preference.

[ 49 ] This means that a voter could cast some of his votes to parties other than his co-ethnic party.

[ 49 ] This in turn would compel political parties to broaden their manifestos to appeal to voters across the ethnic divide to hoover up second and third preference votes.

Federalism [ edit ] The theory of implementing federalism in order to curtail ethnic conflict assumes that self-governance reduces "demands for sovereignty".

[ 42 ] Hechter argues that some goods such as language of education and bureaucracy must be provided as local goods, instead of statewide, in order to satisfy more people and ethnic groups.

[ 42 ] Some political scientists such as Stroschein contend that ethnofederalism , or federalism determined along ethnic lines, is "asymmetric" as opposed to the equal devolution of power found in non-ethnic federal states, such as the United States. In this sense, special privileges are granted to specific minority groups as concessions and incentives to end violence or mute conflict.

[ 48 ] The Soviet Union divided its structure into ethnic federal states termed Union Republics . Each Union Republic was named after a titular ethnic group who inhabited the area as a way to Sovietize nationalist sentiments during the 1920s.

[ 50 ] Brubaker asserts that these titular republics were formed in order to absorb any potential elite led nationalist movements against the Soviet center by incentivizing elite loyalty through advancement in the Soviet political structure.

[ 15 ] Thus, federalism provides some self-governance for local matters in order to satisfy some of the grievances which might cause ethnic conflict among the masses. Moreover, federalism brings in the elites and ethnic entrepreneurs into the central power structure; this prevents a resurgence of top-down ethnic conflict.

Nevertheless, after the dissolution of the Soviet Union many critiques of federalism as an institution to resolve ethnic conflict emerged. The devolution of power away from the central state can weaken ties to the central state.

[ 15 ] Moreover, the parallel institutions created to serve a particular nation or ethnic group might provide significant resources for secession from the central state.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] As most states are unwilling to give up an integral portion of their territory, secessionist movements may trigger violence.

[ 53 ] Furthermore, some competing elite political players may not be in power; they would remain unincorporated into the central system. These competing elites can gain access through federal structures and their resources to solidify their political power in the structure.

[ 15 ] According to V.P. Gagnon this was the case in the former Yugoslavia and its disintegration into its ethnic federal states. Ethnic entrepreneurs were able to take control of the institutionally allocated resources to wage war on other ethnic groups.

[ 54 ] Non-territorial autonomy [ edit ] A recent theory of ethnic tension resolution is non-territorial autonomy or NTA. NTA has emerged in recent years as an alternative solution to ethnic tensions and grievances in places that are likely to breed conflict.

[ 55 ] For this reason, NTA has been promoted as a more practical and state building solution than consociationalism.

[ 55 ] NTA, alternatively known as non-cultural autonomy (NCA), is based on the difference of jus solis and jus sanguinis , the principles of territory versus that of personhood.

[ 56 ] It gives rights to ethnic groups to self-rule and govern matters potentially concerning but limited to: education, language, culture, internal affairs, religion, and the internally established institutions needed to promote and reproduce these facets.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ 57 ] In contrast to federalism, the ethnic groups are not assigned a titular sub-state, but rather the ethnic groups are dispersed throughout the state unit. Their group rights and autonomy are not constrained to a particular territory within the state. This is done in order not to weaken the center state such as in the case of ethnofederalism.

[ 15 ] [ 42 ] The origin of NTA can be traced back to the Marxists works of Otto Bauer and Karl Renner .

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] NTA was employed during the interwar period, and the League of Nations sought to add protection clauses for national minorities in new states.

[ 56 ] In the 1920s, Estonia granted some cultural autonomy to the German and Jewish populations in order to ease conflicts between the groups and the newly independent state.

[ 58 ] In Europe, most notably in Belgium , NTA laws have been enacted and created parallel institutions and political parties in the same country.

[ 59 ] In Belgium, NTA has been integrated within the federal consociational system.

[ 57 ] Some scholars of ethnic conflict resolution claim that the practice of NTA will be employed dependent on the concentration and size of the ethnic group asking for group rights.

[ 56 ] [ 57 ] Other scholars, such as Clarke, argue that the successful implementation of NTA rests on the acknowledgement in a state of "universal" principles: true rule of law , established human rights , stated guarantees to minorities and their members to use their own quotidien language, religion, and food practices, and a framework of anti-discrimination legislation in order to enforce these rights.

[ 60 ] Moreover, no individual can be forced to adhere, identify, or emphasize a particular identity (such as race, gender, sexuality, etc.) without their consent in order for NTA to function for its purpose.

[ 61 ] Nonetheless, Clarke critiques the weaknesses of NTA in areas such as education, a balance between society wide norms and intracommunity values; policing, for criminal matters and public safety; and political representation, which limits the political choices of an individual if based solely on ethnicity.

[ 60 ] Furthermore, the challenge in evaluating the efficacy of NTA lies in the relatively few legal implementations of NTA.

Cultural rights [ edit ] Emphasizing the limits of approaches that focus mainly on institutional answers to ethnic conflicts—which are essentially driven by ethnocultural dynamics of which political and/or economic factors are but elements—Gregory Paul Meyjes urges the use of intercultural communication and cultural-rights based negotiations as tools with which to effectively and sustainably address inter-ethnic strife. Meyjes argues that to fully grasp, preempt, and/or resolve such conflicts—whether with or without the aid of territorial or non-territorial institutional mechanism(s) -- a cultural rights approach grounded in intercultural knowledge and skill is essential.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] Ethnic conflict resolution outside formal institutions [ edit ] Informal inter-ethnic engagement [ edit ] Institutionalist arguments for resolving ethnic conflict often focus on national-level institutions and do not account for regional and local variation in ethnic violence within a country. Despite similar levels of ethnic diversity in a country, some towns and cities have often found to be especially prone to ethnic violence. For example, Ashutosh Varshney, in his study of ethnic violence in India , argues that strong inter-ethnic engagement in villages often disincentivizes politicians from stoking ethnic violence for electoral gain.

[ 64 ] Informal interactions include joint participation in festivals, families from different communities eating together or allowing their children to play with one another.

[ 64 ] Every day engagement between ethnic groups at the village level can help to sustain the peace in the face of  national level shocks like an ethnic riot in another part of the country.

[ 64 ] In times of ethnic tension, these communities can quell rumors, police neighborhoods and come together to resist any attempts by politicians to polarize the community.

[ 64 ] The stronger the inter-ethnic networks are, the harder it is for politicians to polarize the community even if it may be in their political interest to do so.

Formal inter-ethnic associations [ edit ] In cities where the population tends to be much higher, informal interactions between ethnic groups might not be sufficient to prevent violence. This is because many more links are needed to connect everyone, and therefore it is much more difficult to form and strengthen inter-ethnic ties.

[ 64 ] In cities, formal inter-ethnic associations like trade unions, business associations and professional organizations are more effective in encouraging inter-ethnic interactions that could prevent ethnic violence in the future.

[ 64 ] These organizations force ethnic groups to come together based on shared economic interests that overcomes any pre-existing ethnic differences. For example, inter-ethnic business organizations serve to connect the business interests of different ethnic groups which would increase their desire to maintain ethnic harmony. Any ethnic tension or outbreak of violence will go against their economic interests and therefore, over time, the salience of ethnic identity diminishes.

Interactions between ethnic groups in formal settings can also help countries torn apart by ethnic violence to recover and break down ethnic divisions. Paula Pickering, a political scientist, who studies peace-building efforts in Bosnia, finds that formal workplaces are often the site where inter-ethnic ties are formed.

[ 65 ] She claims that mixed workplaces lead to repeated inter-ethnic interaction where norms of professionalism compel everyone to cooperate and to treat each other with respect, making it easier for individuals belonging to the minority group to reach out and form relationships with everyone else.

[ 65 ] Nevertheless, Giuliano's research in Russia has shown that economic grievances, even in a mixed workplace, can be politicized on ethnic lines.

[ 8 ] Examples of ethnic conflicts [ edit ] Human rights in Ethiopia Ethnic violence in Konso Ethnic violence against Amaro Koore Sampit conflict Caste War of Yucatán Russo-Ukrainian War Indo-Pakistani war of 1947–1948 First Sino-Japanese War Moro conflict Basque conflict Bersiap Maluku sectarian conflict Caucasian War Galikoma massacre Cyprus problem The Troubles Insurgency in the North Caucasus Nagorno-Karabakh conflict Philippine–American War Polish-Ukrainian War Polish-Ukrainian ethnic conflict during World War II Russo-Turkish wars Occupation of Poland during World War II Hungarian-Romanian War American Indian Wars Amhara genocide Guatemalan genocide Israeli–Lebanese conflict Arab–Israeli conflict Communal conflicts in Nigeria Sudanese nomadic conflicts Oromo–Somali clashes Tuareg rebellions (disambiguation) (multiple) Kurdish–Turkish conflict (1978–present) Ethnic conflict in Nagaland Internal conflict in Myanmar Jihadist insurgency in Burkina Faso Sabra and Shatila massacre Sri Lankan Civil War Insurgency in Manipur Human rights abuses in Manipur 1910s [ edit ] Armenian genocide 1980s [ edit ] Isaaq genocide 1990s [ edit ] First Chechen War Yugoslav Wars Rwandan genocide Transnistria War War in Abkhazia (1992–1993) 2010s [ edit ] Central African Republic conflict (2013–2014) Rohingya genocide 2020s [ edit ] 2020 Dungan–Kazakh ethnic clashes 2023–2025 Manipur violence See also [ edit ] Accelerationism Communal violence Cultural conflict Cultural rights Democide Diaspora politics Ethnic cleansing Ethnic hatred Ethnic nationalism Ethnic violence Genocide Hate crime List of ethnic cleansing campaigns List of ongoing military conflicts List of ethnic riots Political cleansing of population Population cleansing Social cleansing References [ edit ] ^ Varshney, Ashutosh (2002).

Ethnic Conflict and Civic Life : Hindus and Muslims in India . New Haven: Yale University Press.

^ Kaufman, Stuart J. (2001).

Modern Hatreds: The Symbolic politics of ethnic war . Ithaca: Cornell University. Press. pp.

17 .

^ Denny, Elaine K; Walter, Barbara F (March 2014). "Ethnicity and civil war".

Journal of Peace Research .

51 (2): 199– 212.

doi : 10.1177/0022343313512853 .

S2CID 110666158 .

^ Grosby, Steven (1994). "The verdict of history: The inexpungeable tie of primordiality – a response to Eller and Coughlan".

Ethnic and Racial Studies .

17 (1): 164–171 [p. 168].

doi : 10.1080/01419870.1994.9993817 .

^ Horowitz, Donald L. (1985).

Ethnic Groups in Conflict . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press. p.

57 .

ISBN 0520053850 .

^ Geertz, Clifford (1963).

Old societies and new States; the quest for modernity in Asia and Africa . London: Free Press of Glencoe.

^ a b c d e f g Lijphart, Arend (Winter 2001).

"Constructivism and Consociational Theory" (PDF) .

Newsletter of the Organized Section in Comparative Politics of the American Political Science Association .

^ a b Giuliano, Elise (2011).

Constructing Grievance: Ethnic Nationalism in Russia's Republics . Cornell University Press.

^ a b c Varshney, Ashutosh (2007).

"Ethnicity and Ethnic Conflict" (PDF) . Oxford handbook of comparative politics. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-03-29 . Retrieved 2016-02-07 .

^ a b Smith, Anthony (2001).

Nationalism: Theory, Ideology, History . Cambridge: Polity. pp.

54–55 .

ISBN 0745626580 .

^ Cornell, Stephen; Hartmann, Douglas (1998).

Ethnicity and Race: Making Identities in a Changing World . Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge. p. 59.

ISBN 0761985018 .

^ Schlichting, Ursel (1997). "Conflict Between Different Nationalities: Chances for and Limits to Their Settlement". In Klinke, Andreas; Renn, Ortwin; Lehners, Jean Paul (eds.).

Ethnic Conflicts and Civil Society . Aldershot: Ashgate.

ISBN 1840144556 .

^ Smith, Dan (2003).

"Trends and Causes of Armed Conflicts" (PDF) . In Austin, Alexander; Fischer, Martina; Ropers, Norbert (eds.).

Berghof Handbook for Conflict Transformation . Berlin: Berghof Research Centre for Constructive Conflict Management/Berghof Foundation.

^ a b Snyder, Jack (2000).

From Voting to Violence: Democratization and Nationalist Conflict . W. W. Norton & Company.

^ a b c d e f Brubaker, Roger (1996).

Nationalism Reframed . New York: Cambridge.

^ Kymlicka, Wil (2001).

Can Liberalism Be Exported?

. Oxford University Press.

^ Evangelista, Matthew (2005).

Peace studies: Critical concepts in political science . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 9780415339254 .

^ Mamdani, Mahmood (2001).

When Victims Become Killers: Colonialism, Nativism, and the Genocide in Rwanda . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0691058210 .

^ a b Toft, Monica Duffy (2003).

The Geography of Ethnic Violence: Identity, Interests, and the Indivisibility of Territory . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0691113548 .

^ Mishali-Ram, Meirav (September 2006). "Ethnic Diversity, Issues, and International Crisis Dynamics, 1918-2002".

Journal of Peace Research .

43 (5): 583– 600.

doi : 10.1177/0022343306066524 .

S2CID 110835057 .

^ Huntington, Samuel P. (1993).

"The clash of civilizations?" .

Foreign Affairs .

72 (3): 22– 49.

doi : 10.2307/20045621 .

JSTOR 20045621 . Archived from the original on 2007-06-29.

^ Kaplan, Robert D. (1994).

"The coming anarchy" .

The Atlantic Monthly .

273 (2): 44– 76. Archived from the original on 2008-07-24 . Retrieved 2017-03-06 .

^ "Climate change, food shortages, and conflict in Mali" .

Al-Jazeera . 27 April 2015.

^ "How Climate Change Is Spurring Land Conflict in Nigeria" .

Time . 28 June 2018.

^ "Farmer-Herder Conflicts on the Rise in Africa" . ReliefWeb. 6 August 2018.

^ Wallensteen, Peter; Sollenberg, Margareta (1995). "After the Cold War: Emerging patterns of armed conflict 1989–94".

Journal of Peace Research .

32 (3): 345– 360.

doi : 10.1177/0022343395032003007 .

S2CID 110533926 .

^ Harbom, Lotta; Wallensteen, Peter (2005).

"Armed conflict and its international dimensions, 1946–2004" (PDF) .

Journal of Peace Research .

42 (5): 623– 635.

doi : 10.1177/0022343305056238 .

S2CID 111270925 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-06-16 . Retrieved 2007-02-18 .

^ "Measuring systemic peace" . Center for Systemic Peace. 30 October 2006. Archived from the original on 16 June 2006 . Retrieved 18 February 2007 .

^ Gilley, Bruce (2004). "Against the concept of ethnic conflict".

Third World Quarterly .

25 (6): 1155– 1166.

doi : 10.1080/0143659042000256959 .

S2CID 121147717 .

^ Fox, Jonathan (2002). "Ethnic minorities and the Clash of Civilizations: A quantitative analysis of Huntington's thesis".

British Journal of Political Science .

32 (3): 415– 434.

doi : 10.1017/S0007123402000170 .

^ Chiozza, Giacomo (2002). "Is there a Clash of Civilizations? Evidence from patterns of international conflict involvement, 1946–97".

Journal of Peace Research .

39 (6): 711– 734.

doi : 10.1177/0022343302039006004 .

JSTOR 1555255 .

S2CID 37203913 .

^ a b Kalyvas, Stathis N. (2006).

The Logic of Violence in Civil War . New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0521854091 .

^ Kolev, Wang (2010). "Ethnic Group Divisions and Clientelism".

APSA Annual Meeting Paper .

SSRN 1644406 .

^ Kitschelt, Herbert (2007).

Patrons, clients, and policies: Patterns of democratic accountability and political competition (PDF) . Cambridge University Press.

^ a b Berenschot, Ward (2010). "The Spatial Distribution of Riots: Patronage and the Instigation of Communal Violence in Gujarat, India".

World Development .

39 (2): 221– 230.

doi : 10.1016/j.worlddev.2009.11.029 .

^ a b c Habyaimana, James (November 2007).

"Why does ethnic diversity undermine public goods provision?" (PDF) .

American Political Science Review .

101 (4): 709– 725.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055407070499 .

S2CID 4498060 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-01-22 . Retrieved 2016-05-07 .

^ a b "Report of the independent international fact-finding mission on Myanmar" (PDF) .

United Nations Human Rights Council . 2018-09-12. Archived from the original on 2020-12-22 . Retrieved 2020-12-10 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ a b c Gilbert, David (2020-09-14).

"Hate Speech on Facebook Is Pushing Ethiopia Dangerously Close to a Genocide" .

Vice .

Archived from the original on 2020-10-14 . Retrieved 2020-11-22 .

^ Lashitew, Addisu (2019-11-08).

"Ethiopia Will Explode if It Doesn't Move Beyond Ethnic-Based Politics" .

Foreign Policy .

Archived from the original on 2020-10-04 . Retrieved 2020-11-22 .

^ Coakley, John (1992). "The resolution of ethnic conflict: Towards a typology".

International Political Science Review .

13 (4): 343– 358.

doi : 10.1177/019251219201300401 .

S2CID 146798940 .

^ John McGarry and Brendan O’Leary (1993) 'Introduction: The macro-political regulation of ethnic conflict', in John McGarry and Brendan O’Leary (eds.) The Politics of Ethnic Conflict Regulation: Case Studies of Protracted Ethnic Conflicts , London: Routledge, pp. 1-40 ^ a b c d e Hechter, Michael (2000).

Containing Nationalism . New York: Oxford University Press.

^ a b c Stroschein, Sherrill (November 2014). "Consociational Settlements and Reconstruction: Bosnia in Comparative Perspective (1995- Present)".

Annals of the American Academy .

doi : 10.1177/0002716214544459 .

S2CID 8830183 .

^ Kaufman, Stuart (Fall 1996). "Spiraling to Ethnic War: Elites, Masses, and Moscow in Moldova's Civil War".

International Security .

21 (2): 108– 138.

doi : 10.1162/isec.21.2.108 .

S2CID 57559698 .

^ a b c Howard, Lisa Morje (October 2012). "The Ethnocracy Trap".

Journal of Democracy .

23 (4): 155– 169.

doi : 10.1353/jod.2012.0068 .

S2CID 145795576 .

^ a b c Bieber, Florian (2001). "Challenge of Democracy in Divided Societies: Lessons from Bosnia-- Challenges for Kosovo".

Reconstructing Multiethnic Societies: The Case of Bosnia-Hercegovina . Ashgate Press. pp.

109– 121.

^ Guss, Jason; Siroky, David S. (2012). "Living with Heterogeneity: Bridging the Ethnic Divide in Bosnia".

Comparative Sociology .

doi : 10.1163/156913312X638570 .

^ a b Stroschein, Sherill (December 2008). "Making or Breaking Kosovo: Applications of Dispersed State Control".

Perspectives on Politics .

6 (4): 655.

doi : 10.1017/s153759270808184x .

S2CID 154841501 .

^ a b Horowitz, Donald (1992).

A Democratic South Africa? Constitutional Engineering in a Divided Society . University of California Press. pp.

167– 173.

^ Suny, Ronald (1993).

The Revenge of the Past Nationalism, Revolution, and the Collapse of the Soviet Union . Stanford University Press.

^ Bunce, Valerie (1998). "Subversive Institutions: The End of Soviet State in Comparative Perspective".

Post-Soviet Affairs .

14 (4): 323– 354.

doi : 10.1080/1060586X.1998.10641456 .

^ Derluguian, Georgi M. (1999). "Ethnofederalism and Ethnonationalism: The Separatist politics of Chechnya and Tatarstan: Sources or Resources?".

International Journal of Public Administration .

22 ( 9– 10): 1387– 1428.

doi : 10.1080/01900699908525435 .

^ Buchanan, Allen (1995). "Morality of Secession". In Kymlicka, Will (ed.).

Rights of Minority Cultures . Oxford University Press.

^ Gagnon, V.P. (2004).

The Myth of Ethnic War: Serbia and Croatia in the 1990s . Cornell University Press.

^ a b c Osipov, Alexander (2013). "Non-Territorial Autonomy during and after Communism: In the Wrong or Right Place?".

Journal on Ethnopolitics and Minority Issues in Europe .

^ a b c d Coakley, John (1994). "Approaches to the Resolution of Ethnic Conflict: The Strategy of Non-territorial Autonomy".

International Political Science Review .

15 (3): 297– 314.

doi : 10.1177/019251219401500305 .

S2CID 154019481 .

^ a b c d Wolff, Stefan.

"A Consociational Theory of Conflict Management" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-02-18 . Retrieved 2016-05-07 .

^ a b Smith, David J. "Challenges of Non-Territorial Autonomy in Contemporary Central and Eastern Europe".

Challenge of Non-Territorial Autonomy: Theory and Practice . Peter Lang.

^ Dalle Mulle, Emmanuel (2016). "Belgium and the Brussels Question: The Role of Non-Territorial Autonomy".

Ethnopolitics .

^ a b Clarke, Charles. "Preface: Using the Ideas of 'Non-Territorial Autonomy' to Avoid Violent Conflict and Meet the Modern Challenges of Nationalism".

The Challenge of Non-Territorial Autonomy . Peter Lang.

^ Sen, Amartya (2007).

Identity and Violence: The Illusion of Destiny . Penguin.

^ Meyjes (also: Posthumus Meyjes), Gregory Paul (2012) 'Multi-Ethnic Conflicts in U.S. Military Theatres Overseas: Intercultural Imperatives', in Volker Franke and Robert H. "Robin" Dorff (eds.) Conflict Management: A Tool for U.S. National Security Strategy , Carlisle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War College, pp. 381-438 ^ Meyjes (also: Posthumus Meyjes), Gregory Paul (2007) 'Plan "C" is for Culture: out of Iraq – Opportunity,' Landpower Essay 07-4, May 2007, Arlington, VA: Association of the United States Army.

^ a b c d e f Varshney, Ashutosh (April 2001).

"Ethnic Conflict and Civil Society: India and Beyond" (PDF) .

World Politics .

53 (3): 362– 398.

doi : 10.1353/wp.2001.0012 .

S2CID 73642565 .

^ a b Pickering, Paula (January 2006).

"Generating social capital for bridging ethnic divisions in the Balkans: Case studies of two Bosniak cities" (PDF) .

Ethnic and Racial Studies .

29 : 79– 103.

doi : 10.1080/01419870500352397 .

S2CID 217510530 .

External links [ edit ] European Centre for Minority Issues INCORE International Conflict Research Political Studies Association Specialist Group on Ethnopolitics Minority Rights Group International Party-Directed Mediation: Facilitating Dialogue Between Individuals by Gregorio Billikopf , free complete book PDF download, at the University of California (3rd Edition, 2014). Special focus on multiethnic and multicultural conflicts.

Party-Directed Mediation from Internet Archive (3rd Edition, multiple file formats including PDF, EPUB, and others) v t e Ethnicity Concepts Clan Ethnic group Ethnographic group Ethnolinguistic group Ethnonational group Ethnoreligious group Ethnographic realism Diaspora Immigration / Emigration Hyphenated ethnicity Indigenous peoples In-group and out-groups Meta-ethnicity Metroethnicity Minority group Influence Monoethnicity Nation Nationality Panethnicity Polyethnicity Population Race Supraethnicity Symbolic ethnicity Tribe Ethnology Anthropology Ethnic studies Ethnoarchaeology Ethnobiology Ethnobotany Ethnoecology Ethnomycology Ethnozoology Ethnocinema Ethnogeology Ethnography Autoethnography Clinical Critical Institutional Netnography Online Person-centered Salvage Transidioethnography Video Ethnohistory Ethnolinguistics Ethnology Ethnomathematics Ethnostatistics Ethnomedicine Ethnomethodology Ethnomuseology Ethnomusicology Ethnophilosophy Ethnopoetics Ethnopsychopharmacology Ethnoscience Ethnosemiotics Ethnotaxonomy Groups by region World Contemporary ethnic groups Countries by ethnic groups Africa Americas Indigenous Canada Greenland Mexico United States Caribbean Central America South America Asia Central Asia East Asia Northern Asia South Asia Southeast Asia West Asia Australia Aboriginal groups Torres Strait Islanders Europe Oceania Indigenous European Identity and ethnogenesis Cross-race effect Cultural assimilation Cultural identity Demonym Development Endonym Ethnarch Ethnic flag Ethnic option Ethnic origin Ethnic religion Ethnicity in censuses Ethnofiction Ethnonym Folk religion Historical Imagined community Kinship Legendary progenitor Linguistic homeland Mores Mythomoteur Nation-building Nation state National language National myth Origin myth Pantribal sodality Statistext Tribal name Tribalism Detribalization Neotribalism White ethnic Multiethnic society Consociationalism Cultural appropriation Diaspora politics Dominant minority Ethnic democracy Ethnic enclave Ethnic interest group Ethnic majority Ethnic media Ethnic nationalism Ethnic pornography Ethnic theme park Ethnoburb Ethnocracy Ethnographic film Ethnographic village Ethnopluralism Indigenous rights Middleman minority Minority rights Model minority Model minority myth Multinational state Ideology and ethnic conflict Allophilia Ethnic bioweapon Ethnic cleansing Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnic party Ethnic penalty Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Ethnic violence Ethnic riots Ethnocentrism Ethnocide Ethnofuturism Ethnosymbolism Indigenism Indigenization Nativism Remigration Separatist movements Xenocentrism Xenophilia Xenophobia Related Minzu (anthropology) v t e Racism Types of racism Aversive Colorism Covert Cultural Cyber Environmental Formal Gendered Institutional Internalized Patent Laissez-faire Linguistic Neocolonial Romantic Scientific Societal Substantive Symbolic Manifestations of racism Anti-miscegenation laws Apartheid Biological determinism Discrimination based on nationality Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic jokes Ethnic slurs Ethnic stereotype Hate crime Hate speech Hate group Hypodescent / Hyperdescent Racial capitalism Racialization Racial hierarchy Racial nationalism Racial profiling Racial segregation Racism by region Global apartheid Africa South Africa Zimbabwe Asia China Japan North Korea South Korea Thailand Vietnam Arab world Libya Saudi Arabia Sudan Australia Europe Denmark France Germany Italy Poland Portugal Russia Soviet Union Spain Ukraine United Kingdom Middle East Iran Israel Palestine Turkey North America Canada United States Mexico South America Argentina Brazil Chile Racism by target Arab Asians Chinese Chinese Americans Zainichi Chinese Japanese Japanese Americans Japanese Koreans Korean Zainichi Koreans Vietnamese Black African Americans Arab Women Mexican Native Americans Jewish Anti-racism Jewish Americans In Jewish communities LGBT Middle Eastern Muslim Romani Slavic Wine industry Racial supremacy Black supremacy White supremacy White Related topics Ableism Alt-right Anti-racism Casteism Ethnic plastic surgery Go back to where you came from Herrenvolk democracy Interminority racism in the United States Hispanics/Latinos Lynching Passing Perpetual foreigner Psychometrics of racism Race and sexuality Race card Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racial misrepresentation Racial figleaf Racial integration Racial quota Racism in sport in Australia Reverse racism Sociology of race and ethnic relations Xenophobia Category Commons Index v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Poland Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ethnic_conflict&oldid=1303838394 " Categories : Ethnic conflict Conflict (process) Wars by type Hidden categories: CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles to be expanded from October 2022 All articles to be expanded This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 10:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ethnic conflict 40 languages Add topic

