Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Notable buildings 3 Hobson's Conduit 4 Gallery 5 References Toggle the table of contents Trumpington Street 1 language 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 52°12′03″N 0°07′09″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.2009°N 0.1192°E ﻿ / 52.2009; 0.1192 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Street in central Cambridge, England Not to be confused with Trumpington High Street or Trumpington Road .

The Trumpington Street façade of Pembroke College , with the chapel on the right, the first building to be built by Sir Christopher Wren St Catharine's College viewed from Trumpington Street, showing the open court Trumpington Street is a major historic street in central Cambridge , England.

[ 1 ] At the north end it continues as King's Parade where King's College is located. To the south it continues as Trumpington Road (the A1134 ), an arterial route out of Cambridge, at the junction with Lensfield Road .

History [ edit ] Corpus Christi College New Court seen from Trumpington Street In 1361, at Spittle End, the leper hospital of St Anthony and St Eligius was founded.

[ 2 ] Addenbrooke's Hospital was founded in 1766 on Trumpington Street, but it has since relocated to larger premises further out of the city. The Cambridge Judge Business School is now on the original site of the hospital, the Old Addenbrooke's Site .

[ 3 ] Until the 19th century, Trumpington Street was at the edge of development to the south of Cambridge.

[ 2 ] Notable buildings [ edit ] The University of Cambridge colleges St Catharine's College , Corpus Christi College , Pembroke College , and Peterhouse are all on Trumpington Street. Pembroke College also fronts onto the adjoining Pembroke Street . Further south is Fitzwilliam Museum , the main museum of the university. At the southern end is the main site of the Cambridge University Engineering Department .

Little St Mary's Parish Church , is next to Peterhouse (just to the north) on the corner of Trumpington Street and Little St Mary's Lane. The first church here was called St Peter-without-Trumpington Gate.
The former Emmanuel United Reformed Church building, built to a design of James Cubitt in 1875, is also located on Trumpington Street; this now forms part of Pembroke College's Mill Lane Project development site.

At the northern end on the corner of Corpus Christi College facing King's Parade is the Corpus Clock , a new artwork installed in 2008.

Hobson's Conduit [ edit ] The Trumpington Street branch of Hobson's Conduit still functions as sluices along each side of the street. At this point, it is known as the Pem (east side) and Pot (west side).

[ 4 ] The Cambridge City Council 's Drainage Engineer controls flow through the sluices and generally lets water flow in the open conduits in the street between the months of April and September. Feeds run into Peterhouse and Pembroke College.  A run also used to feed into the basement of the old Addenbrooke's Hospital, now the Judge Business School.

[ 5 ] Trumpington Street, Corpus Christi College.

Gallery [ edit ] The main entrance of the Fitzwilliam Museum , facing Trumpington Street.

The Pitt Building, former headquarters of the Cambridge University Press , on Trumpington Street.

Little St Mary's Church , on the corner of Little St Mary's Lane and Trumpington Street.

The former Emmanuel United Reformed Church building (now part of Pembroke College ) on Trumpington Street.

Front of the college Peterhouse on Trumpington Street.

Hobson's Conduit running in a sluice along the street towards Peterhouse .

References [ edit ] ^ Trumpington Street , Cambridge City Council .

Archived 27 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ a b Trumpington Street Archived 16 July 2011 at the Wayback Machine , 800 Years of Death and Disease in Cambridge , Stride Design Ltd, 2009.

^ Official Map: Old Addenbrooke's Site , University of Cambridge , 800 Years 1209–2009.

^ "Janus Glossary of terms: Pot" .

^ "Hobson's Conduit" .

52°12′03″N 0°07′09″E ﻿ / ﻿ 52.2009°N 0.1192°E ﻿ / 52.2009; 0.1192 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trumpington_Street&oldid=1270874660 " Categories : Streets in Cambridge History of Cambridge St Catharine's College, Cambridge Corpus Christi College, Cambridge Pembroke College, Cambridge Peterhouse, Cambridge Cambridge University Press Fitzwilliam Museum Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2025 Use British English from August 2015 Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 January 2025, at 17:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trumpington Street 1 language Add topic

