Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background Toggle Background subsection 1.1 Decoupling 1.2 Resource depletion 1.3 Ecological footprint 1.4 Sustainable development 1.5 "Rebound effect" 1.6 Mitigation of climate change and determinants of 'growth' 1.7 Open Localism 1.8 Feminism 1.9 Decolonialism 1.10 Policies 1.11 Popularity 2 Degrowth in the Global South 3 Origins of the movement Toggle Origins of the movement subsection 3.1 Club of Rome reports 3.2 Lasting influence of Georgescu-Roegen 3.3 Ecological and social issues 4 Movement Toggle Movement subsection 4.1 Conferences 4.2 International Degrowth Network 4.3 Relation to other social movements 5 Scholarly reviews 6 Critiques Toggle Critiques subsection 6.1 Criticisms 6.1.1 Ineffectiveness and better alternatives 6.1.2 Negative connotation 6.1.3 Systems theoretical critique 6.1.4 Marxist critique 6.2 Challenges 6.2.1 Lack of macroeconomics for sustainability 6.2.2 Political and social spheres 6.2.3 Land privatisation 6.2.4 Agriculture 6.3 Dilemmas 6.3.1 Healthcare 7 See also 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 Reference details 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Degrowth 39 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Italiano Latina Latviešu Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political, economic and social movement The neutrality of this article is disputed .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please do not remove this message until conditions to do so are met .

( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Not to be confused with downsizing or shrinkage .

Part of a series on Ecological economics Humanity's economic system viewed as a subsystem of the global environment Concepts Carbon fee and dividend Carrying capacity Ecological market failure Ecological model of competition Ecosystem services Embodied energy Energy accounting Entropy pessimism Index of Sustainable Economic Welfare Natural capital Spaceship Earth Steady-state economy Sustainability, 'weak' vs 'strong' Uneconomic growth People Serhiy Podolynsky Frederick Soddy Karl William Kapp Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen Kenneth E. Boulding E. F. Schumacher Robert Ayres Herman Daly Joan Martinez Alier Richard B. Norgaard Robert Costanza Tim Jackson Clive Spash Jason Hickel Julia Steinberger Giorgos Kallis Organizations: International Society for Ecological Economics Works Wealth, Virtual Wealth and Debt The Entropy Law and the Economic Process The Limits to Growth Small Is Beautiful Prosperity Without Growth Ecological Economics (journal) Related topics Agrowth Degrowth Eco-socialism Ecofeminism Environmental economics Environmental ethics Environmental justice Externality Green politics Planetary boundaries Post-growth Social metabolism Thermodynamics Thermoeconomics Unequal exchange v t e Degrowth is an academic and social movement [ 1 ] aimed at the planned and democratic reduction of production and consumption as a solution to purported social-ecological crises.

[ 2 ] Commonly cited policy goals of degrowth include reducing the environmental impact of human activities, redistributing income and wealth within and between countries, and encouraging a shift from materialistic values to a convivial and participatory society.

[ 3 ] Degrowth is a multi-layered concept that combines critiques of capitalism , colonialism , patriarchy , productivism , and utilitarianism , while envisioning more caring, just, convivial, happy, and democratic societies.

[ 2 ] Degrowth is critical of the concept of growth in gross domestic product as a measure of human and economic development .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 1 ] It argues that modern capitalism's unitary focus on growth causes widespread ecological damage and is unnecessary for the further increase of human living standards .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Degrowth's main argument is that an infinite expansion of the economy is fundamentally contradictory to the finiteness of material resources on Earth. It argues that economic growth measured by GDP should be abandoned as a policy objective. Policy should instead focus on economic and social metrics such as life expectancy , health , education , housing , and ecologically sustainable work as indicators of both ecosystems and human well-being.

[ 9 ] Degrowth theorists posit that this would increase human living standards and ecological preservation even as GDP growth slows.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 1 ] Degrowth, an unorthodox school of thought , occupies a niche in academic literature and faces substantial criticism.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] Critics describe it as a vague concept that fails to offer an effective strategy for reducing environmental harm, ignores rebound effects , and has little social or political support, whereas price incentives through environmental taxes or tradable permits are much more effective.

[ 16 ] Critics also note that far-reaching degrowth scenarios are projected to increase extreme poverty , with no historical precedent of the poorest benefiting in a shrinking economy.

[ 17 ] Systematic reviews describe degrowth research as largely normative opinions rather than analysis, with most proposals lacking precision, depth, and concrete policy design, and rarely using quantitative or qualitative data, formal modelling, or representative samples, while empirical and system-wide analyses remain scarce.

[ 18 ] [ 2 ] [ 19 ] [ 12 ] Alternatives to degrowth include green growth (economic growth and sustainability are deemed compatible) and agrowth (agnostic on growth, focusing on reducing environmental harm through effective instruments, regardless of whether the economy is growing, stagnant, or contracting), [ 20 ] [ 21 ] as well as ideologies such as eco-socialism and eco-anarchism .

[ 22 ] Background [ edit ] The "degrowth" movement arose from concerns over the consequences of the productivism and consumerism associated with industrial societies (whether capitalist or socialist ) including: [ 23 ] The reduced availability of energy sources (see peak oil ); The destabilization of Earth's ecosystems upon which all life on Earth depends (see Holocene Extinction , Anthropocene , global warming , pollution , current biodiversity loss , planetary boundaries ); The rise of negative societal side-effects ( unsustainable development , poorer health , poverty , social inequality ); and The ever-expanding use of resources by Global North countries to satisfy lifestyles that consume more food and energy, and produce greater waste, at the expense of the Global South (see neocolonialism ).

A 2025 review of research literature on degrowth concluded that degrowth scholars are skeptical of the feasibility of achieving an equitable economic slowdown within a capitalist framework. This skepticism stems from the structural reliance of capitalism on continuous growth driven by competition. As a result, degrowth advocates argue for a deliberate and democratically guided overhaul of the economic system. Such a transformation aims to significantly reduce environmental harm, address inequality, and enhance overall well-being.

[ 24 ] Decoupling [ edit ] Main article: Eco-economic decoupling Examples of countries with eco-economic decoupling The concept of decoupling denotes decoupling economic growth, usually measured in GDP growth , GDP per capita growth or GNI per capita growth [ 25 ] from the use of natural resources and greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.

Absolute decoupling refers to GDP growth coinciding with a reduction in natural resource use and GHG emissions, while relative decoupling describes an increase in resource use and GHG emissions lower than the increase in GDP growth.

[ 26 ] The degrowth movement heavily critiques this idea and argues that absolute decoupling is only possible for short periods, specific locations, or with small mitigation rates.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] In 2021 NGO European Environmental Bureau called stated that there is "no empirical evidence supporting the existence of a decoupling of economic growth from environmental pressures on anywhere near the scale needed to deal with environmental breakdown", and that reported cases of existing eco-economic decouplings either depict relative decoupling and/or are observed only temporarily and/or only on a local scale, arguing that alternatives to eco-economic decoupling are needed.

[ 28 ] This is supported by several other studies which state that absolute decoupling is highly unlikely to be achieved fast enough to prevent global warming over 1.5 °C or 2 °C, even under optimistic policy conditions.

[ 29 ] In a review paper Hickel and Kallis argue that “ green growth ” lacks empirical validity, citing evidence that high-income nations cannot achieve absolute reductions in resource use or cut emissions fast enough to stay within the 2 °C carbon budget while pursuing GDP growth at historical rates.

[ 30 ] Environmental scientist Rikard Warlenius argues in the scientific journal Ecological Economics that the pessimistic assessment of Hickel regarding decoupling is not based on robust arguments but rather on mystifications of what decoupling entails. They assume a maximum annual reduction in the carbon intensity of GDP of 4%, combined with the notion that global GDP must decline or converge. Based on these assumptions, limiting global warming to 1.5 °C would be impossible, and even the 2 °C target would only be achievable if high-income countries reduced their economies by more than 90%, and middle-income countries by around 70%. However, such a scenario is widely considered politically unrealistic, which could in turn jeopardize the climate targets themselves. Warlenius also finds their pessimism unfounded, noting that decoupling above 4% has already occurred and that there is no reason strong policy measures could not achieve even higher rates. Warlenius finds it surprising that scholars such as Hickel and Kallis could not imagine more “aggressive policies” than those used in their model. Under normal conditions, economic growth increases emissions (while carbon intensity declines), and degrowth (recession) stabilizes emissions. At the same time, however, growth is likely better positioned than degrowth to create the conditions necessary for ambitious climate action, such as the deep, transformative, and costly transitions outlined by the IPCC .

[ 31 ] Resource depletion [ edit ] Main article: Resource depletion Degrowth proponents argue that economic expansion must be met with a corresponding increase in resource consumption.

[ 32 ] Non-renewable resources, like petroleum, have a limited supply and can eventually be exhausted. Similarly, renewable resources can also be depleted if they are harvested at unsustainable rates for prolonged periods. An example of this depletion is evident in the case of caviar production in the Caspian Sea .

[ 33 ] Supporters of degrowth contend that reducing demand is the sole permanent solution to bridging the demand gap. To sustain renewable resources, both demand and production must be regulated to levels that avert depletion and ensure environmental sustainability. Transitioning to a society less reliant on oil is crucial for averting societal collapse as non-renewable resources dwindle.

[ 34 ] Degrowth can also be interpreted as a plea for resource reallocation, aiming to halt unsustainable practices of transforming certain entities into resources, such as non-renewable natural resources. Instead, the focus shifts towards identifying and utilizing alternative resources, such as renewable human capabilities.

[ 35 ] Ecological footprint [ edit ] Main article: Ecological footprint The ecological footprint measures human demand on the Earth's ecosystems by comparing human demand with the Earth's ecological capacity to regenerate. It represents the amount of biologically productive land and sea area required to regenerate the resources a human population consumes and to absorb and render harmless the corresponding waste .

Sustainable development [ edit ] Further information: Sustainable development Degrowth ideology opposes all manifestations of productivism, which advocates that economic productivity and growth should be the primary objectives of human organization. Consequently, it stands in opposition to the prevailing model of sustainable development .

[ 36 ] While the concept of sustainability aligns with some aspects of degrowth philosophy, sustainable development, as conventionally understood, is based on mainstream development principles focused on augmenting economic growth and consumption. Degrowth views sustainable development as contradictory because any development reliant on growth within a finite and ecologically strained context is deemed intrinsically unsustainable.

[ 37 ] Critics of degrowth argue that a slowing of economic growth would result in increased unemployment , increased poverty , and decreased income per capita. Many who believe in negative environmental consequences of growth still advocate for economic growth in the South, even if not in the North. Slowing economic growth would fail to deliver the benefits of degrowth — self-sufficiency and material responsibility — and would indeed lead to decreased employment. Rather, degrowth proponents advocate the complete abandonment of the current (growth) economic model, suggesting that relocalizing and abandoning the global economy in the Global South would allow people of the South to become more self-sufficient and would end the overconsumption and exploitation of Southern resources by the North.

[ 37 ] Supporters of degrowth view it as a potential method to shield ecosystems from human exploitation. Within this concept, there is an emphasis on communal stewardship of the environment, fostering a symbiotic relationship between humans and nature. Degrowth recognizes ecosystems as valuable entities beyond their utility as mere sources of resources.

[ 23 ] During the Second International Conference on degrowth, discussions encompassed concepts like implementing a maximum wage and promoting open borders. Degrowth advocates an ethical shift that challenges the notion that high-resource consumption lifestyles are desirable. Additionally, alternative perspectives on degrowth include addressing perceived historical injustices perpetrated by the global North through centuries of colonization and exploitation, advocating for wealth redistribution. Determining the appropriate scale of action remains a focal point of debate within degrowth movements.

[ 23 ] Some researchers believe that the world is poised to experience a Great Transformation, either by disastrous events or intentional design. They maintain that ecological economics must incorporate Postdevelopment theories , Buen vivir , and degrowth to affect the change necessary to avoid these potentially catastrophic events.

[ 38 ] A 2022 paper by Mark Diesendorf found that limiting global warming to 1,5 degrees with no overshoot would require a reduction of energy consumption. It describes (chapters 4–5) degrowth toward a steady state economy as possible and probably positive. The study ends with the words: "The case for a transition to a steady-state economy with low throughput and low emissions, initially in the high-income economies and then in rapidly growing economies, needs more serious attention and international cooperation." [ 39 ] "Rebound effect" [ edit ] Main article: Rebound effect (conservation) Technologies designed to reduce resource use and improve efficiency are often touted as sustainable or green solutions. Degrowth literature, however, warns about these technological advances due to the " rebound effect ", also known as Jevons paradox .

[ 40 ] This concept is based on observations that when a less resource-exhaustive technology is introduced, behavior surrounding the use of that technology may change, and consumption of that technology could increase or even offset any potential resource savings.

[ 41 ] In light of the rebound effect, proponents of degrowth hold that the only effective "sustainable" solutions must involve a complete rejection of the growth paradigm and a move to a degrowth paradigm. There are also fundamental limits to technological solutions in the pursuit of degrowth, as all engagements with technology increase the cumulative matter-energy throughput .

[ 42 ] However, the convergence of digital commons of knowledge and design with distributed manufacturing technologies may arguably hold potential for building degrowth future scenarios.

[ 43 ] Mitigation of climate change and determinants of 'growth' [ edit ] 1.5 °C scenario map under different levels of energy-GDP decoupling, RE speed and NETs [ 44 ] Scientists report that degrowth scenarios, where economic output either "declines" or declines in terms of contemporary economic metrics such as current GDP , have been neglected in considerations of 1.5 °C scenarios reported by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), finding that investigated degrowth scenarios "minimize many key risks for feasibility and sustainability compared to technology-driven pathways" with a core problem of such being feasibility in the context of contemporary decision-making of politics and globalized rebound- and relocation-effects.

[ 45 ] [ 44 ] However, structurally realigning 'economic growth' and socioeconomic activity determination-structures may not be widely debated in both the degrowth community and in degrowth research which may largely focus on reducing economic growth either more generally or without structural alternative but with e.g. nonsystemic political interventions. Similarly, many green growth advocates suggest that contemporary socioeconomic mechanisms and metrics – including for economic growth – can be continued with forms of nonstructural "energy-GDP decoupling".

[ 46 ] [ additional citation(s) needed ] A study concluded that public services are associated with higher human need satisfaction and lower energy requirements while contemporary forms of economic growth are linked with the opposite, with the contemporary economic system being fundamentally misaligned with the twin goals of meeting human needs and ensuring ecological sustainability , suggesting that prioritizing human well-being and ecological sustainability would be preferable to overgrowth in current metrics of economic growth.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] The word 'degrowth' was mentioned 28 times in the United Nations IPCC Sixth Assessment Report by Working Group III published in April 2022.

[ 49 ] Open Localism [ edit ] Open localism is a concept that has been promoted by the degrowth community when envisioning an alternative set of social relations and economic organization. It builds upon the political philosophies of localism and is based on values such as diversity, ecologies of knowledge, and openness. Open localism does not look to create an enclosed community but rather to circulate production locally in an open and integrative manner.

[ 50 ] Open localism is a direct challenge to the acts of closure regarding identitarian politics.

[ 51 ] By producing and consuming as much as possible locally, community members enhance their relationships with one another and the surrounding environment.

Degrowth's ideas around open localism share similarities with ideas around the commons while also having clear differences. On the one hand, open localism promotes localized, common production in cooperative-like styles similar to some versions of how commons are organized. On the other hand, open localism does not impose any set of rules or regulations creating a defined boundary, rather it favours a cosmopolitan approach.

[ 52 ] Feminism [ edit ] The degrowth movement builds on feminist economics that has criticized measures of economic growth like the GDP as it excludes work mainly done by women such as unpaid care work (the work performed to fulfill people's needs) and reproductive work (the work sustaining life), first argued by Marilyn Waring .

[ 53 ] Further, degrowth draws on the critique of socialist feminists like Silvia Federici and Nancy Fraser claiming that capitalist growth builds on the exploitation of women's work.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Instead of devaluing it, degrowth centers the economy around care, [ 4 ] proposing that care work should be organized as a commons .

[ 56 ] Centering care goes hand in hand with changing society's time regimes. Degrowth scholars propose a working time reduction.

[ 57 ] As this does not necessarily lead to gender justice, the redistribution of care work has to be equally pushed.

[ 56 ] A concrete proposal by Frigga Haug is the 4-in-1 perspective that proposes 4 hours of wage work per day, freeing time for 4 hours of care work, 4 hours of political activities in a direct democracy , and 4 hours of personal development through learning.

[ 58 ] Furthermore, degrowth draws on materialist ecofeminisms that state the parallel of the exploitation of women and nature in growth-based societies and proposes a subsistence perspective conceptualized by Maria Mies and Ariel Salleh .

[ 59 ] [ 60 ] Synergies and opportunities for cross-fertilization between degrowth and feminism were proposed in 2022, through networks including the Feminisms and Degrowth Alliance (FaDA).

[ 56 ] FaDA argued that the 2023 launch of Degrowth Journal created "a convivial space for generating and exploring knowledge and practice from diverse perspectives".

[ 61 ] Decolonialism [ edit ] A relevant concept within the theory of degrowth is decolonialism , which refers to putting an end to the perpetuation of political, social, economic, religious, racial, gender, and epistemological relations of power, domination, and hierarchy of the global north over the global south.

[ 62 ] The foundation of this relationship lies in the claim that the imminent socio-ecological collapse is caused by capitalism , which is sustained by economic growth . This economic growth in turn can only be maintained under the eaves of colonialism and extractivism , perpetuating asymmetric power relationships between territories.

[ 63 ] Colonialism is understood as the appropriation of common goods , resources, and labor, which is antagonistic to degrowth principles.

Through colonial domination, capital depresses the prices of inputs and colonial cheapening occurs to the detriment of the oppressed countries.

[ citation needed ] Degrowth criticizes these appropriation mechanisms and enclosure of one territory over another and proposes a provision of human needs through disaccumulation, de-enclosure, and decommodification. It also reconciles with social movements and seeks to recognize the ecological debt to achieve the catch-up , which is postulated as impossible without decolonization.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] Policies [ edit ] There is a wide range of policy proposals associated with degrowth. In 2022, Nick Fitzpatrick, Timothée Parrique and Inês Cosme conducted a comprehensive survey of degrowth literature from 2005 to 2020 and found 530 specific policy proposals with "50 goals, 100 objectives, 380 instruments".

[ 2 ] The survey found that the ten most frequently cited proposals were: universal basic incomes , work-time reductions, job guarantees with a living wage , maximum income caps, declining caps on resource use and emissions , not-for-profit cooperatives , holding deliberative forums , reclaiming the commons , establishing ecovillages , and housing cooperatives .

To address the common criticism that such policies are not realistically financeable, economic anthropologist Jason Hickel sees an opportunity to learn from modern monetary theory , which argues that monetary sovereign states can issue the money needed to pay for anything available in the national economy without the need to first tax their citizens for the requisite funds.

[ 65 ] Taxation, credit regulations and price controls could be used to mitigate the inflation this may generate, while also reducing consumption.

Popularity [ edit ] In a representative survey of Spanish citizens, Drews and van den Bergh (2016) found that a majority regarded economic growth and environmental sustainability as compatible ( green growth ), about one-third preferred either disregarding economic growth as a policy goal (agrowth) or halting it altogether (degrowth).

[ 66 ] Keyßer and Lenzen (2021) state that, compared with technology-driven pathways, a degrowth transition faces substantial political barriers. They cautioned, however, that not examining degrowth scenarios could contribute to a self-fulfilling prophecy, as deeming such scenarios infeasible from the outset would keep them marginalised in public discourse.

[ 67 ] Researcher Kristian Kongshøj, drawing on public opinion studies, argues that  environmentalism is often associated with left-wing ideology, particularly when moving from general attitudes and values to views on specific policy measures with material and distributional implications. He suggests that strong environmental policies—especially when combined with social policies positioned firmly on the political left—may have difficulty attracting support beyond a predominantly left-leaning constituency. According to Kongshøj, perceptions of degrowth as a form of ecosocialism could therefore pose a challenge for its broader public acceptance.

[ 68 ] Khan et al. (2022) surveyed public opinion in Sweden on five policies associated with ecosocial and degrowth-oriented agendas: reduced working hours, a wealth tax, a maximum income, a basic income, and a meat tax.

Reduced working hours received the highest level of support (about 50%), followed by a wealth tax (40%) and a meat tax (30%), while a maximum income and a basic income were supported by only 25% and 15% of respondents, respectively. In Europe, support for basic income varied from large minorities to clear majorities in favour, with higher support in countries where existing safety nets are less encompassing. The authors reported that political left–right orientation was a stronger predictor of support for such degrowth related policies than pro-environmental attitudes.

[ 68 ] Drews and Van den Bergh surveyed scientists’ views on economic growth versus the environment. The respondents were academics publishing on the relationship between economic growth and environmental sustainability, drawn from an interdisciplinary group of economists, environmental social scientists, and environmental natural scientists, selected based on their publications in leading peer-reviewed journals. Less than 1% favoured pursuing economic growth regardless of its environmental impacts (“growth at all costs”), 42% supported the view that growth can be made compatible with environmental sustainability (“green growth”), 31% preferred to ignore economic growth as a policy objective (“agrowth”), and 17% favoured halting economic growth altogether (“degrowth”).

[ 69 ] Another survey of nearly 800 climate policy researchers around the world found that 28% support degrowth.

[ 70 ] Degrowth in the Global South [ edit ] Main article: Degrowth in the global south The discussion around degrowth in the Global South highlights the importance of moving beyond a one-size-fits-all model of socio-ecological transformation. Rather than applying degrowth uniformly, scholars emphasize the need for context-specific approaches that account for historical inequalities, global economic dependencies, and diverse local realities. Emerging frameworks call for greater inclusion of Southern perspectives, attention to structural imbalances in global trade and finance, and the recognition of alternative visions of prosperity rooted in indigenous knowledge and post-development thought. In this sense, degrowth is increasingly framed not as a prescriptive agenda, but as an open, evolving dialogue shaped by multiple pathways toward ecological balance and social justice.

[ 71 ] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] [ 74 ] Origins of the movement [ edit ] The contemporary degrowth movement can trace its roots back to the anti-industrialist trends of the 19th century, developed in Great Britain by John Ruskin , William Morris and the Arts and Crafts movement (1819–1900), in the United States by Henry David Thoreau (1817–1862), and in Russia by Leo Tolstoy (1828–1910).

[ 75 ] Degrowth movements draw on the values of humanism , enlightenment , anthropology and human rights .

[ 76 ] Club of Rome reports [ edit ] In 1968, the Club of Rome , a think tank headquartered in Winterthur , Switzerland , asked researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology for a report on the limits of our world system and the constraints it puts on human numbers and activity. The report, called The Limits to Growth , published in 1972, became the first significant study to model the consequences of economic growth.

[ 77 ] The reports (also known as the Meadows Reports) are not strictly the founding texts of the degrowth movement, as these reports only advise zero growth , and have also been used to support the sustainable development movement. Still, they are considered the first studies explicitly presenting economic growth as a key reason for the increase in global environmental problems such as pollution, shortage of raw materials, and the destruction of ecosystems .

The Limits to Growth: The 30-Year Update was published in 2004, [ 78 ] and in 2012, a 40-year forecast from Jørgen Randers , one of the book's original authors, was published as 2052: A Global Forecast for the Next Forty Years .

[ 79 ] In 2021, Club of Rome committee member Gaya Herrington published an article comparing the proposed models' predictions against empirical data trends.

[ 80 ] The BAU2 ("Business as Usual 2") scenario, predicting "collapse through pollution", [ 80 ] as well as the CT ("Comprehensive Technology") scenario, predicting exceptional technological development and gradual decline, were found to align most closely with data observed as of 2019.

[ 80 ] In September 2022, the Club of Rome released updated predictive models and policy recommendations in a general-audiences book titled Earth for all – A survival guide to humanity.

[ 81 ] Lasting influence of Georgescu-Roegen [ edit ] Main article: Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen See also: Steady-state economy  § Declining-state economy The degrowth movement recognises Romanian American mathematician , statistician and economist Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen as the main intellectual figure inspiring the movement.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] : 548f [ 84 ] : 1742 [ 85 ] : xi [ 6 ] : 1f In his 1971 work, The Entropy Law and the Economic Process , Georgescu-Roegen argues that economic scarcity is rooted in physical reality; that all natural resources are irreversibly degraded when put to use in economic activity; that the carrying capacity of Earth—that is, Earth's capacity to sustain human populations and consumption levels—is bound to decrease sometime in the future as Earth's finite stock of mineral resources is presently being extracted and put to use; and consequently, that the world economy as a whole is heading towards an inevitable future collapse.

[ 86 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Georgescu-Roegen's intellectual inspiration to degrowth dates back to the 1970s. When Georgescu-Roegen delivered a lecture at the University of Geneva in 1974, he made a lasting impression on the young, newly graduated French historian and philosopher, Jacques Grinevald , who had earlier been introduced to Georgescu-Roegen's works by an academic advisor. Georgescu-Roegen and Grinevald became friends, and Grinevald devoted his research to a closer study of Georgescu-Roegen's work. As a result, in 1979, Grinevald published a French translation of a selection of Georgescu-Roegen's articles entitled Demain la décroissance: Entropie – Écologie – Économie ('Tomorrow, the Decline: Entropy – Ecology – Economy').

[ 87 ] Georgescu-Roegen, who spoke French fluently, approved the use of the term décroissance in the title of the French translation. The book gained influence in French intellectual and academic circles from the outset. Later, the book was expanded and republished in 1995 and once again in 2006; however, the word Demain ('tomorrow') was removed from the book's title in the second and third editions.

[ 84 ] : 1742 [ 87 ] [ 88 ] : 15f By the time Grinevald suggested the term décroissance to form part of the title of the French translation of Georgescu-Roegen's work, the term had already permeated French intellectual circles since the early 1970s to signify a deliberate political action to downscale the economy on a permanent and voluntary basis.

[ 23 ] : 195 Simultaneously, but independently, Georgescu-Roegen criticised the ideas of The Limits to Growth and Herman Daly 's steady-state economy in his article, "Energy and Economic Myths", delivered as a series of lectures from 1972, but not published before 1975. In the article, Georgescu-Roegen stated the following: [Authors who] were set exclusively on proving the impossibility of growth ... were easily deluded by a simple, now widespread, but false syllogism : Since exponential growth in a finite world leads to disasters of all kinds, ecological salvation lies in the stationary state. ... The crucial error consists in not seeing that not only growth, but also a zero-growth state, nay, even a declining state that does not converge toward annihilation, cannot exist forever in a finite environment.

[ 89 ] : 366f ... [T]he important, yet unnoticed point [is] that the necessary conclusion of the arguments in favor of that vision [of a stationary state] is that the most desirable state is not a stationary, but a declining one.

Undoubtedly, the current growth must cease, nay, be reversed.

[ 89 ] : 368f [Emphasis in original] When reading this particular passage of the text, Grinevald realised that no professional economist of any orientation had ever reasoned like this before. Grinevald also realised the congruence of Georgescu-Roegen's viewpoint and the French debates occurring at the time; this resemblance was captured in the title of the French edition. The translation of Georgescu-Roegen's work into French both fed on and gave further impetus to the concept of décroissance in France—and everywhere else in the francophone world—thereby creating something of an intellectual feedback loop.

[ 84 ] : 1742 [ 88 ] : 15f [ 23 ] : 197f By the 2000s, when décroissance was to be translated from French back into English as the catchy banner for the new social movement, the original term "decline" was deemed inappropriate and misdirected for the purpose: "Decline" usually refers to an unexpected, unwelcome, and temporary economic recession , something to be avoided or quickly overcome. Instead, the neologism "degrowth" was coined to signify a deliberate political action to downscale the economy on a permanent, conscious basis—as in the prevailing French usage of the term—something good to be welcomed and maintained, or so followers believe.

[ 83 ] : 548 [ 88 ] : 15f [ 90 ] : 874–876 When the first international degrowth conference was held in Paris in 2008, the participants honoured Georgescu-Roegen and his work.

[ 91 ] : 15f, 28, et passim In his manifesto on Petit traité de la décroissance sereine ("Farewell to Growth"), the leading French champion of the degrowth movement, Serge Latouche , credited Georgescu-Roegen as the "main theoretical source of degrowth".

[ 82 ] Likewise, Italian degrowth theorist Mauro Bonaiuti considered Georgescu-Roegen's work to be "one of the analytical cornerstones of the degrowth perspective".

[ 85 ] Ecological and social issues [ edit ] In January 1972, Edward Goldsmith and Robert Prescott-Allen—editors of The Ecologist —published A Blueprint for Survival , which called for a radical programme of decentralisation and deindustrialization to prevent what the authors referred to as "the breakdown of society and the irreversible disruption of the life-support systems on this planet".

[ 92 ] In 2019, a summary for policymakers of the largest, most comprehensive study to date of biodiversity and ecosystem services was published by the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services . The report was finalised in Paris. The main conclusions: Over the last 50 years, the state of nature has deteriorated at an unprecedented and accelerating rate.

The main drivers of this deterioration have been changes in land and sea use, exploitation of living beings, climate change , pollution and invasive species. These five drivers, in turn, are caused by societal behaviors, from consumption to governance.

Damage to ecosystems undermines 35 of 44 selected UN targets, including the UN General Assembly's Sustainable Development Goals for poverty, hunger, health, water, cities' climate, oceans and land. It can cause problems with food, water and humanity's air supply.

To fix the problem, humanity needs transformative change, including sustainable agriculture , reductions in consumption and waste, fishing quotas and collaborative water management. Page 8 of the report proposes "enabling visions of a good quality of life that do not entail ever-increasing material consumption" as one of the main measures. The report states that "Some pathways chosen to achieve the goals related to energy, economic growth, industry and infrastructure and sustainable consumption and production (Sustainable Development Goals 7, 8, 9 and 12), as well as targets related to poverty, food security and cities (Sustainable Development Goals 1, 2 and 11), could have substantial positive or negative impacts on nature and therefore on the achievement of other Sustainable Development Goals".

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] In a June 2020 paper published in Nature Communications , the authors state that a change in economic paradigms is imperative to prevent environmental destruction , and suggest a range of ideas from the reformist (agrowth) to the radical (degrowth, eco-socialism and eco-anarchism ).

[ 22 ] In a 2022 comment published in Nature , Hickel, Giorgos Kallis , Juliet Schor , Julia Steinberger and others say that both the IPCC and the IPBES "suggest that degrowth policies should be considered in the fight against climate breakdown and biodiversity loss, respectively".

[ 7 ] Movement [ edit ] Conferences [ edit ] The degrowth movement has included several international and national conferences.

[ 95 ] The First International Conference on Economic Degrowth for Ecological Sustainability and Social Equity in Paris (2008) was a discussion about the financial, social, cultural, demographic, and environmental crisis caused by the deficiencies of capitalism and an explanation of the main principles of degrowth.

[ 96 ] Subsequent international degrowth conferences have been held every one to two years in various cities around the world. Separately, two conferences have been organised as cross-party initiatives of Members of the European Parliament : the Post-Growth 2018 Conference [ 97 ] and the Beyond Growth 2023 Conference, [ 98 ] both held in the European Parliament in Brussels. Inspired by the European Parliament conferences, a wave of national parliamentary conferences have taken place in Europe 2ince 2023 under the "Beyond Growth" banner. These have included Italy, Austria, Denmark, Ireland, France, Lisbon, Norway, Spain, Estonia and Germany.

[ 99 ] International Degrowth Network [ edit ] The conferences have also been accopanied by informal, yearly degrowth assemblies since 2018, to build community, increase collaboration and promote a cohesive narrative between degrowth groups and allies across countries.

[ 100 ] The 4th International Assembly in Zagreb in 2023 discussed a proposal to create a more intentional organisational structure and led to the creation of the International Degrowth Network, which has organised the 5th and 6th assemblies in 2024 and 2025 respectively.

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] Relation to other social movements [ edit ] The degrowth movement has a variety of relations to other social movements and alternative economic visions, which range from collaboration to partial overlap. The Konzeptwerk Neue Ökonomie (Laboratory for New Economic Ideas), which hosted the 2014 international Degrowth conference in Leipzig, has published a project entitled "Degrowth in movement(s)" in 2017, which maps relationships with 32 other social movements and initiatives.

[ 103 ] The relation to the environmental justice movement is especially visible.

[ 75 ] Although not explicitly called degrowth, movements inspired by similar concepts and terminologies can be found around the world, including Buen Vivir [ 104 ] in Latin America, the Zapatistas in Mexico, the Kurdish Rojava or Eco-Swaraj in India, and the sufficiency economy in Thailand.

[ 105 ] The Cuban economic situation has also been of interest to degrowth advocates because its limits on growth were socially imposed (although as a result of geopolitics), and has resulted in positive health changes.

[ 106 ] Another set of movements the degrowth movement finds synergy with is the wave of initiatives and networks inspired by the commons , where resources are sustainably shared in a decentralised and self-managed manner, instead of through capitalist organization.

[ 9 ] [ 75 ] [ 107 ] For example, initiatives inspired by commons could be food cooperatives, open-source platforms, and group management of resources such as energy or water.

Commons-based peer production also guides the role of technology in degrowth, where conviviality and socially useful production are prioritised over capital gain.

[ 108 ] This could happen in the form of cosmolocalism , which offers a framework for localising collaborative forms of production while sharing resources globally as digital commons, to reduce dependence on global value chains.

[ 109 ] Scholarly reviews [ edit ] Several systematic reviews and critical assessments of degrowth literature have been published since 2017.

[ 3 ] [ 12 ] [ 2 ] [ 19 ] [ 18 ] [ 110 ] The first inventory of degrowth policy proposals was conducted by Cosme et al. (2017), who reviewed 128 academic articles in English published between 2007 and 2014. The authors concluded about three-quarters of the proposals were top-down public policies with a national focus. The study found that proposals tended to prioritise social equity over ecological sustainability, with even less emphasis on efficient allocation, and gave limited attention to topics such as implications for the Global South, demographic issues, and the role of the state in sustainability transitions.

[ 3 ] A 2017 review reviewed 91 articles between 2006 and 2015. Until 2012, articles largely constitute conceptual essays endorsed by normative claims. After 2012, they found a gradual shift from activist-driven narratives and conceptual essays to more formal economics, material and energy flow accounting, and empirical case studies. However in general the empirical assessments in the economic domain are scarce; attempts to quantify the increasing costs and disutility of continued economic growth are largely absent from the degrowth discourse. Only 17 out of 91 articles separate introduction, methods, results, and discussion as it is typically done in the natural sciences. one third of the reviewed articles contain normative claims that are inaccessible to rigid scientific testing, often adhering to a vision that wants to reclaim democracy and re-politicize economic relations. Also engineering and technological innovation have been dealt with only anecdotally in the degrowth discourse. They conclude the academic degrowth discourse could benefit from rigid hypotheses testing through input-output modelling, material flow analysis, life-cycle assessments, or social surveys.

[ 12 ] A 2022 systematic review concluded most degrowth proposals lack precision, depth, and overlook interactions between policies. They also note that policy dropping is commonplace, with policies mentioned only in passing and without much analytical effort to connect them to the issues at hand.

[ 2 ] A 2024 systematic review of 561 degrowth studies over the past 10 years showed that most were of poor quality: almost 90% were opinions rather than analysis, few used quantitative or qualitative data, and even fewer ones used formal modelling. The data-based studies often relied on small or non-representative samples, and therefore tended not to satisfy accepted standards for good research. Also most studies offered subjective policy advice, but lacked policy evaluation and integration with insights from the literature on environmental/climate policies. Of the few studies on public support , a majority concluded that degrowth strategies and policies are socially and politically infeasible. Few adopted a system-wide perspective, instead focusing on small, local cases without clear implications for the economy as a whole. The study also notes there is no clear increase in the share of studies employing modelling or data analysis; the percentage fluctuates over the years between 0% and 15%.

[ 19 ] A 2024 systematic review of 951 peer-reviewed articles (2008–2022) found strong evidence of a widespread lack of concrete policy proposals in degrowth research, with about two-thirds of the literature containing no concrete distributional or monetary policy proposals. They conclude, that there appear to be few efforts in degrowth literature to develop and test concrete economic policies. They also concluded there is a low degree of collaboration among authors. The authors criticise that much degrowth research uncritically assumes that a monetary system with interest-bearing debt and private banks inevitably leads to continuous economic growth. This assumption is contested, and uncritically adopting it can, according to them, result in a misjudgment of the current economic reality, thereby hindering the development of feasible and effective transition strategies towards a degrowth economy.

[ 18 ] A 2025 comparative review of degrowth and post-growth modeling studies published in Ecological Economics analyzed 75 peer-reviewed articles published between 2000 and 2023. The review found that "the reviewed studies represent a broad quantitative knowledge base demonstrating that, at least in the Global North, further growth is not necessary to achieve well-being while a reduction of the socio-economic metabolism would considerably facilitate the pursuit of ambitious climate goals ." However, the authors noted that many models rely on a narrow set of policy proposals (like working time reduction, maximum income caps, carbon taxes , or a universal basic income ) and call for more inclusive, geographically diverse approaches.

[ 110 ] Critiques [ edit ] Criticisms [ edit ] According to environmental economist Jeroen C. J. M. van den Bergh , degrowth is often seen as an ambiguous concept due to its various interpretations, which can lead to confusion rather than a clear and constructive debate on environmental policy. Many interpretations of degrowth do not offer effective strategies for reducing environmental impact or transitioning to a sustainable economy, whereas price incentives through environmental taxes or tradable permits are much more effective. Additionally, degrowth is unlikely to gain significant social or political support, making it an ineffective strategy for achieving environmental sustainability.

[ 16 ] Ineffectiveness and better alternatives [ edit ] Jeroen C. J. M. van den Bergh argues in the scientific journal Ecological Economics that a focus solely on reducing consumption (or consumption degrowth) may lead to rebound effects . For instance, reducing consumption of certain goods and services might result in an increase in spending on other items, as disposable income remains unchanged. Alternatively, it could lead to savings, which would provide additional funds for others to borrow and spend. He emphasizes the importance of (global) environmental policies, such as pricing externalities through environmental taxes or tradable permits , which incentivize behavior changes that reduce environmental impact and which provide essential information for consumers and help manage rebound effects.

[ 16 ] Jeroen C. J. M. van den Bergh argues for an agnostic attitude toward economic growth, called agrowth . According to him, environmental policy should not be aimed at pursuing or avoiding growth in the hope of reducing environmental damage, but at direct deployment of effective instruments such as pricing externalities (for example, via carbon taxes or emission rights). Whether the economy grows, stagnates or shrinks as a result is of secondary importance.

[ 21 ] A study published in Scientific Reports modelled two degrowth scenarios: one where the Global North undergoes negative growth and societal transformation, and another where degrowth is adopted globally. The former shows that such changes in the Global North are possible without severely harming long-term global socioeconomic development, though they only lead to a modest 10.5% reduction in future carbon emissions by 2100, and thus don't solve the climate crisis. In contrast, a global negative growth scenario could significantly cut future carbon emissions by 45%. However, it would also drastically hinder global development goals , particularly the elimination of poverty . Even with strong global policies aimed at supporting the poor (like increased cash transfers , improved income equality , and no military spending), this global degrowth approach is projected to increase global extreme poverty by 15 percentage points by 2100. The study also notes an absolute decoupling of long-term economic growth from human development outcomes has historically never been observed.

[ 17 ] David Schwartzman argues in the academic journal Capitalism Nature Socialism that the degrowth program falls short in analyzing the qualitative aspects of economic growth and places too much emphasis on local economies without giving sufficient attention to global, transnational political strategies. Critics also point out that the debate on economic growth should distinguish between harmful and beneficial forms of growth. For example, growth in polluting products is problematic, whereas growth in knowledge, culture, or sustainable technologies can be desirable.

[ 111 ] Economist Wim Naudé notes that Western economies are already in a state resembling degrowth, which he characterizes as a Great Stagnation . This period is marked by declining levels of entrepreneurship , innovation , scientific output, and research productivity. In a context of prolonged economic stagnation, the economy increasingly resembles a zero-sum system. In such a scenario, improvements in the well-being of one group or country may come at the expense of another, leading to conflict.

[ 112 ] Naudé refers to the analysis by Thomas Piketty (2014), arguing that low growth leads to very substantial inequality in the distribution of wealth over the long run.

[ 113 ] According to Naudé economic stagnation makes societies less innovative and less resilient, which hinders the timely development of the technological and organizational innovations needed to prevent ecological overshoot and tackle climate change.

[ 112 ] Major critics point out that degrowth is politically unpalatable, defaulting towards the more free market green growth orthodoxy as a set of solutions that is more politically tenable.

[ 114 ] [ 15 ] Per Espen Stoknes , director of the Center for Green Growth at the BI Norwegian Business School , stated: “The degrowth people are living a fantasy where they assume that if you bake a smaller cake, then for some reason, the poorest will get a bigger share of it. That has never happened in history.” [ 15 ] Ezra Klein of the New York Times claims problems with the current SDG process are political rather than technical and degrowth has less plausibility than green growth as a democratic political platform.

[ 114 ] Negative connotation [ edit ] The use of the term "degrowth" is criticized for being detrimental to the degrowth movement because it could carry a negative connotation, [ 115 ] in opposition to the positively perceived "growth".

[ 116 ] "Growth" is associated with the "up" direction and positive experiences, while "down" generates the opposite associations.

[ 117 ] Research in political psychology has shown that the initial negative association of a concept, such as of "degrowth" with the negatively perceived "down", can bias how the subsequent information on that concept is integrated at the unconscious level.

[ 118 ] At the conscious level, degrowth can be interpreted negatively as the contraction of the economy, [ 115 ] [ 119 ] although this is not the goal of a degrowth transition, but rather one of its expected consequences.

[ 120 ] In the current economic system, a contraction of the economy is associated with a recession and its ensuing austerity measures, job cuts, or lower salaries.

[ 119 ] Noam Chomsky commented on the use of the term: "When you say 'degrowth' it frightens people. It's like saying you're going to have to be poorer tomorrow than you are today, and it doesn't mean that." [ 121 ] Since "degrowth" contains the term "growth", there is also a risk of the term having a backfire effect , which would reinforce the initial positive attitude toward growth.

[ 115 ] "Degrowth" is also criticized for being a confusing term, since its aim is not to halt economic growth as the word implies. Instead, " a-growth " is proposed as an alternative concept that emphasizes that growth ceases to be an important policy objective, but that it can still be achieved as a side-effect of environmental and social policies.

[ 119 ] [ 122 ] Systems theoretical critique [ edit ] In stressing the negative rather than the positive side(s) of growth, the majority of degrowth proponents remain focused on (de-)growth, thus giving continued attention to the issue of growth, leading to continued attention to the arguments that sustainable growth is possible. One way to avoid giving attention to growth might be extending from the economic concept of growth, which proponents of both growth and degrowth commonly adopt, to a broader concept of growth that allows for the observation of growth in other sociological characteristics of society. A corresponding "recoding" of "growth-obsessed", capitalist organizations was proposed by Steffen Roth.

[ 123 ] Marxist critique [ edit ] See also: Steady-state economy  § Capitalism without growth Traditional Marxists distinguish between two types of value creation: that which is useful to humankind, and that which only serves the purpose of accumulating capital.

[ 6 ] : 86–87 Traditional Marxists consider that it is the exploitative nature and control of the capitalist production relations that is the determinant and not the quantity. According to Jean Zin, while the justification for degrowth is valid, it is not a solution to the problem.

[ 124 ] Other Marxist writers have adopted positions close to the de-growth perspective. For example, John Bellamy Foster [ 125 ] and Fred Magdoff, [ 126 ] in common with David Harvey , Immanuel Wallerstein , Paul Sweezy and others focus on endless capital accumulation as the basic principle and goal of capitalism. This is the source of economic growth and, in the view of these writers, results in an unsustainable growth imperative . Foster and Magdoff develop Marx's own concept of the metabolic rift, something he noted in the exhaustion of soils by capitalist systems of food production, though this is not unique to capitalist systems of food production as seen in the Aral Sea . Many degrowth theories and ideas are based on neo-Marxist theory.

[ 6 ] Foster emphasizes that degrowth "is not aimed at austerity, but at finding a 'prosperous way down' from our current extractivist, wasteful, ecologically unsustainable, maldeveloped, exploitative, and unequal, class-hierarchical world." [ 127 ] Challenges [ edit ] Lack of macroeconomics for sustainability [ edit ] It is reasonable for society to worry about recession as economic growth has been the unanimous goal around the globe in the past decades. However, in some advanced countries, there are attempts to develop a model for a regrowth economy. For instance, the Cool Japan strategy has proven to be instructive for Japan, which has been a static economy for almost decades.

[ 128 ] Political and social spheres [ edit ] According to some scholars in Sociology, the growth imperative is deeply entrenched in market capitalist societies such that it is necessary for their stability.

[ 129 ] Moreover, the institutions of modern societies, such as the nation state , welfare , labor market , education , academia , law and finance , have co-evolved with growth to sustain them.

[ 130 ] A degrowth transition thus requires not only a change of the economic system but of all the systems on which it relies. As most people in modern societies are dependent on those growth-oriented institutions, the challenge of a degrowth transition also lies in individual resistance to move away from growth.

[ 131 ] Land privatisation [ edit ] Baumann, Alexander and Burdon suggest that "the Degrowth movement needs to give more attention to land and housing costs, which are significant barriers hindering true political and economic agency and any grassroots driven degrowth transition." [ 132 ] They claim that land – a necessity like land and air – privatisation creates an absolute economic growth determinant. They point out that even one who is fully committed to degrowth nevertheless has no option but decades of market growth participation to pay rent or mortgage. Because of this, land privatisation is a structural impediment to moving forward that makes degrowth economically and politically unviable. They conclude that without addressing land privatisation (the market's inaugural privatisation – primitive accumulation) the degrowth movement's strategies cannot succeed. Just as land enclosure (privatisation) initiated capitalism (economic growth), degrowth must start with reclaiming land commons.

[ 133 ] Agriculture [ edit ] When it comes to agriculture, a degrowth society would require a shift from industrial agriculture to less intensive and more sustainable agricultural practices such as permaculture or organic agriculture . Still, it is not clear if any of those alternatives could feed the current and projected global population .

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] In the case of organic agriculture, Germany, for example, would not be able to feed its population under ideal organic yields over all of its arable land without meaningful changes to patterns of consumption, such as reducing meat consumption and food waste .

[ 136 ] [ 134 ] Moreover, labour productivity of non-industrial agriculture is significantly lower due to the reduced use or absence of fossil fuels, which leaves much less labour for other sectors .

[ 137 ] Dilemmas [ edit ] Given that modernity has emerged with high levels of energy and material throughput , there is an apparent compromise between desirable aspects of modernity [ 138 ] (e.g., social justice , gender equality , long life expectancy , low infant mortality ) and unsustainable levels of energy and material use.

[ 139 ] Some researchers have said that the decline in income inequality and rise in social mobility occurring under capitalism from the late 1940s to the 1960s was a product of the heavy bargaining power of labor unions and increased wealth and income redistribution during that time; while also commenting on the rise in income inequality in the 1970s following the collapse of labor unions and weakening of state welfare measures.

[ 140 ] Others also argue that modern capitalism maintains gender inequalities by means of advertising, messaging in consumer goods, and social media.

[ 141 ] Another way of looking at the argument that the development of desirable aspects of modernity require unsustainable energy and material use is through the lens of the Marxist tradition , which relates the superstructure (culture, ideology, institutions) and the base (material conditions of life, division of labor). A degrowth society, with its drastically different material conditions, could produce equally drastic changes in society's cultural and ideological spheres.

[ 139 ] The political economy of global capitalism has generated a lot of social and environmental bads , such as socioeconomic inequality and ecological devastation , which in turn have also generated a lot of goods through individualization and increased spatial and social mobility .

[ 142 ] At the same time, some argue the widespread individualization promulgated by a capitalist political economy is a bad due to its undermining of solidarity , aligned with democracy as well as collective, secondary, and primary forms of caring, [ 143 ] and simultaneous encouragement of mistrust of others, highly competitive interpersonal relationships, blame of failure on individual shortcomings, prioritization of one's self-interest, and peripheralization of the conceptualization of human work required to create and sustain people.

[ 143 ] Some argue the political economy of capitalism has allowed social emancipation at the level of gender equality, [ 144 ] disability, sexuality and anti-racism that has no historical precedent. However, others dispute social emancipation as being a direct product of capitalism or question the emancipation that has resulted. The feminist writer Nancy Holmstrom, for example, argues that capitalism's negative impacts on women outweigh the positive impacts, and women tend to be hurt by the system. In her examination of China following the Chinese Communist Revolution , Holmstrom notes that women were granted state-assisted freedoms to equal education, childcare, healthcare, abortion, marriage, and other social supports.

[ 145 ] Doyal and Gough allege that the modern capitalist system is built on the exploitation of female reproductive labor as well as that of the Global South, and sexism and racism are embedded in its structure. Therefore, some theories (such as Eco-Feminism or political ecology ) argue that there cannot be equality regarding gender and the hierarchy between the Global North and South within capitalism .

[ 146 ] The structural properties of growth present another barrier to degrowth as growth shapes and is enforced by institutions, norms, culture, technology, identities, etc. The social ingraining of growth manifests in peoples' aspirations, thinking, bodies, mindsets, and relationships. Together, growth's role in social practices and in socio-economic institutions present unique challenges to the success of the degrowth movement.

[ 147 ] Another potential barrier to degrowth is the need for a rapid transition to a degrowth society due to climate change and the potential negative impacts of a rapid social transition including disorientation, conflict, and decreased well-being.

[ 147 ] In the United States, a large barrier to the support of the degrowth movement is the modern education system, including both primary and higher learning institutions. Beginning in the second term of the Reagan administration, the education system in the US was restructured to enforce neoliberal ideology by means of privatization schemes such as commercialization and performance contracting, implementation of standards and accountability measures incentivizing schools to adopt a uniform curriculum, and higher education accreditation and curricula designed to affirm market values and current power structures and avoid critical thought concerning the relations between those in power, ethics, authority, history, and knowledge.

[ 148 ] The degrowth movement is based on the empirical assumption that resources are finite and growth is limited.

[ 149 ] Co-evolving aspects of global capitalism, liberal modernity, and the market society, are closely tied and will be difficult to separate to maintain liberal and cosmopolitan values in a degrowth society.

[ 142 ] At the same time, the goal of the degrowth movement is progression rather than regression, and researchers have said that neoclassical economic models indicate neither negative nor zero growth would harm economic stability or full employment.

[ 149 ] Several assert the main barriers to the movement are social and structural factors clashing with implementing degrowth measures.

[ 149 ] [ 147 ] [ 150 ] Healthcare [ edit ] One analysis has said there is an apparent trade-off between the ability of modern healthcare systems to treat individual bodies to their last breath and the broader global ecological risk of such an energy and resource intensive care. If this trade-off exists, a degrowth society must choose between prioritizing the ecological integrity and the ensuing collective health or maximizing the healthcare provided to individuals.

[ 151 ] See also [ edit ] A Blueprint for Survival Agrowth Anti-consumerism Critique of political economy Degrowth advocates (category) Political ecology Postdevelopment theory Power Down: Options and Actions for a Post-Carbon World Paradox of thrift The Path to Degrowth in Overdeveloped Countries Post-capitalism Post-growth Productivism Prosperity Without Growth Slow movement Steady-state economy Transition town Uneconomic growth References [ edit ] This article incorporates text by Savin and van den Bergh available under the CC BY 4.0 license.

^ a b c Demaria, Federico; Schneider, François; Sekulova, Filka; Martinez-Alier, Joan (2013). "What is Degrowth? From an Activist Slogan to a Social Movement".

Environmental Values .

22 (2): 191– 215.

Bibcode : 2013EnvV...22..191D .

doi : 10.3197/096327113X13581561725194 .

JSTOR 23460978 .

S2CID 55888884 .

^ a b c d e f Fitzpatrick, Nick; Parrique, Timothée; Cosme, Inês (September 2022).

"Exploring degrowth policy proposals: A systematic mapping with thematic synthesis" .

Journal of Cleaner Production .

365 : 132764.

Bibcode : 2022JCPro.36532764F .

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2022.132764 .

hdl : 10362/150706 .

^ a b c Cosme, Inês; Santos, Rui; O’Neill, Daniel W. (2017).

"Assessing the degrowth discourse: A review and analysis of academic degrowth policy proposals" (PDF) .

Journal of Cleaner Production .

149 : 321– 334.

^ a b Kallis, Giorgos; Demaria, Federico; D'Alisa, Giacomo (2015).

Introduction: Degrowth .

In: Kallis, Giorgos; Demaria, Federico; D'Alisa, Giacomo.

Degrowth: Vocabulary for a New Era . New York: Routledge. pp.

1– 17.

^ Schneider, François; Kallis, Giorgos; Martinez-Alier, Joan (April 2010). "Crisis or opportunity? Economic degrowth for social equity and ecological sustainability. Introduction to this special issue".

Journal of Cleaner Production .

18 (6): 511– 518.

Bibcode : 2010JCPro..18..511S .

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2010.01.014 .

^ a b c d D'Alisa, Giacomo; et al., eds. (2015).

Degrowth: A Vocabulary for a New Era (Book info page containing download samples) . London: Routledge.

ISBN 9781138000766 .

^ a b Hickel, Jason; Kallis, Giorgos; Jackson, Tim; O’Neill, Daniel W.; Schor, Juliet B.; Steinberger, Julia K.; Victor, Peter A.; Ürge-Vorsatz, Diana (15 December 2022). "Degrowth can work — here's how science can help".

Nature .

612 (7940): 400– 403.

Bibcode : 2022Natur.612..400H .

doi : 10.1038/d41586-022-04412-x .

PMID 36510013 .

^ Kallis, Giorgos; Demaria, Federico; d'Alisa, Giacomo (2015). "Degrowth".

International Encyclopedia of the Social & Behavioral Sciences . pp.

24– 30.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-08-097086-8.91041-9 .

ISBN 978-0-08-097087-5 .

^ a b Nelson, Anitra (2024-01-31).

"Degrowth as a Concept and Practice: Introduction" .

The Commons Social Change Library . Retrieved 2024-02-20 .

^ Hickel, Jason (2021).

Less is More: How Degrowth Will Save the World . National Geographic Books. pp.

170– 179.

ISBN 978-1-78609-121-5 .

^ Akbulut, Bengi (2 January 2021). "Degrowth".

Rethinking Marxism .

33 (1): 98– 110.

doi : 10.1080/08935696.2020.1847014 .

S2CID 232116190 .

^ a b c d Weiss, Martin; Cattaneo, Claudio (2017-07-01).

"Degrowth – Taking Stock and Reviewing an Emerging Academic Paradigm" .

Ecological Economics .

137 : 220– 230.

Bibcode : 2017EcoEc.137..220W .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.01.014 .

ISSN 0921-8009 .

PMC 5421156 .

PMID 28674463 .

^ Vandeventer, James Scott; Cattaneo, Claudio; Zografos, Christos (2019).

"A degrowth transition: pathways for the degrowth niche to replace the capitalist-growth regime" .

Ecological Economics .

156 : 272– 286.

^ "Degrowth: what's behind this economic theory and why it matters today" .

World Economic Forum . 2022-06-15 . Retrieved 2023-09-11 .

^ a b c Horowitz, Julia (13 November 2022).

"To save the world, does the economy need to stop growing?" .

CNN .

^ a b c van den Bergh, Jeroen C.J.M. (2011).

"Environment versus growth — A criticism of "degrowth" and a plea for "a-growth" " .

Ecological Economics .

70 (5): 881– 890.

Bibcode : 2011EcoEc..70..881V .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2010.09.035 .

^ a b Moyer, Jonathan D. (2023).

"Modeling transformational policy pathways on low growth and negative growth scenarios to assess impacts on socioeconomic development and carbon emissions" (PDF) .

Scientific Reports .

13 (1): 15996 . Retrieved 5 August 2025 .

^ a b c Engler, John-Oliver; Kretschmer, Max-Friedemann; Rathgens, Julius; Ament, Joe A.; Huth, Thomas; von Wehrden, Henrik (2024-04-01).

"15 years of degrowth research: A systematic review" .

Ecological Economics .

218 : 108101.

Bibcode : 2024EcoEc.21808101E .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2023.108101 .

ISSN 0921-8009 .

^ a b c Savin, Ivan; van den Bergh, Jeroen (2024-12-01).

"Reviewing studies of degrowth: Are claims matched by data, methods and policy analysis?" .

Ecological Economics .

226 : 108324.

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2024.108324 .

hdl : 1871.1/c67d1da2-4c62-4e4c-ae4a-06f215317b25 .

ISSN 0921-8009 .

^ Lehmann, Cathérine; Delbard, Olivier; Lange, Steffen (2022).

"Green growth, a-growth or degrowth? Investigating the attitudes of environmental protection specialists at the German Environment Agency" .

Journal of Cleaner Production .

336 : 130306.

^ a b van den Bergh, Jeroen C. J. M. (February 2017).

"A third option for climate policy within potential limits to growth" .

Nature Climate Change .

7 (2): 107– 112.

Bibcode : 2017NatCC...7..107V .

doi : 10.1038/nclimate3113 .

hdl : 1871.1/55d55cfa-2617-4e8a-b21c-fbc02ee19eea .

^ a b Wiedmann, Thomas; Lenzen, Manfred; Keyßer, Lorenz T.; Steinberger, Julia K.

(2020).

"Scientists' warning on affluence" .

Nature Communications .

11 (3107): 3107.

Bibcode : 2020NatCo..11.3107W .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-020-16941-y .

PMC 7305220 .

PMID 32561753 .

^ a b c d e Demaria, Federico; Schneider, Francois; Sekulova, Filka; Martinez-Alier, Joan (April 2013). "What is Degrowth? From an Activist Slogan to a Social Movement".

Environmental Values .

22 (2): 191– 215.

Bibcode : 2013EnvV...22..191D .

doi : 10.3197/096327113X13581561725194 .

^ Kallis, Giorgos; Hickel, Jason; O’Neill, Daniel W; Jackson, Tim; Victor, Peter A; Raworth, Kate; Schor, Juliet B; Steinberger, Julia K; Ürge-Vorsatz, Diana (2025-01-01).

"Post-growth: the science of wellbeing within planetary boundaries" .

The Lancet Planetary Health .

9 (1): e62 – e78 .

doi : 10.1016/S2542-5196(24)00310-3 .

ISSN 2542-5196 .

PMID 39855235 .

^ Gupta, Shilpi (2 November 2015). "Decoupling: a step toward sustainable development with reference to OECD countries".

International Journal of Sustainable Development & World Ecology .

22 (6): 510– 519.

Bibcode : 2015IJSDW..22..510G .

doi : 10.1080/13504509.2015.1088485 .

^ Haberl, Helmut; Wiedenhofer, Dominik; Virág, Doris; Kalt, Gerald; Plank, Barbara; Brockway, Paul; Fishman, Tomer; Hausknost, Daniel; Krausmann, Fridolin; Leon-Gruchalski, Bartholomäus; Mayer, Andreas (2020-06-10).

"A systematic review of the evidence on decoupling of GDP, resource use and GHG emissions, part II: synthesizing the insights" .

Environmental Research Letters .

15 (6): 065003.

Bibcode : 2020ERL....15f5003H .

doi : 10.1088/1748-9326/ab842a .

S2CID 216453887 .

^ Antal, Miklós; Van Den Bergh, Jeroen C.J.M. (17 February 2016). "Green growth and climate change: conceptual and empirical considerations".

Climate Policy .

16 (2): 165– 177.

Bibcode : 2016CliPo..16..165A .

doi : 10.1080/14693062.2014.992003 .

S2CID 153816870 .

^ a b "Decoupling debunked – Evidence and arguments against green growth as a sole strategy for sustainability" .

EEB – The European Environmental Bureau . Retrieved 2022-05-31 .

^ Hickel, Jason; Kallis, Giorgos (6 June 2020).

"Is Green Growth Possible?" .

New Political Economy .

25 (4): 469– 486.

doi : 10.1080/13563467.2019.1598964 .

S2CID 159148524 .

^ Hickel, Jason; Kallis, Giorgos (2020-06-06).

"Is Green Growth Possible?" .

New Political Economy .

25 (4): 469– 486.

doi : 10.1080/13563467.2019.1598964 .

ISSN 1356-3467 .

S2CID 159148524 .

^ Warlenius, Rikard Hjorth (2023).

"The Limits to Degrowth: Economic and Climatic Consequences of Pessimist Assumptions on Decoupling" .

Ecological Economics .

213 : 107937.

^ Spangenberg, Joachim H.; Polotzek, Lia (19 March 2019).

"Like blending chalk and cheese - the impact of standard economics in IPCC scenarios" (PDF) .

Real-World Economics Review .

87 : 196– 213 – via Paecon.

^ Bardi, Ugo (2018-08-05).

"Peak Caviar" .

The Oil Drum: Europe .

^ "Peak Oil Reports" .

Resilience.org . October 20, 2009.

^ Corvellec, Hervé; Paulsson, Alexander (2023-03-01).

"Resource shifting: Resourcification and de-resourcification for degrowth" .

Ecological Economics .

205 : 107703.

Bibcode : 2023EcoEc.20507703C .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2022.107703 .

S2CID 254388285 .

^ Lorek, Sylvia; Fuchs, Doris (2013).

"Strong sustainable consumption governance – precondition for a degrowth path?" (PDF) .

Journal of Cleaner Production .

38 : 36– 43.

Bibcode : 2013JCPro..38...36L .

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2011.08.008 .

S2CID 49362153 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2024-01-05 . Retrieved 2020-01-17 .

^ a b Latouche, S. (2004).

Degrowth Economics: Why less should be so much more.

Le Monde Diplomatique .

^ Beling, Adrián E.; Vanhulst, Julien; Demaria, Federico; Rabi, Violeta; Carballo, Ana E.; Pelenc, Jérôme (11 September 2017).

"Discursive Synergies for a 'Great Transformation' Towards Sustainability: Pragmatic Contributions to a Necessary Dialogue Between Human Development, Degrowth, and Buen Vivir" .

Ecological Economics .

144 : 304– 313.

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.08.025 . Retrieved 21 July 2020 .

^ Diesendorf, Mark (22 April 2022).

"Scenarios for mitigating CO2 emissions from energy supply in the absence of CO2 removal" .

Climate Policy .

22 (7): 882– 896.

Bibcode : 2022CliPo..22..882D .

doi : 10.1080/14693062.2022.2061407 .

hdl : 1959.4/unsworks_80159 .

^ ( Zehner 2012 ), pp.172–73, 333–34 ^ Binswanger, M. (2001).

"Technological Progress and Sustainable Development: What About the Rebound Effect?" .

Ecological Economics .

36 (1): 119– 32.

Bibcode : 2001EcoEc..36..119B .

doi : 10.1016/S0921-8009(00)00214-7 .

^ Heikkurinen, Pasi (October 2018).

"Degrowth by means of technology? A treatise for an ethos of releasement" (PDF) .

Journal of Cleaner Production .

197 : 1654– 1665.

Bibcode : 2018JCPro.197.1654H .

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.07.070 .

^ Kostakis, Vasilis; Latoufis, Kostas; Liarokapis, Minas; Bauwens, Michel (October 2018). "The convergence of digital commons with local manufacturing from a degrowth perspective: Two illustrative cases".

Journal of Cleaner Production .

197 : 1684– 1693.

Bibcode : 2018JCPro.197.1684K .

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.09.077 .

^ a b Keyßer, Lorenz T.; Lenzen, Manfred (2021-05-11).

"1.5 °C degrowth scenarios suggest the need for new mitigation pathways" .

Nature Communications .

12 (1): 2676.

Bibcode : 2021NatCo..12.2676K .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-22884-9 .

PMC 8113441 .

PMID 33976156 .

Available under CC BY 4.0 .

^ "1.5°C degrowth scenarios suggest need for new mitigation pathways" .

phys.org . Retrieved 14 June 2021 .

Alternative Link Archived 2023-04-10 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Green growth vs degrowth: are we missing the point?" .

Resilience . 2020-12-07 . Retrieved 23 June 2021 .

^ "Securing decent living standards for all while reducing global energy use" .

phys.org . Retrieved 10 July 2021 .

^ Vogel, Jefim; Steinberger, Julia K.; O'Neill, Daniel W.; Lamb, William F.; Krishnakumar, Jaya (29 June 2021).

"Socio-economic conditions for satisfying human needs at low energy use: An international analysis of social provisioning" .

Global Environmental Change .

69 : 102287.

Bibcode : 2021GEC....6902287V .

doi : 10.1016/j.gloenvcha.2021.102287 .

^ Bordera, Juan (27 April 2022).

"How the corporate interests and political elites watered down the world's most important climate report" .

Monthly Review .

^ Schneider, Francois; Sekulova, Filka.

open localism (PDF) . Leipzig.

^ Schneider, François.

"Open-localism: degrowth as a way to challenge social closure" (PDF) .

University of Leeds .

^ Schneider, François; Nelson, Anitra (2018). " 'Open localism'–on Xue and Vansintjan III". In Nelson, Anitra; Schneider, François (eds.).

Housing for Degrowth: Principles, Models, Challenges and Opportunities . Routledge. pp.

223– 230.

ISBN 978-1-351-36523-9 .

^ Waring, Marilyn (1989).

If Women Counted: A New Feminist Economics . London: Macmillan.

ISBN 0-333-49262-5 .

^ Federici, Silvia (17 June 2020).

"Feminism and the Politics of the Commons" . Retrieved 4 April 2022 .

^ Fraser, Nancy (2017).

Crisis of Care? On the Social-Reproductive Contradictions of Contemporary Capitalism .

In: Bhattacharya, Tithi.

Social Reproduction Theory: Remapping Class, Recentering Oppression . London: Pluto Press. pp.

21– 36.

^ a b c Dengler, Corinna; Lang, Miriam (2022). "Commoning Care: Feminist Degrowth Visions for a Socio-Ecological Transformation".

Feminist Economics .

28 (1): 1– 28.

doi : 10.1080/13545701.2021.1942511 .

S2CID 240534324 .

^ Kallis, Giorgos (2018).

Degrowth . Agenda Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-911116-79-0 .

^ Haug, Frigga (2009).

Die Vier-in-einem-Perspektive. Politik von Frauen für eine neue Linke . Hamburg: Argument Verlag.

ISBN 978-978-3-88619-3 .

^ Mies, Maria; Bennholdt-Thomsen, Veronika (1999).

The Subsistence Perspective: Beyond the Globalised Economy . Zed Books.

^ Salleh, Ariel (1997).

Ecofeminism as Politics; Nature, Marx and the Postmodern. When Feminism Fails . pp.

153– 174.

doi : 10.1080/08854300.2018.1509619 .

S2CID 149712144 .

^ Sourayan Mookerjea; Susan Paulson; Corinna Dengler; Nadine Gerner; Taís Sonetti–González; Lina Hansen; Anna Saave (3 May 2023).

"Why are feminist perspectives, analyses, and actions vital to degrowth?" .

Degrowth Journal .

1 : 00046.

ISSN 2977-1951 .

Wikidata Q118151474 . Archived from the original on 4 May 2023.

^ Gómez Vélez, Martha Isabel; Saldarriaga Grisales, Dora Cecilia; López Gil, María Claudia; Zapata Botero, Lina María (2017).

"Estudios decoloniales y poscoloniales. Posturas acerca de la modernidad/colonialidad y el eurocentrismo" [Decolonial and postcolonial studies. Positions on modernity/coloniality and Eurocentrism].

Ratio Juris (in Spanish).

12 (24): 27– 60.

doi : 10.24142/raju.v12n24a2 .

^ a b Hickel, Jason (June 2021).

"The anti-colonial politics of degrowth" .

Political Geography .

88 : 102404.

doi : 10.1016/j.polgeo.2021.102404 .

^ Wuttke, Tobias (19 January 2021).

"Reconciling catch-up industrialisation with de-growth" .

LSE International Development .

[ self-published source?

] ^ Olk, Christopher; Schneider, Colleen; Hickel, Jason (December 2023). "How to pay for saving the world: Modern Monetary Theory for a degrowth transition".

Ecological Economics .

214 : 107968.

Bibcode : 2023EcoEc.21407968O .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2023.107968 .

^ Drews, Stefan; Van Den Bergh, Jeroen C. J. M. (2016).

"Public views on economic growth, the environment and prosperity: Results of a questionnaire survey" .

Global Environmental Change .

39 : 1– 14 . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

^ Keyßer, Lorenz T.; Lenzen, Manfred (2021).

"1.5 °C degrowth scenarios suggest the need for new mitigation pathways" .

Nature Communications .

12 (1): 2676.

doi : 10.1038/s41467-021-22884-9 .

PMC 8127720 .

PMID 33986228 . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

^ a b Kongshøj, Kristian (2023).

"Social policy in a future of degrowth? Challenges for decommodification, commoning and public support" .

Humanities and Social Sciences Communications .

10 (1): 1– 11 . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

^ Drews, Stefan; van den Bergh, Jeroen C. J. M. (2017).

"Scientists' views on economic growth versus the environment: a questionnaire survey among economists and non-economists" (PDF) .

Global Environmental Change .

46 : 88– 103 . Retrieved 11 August 2025 .

^ King, Lewis C.; Savin, Ivan; Drews, Stefan (November 2023).

"Shades of green growth scepticism among climate policy researchers" .

Nature Sustainability .

6 (11): 1316– 1320.

Bibcode : 2023NatSu...6.1316K .

doi : 10.1038/s41893-023-01198-2 .

hdl : 10630/34655 .

ISSN 2398-9629 .

^ Gräbner-Radkowitsch, Claudius; Strunk, Birte (2023-11-01).

"Degrowth and the Global South: The twin problem of global dependencies" .

Ecological Economics .

213 : 107946.

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2023.107946 .

hdl : 10419/273780 .

ISSN 0921-8009 .

^ Dengler, Corinna; Seebacher, Lisa M. (2019-03-01).

"What About the Global South? Towards a Feminist Decolonial Degrowth Approach" .

Ecological Economics .

157 : 246– 252.

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2018.11.019 .

ISSN 0921-8009 .

^ Gerber, Julien-François; Raina, Rajeswari S. (2018-08-01).

"Post-Growth in the Global South? Some Reflections from India and Bhutan" .

Ecological Economics .

150 : 353– 358.

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2018.02.020 .

hdl : 1765/114743 .

ISSN 0921-8009 .

^ Labrecque, Marie France (1996).

"Arturo ESCOBAR, 1995, Encountering Development. The Making and Unmaking of the Third World. Princeton, N.J., Princeton University Press, 290 p." Anthropologie et Sociétés .

20 (1): 222.

doi : 10.7202/015405ar .

ISSN 0702-8997 .

^ a b c D'Alisa, Giacomo; Demaria, Federico; Kallis, Giorgos (2014).

Degrowth: A Vocabulary for a New Era . Routledge. p. 134.

ISBN 978-1-134-44977-4 .

^ D'Alisa, Giacomo; Demaria, Federico; Cattaneo, Claudio (June 2013). "Civil and Uncivil Actors for a Degrowth Society".

Journal of Civil Society .

9 (2): 212– 224.

doi : 10.1080/17448689.2013.788935 .

^ "The Limits to Growth+50" .

Club of Rome . Retrieved 7 November 2023 .

[ unreliable source?

] ^ Meadows, Donella H.; Randers, Jørgen; Meadows, Dennis L. (2004).

The Limits to Growth: The 30-year Update . Chelsea Green.

ISBN 978-1-931498-51-7 .

[ page needed ] ^ Randers, Jorgen (2012).

2052: A Global Forecast for the Next Forty Years . Chelsea Green Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-60358-422-7 .

[ page needed ] ^ a b c Herrington, Gaya (June 2021). "Update to limits to growth: Comparing the World3 model with empirical data".

Journal of Industrial Ecology .

25 (3): 614– 626.

Bibcode : 2021JInEc..25..614H .

doi : 10.1111/jiec.13084 .

S2CID 226019712 .

^ Dixson-Declève, Sandrine; Gaffney, Owen; Ghosh, Jayati; Randers, Jørgen; Rockström, Johan; Stoknes, Per Espen (2022).

Earth for All: A Survival Guide for Humanity . New Society Publishers.

ISBN 978-0-86571-986-6 .

OCLC 1315537859 .

[ page needed ] ^ a b ( Latouche 2009 ), pp. 13-16 ^ a b Kerschner, Christian (2010).

"Economic de-growth vs. steady-state economy" (PDF) .

Journal of Cleaner Production .

18 (6): 544– 551.

Bibcode : 2010JCPro..18..544K .

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2009.10.019 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-04-17 . Retrieved 2016-07-19 .

^ a b c Martínez-Alier, Juan ; et al. (2010).

"Sustainable de-growth: Mapping the context, criticisms and future prospects of an emergent paradigm" (PDF) .

Ecological Economics .

69 (9): 1741– 1747.

Bibcode : 2010EcoEc..69.1741M .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2010.04.017 .

^ a b Bonaiuti, Mauro , ed. (2011).

From Bioeconomics to Degrowth: Georgescu-Roegen's "New Economics" in eight essays (Book info page at publisher's site) . London: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415587006 .

^ Georgescu-Roegen, Nicholas (1971).

The Entropy Law and the Economic Process (Full book accessible at Scribd) . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674257801 .

^ a b Georgescu-Roegen, Nicholas (1995) [1979].

Grinevald, Jacques [in French] ; Rens, Ivo [in French] (eds.).

La Décroissance: Entropie – Écologie – Économie (PDF contains full book) (2nd ed.). Paris: Sang de la terre .

^ a b c Grinevald, Jacques [in French] (2008).

"Introduction to Georgescu-Roegen and Degrowth" (PDF contains all conference proceedings) . In Flipo, Fabrice; Schneider, François [in French] (eds.).

Proceedings of the First International Conference on Economic De-Growth for Ecological Sustainability and Social Equity . Paris: European Society of Ecological Economics. pp.

14– 17.

^ a b Georgescu-Roegen, Nicholas (1975).

"Energy and Economic Myths" (PDF) .

Southern Economic Journal .

41 (3): 347– 381.

doi : 10.2307/1056148 .

JSTOR 1056148 .

^ Kallis, Giorgos (2011).

"In defense of degrowth" (PDF) .

Ecological Economics .

70 (5): 873– 880.

Bibcode : 2011EcoEc..70..873K .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2010.12.007 .

; Kallis, Giorgos (February 2015).

"The Degrowth Alternative" .

Great Transition Initiative .

^ Flipo, Fabrice; Schneider, François [in French] , eds. (2008).

Proceedings of the First International Conference on Economic De-Growth for Ecological Sustainability and Social Equity (PDF contains all conference proceedings) . Paris: European Society of Ecological Economics.

^ "A Blueprint for Survival, The Ecologist Vol. 2, No. 1. Preface" . Archived from the original on 2009-09-07 . Retrieved 2008-04-10 .

^ Summary for policymakers of the global assessment report on biodiversity and ecosystem services of the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (PDF) . the Intergovernmental Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services. 6 May 2019 . Retrieved 10 May 2019 .

^ "Why Biodiversity Loss Hurts Humans as Much as Climate Change Does" .

Deutsche Welle . May 6, 2019 . Retrieved 10 May 2019 .

^ "Conferences" .

Degrowth . Retrieved 2025-07-31 .

^ "Décroissance économique pour la soutenabilité écologique et l'équité sociale" .

events.it-sudparis.eu . Archived from the original on 2009-08-30 . Retrieved 2025-07-31 .

^ "Post-Growth 2018 Conference" . September 2018.

^ "Beyond Growth 2023 Conference" . May 2023.

^ "Degrowth Database" .

Google Docs . Retrieved 2025-07-31 .

^ "Movement History" . International Degrowth Network . Retrieved 2024-05-20 .

^ "Pontevedra Assembly 2024" .

International Degrowth Network . June 2024.

^ "International Degrowth Assembly 2025" .

International Degrowth Network . Retrieved 31 July 2025 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: url-status ( link ) ^ Burkhart, Corinna; Schmelzer, Matthias; Treu, Nina, eds. (2020).

Degrowth in movement(s): exploring pathways for transformation . Winchester, UK Washington, USA: Zero Books.

ISBN 978-1-78904-186-6 .

^ Balch, Oliver (4 February 2013).

"Buen vivir: the social philosophy inspiring movements in South America" .

The Guardian .

^ Kothari, Ashish; Demaria, Federico; Acosta, Alberto (December 2014). "Buen Vivir, Degrowth and Ecological Swaraj: Alternatives to sustainable development and the Green Economy".

Development .

57 ( 3– 4): 362– 375.

doi : 10.1057/dev.2015.24 .

^ Cederlof, Gustav (2023).

The Low-Carbon Contradiction: Energy Transition, Geopolitics, and the Infrastructural State in Cuba . Univ of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-39313-4 .

[ page needed ] ^ Asara, Viviana; Profumi, Emanuele; Kallis, Giorgos (April 2013). "Degrowth, Democracy and Autonomy".

Environmental Values .

22 (2): 217– 239.

Bibcode : 2013EnvV...22..217A .

doi : 10.3197/096327113X13581561725239 .

^ Robra, Ben; Pazaitis, Alex; Giotitsas, Chris; Pansera, Mario (July 2023). "From creative destruction to convivial innovation - A post-growth perspective".

Technovation .

125 : 102760.

doi : 10.1016/j.technovation.2023.102760 .

hdl : 11093/4788 .

^ Kostakis, Vasilis; Niaros, Vasilis; Giotitsas, Chris (September 2023).

"Beyond global versus local: illuminating a cosmolocal framework for convivial technology development" .

Sustainability Science .

18 (5): 2309– 2322.

Bibcode : 2023SuSc...18.2309K .

doi : 10.1007/s11625-023-01378-1 .

^ a b Lauer, Arthur; Capellán-Pérez, Iñigo; Wergles, Nathalie (2025-01-01).

"A comparative review of de- and post-growth modeling studies" .

Ecological Economics .

227 : 108383.

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2024.108383 .

ISSN 0921-8009 .

^ Schwartzman, David (2012-03-01).

"A Critique of Degrowth and its Politics" .

Capitalism Nature Socialism .

23 (1): 119– 125.

doi : 10.1080/10455752.2011.648848 .

ISSN 1045-5752 .

^ a b Naudé, Wim (2023).

"We Already Live in a Degrowth World, and We Do Not Like It" (PDF) .

IZA Discussion Papers . IZA – Institute of Labor Economics.

^ Piketty, Thomas (2014).

Capital in the Twenty-First Century (PDF) . Harvard University Press.

^ a b Bokat-Lindell, Spencer (16 September 2021).

"Opinion | Do We Need to Shrink the Economy to Stop Climate Change?" .

The New York Times .

^ a b c Drews, Stefan; Antal, Miklós (2016). "Degrowth: A 'missile word' that backfires?".

Ecological Economics .

126 : 182– 187.

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2016.04.001 .

^ Warriner, Amy Beth; Kuperman, Victor; Brysbaert, Marc (2013).

"Norms of valence, arousal, and dominance for 13,915 English lemmas" .

Behavior Research Methods .

45 (4): 1191– 1207.

doi : 10.3758/s13428-012-0314-x .

PMID 23404613 .

^ Meier, Brian P.; Robinson, Michael D. (April 2004). "Why the Sunny Side Is Up: Associations Between Affect and Vertical Position".

Psychological Science .

15 (4): 243– 247.

doi : 10.1111/j.0956-7976.2004.00659.x .

PMID 15043641 .

S2CID 31201262 .

^ Lodge, Milton; Taber, Charles S. (2013).

The Rationalizing Voter .

doi : 10.1017/cbo9781139032490 .

ISBN 978-0-521-76350-9 .

[ page needed ] ^ a b c van den Bergh, Jeroen C.J.M.

(2011). "Environment versus growth — A criticism of "degrowth" and a plea for "a-growth" ".

Ecological Economics .

70 (5): 881– 890.

Bibcode : 2011EcoEc..70..881V .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2010.09.035 .

^ Kallis, Giorgos; Kostakis, Vasilis; Lange, Steffen; Muraca, Barbara; Paulson, Susan; Schmelzer, Matthias (17 October 2018).

"Research On Degrowth" .

Annual Review of Environment and Resources .

43 (1): 291– 316.

doi : 10.1146/annurev-environ-102017-025941 .

^ Levy, Andrea; Gonick, Cy; Lukacs, Martin (January 22, 2014).

"The greening of Noam Chomsky: a conversation" .

Canadian Dimension . Open Publishing . Retrieved March 27, 2019 .

^ van den Bergh, Jeroen C. J. M. (February 2017).

"A third option for climate policy within potential limits to growth" .

Nature Climate Change .

7 (2): 107– 112.

Bibcode : 2017NatCC...7..107V .

doi : 10.1038/nclimate3113 .

hdl : 1871.1/55d55cfa-2617-4e8a-b21c-fbc02ee19eea .

^ Roth, Steffen (2016). "Growth and function: a viral research program for next organisations".

International Journal of Technology Management .

72 (4): 296– 309.

doi : 10.1504/IJTM.2016.081574 .

^ L'écologie politique à l'ère de l'information , Ere, 2006, p. 68-69 ^ Foster, John Bellamy ; Clark, Brett; York, Richard (2010).

The ecological rift : capitalism's war on the earth .

Monthly Review .

ISBN 9781583673898 .

OCLC 823169963 – via Internet Archive .

[ page needed ] ^ "Harmony and Ecological Civilization: Beyond the Capitalist Alienation of Nature" .

Monthly Review . June 2012.

^ Foster, John Bellamy (July 1, 2023).

"Planned Degrowth: Ecosocialism and Sustainable Human Development" .

Monthly Review . Retrieved August 20, 2023 .

^ Tunstall, Elizabeth Dori (2015-05-05).

"Degrowth: Japan models design for steady state economies" .

Swinburne University of Technology .

^ Rosa, Hartmut; Dörre, Klaus; Lessenich, Stephan (January 2017).

"Appropriation, Activation and Acceleration: The Escalatory Logics of Capitalist Modernity and the Crises of Dynamic Stabilization" .

Theory, Culture & Society .

34 (1): 53– 73.

doi : 10.1177/0263276416657600 .

^ Luhmann, Niklas (1976). "The Future Cannot Begin: Temporal Structures in Modern Society".

Social Research .

43 : 130– 152.

^ Büchs, Milena; Koch, Max (January 2019).

"Challenges for the degrowth transition: The debate about wellbeing" .

Futures .

105 : 155– 165.

doi : 10.1016/j.futures.2018.09.002 .

^ Baumann, Alex; Alexander, Samuel; Burdon, Peter (Summer 2020).

"Land Commodification as a Barrier to Political and Economic Agency: A Degrowth Perspective" (PDF) .

Journal of Australian Political Economy (86): 379– 405.

Gale A663469452 ProQuest 2539941234 .

^ Baumann, Alex; Alexander, Samuel (21 August 2019).

"Access to land is a barrier to simpler, sustainable living. Public housing could offer a way forward" .

The Conversation .

^ a b Gomiero, Tiziano (October 2018). "Agriculture and degrowth: State of the art and assessment of organic and biotech-based agriculture from a degrowth perspective".

Journal of Cleaner Production .

197 : 1823– 1839.

Bibcode : 2018JCPro.197.1823G .

doi : 10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.03.237 .

S2CID 157265598 .

^ Ferguson, Rafter Sass; Lovell, Sarah Taylor (April 2014).

"Permaculture for agroecology: design, movement, practice, and worldview. A review" .

Agronomy for Sustainable Development .

34 (2): 251– 274.

Bibcode : 2014AgSD...34..251F .

doi : 10.1007/s13593-013-0181-6 .

^ Muller, Adrian; Schader, Christian; El-Hage Scialabba, Nadia; Brüggemann, Judith; Isensee, Anne; Erb, Karl-Heinz; Smith, Pete; Klocke, Peter; Leiber, Florian; Stolze, Matthias; Niggli, Urs (14 November 2017).

"Strategies for feeding the world more sustainably with organic agriculture" .

Nature Communications .

8 (1): 1290.

Bibcode : 2017NatCo...8.1290M .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-017-01410-w .

PMC 5686079 .

PMID 29138387 .

^ Giampietro, Mario; Mayumi, Kozo; Sorman, Alevgül (2011).

The Metabolic Pattern of Societies .

doi : 10.4324/9780203635926 .

ISBN 978-1-136-61994-6 .

[ page needed ] ^ Pinker, Steven (2019-01-03).

Enlightenment Now . Penguin Books.

ISBN 9780141979090 .

OCLC 1083713125 .

^ a b Quilley, Stephen (April 2013). "De-Growth Is Not a Liberal Agenda: Relocalisation and the Limits to Low Energy Cosmopolitanism".

Environmental Values .

22 (2): 261– 285.

Bibcode : 2013EnvV...22..261Q .

doi : 10.3197/096327113X13581561725310 .

^ Nelson, Joel I. (January 2001). "Inequality in america: The case for post-industrial capitalism".

Research in Social Stratification and Mobility .

18 : 39– 62.

doi : 10.1016/S0276-5624(01)80022-6 .

^ Gill, Rosalind; Kanai, Akane (April 2018). "Mediating Neoliberal Capitalism: Affect, Subjectivity and Inequality".

Journal of Communication .

68 (2): 318– 326.

doi : 10.1093/joc/jqy002 .

^ a b Kish, Kaitlin; Quilley, Stephen (2017). "Wicked Dilemmas of Scale and Complexity in the Politics of Degrowth".

Ecological Economics .

142 : 306– 317.

Bibcode : 2017EcoEc.142..306K .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2017.08.008 .

^ a b Lynch, Kathleen; Kalaitzake, Manolis (May 2020). "Affective and calculative solidarity: The impact of individualism and neoliberal capitalism".

European Journal of Social Theory .

23 (2): 238– 257.

doi : 10.1177/1368431018786379 .

hdl : 10197/9557 .

^ Felski, Rita (2009).

Gender of Modernity . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674036796 .

OCLC 1041150387 .

^ Cudd, Ann E.; Holmstrom, Nancy (2011).

Capitalism, For and Against: A Feminist Debate . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1-139-49379-6 .

[ page needed ] ^ Chertkovskaya, Ekaterina; Paulsson, Alexander; Barca, Stefania (2019).

Towards a Political Economy of Degrowth . Rowman & Littlefield International. p. 77.

ISBN 978-1-78660-896-3 .

^ a b c Büchs, Milena; Koch, Max (January 2019).

"Challenges for the degrowth transition: The debate about wellbeing" .

Futures .

105 : 155– 165.

doi : 10.1016/j.futures.2018.09.002 .

^ Saltman, Kenneth; Gabbard, David A., eds. (2003).

Education as Enforcement .

doi : 10.4324/9780203465585 .

ISBN 978-1-134-00081-4 .

[ page needed ] ^ a b c Kallis, Giorgos; Kerschner, Christian; Martinez-Alier, Joan (December 2012). "The economics of degrowth".

Ecological Economics .

84 : 172– 180.

Bibcode : 2012EcoEc..84..172K .

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2012.08.017 .

^ Akbulut, Bengi (2 January 2021). "Degrowth".

Rethinking Marxism .

33 (1): 98– 110.

doi : 10.1080/08935696.2020.1847014 .

^ Zywert, Katharine; Quilley, Stephen (2018). "Health systems in an era of biophysical limits: The wicked dilemmas of modernity".

Social Theory & Health .

16 (2): 188– 207.

doi : 10.1057/s41285-017-0051-4 .

S2CID 149177035 .

Reference details [ edit ] Latouche, Serge (2009) [2007].

Farewell to Growth (PDF contains full book) . Cambridge: Polity Press.

ISBN 978-0-7456-4616-9 .

Zehner, Ozzie (2012).

Green Illusions . Lincoln & London: U. Neb. Press.

ISBN 978-0803237759 .

Further reading [ edit ] Berwyn, Bob (January 9, 2024).

"New Research Explores a Restorative Climate Path for the Earth" .

Inside Climate News .

Hickel, Jason (October 27, 2020).

"Degrowth: A Response to Branko Milanovic" .

Jason Hickel . Retrieved 25 November 2020 .

Komlos, John (2023).

Foundations of Real-World Economics .

doi : 10.4324/9781003174356 .

ISBN 978-1-003-17435-6 .

Milanovic, Branko (November 18, 2017).

"The illusion of 'degrowth' in a poor and unequal world" .

globalinequality . Retrieved 25 November 2020 .

Kronenberg, Jakub; Andersson, Erik; Elmqvist, Thomas; Łaszkiewicz, Edyta; Xue, Jin; Khmara, Yaryna (2024).

"Cities, planetary boundaries, and degrowth" .

The Lancet Planetary Health .

8 (4): e234 – e241 .

doi : 10.1016/S2542-5196(24)00025-1 .

PMID 38580425 .

Saito, Kohei (2024).

Slow Down: The Degrowth Manifesto . Astra House.

ISBN 978-1662602368 .

External links [ edit ] Scholia has a profile for degrowth (Q611217) .

Research and Degrowth International International Degrowth Network Degrowth.info Degrowth Database Degrowth Journal Explore Degrowth Planned Degrowth: Ecosocialism and Sustainable Human Development.

Monthly Review issue on "Planned Degrowth" . July 1, 2023.

v t e Simple living Practices Barter Cord-cutting DIY ethic Downshifting Dry toilet Fasting Forest gardening Freeganism Frugality Gift economy Intentional community Local currency Low-impact development No frills Off-the-grid Permaculture Regift Sattvic diet Self-sufficiency Slow living Slow movement (culture) Subsistence agriculture Sustainable living Sustainable sanitation Veganism Vegetarianism War tax resistance WWOOF Religious and spiritual Amish Aparigraha Asceticism Detachment Distributism Jesus movement Mendicant Mindfulness Monasticism New Monasticism Plain dress Plain people Quakers Rastafari Temperance Testimony of simplicity Tolstoyan movement Twelve Tribes communities Secular movements Back-to-the-land Car-free Environmental Hippie Open Source Ecology Slow Small house Tiny house Transition town Notable writers Wendell Berry Ernest Callenbach G. K. Chesterton Duane Elgin Mahatma Gandhi Richard Gregg Tom Hodgkinson Harlan Hubbard Satish Kumar Helen Nearing Scott Nearing Peace Pilgrim Nick Rosen Dugald Semple E. F. Schumacher George Skene Keith Henry David Thoreau Leo Tolstoy Valluvar Modern-day adherents Mark Boyle Robin Greenfield Ted Kaczynski Pentti Linkola Jim Merkel Peace Pilgrim Suelo Thomas Media " Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral " Escape from Affluenza The Good Life The Moon and the Sledgehammer Mother Earth News The Power of Half Small Is Beautiful Walden Related Affluenza Agrarianism Amateurism Anarcho-primitivism Anti-consumerism Appropriate technology Bohemianism Consumerism Critique of work Deep ecology Degrowth Ecological footprint Food miles Front Porch Republic Green anarchism The good life Global warming Hedonophobia Intentional living commune Rainbow Gathering Itinerant Low-technology Nonviolence Peak oil Sustainability Work–life interface v t e Environmental social science Fields Ecological anthropology Ecological economics Environmental anthropology Environmental crime Environmental economics Environmental communication Environmental history Environmental politics Environmental psychology Environmental sociology Human ecology Human geography Political ecology Regional science Related Agroecology Anthrozoology Behavioral geography Community studies Demography Design ecological environmental Ecological humanities Economics energy thermo Environmental education ethics law science studies justice racism Ethnobiology botany ecology zoology Forestry Industrial ecology Integrated geography Permaculture Political representation of nature Rural sociology Sexecology Science, technology and society science studies Sustainability science studies Systems ecology Urban ecology geography metabolism studies Applied Architecture landscape sustainable Ecopsychology Engineering ecological environmental Green criminology Health environmental epidemiology occupational public Management environmental fisheries forest natural resource waste Planning environmental land use regional spatial urban Policy energy environmental Environment portal Category Concepts Degrees Journals Research institutes Scholars Portals : Business and economics Society Environment NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vmpwj
Cached time: 20250818045719
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.217 seconds
Real time usage: 2.517 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16696/1000000
Revision size: 121509/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 427493/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13961/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 23/100
Expensive parser function count: 24/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 627137/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.484/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11572396/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 3/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2209.865      1 -total
 70.13% 1549.833      1 Template:Reflist
 30.19%  667.093     84 Template:Cite_journal
 10.28%  227.188     36 Template:Cite_book
  5.70%  125.901     14 Template:Fix
  5.32%  117.594     26 Template:Cite_web
  5.15%  113.796      1 Template:Cite_Q
  4.48%   99.071      2 Template:Harv
  4.40%   97.332     17 Template:Rp
  4.35%   96.025      8 Template:Pn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:18287344:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818045719 and revision id 1306518268. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Degrowth&oldid=1306518268 " Categories : Degrowth Simple living Sustainability Green politics Ecological economics Environmental movements Environmental ethics Environmental economics Environmental social science concepts Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from July 2024 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from July 2024 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2024 CS1 interwiki-linked names CS1 maint: url-status Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from August 2025 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from June 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from July 2024 Articles with imported Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 text This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 04:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Degrowth 39 languages Add topic

