Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Political reform and modernisation 3 Geography Toggle Geography subsection 3.1 Climate 3.2 Biodiversity 3.2.1 Animals 3.2.2 Plants 3.2.3 Conservation 3.2.4 Environmental issues 4 Government and politics Toggle Government and politics subsection 4.1 Political culture 4.2 Foreign relations 4.3 Military 4.4 Human rights 4.4.1 1990s ethnic cleansing 4.5 Political divisions 5 Economy Toggle Economy subsection 5.1 Agriculture 5.2 Cryptocurrency 5.3 Industry 5.4 Mining 5.5 Energy 5.6 Financial sector 5.7 Tourism 6 Transport Toggle Transport subsection 6.1 Air 6.2 Road 6.3 Rail 7 Demographics Toggle Demographics subsection 7.1 Ethnic groups 7.2 Cities and towns 7.3 Religion 7.4 Languages 7.5 Health 7.6 Education 8 Culture Toggle Culture subsection 8.1 Dress 8.2 Architecture 8.3 Public holidays 8.4 Mass media 8.5 Film industry 8.6 Music and dance 8.7 Family structure 8.8 Cuisine 8.9 Sports 8.10 Women in the workforce 8.11 Women in the household 8.12 Women's health 9 See also 10 References 11 Notes 12 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 12.1 General 12.2 History 12.3 Geography 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Bhutan 255 languages Acèh Адыгабзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Anarâškielâ अंगिका Ænglisc Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés Armãneashti Arpetan অসমীয়া Asturianu अवधी Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা Banjar 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Basa Banyumasan Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Bislama Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Chavacano de Zamboanga ChiShona ChiTumbuka Corsu Cymraeg Dagbanli Dansk الدارجة Davvisámegiella Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Diné bizaad Dolnoserbski डोटेली ཇོང་ཁ Eesti Ελληνικά Эрзянь Español Esperanto Estremeñu Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Gaeilge Gaelg Gagauz Gàidhlig Galego Gĩkũyũ ગુજરાતી 𐌲𐌿𐍄𐌹𐍃𐌺 गोंयची कोंकणी / Gõychi Konknni 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano বিষ্ণুপ্রিয়া মণিপুরী Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Interlingue Ирон IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan Къарачай-малкъар ქართული کٲشُر Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Коми Kongo Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Лезги Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Livvinkarjala Lombard Magyar मैथिली Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Malti Māori मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Minangkabau 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Novial Occitan ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ पालि Pangasinan Pangcah پنجابی ပအိုဝ်ႏဘာႏသာႏ Papiamentu پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Picard Piemontèis Tok Pisin Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Sakizaya Gagana Samoa संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Sardu Scots Seediq Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي SiSwati Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Sranantongo Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça တႆး Tayal తెలుగు Tetun ไทย Тоҷикӣ Lea faka-Tonga ᏣᎳᎩ ತುಳು Türkçe Türkmençe Twi Удмурт Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Volapük Võro 文言 Winaray Wolof 吴语 Xitsonga ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Betawi Kadazandusun Kumoring ꠍꠤꠟꠐꠤ Tolışi ⵜⴰⵎⴰⵣⵉⵖⵜ ⵜⴰⵏⴰⵡⴰⵢⵜ Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 27°25′01″N 90°26′06″E ﻿ / ﻿ 27.417°N 90.435°E ﻿ / 27.417; 90.435 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Country in South Asia Not to be confused with Bohtan , Butuan , or Butane .

Kingdom of Bhutan འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་ཁབ ( Dzongkha ) Druk gyal khab Flag Emblem Anthem: འབྲུག་ཙན་དན Druk Tsenden "The Thunder Dragon Kingdom" Capital and largest city Thimphu 27°28.0′N 89°38.5′E ﻿ / ﻿ 27.4667°N 89.6417°E ﻿ / 27.4667; 89.6417 Official languages Dzongkha Religion (2020) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] 74.7% Buddhism 22.6% Hinduism 1.9% Bon 0.8% others Demonym(s) Bhutanese Government Unitary parliamentary semi-constitutional monarchy • Dragon King Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck • Prime Minister Tshering Tobgay Legislature Parliament • Upper house National Council • Lower house National Assembly Formation • Unification of Bhutan 1616–1634 • Period of Desi administration 1650–1905 • Start of the Wangchuck dynasty 17 December 1907 • Bhutan–India treaty 8 August 1949 • Current constitution 18 July 2008 Area • Total 38,394 km 2 (14,824 sq mi) [ 3 ] [ 4 ] ( 133rd ) • Water (%) 1.1 Population • 2021 estimate 777,486 [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] ( 159th ) • 2022 census 727,145 [ 8 ] • Density 20.3/km 2 (52.6/sq mi) GDP ( PPP ) 2025 estimate • Total $14.110 billion [ 9 ] ( 160th ) • Per capita $17,774 [ 10 ] ( 102th ) GDP (nominal) 2025 estimate • Total $3.420 billion [ 11 ] ( 166th ) • Per capita $4,300 [ 12 ] ( 127th ) Gini (2022) 28.5 [ 13 ] low inequality HDI (2023) 0.698 [ 14 ] medium ( 125th ) Currency Ngultrum (BTN) Indian rupee (₹) Time zone UTC +06 ( BTT ) Calling code +975 ISO 3166 code BT Internet TLD .bt The population of Bhutan had been estimated based on the reported figure of about 1 million in the 1970s when the country had joined the United Nations and precise statistics were lacking.

[ 15 ] Thus, using the annual increase rate of 2–3%, the most population estimates were around 2 million in 2000. A national census was carried out in 2005 and it turned out that the population was 672,425. Consequently, United Nations Population Division reduced its estimation of the country's population in the 2006 revision [ 16 ] for the whole period from 1950 to 2000.

This article contains Tibetan script .

Without proper rendering support , you may see very small fonts, misplaced vowels or missing conjuncts instead of Tibetan characters .

Bhutan , [ a ] officially the Kingdom of Bhutan , [ b ] [ 18 ] is a landlocked country in South Asia , in the Eastern Himalayas between China to the north and northwest and India to the south and southeast.

[ c ] With a population of over 727,145 and a territory of 38,394 square kilometres (14,824 sq mi), Bhutan ranks 133rd in land area and 160th in population. Bhutan is a democratic constitutional monarchy with a King as the head of state and a prime minister as the head of government . The Je Khenpo is the head of the state religion , Vajrayana Buddhism.

The Himalayan mountains in the north rise from the country's lush subtropical plains in the south. In the Bhutanese Himalayas , there are peaks higher than 7,000 metres (23,000 ft) above sea level .

Gangkhar Puensum is Bhutan's highest peak and is the highest unclimbed mountain in the world. The wildlife of Bhutan is notable for its diversity, including the Himalayan takin and golden langur . The capital and largest city is Thimphu , with close to 15% of the population living there.

Bhutan and neighbouring Tibet experienced the spread of Buddhism , which originated in the Indian subcontinent during the lifetime of the Buddha . In the first millennium, the Vajrayana school of Buddhism spread to Bhutan from the southern Pala Empire of Bengal. During the 16th century, Zhabdrung Ngawang Namgyal unified the valleys of Bhutan into a single state. He defeated three Tibetan invasions, subjugated rival religious schools, codified the Tsa Yig legal system, and established a government of theocratic and civil administrators. Namgyal became the first Zhabdrung Rinpoche and his successors acted as the spiritual leaders of Bhutan, like the Dalai Lama in Tibet. During the 17th century, Bhutan controlled large parts of northeast India , Sikkim and Nepal ; it also wielded significant influence in Cooch Behar State .

Bhutan was never colonised, although it became a protectorate of the British Empire . Bhutan ceded the Bengal Duars to British India during the Duar War in the 19th century. The Wangchuck dynasty emerged as the monarchy and pursued closer ties with Britain in the subcontinent. In 1910, the Treaty of Punakha guaranteed British advice in foreign policy in exchange for internal autonomy in Bhutan. The arrangement continued under a new treaty with India in 1949, signed at Darjeeling , in which both countries recognised each other's sovereignty. Bhutan joined the United Nations in 1971 and currently has relations with 56 countries. While dependent on the Indian military , Bhutan maintains its own military units . The 2008 Constitution established a parliamentary government with an elected National Assembly and a National Council .

Bhutan is a founding member of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), and a member of the Climate Vulnerable Forum , the Non-Aligned Movement , BIMSTEC , the IMF , the World Bank , UNESCO and the World Health Organization (WHO). Bhutan ranked first in SAARC in economic freedom , ease of doing business , peace and lack of corruption in 2016. In 2020, Bhutan ranked third in South Asia after Sri Lanka and the Maldives in the Human Development Index , and 21st on the Global Peace Index as the most peaceful country in South Asia as of 2024, as well as the only South Asian country in the list's first quartile.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Bhutan has one of the largest water reserves for hydropower in the world.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Melting glaciers caused by climate change are a growing concern in Bhutan.

[ 24 ] Etymology [ edit ] The precise etymology of "Bhutan" is unknown, although it is likely to derive from the Tibetan endonym "Böd" for Tibet . Traditionally, it is taken to be a transcription of the Sanskrit Bhoṭa-anta ( भोट-अन्त ) "end of Tibet " through Nepali Bhuṭān ( भुटान ), a reference to Bhutan's position as the southern extremity of the Tibetan plateau and culture.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Since the 17th century, Bhutan's official name has been Druk yul (literally, "country of the Drukpa Lineage " or "the Land of the Thunder Dragon," a reference to the country's dominant Buddhist sect); "Bhutan" appears only in English-language official correspondence.

[ 27 ] The terms for the Kings of Bhutan Druk Gyalpo ("Dragon King"), and the Bhutanese endonym Drukpa , "Dragon people," are similarly derived.

[ 28 ] Names similar to Bhutan—including Bohtan, Buhtan, Bottanthis, Bottan and Bottanter—began to appear in Europe around the 1580s.

Jean-Baptiste Tavernier 's 1676 Six Voyages is the first to record the name Boutan . However, these names seem to have referred not to modern Bhutan but to the Kingdom of Tibet . The modern distinction between the two did not begin until well into the Scottish explorer George Bogle 's 1774 expedition. Realising the differences between the two regions, cultures, and states, his final report to the East India Company formally proposed calling the Druk Desi 's kingdom "Boutan" and the Panchen Lama 's kingdom "Tibet". The EIC's surveyor general James Rennell first anglicised the French name as "Bootan" and then popularised the distinction between it and Greater Tibet .

[ 29 ] The first time a separate Kingdom of Bhutan appeared on a western map, it did so under its local name "Broukpa".

[ 29 ] Others include Lho Mon ("Dark Southland"), Lho Tsendenjong ("Southland of the Cypress "), Lhomen Khazhi ("Southland of the Four Approaches") and Lho Menjong ("Southland of the Herbs ").

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] History [ edit ] Main articles: History of Bhutan and Timeline of Bhutanese history Bhutan, shaded in green in the centre of three Himalayan regions, shown on a 1912 map of Western Asia Stone tools, weapons, elephants, and remnants of large stone structures provide evidence that Bhutan was inhabited as early as 2000 BC, although there are no existing records from that time. Historians have theorised that the state of Lhomon ( lit.

' southern darkness ' ), or Monyul ("Dark Land", a reference to the Monpa , an ethnic group in Bhutan and Arunachal Pradesh , India), may have existed between 500 BC and AD 600. The names Lhomon Tsendenjong ( Sandalwood Country) and Lhomon Khashi or Southern Mon (country of four approaches), have been found in ancient Bhutanese and Tibetan chronicles.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] The dzong in the Paro valley , built in 1646 Buddhism was first introduced to Bhutan in the mid of 7th century AD. The Tibetan king Songtsen Gampo [ 34 ] (reigned 627–649), a Buddhist convert, extended the Tibetan Empire into Sikkim and Bhutan.

[ 35 ] He ordered the construction of two Buddhist temples, Jambay Lhakhang in Bumthang in central Bhutan and Kyichu Lhakhang in Paro Valley .

[ 36 ] Buddhism was propagated in earnest [ 34 ] in 746 [ 37 ] under King Sindhu Rāja ( also Künjom; [ 38 ] Sendha Gyab; Chakhar Gyalpo), an exiled Indian king who had established a government in Bumthang at Chakhar Gutho Palace.

[ 39 ] : 35 [ 40 ] : 13 The Portuguese cannons in the National museum of Paro Trashigang Dzong , built in 1659 By the 10th century, Bhutan's religious history had a significant impact on its political development. Various subsects of Buddhism emerged that were patronised by the various Mongol warlords.

[ 41 ] Bhutan may have been influenced by the Yuan dynasty with which it shares various cultural and religious similarities.

[ 42 ] After the decline of the Yuan dynasty in the 14th century, these subsects vied with each other for supremacy in the political and religious landscape, eventually leading to the ascendancy of the Drukpa Lineage by the 16th century.

[ 36 ] [ 43 ] Sketch of Bhutan's interior, 1783 Painting of Bhutan, 1813 British envoys in Bhutan's royal court in 1905 A thrikhep (throne cover) from the 19th century. Throne covers were placed atop the temple cushions used by high lamas . The central circular swirling symbol is the gankyil in its mode as the "Four Joys".

Locally, Bhutan has been known by many names. The earliest Western record of Bhutan, the 1627 Relação of the Portuguese Jesuits Estêvão Cacella and João Cabral , [ 44 ] records its name variously as Cambirasi (among the Koch Biharis [ 45 ] ), Potente , and Mon (an endonym for southern Tibet).

[ 29 ] Until the early 17th century, Bhutan existed as a patchwork of minor warring fiefdoms , when the area was unified by the Tibetan lama and military leader Ngawang Namgyal , who had fled religious persecution in Tibet. To defend the country against intermittent Tibetan forays, Namgyal built a network of impregnable dzongs or fortresses, and promulgated the Tsa Yig , a code of law that helped to bring local lords under centralised control. Many such dzong still exist and are active centres of religion and district administration.

Portuguese Jesuits Estêvão Cacella and João Cabral were the first recorded Europeans to visit Bhutan in 1627, [ 46 ] on their way to Tibet. They met Zhabdrung Ngawang Namgyal, presented him with firearms, gunpowder and a telescope, and offered him their services in the war against Tibet, but the Zhabdrung declined the offer. After a stay of nearly eight months Cacella wrote a long letter from the Chagri Monastery reporting on his travels. This is a rare extant report of the Zhabdrung.

[ 47 ] [ 48 ] When Ngawang Namgyal died in 1651, his death was kept secret for 54 years. After a period of consolidation, Bhutan lapsed into internal conflict. In 1711, Bhutan went to war against the Raja of the kingdom of Koch Bihar in the south. During the chaos that followed, the Tibetans unsuccessfully attacked Bhutan in 1714.

[ 49 ] This period was marked by an increase in Bhutan's influence in Koch Bihar.

[ 50 ] In the 18th century, the Bhutanese invaded and occupied the kingdom of Koch Bihar. In 1772, the Maharaja of Koch Bihar appealed to the British East India Company which assisted by ousting the Bhutanese and later attacking Bhutan itself in 1774. A peace treaty was signed in which Bhutan agreed to retreat to its pre-1730 borders. However, the peace was tenuous, and border skirmishes with the British were to continue for the next hundred years. The skirmishes eventually led to the Duar War (1864–65), a confrontation to control of the Bengal Duars . After Bhutan lost the war, the Treaty of Sinchula was signed between British India and Bhutan. As part of the war reparations , the Duars were ceded to the United Kingdom in exchange for a rent of ₹50,000 . The treaty ended all hostilities between British India and Bhutan.

During the 1870s, power struggles between the rival valleys of Paro and Tongsa led to civil war in Bhutan, eventually leading to the ascendancy of Ugyen Wangchuck , the penlop (governor) of Trongsa . From his power base in central Bhutan, Ugyen Wangchuck defeated his political enemies and united the country following several civil wars and rebellions during 1882–85.

[ 51 ] In 1907, an epochal year for the country, Ugyen Wangchuck was unanimously chosen as the hereditary king of the country by the Lhengye Tshog of leading Buddhist monks, government officials, and heads of important families, with the firm petition made by Gongzim Ugyen Dorji .

John Claude White , British Political Agent in Bhutan, took photographs of the ceremony.

[ 52 ] The British government promptly recognised the new monarchy. In 1910, Bhutan signed the Treaty of Punakha , a subsidiary alliance that gave the British control of Bhutan's foreign affairs and meant that Bhutan was treated as an Indian princely state . This had little real effect, given Bhutan's historical reticence, and also did not appear to affect Bhutan's traditional relations with Tibet. After the new Union of India gained independence from the United Kingdom on 15 August 1947, Bhutan became one of the first countries to recognise India's independence. On 8 August 1949, a treaty similar to that of 1910, in which Britain had gained power over Bhutan's foreign relations, was signed with the newly independent India.

[ 32 ] In 1953, King Jigme Dorji Wangchuck established the country's legislature—a 130-member National Assembly —to promote a more democratic form of governance. In 1965, he set up a Royal Advisory Council, and in 1968 he formed a Cabinet. In 1971, Bhutan was admitted to the United Nations , having held observer status for three years. In July 1972, Jigme Singye Wangchuck ascended to the throne at the age of sixteen after the death of his father, Dorji Wangchuck.

Leaders of Afghanistan, Bhutan, Bangladesh, India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Maldives and Nepal at the 16th SAARC Summit in Thimphu, 2010 Bhutan's sixth Five-Year Plan (1987–92) included a policy of 'one nation, one people' and introduced a code of traditional Drukpa dress and etiquette called Driglam Namzhag . The dress element of this code required all citizens to wear the gho (a knee-length robe for men) and the kira (an ankle-length dress for women).

[ 53 ] A central plank of the Bhutanese government's policy since the late 1960s has been to modernise the use of Dzongkha language. This began with abandoning the use of Hindi , a language that was adopted to help start formal secular education in the country, in 1964.

[ 54 ] As a result, at the beginning of the school year in March 1990, the teaching of Nepali language (which share similarities with Hindi) spoken by ethnic Lhotshampas in southern Bhutan was discontinued and all Nepali curricular materials were discontinued from Bhutanese schools.

[ 53 ] In 1988, Bhutan conducted a census in southern Bhutan to guard against illegal immigration, a constant issue in the south where borders with India are porous.

[ 55 ] Each family was required to present census workers with a tax receipt from the year 1958—no earlier, no later—or with a certificate of origin, which had to be obtained from one's place of birth, to prove that they were indeed Bhutanese citizens. Previously issued citizenship cards were no longer accepted as proof of citizenship. Alarmed by these measures, many began to protest for civil and cultural rights and demanded a total change to be brought to the political system that existed since 1907. As protests and related violence swept across southern Bhutan, the government in turn increased its resistance. People present at protests were labeled "anti-national terrorists".

[ 56 ] After the demonstrations, the Bhutanese army and police began the task of identifying participants and supporters engaged in the violence against the state and people. They were arrested and held for months without trial.

[ 53 ] Soon the Bhutanese government arbitrarily reported that its census operations had detected the presence in southern Bhutan of over 100,000 "illegal immigrants" although this number is often debated. The census operations, thus, were used as a tool for the identification, eviction and banishment of dissidents who were involved in the uprising against the state. Military and other security forces were deployed for forceful deportations of between 80,000 and 100,000 Lhotshampas and were accused of using widespread violence, torture, rape and killing.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] [ 59 ] The evicted Lhotshampas became refugees in camps in southern Nepal. Since 2008, many Western countries, such as Canada, Norway, the United Kingdom, Australia, and the United States, have allowed resettlement of the majority of the Lhotshampa refugees.

[ 56 ] Political reform and modernisation [ edit ] Further information: Law of Bhutan and Bhutanese democracy Bhutan's political system has recently changed from an absolute monarchy to a constitutional monarchy . King Jigme Singye Wangchuck transferred most of his administrative powers to the Council of Cabinet Ministers and allowed for impeachment of the King by a two-thirds majority of the National Assembly.

[ 60 ] In 1999, the government lifted a ban on television and internet, making Bhutan one of the last countries to introduce television. In his speech, the King said that television was a critical step to the modernisation of Bhutan as well as a major contributor to the country's gross national happiness , [ 61 ] but warned that the "misuse" of this new technology could erode traditional Bhutanese values.

[ 62 ] A new constitution was presented in early 2005. In December 2005, Wangchuck announced that he would abdicate the throne in his son's favour in 2008. On 9 December 2006, he announced that he would abdicate immediately. This was followed by the first national parliamentary elections in December 2007 and March 2008 .

On 6 November 2008, 28-year-old Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck was crowned king.

[ 63 ] In July 2021 during the COVID-19 pandemic , Bhutan became the first world-leading nation in its role of vaccinating 470,000 out of 770,000 people with a two-dose shot of AstraZeneca vaccines.

On 13 December 2023, Bhutan was officially delisted as a least developed country .

[ 64 ] Geography [ edit ] Main article: Geography of Bhutan This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Bhutan" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A topographic map of Bhutan Bhutan is on the southern slopes of the eastern Himalayas , landlocked between the Tibet Autonomous Region of China to the north and the Indian states of Sikkim , West Bengal , Assam to the west and south, and the Indian state of Arunachal Pradesh to the east.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] It lies between latitudes 26°N and 29°N , and longitudes 88°E and 93°E . The land consists mostly of steep and high mountains crisscrossed by a network of swift rivers that form deep valleys before draining into the Indian plains. In fact, 98.8% of Bhutan is covered by mountains, which makes it the most mountainous country in the world.

[ 67 ] Elevation rises from 200 m (660 ft) in the southern foothills to more than 7,000 m (23,000 ft). This great geographical diversity combined with equally diverse climate conditions contributes to Bhutan's outstanding range of biodiversity and ecosystems.

[ 4 ] Snowfall in Bhutan Bhutan's northern region consists of an arc of Eastern Himalayan alpine shrub and meadows reaching up to glaciated mountain peaks with an extremely cold climate at the highest elevations. Most peaks in the north are over 7,000 m (23,000 ft) above sea level; the highest point is 7,570-metre (24,840 ft)-tall Gangkhar Puensum , which has the distinction of being the highest unclimbed mountain in the world.

[ 68 ] The lowest point, at 98 m (322 ft), is in the valley of Drangme Chhu , where the river crosses the border with India.

[ 68 ] Watered by snow-fed rivers, alpine valleys in this region provide pasture for livestock, tended by a sparse population of migratory shepherds.

The Black Mountains in Bhutan's central region form a watershed between two major river systems: the Mo Chhu and the Drangme Chhu. Peaks in the Black Mountains range between 1,500 and 4,925 m (4,921 and 16,158 ft) above sea level, and fast-flowing rivers have carved out deep gorges in the lower mountain areas. The forests of the central Bhutan mountains consist of Eastern Himalayan subalpine conifer forests in higher elevations and Eastern Himalayan broadleaf forests in lower elevations. The Woodlands of the central region provide most of Bhutan's forest production. The Torsa , Raidāk , Sankosh , and Manas are Bhutan's main rivers, flowing through this region. Most of the population lives in the central highlands.

In the south, the Sivalik Hills are covered with dense Himalayan subtropical broadleaf forests , alluvial lowland river valleys, and mountains up to around 1,500 m (4,900 ft) above sea level. The foothills descend into the subtropical Duars Plain, which is the eponymous gateway to strategic mountain passes (also known as dwars or dooars; literally, "doors" in Assamese , Bengali , Maithili , Bhojpuri , and Magahi languages).

[ 65 ] [ 69 ] Most of the Duars is in India, but a 10 to 15 km (6.2 to 9.3 mi)-wide strip extends into Bhutan. The Bhutan Duars is divided into two parts, the northern and southern Duars.

The northern Duars, which abut the Himalayan foothills, have rugged, sloping terrain and dry, porous soil with dense vegetation and abundant wildlife. The southern Duars have moderately fertile soil, heavy savanna grass, dense, mixed jungle, and freshwater springs. Mountain rivers, fed by melting snow or monsoon rains, empty into the Brahmaputra River in India. Data released by the Ministry of Agriculture showed that the country had a forest cover of 64% as of October 2005.

Landscape of Bhutan Gangkar Puensum , the highest mountain in Bhutan Sub-alpine Himalayan landscape A Himalayan peak from Bumthang Jigme Dorji National Park The Haa Valley in Western Bhutan Climate [ edit ] Main article: Geography of Bhutan § Climate Köppen climate classifications of Bhutan Bhutan's climate varies with elevation, from subtropical in the south to temperate in the highlands and polar-type climate with year-round snow in the north. Bhutan experiences five distinct seasons: summer, monsoon , autumn, winter and spring. Western Bhutan has the heavier monsoon rains; southern Bhutan has hot humid summers and cool winters; central and eastern Bhutan are temperate and drier than the west with warm summers and cool winters.

Biodiversity [ edit ] See also: List of mammals of Bhutan and Wildlife of Bhutan The takin is Bhutan's national animal .

Bhutan signed the Rio Convention on Biological Diversity on 11 June 1992, and became a party to the convention on 25 August 1995.

[ 70 ] It has subsequently produced a National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan , with two revisions, the most recent of which was received by the convention on 4 February 2010.

[ 71 ] Animals [ edit ] Himalayan Marmot at Tshophu Lake, Bhutan Bhutan has a rich primate life, with rare species such as the golden langur .

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] A variant Assamese macaque has also been recorded, which is regarded by some authorities as a new species, Macaca munzala .

[ 74 ] The Bengal tiger , clouded leopard , hispid hare and the sloth bear live in the tropical lowland and hardwood forests in the south. In the temperate zone, grey langur , tiger, goral and serow are found in mixed conifer, broadleaf and pine forests. Fruit-bearing trees and bamboo provide habitat for the Himalayan black bear , red panda , squirrel , sambar , wild pig and barking deer . The alpine habitats of the great Himalayan range in the north are home to the snow leopard , blue sheep , Himalayan marmot , Tibetan wolf , antelope , Himalayan musk deer and the Bhutan takin , Bhutan's national animal . The endangered wild water buffalo occurs in southern Bhutan, although in small numbers.

[ 75 ] More than 770 species of bird have been recorded in Bhutan. The globally endangered white-winged duck has been added recently in 2006 to Bhutan's bird list.

[ 76 ] The 2010 BBC documentary Lost Land of the Tiger follows an expedition to Bhutan. The expedition is notable for claiming to obtain the first footage of tigers living at 4,000 metres (13,000 ft) in the high Himalayas. The BBC footage shows a female tiger lactating and scent-marking, followed a few days later by a male tiger responding, suggesting that the cats could be breeding at this elevation. Camera traps also recorded footage of other rarely seen forest creatures, including dhole (or Indian wild dog), Asian elephants, leopards and leopard cats.

[ 77 ] Plants [ edit ] In Bhutan forest cover is around 71% of the total land area, equivalent to 2,725,080 hectares (ha) of forest in 2020, up from 2,506,720 hectares (ha) in 1990. In 2020, naturally regenerating forest covered 2,704,260 hectares (ha) and planted forest covered 20,820 hectares (ha). Of the naturally regenerating forest 15% was reported to be primary forest (consisting of native tree species with no clearly visible indications of human activity) and around 41% of the forest area was found within protected areas. For the year 2015, 100% of the forest area was reported to be under public ownership .

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] More than 5,400 species of plants are found in Bhutan, [ 80 ] including Pedicularis cacuminidenta . Fungi form a key part of Bhutanese ecosystems, with mycorrhizal species providing forest trees with mineral nutrients necessary for growth, and with wood decay and litter decomposing species playing an important role in natural recycling.

Conservation [ edit ] Main article: List of protected areas of Bhutan JDNP Motithang WCNP BWS PNP JWS JKSNR JSWNP PWS RMNP SWS Protected areas of Bhutan in lavender; biological corridors in green The Eastern Himalayas has been identified as a global biodiversity hotspot and counted among the 234 globally outstanding ecoregions of the world in a comprehensive analysis of global biodiversity undertaken by WWF between 1995 and 1997.

According to the Swiss-based International Union for Conservation of Nature , Bhutan is viewed as a model for proactive conservation initiatives. The Kingdom has received international acclaim for its commitment to the maintenance of its biodiversity.

[ 81 ] This is reflected in the decision to maintain at least sixty per cent of the land area under forest cover, to designate more than 40% [ 82 ] [ 83 ] of its territory as national parks, reserves and other protected areas, and most recently to identify a further nine per cent of land area as biodiversity corridors linking the protected areas. All of Bhutan's protected land is connected to one another through a vast network of biological corridors, allowing animals to migrate freely throughout the country.

[ 84 ] Environmental conservation has been placed at the core of the nation's development strategy, the middle path. It is not treated as a sector but rather as a set of concerns that must be mainstreamed in Bhutan's overall approach to development planning and to be buttressed by the force of law. The country's constitution mentions environmental standards in multiple sections.

[ 85 ] Environmental issues [ edit ] Further information: Environmental issues in Bhutan Himalayan black bear Although Bhutan's natural heritage is still largely intact, the government has said that it cannot be taken for granted and that conservation of the natural environment must be considered one of the challenges that will need to be addressed in the years ahead.

[ 86 ] Nearly 56.3% of all Bhutanese are involved with agriculture, forestry or conservation.

[ 85 ] The government aims to promote conservation as part of its plan to target Gross National Happiness. It currently has net negative [ 84 ] greenhouse gas emissions because the small amount of pollution it creates is absorbed by the forests that cover most of the country.

[ 87 ] While the entire country collectively produces 2,200,000 metric tons (2,200,000 long tons; 2,400,000 short tons) of carbon dioxide a year, the immense forest covering 72% of the country acts as a carbon sink , absorbing more than four million tons of carbon dioxide every year.

[ 84 ] Bhutan had a 2018 Forest Landscape Integrity Index mean score of 8.85/10, ranking it 16th globally out of 172 countries.

[ 88 ] Bhutan has a number of progressive environmental policies that have caused the head of the UNFCCC to call it an "inspiration and role model for the world on how economies and different countries can address climate change while at the same time improving the life of the citizen." [ 89 ] For example, electric cars have been pushed in the country and as of 2014 [update] make up a tenth of all cars. Because the country gets most of its energy from hydroelectric power , it does not emit significant greenhouse gases for energy production.

[ 87 ] In practice, the overlap of these extensive protected lands with populated areas has led to mutual habitat encroachment. Protected wildlife has entered agricultural areas, trampling crops and killing livestock. In response, Bhutan has implemented an insurance scheme, begun constructing solar powered alarm fences, watch towers, and search lights, and has provided fodder and salt licks outside human settlement areas to encourage animals to stay away.

[ 90 ] The huge market value of the Ophiocordyceps sinensis fungus crop collected from the wild has also resulted in unsustainable exploitation which is proving very difficult to regulate.

[ 91 ] Bhutan has enforced a plastic ban rule from 1 April 2019, where plastic bags were replaced by alternative bags made of jute and other biodegradable material.

[ 92 ] Government and politics [ edit ] Main articles: Politics of Bhutan and Elections in Bhutan King Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck and Queen consort Jetsun Pema of Bhutan with Naruhito of Japan Bhutan is a constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary form of government. The reigning monarch is Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck . The current Prime Minister of Bhutan is Tshering Tobgay , leader of the People's Democratic Party . Bhutan's democratic transition in 2008 is seen as an evolution of its social contract with the monarchy since 1907.

[ 93 ] Bhutan was classified as a electoral democracy for year 2024 according to V-Dem Democracy Indices in the Regimes of the World classification.

[ 94 ] The Druk Gyalpo ( Dragon King ) is the head of state .

[ 95 ] The political system grants universal suffrage . It consists of the National Council , an upper house with 25 elected members; and the National Assembly with 47 elected lawmakers from political parties .

Executive power is exercised by the Council of Ministers led by the Prime Minister. Legislative power is vested in both the government and the National Assembly. Judicial power is vested in the courts. The legal system originates from the semi-theocratic Tsa Yig code, and was influenced by English common law during the 20th century. The chief justice is the administrative head of the judiciary.

Political culture [ edit ] The first general elections for the National Assembly were held on 24 March 2008. The chief contestants were the Bhutan Peace and Prosperity Party (DPT) led by Jigme Thinley and the People's Democratic Party (PDP) led by Sangay Ngedup . The DPT won the elections, taking 45 out of 47 seats.

[ 96 ] Jigme Thinley served as Prime Minister from 2008 to 2013.

The People's Democratic Party came to power in the 2013 elections . It won 32 seats and 54.88% of the vote. PDP leader Tshering Tobgay served as Prime Minister from 2013 to 2018.

Druk Nyamrup Tshogpa won the largest number of seats in the 2018 National Assembly election , bringing Lotay Tshering to the premiership and Druk Nyamrup Tshogpa into the government for the first time.

[ 97 ] Tshering Tobgay returned to power as Prime Minister after the 2024 election , with the PDP gaining 30 seats; he assumed office on 28 January 2024.

[ 98 ] Foreign relations [ edit ] Main article: Foreign relations of Bhutan The permanent mission of Bhutan to the United Nations in New York City Prime Minister of Bhutan Tshering Tobgay with U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry in 2015 [ 99 ] In the early 20th century, Bhutan became a de facto protectorate of the British Empire under the Treaty of Punakha in 1910. British protection guarded Bhutan from Tibet and Qing China . In the aftermath of the Chinese Communist Revolution , Bhutan signed a friendship treaty with the newly independent Dominion of India in 1949. Its concerns were exacerbated after the annexation of Tibet by the People's Republic of China .

[ 100 ] However, Bhutan was never directly colonised.

[ 101 ] Relations with Nepal remained strained due to Bhutanese refugees . Bhutan joined the United Nations in 1971. It was the first country to recognise Bangladesh's independence in 1971. It became a founding member of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation ( SAARC ) in 1985.

[ 102 ] The country is a member of 150 international organisations, [ 100 ] including the Bay of Bengal Initiative , BBIN , World Bank , the International Monetary Fund and the Group of 77 .

Bhutan maintains strong economic, strategic, and military relations with India .

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] In February 2007, the Indo-Bhutan Friendship Treaty was substantially revised, clarifying Bhutan's full control of its foreign relations, as well as its independence and sovereignty. Whereas the Treaty of 1949, Article 2 stated: "The Government of India undertakes to exercise no interference in the internal administration of Bhutan. On its part the Government of Bhutan agrees to be guided by the advice of the Government of India in regard to its external relations," the revised treaty now states "In keeping with the abiding ties of close friendship and cooperation between Bhutan and India, the Government of the Kingdom of Bhutan and the Government of the Republic of India shall cooperate closely with each other on issues relating to their national interests. Neither government shall allow the use of its territory for activities harmful to the national security and interest of the other." The revised treaty also includes this preamble: "Reaffirming their respect for each other's independence, sovereignty and territorial integrity", an element absent in the earlier version. By long-standing agreement, Indian and Bhutanese citizens may travel to each other's countries without a passport or visa, but must still have their national identity cards. Bhutanese citizens may also work in India without legal restrictions.

Bhutan does not have formal diplomatic ties with China, but exchanges of visits at various levels between them have significantly increased in recent times. The first bilateral agreement between China and Bhutan was signed in 1998 and Bhutan has also set up honorary consulates in the Special Administrative Regions of Hong Kong and Macau .

[ 105 ] A map of Bhutan showing its borders with China and India as of 2015 [update] Bhutan's border with China is not mutually demarcated in some areas because China lays claims to those places. In 2021, after more than 35 years of border negotiations, China signed a memorandum of understanding with Bhutan to expedite those talks.

[ 106 ] Approximately 269 square kilometres (104 sq mi) remain under discussion between China and Bhutan.

[ 107 ] On 13 November 2005, Chinese soldiers crossed into the disputed territories between China and Bhutan and began building roads and bridges.

[ 108 ] Bhutanese Foreign Minister Khandu Wangchuk took up the matter with Chinese authorities after the issue was raised in the Bhutanese parliament. In response, Foreign Ministry spokesman Qin Gang of the People's Republic of China said that the border remains in dispute and that the two sides are continuing to work for a peaceful and cordial resolution of the dispute, denying that the presence of soldiers in the area was an attempt to forcibly occupy it.

[ 109 ] An Indian intelligence officer said that a Chinese delegation in Bhutan told the Bhutanese they were "overreacting". The Bhutanese newspaper Kuensel said that China might use the roads to further Chinese claims along the border.

[ 108 ] Bhutan has very warm relations with Japan , which provides significant development assistance. The Bhutanese royals were hosted by the Japanese imperial family during a state visit in 2011. Japan is also helping Bhutan cope with glacial floods by developing an early warning system. Bhutan enjoys strong political and diplomatic relations with Bangladesh. The Bhutanese king was the guest of honour during celebrations of the 40th anniversary of Bangladesh's independence.

[ 110 ] A 2014 joint statement by the prime ministers of both countries announced cooperation in areas of hydropower, river management and climate change mitigation.

[ 111 ] Bangladesh and Bhutan signed a preferential trade agreement in 2020 with provisions for free trade .

[ 112 ] Bhutan has diplomatic relations with 53 countries and the European Union and has missions in India, Bangladesh, Thailand, Kuwait, and Belgium. It has two UN missions, one in New York and one in Geneva . Only India, Bangladesh, and Kuwait have residential embassies in Bhutan. Other countries maintain informal diplomatic contact via their embassies in New Delhi and Dhaka . Bhutan maintains formal diplomatic relations with several Asian and European nations, Canada, and Brazil. Other countries, such as the United States and the United Kingdom, have no formal diplomatic relations with Bhutan but maintain informal contact through their respective embassies in New Delhi and with the United States through Bhutan's permanent mission to the United Nations. The United Kingdom has an honorary consul resident in Thimphu. The latest country Bhutan has established diplomatic relations with is Israel, on 12 December 2020 .

[ 113 ] [ 114 ] [ 115 ] Bhutan opposed the Russian annexation of Crimea in United Nations General Assembly Resolution 68/262 .

Military [ edit ] Further information: Military of Bhutan A royal guard of Bhutan in 1905 The Royal Bhutan Army Chief of Staff (left) and Indian Army Chief of Staff (right) in 2006 The Royal Bhutan Army is Bhutan's military service and is the weakest armed force in the world, in terms of Power Index, according to the Global Firepower survey.

[ 116 ] It includes the royal bodyguard and the Royal Bhutan Police . Membership is voluntary and the minimum age for recruitment is 18.

The standing army numbers about 16,000 and is trained by the Indian Army .

[ 117 ] It has an annual budget of about US$13.7 million (1.8 per cent of GDP ). As a landlocked country , Bhutan has no navy. It also has no air force or army aviation corps. The Army relies on the Eastern Air Command of the Indian Air Force for air assistance.

Human rights [ edit ] Main article: Human rights in Bhutan See also: LGBT rights in Bhutan Women of Bhutan Bhutan is ranked as "Partly Free" by Freedom House .

[ 118 ] Bhutan's parliament decriminalised homosexuality in 2020.

[ 119 ] Women in Bhutan tend to be less active in politics than men due to customs and aspects of Bhutan's culture that dictate a woman's role in the household.

[ 120 ] This leads to a limitation of their voices in government. Bhutan has made steps toward gender equality by enrolling more girls in school as well as creating the "National Commission for Women and Children" (NCWC) in 2004.

[ 121 ] This programme was created to promote and protect women's and children's rights. Bhutan also elected its first female Dzongda , equivalent to a District Attorney, in 2012, and its first female minister in 2013.

[ 121 ] Minister Dorji Choden, chair for the National Commission for Women and Children, believes that the aforementioned programme can be used to "promote women into more leadership roles" which can then lead women to take on more active roles in their society.

[ 120 ] Overall there has also been a gradual increase in women in power with a 68% increase in women representation from 2011 to 2016.

[ 121 ] Minorities have been represented in Bhutan's government since 2008, including in the cabinet, parliament, and local government.

[ 93 ] 1990s ethnic cleansing [ edit ] Main article: Ethnic cleansing in Bhutan Further information: Bhutanese refugees Starting in the 1980s, a part of Bhutan's minority population groups of Nepali speakers (" Lhotshampa "), in Southern Bhutan, fell victim to perceived political persecution by the Bhutanese government as part of what the Nepali-speaking population viewed as Bhutanisation (termed One Nation, One People) policy which was aimed to nationalise the country.

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] In 1977 followed by in 1985, Bhutan's government enacted legislations which impacted the Lhotshampa ethnic minority. The review of the national citizenship criteria and provisions for denationalisation of illegally present population in the country ensued.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] The government enforced uniformity in dress, culture, tradition, language and literature to create a national identity which was aligned with the majority Drukpa culture of the country.

[ 122 ] [ 126 ] [ 127 ] [ 128 ] The Lhotshampas started demonstrations in protest of such discriminatory laws, voicing for a change to be brought to the existing political system toward a preferred multi-party democracy and to gain political autonomy for the Nepali Ethnic minority, most probably incited by the similar political uprising against the established monarchy in the neighbouring country of Nepal.

[ 129 ] These demonstrations turned into violence when some ethnic Nepalese representatives were attacked by the government officials (armed forces) when schools in the southern districts were burned by the demonstrators.

[ 130 ] Consequently, Bhutanese armed forces were mobilised; the members of Bhutanese police and army forces allegedly imprisoned some Nepali descendant ethnic minority who were suspected to be politically active in these demonstrations, under a command of then king Jigme Singye Wangchuck and home minister Dago Tshering to keep peace and open a line of communication.

[ 131 ] Bhutan Armed forces were alleged to have targeted the Nepali ethnic southerners by burning down the houses, livestocks, and forced hundreds and thousands to be expelled from the country with their property being confiscated where no compensation were reported to be granted to anyone, however, claims to these were neither proved nor documented.

[ 132 ] This escalated up until the early 1990s, and was followed by the forceful expulsion of Nepali ethnic minority citizens from the southern part of Bhutan. The main purpose of this was the fear that revolt mirrored images of the Gorkhaland movement stirring up in the neighbouring state of West Bengal, and fueled fears of a fate similar to the Kingdom of Sikkim where the immigrant Nepalis population had overwhelmed the small native population of the kingdom, leading to its demise as an independent nation.

[ 55 ] The Bhutanese security forces were accused of human rights violations including torture and rape of political demonstrators, and some Lhotshampas were accused of staging a violent revolt against the state.

[ 125 ] According to the UNHCR , an estimate of 107,000 Bhutanese refugees living in seven camps in eastern Nepal have been documented as of 2008 [update] .

[ 128 ] After many years in refugee camps, many inhabitants moved to other host nations such as Canada, Norway, the UK, Australia, and the US as refugees. The US admitted 60,773 refugees from fiscal years 2008 to 2012.

[ 133 ] The Nepalese government refused to assimilate the Bhutanese refugees (Lhotshampas) and did not allow a legal path to citizenship, so they were left stateless .

[ 134 ] Careful scrutiny has been used to review the status of the refugee's relatives in the country, and citizenship identity cards and voting rights for these reviewed people are restricted.

[ 134 ] Bhutan does not recognise political parties associated with these refugees and see them as a threat to the well-being of the country.

[ 134 ] Human rights groups' rhetoric that the government interfered with individual rights by requiring all citizens, including ethnic minority members, to wear the traditional dress of the ethnic majority in public places was used as a political tool for the demonstrations. The Bhutanese government since then enforced the law of national attire to be worn in Buddhist religious buildings, government offices, schools, official functions, and public ceremonies aimed toward preserving and promoting the national identity of Bhutan.

[ 134 ] Ethnic Nepalese (" Lhotshampa ") migrants that were forcefully expelled from Bhutan, and arrived in Nepal in the early 1990s The kingdom has been accused of banning religious proselytising , [ 135 ] which critics deem as a violation of freedom of religion [ 136 ] and a policy of ethnic cleansing.

[ 137 ] Starting in the 1980s, Bhutan adopted a policy of "One Nation One People" to create a unified sense of national identity. This was interpreted as cultural (in language, dress and religion) and political dominance of the majority Drukpa people by the Nepali-speaking people.

[ 138 ] Inspired by the Gorkhaland Movement and fuelled by a sense of injustice, some Lhotshampas began organising demonstrations against the Bhutanese state. Furthermore, the removal of Nepali language in school curriculum to adopt a more centralised language in Dzongkha coupled with the denial of citizenship to those who were not able to prove officially issued land holding title prior to 1950 [ 139 ] was perceived as specifically targeting Lhotshampa population estimated to be one-third of the population at the time.

[ 140 ] This resulted in widespread unrest and political demonstrations.

[ 124 ] [ 141 ] In response to this threat, in 1988, the Bhutanese authorities carried out a special census [ 142 ] in southern Bhutan to review the status of legal residents from illegal immigrants. This region with high Lhotshampa population had to be legally verified, and the following census led to the deportation these Lhotshampas, estimated to be one-sixth of the total population at the time.

[ 143 ] [ 60 ] [ 144 ] People who had been granted citizenship by the Bhutanese 1958 Nationality Law were also stripped of their citizenship. The state intervened after violence was instigated by some Nepali-speaking citizens attacking government officials and burning public buildings.

[ 145 ] Members of Bhutanese police and army were accused of burning Lhotshampa houses, land confiscation and other widespread human rights abuses including arrest, torture and rape of Lhotshampas involved in political protests and violence.

[ 125 ] [ 146 ] Following forcible deportation from Bhutan, Lhotshampas spent almost two decades in refugee camps in Nepal and were resettled in various western countries such as the United States between 2007 and 2012.

[ 147 ] Political divisions [ edit ] Main articles: Districts of Bhutan , Gewogs of Bhutan , and Local Government Act of Bhutan 2009 Bhutan is divided into twenty Dzongkhag (districts), administered by a body called the Dzongkhag Tshogdu. In certain thromdes (urban municipalities), a further municipal administration is directly subordinate to the Dzongkhag administration. In the vast majority of constituencies, rural gewog (village blocks) are administered by bodies called the Gewog Tshogde.

[ 148 ] A map of Bhutan showing its 20 dzongkhags in Dzongkha Thromdes (municipalities) elect Thrompons to lead administration, who in turn represent the Thromde in the Dzongkhag Tshogdu. Likewise, geog elect headmen called gup s, vice-headmen called mangmis , who also sit on the Dzongkhag Tshogdu, as well as other members of the Gewog Tshogde. The basis of electoral constituencies in Bhutan is the chiwog , a subdivision of gewogs delineated by the Election Commission.

[ 148 ] Bumthang Chukha Dagana Gasa Haa Lhuntse Mongar Paro Pema- gatshel Punakha Samdrup Jongkhar Samtse Sarpang Thimphu Trashigang Trashiyangtse Trongsa Tsirang Wangdue Phodrang Zhemgang Districts of Bhutan [ 149 ] Dzongkhags of the Kingdom of Bhutan # District Dzongkha name 1 Bumthang བུམ་ཐང་རྫོང་ཁག་ 2 Chukha ཆུ་ཁ་རྫོང་ཁག་ 3 Dagana དར་དཀར་ན་རྫོང་ཁག་ 4 Gasa མགར་ས་རྫོང་ཁག་ 5 Haa ཧཱ་རྫོང་ཁག་ 6 Lhuntse ལྷུན་རྩེ་རྫོང་ཁག་ 7 Mongar མོང་སྒར་རྫོང་ཁག་ 8 Paro སྤ་རོ་རྫོང་ཁག་ 9 Pemagatshel པད་མ་དགའ་ཚལ་རྫོང་ཁག་ 10 Punakha སྤུ་ན་ཁ་རྫོང་ཁག་ 11 Samdrup Jongkhar བསམ་གྲུབ་ལྗོངས་མཁར་རྫོང་ཁག་ 12 Samtse བསམ་རྩེ་རྫོང་ཁག་ 13 Sarpang གསར་སྤང་རྫོང་ཁག་ 14 Thimphu ཐིམ་ཕུ་རྫོང་ཁག་ 15 Trashigang བཀྲ་ཤིས་སྒང་རྫོང་ཁག་ 16 Trashiyangtse བཀྲ་ཤིས་གཡང་རྩེ་རྫོང་ཁག་ 17 Trongsa ཀྲོང་གསར་རྫོང་ཁག་ 18 Tsirang རྩི་རང་རྫོང་ཁག་ 19 Wangdue Phodrang དབང་འདུས་ཕོ་བྲང་རྫོང་ཁག་ 20 Zhemgang གཞམས་སྒང་རྫོང་ཁག་ Economy [ edit ] Main article: Economy of Bhutan The Bhutan Power Corporation headquarters in Thimphu . Bhutan's principal export is hydroelectricity .

Bhutan's currency is the ngultrum , whose value is fixed to the Indian rupee . The Indian rupee is also accepted as legal tender in the country.
Though Bhutan's economy is one of the world's smallest, [ 150 ] it has grown rapidly in recent years, by eight per cent in 2005 and 14 per cent in 2006. In 2007, Bhutan had the second-fastest-growing economy in the world, with an annual economic growth rate of 22.4 per cent. This was mainly due to the commissioning of the gigantic Tala Hydroelectric Power Station . As of 2012 [update] , Bhutan's per capita income was US$2,420.

[ 151 ] Bhutan's economy is based on agriculture, forestry, tourism and the sale of hydroelectric power to India. Agriculture provides the main livelihood for 55.4 per cent of the population.

[ 152 ] Agrarian practices consist largely of subsistence farming and animal husbandry . Handicrafts, particularly weaving and the manufacture of religious art for home altars, are a small cottage industry . A landscape that varies from hilly to ruggedly mountainous has made the building of roads and other infrastructure difficult and expensive.

Modern and traditional bridges over a river in Panbang This, and a lack of access to the sea, has meant that Bhutan has not been able to benefit from significant trading of its produce. Bhutan has no railways , though Indian Railways plans to link southern Bhutan to its vast network under an agreement signed in January 2005.

[ 153 ] Bhutan and India signed a 'free trade' accord in 2008, which additionally allowed Bhutanese imports and exports from third markets to transit India without tariffs.

[ 154 ] Bhutan had trade relations with the Tibet Autonomous Region of China until 1960, when it closed its border with China after an influx of refugees.

[ 155 ] Access to biocapacity in Bhutan is much higher than the world average. In 2016, Bhutan had 5.0 global hectares [ 156 ] of biocapacity per person within its territory, much more than the world average of 1.6 global hectares per person.

[ 157 ] In 2016 Bhutan used 4.5 global hectares of biocapacity per person—their ecological footprint of consumption. This means they use less biocapacity than Bhutan contains. As a result, Bhutan is running a biocapacity reserve.

[ 156 ] The industrial sector is currently in a nascent stage. Although most production comes from cottage industry, larger industries are being encouraged and some industries such as cement, steel, and ferroalloy have been set up. Most development projects, such as road construction, rely on contract labour from neighbouring India. Agricultural produce includes rice, chilies, dairy (some yak, mostly cow) products, buckwheat, barley, root crops, apples, and citrus and maize at lower elevations. Industries include cement, wood products, processed fruits, alcoholic beverages and calcium carbide .

Bhutan has seen recent growth in the technology sector, in areas such as green tech and consumer Internet/e-commerce.

[ 158 ] In May 2012, "Thimphu TechPark" was launched in the capital. It incubates startups via the "Bhutan Innovation and Technology Centre" (BITC).

[ 159 ] GDP per capita development in Bhutan, since 1990 Incomes of over Nu 100,000 per year are taxed, but as Bhutan is currently one of the world's least developed countries, very few wage and salary earners qualify. Bhutan's inflation rate was estimated at three per cent in 2003. Bhutan has a gross domestic product of around US$5.855 billion (adjusted to purchasing power parity ), making it the 158th-largest economy in the world. Per capita income (PPP) is around $7,641, [ 68 ] ranked 144th. Government revenues total $407.1 million, though expenditures amount to $614 million. Twenty-five per cent of the budget expenditure, however, is financed by India's Ministry of External Affairs.

[ 160 ] Bhutan's exports, principally electricity, cardamom , gypsum , timber, handicrafts, cement, fruit, precious stones and spices, total €128 million (2000 est.). Imports, however, amount to €164 million, leading to a trade deficit . Main items imported include fuel and lubricants, grain, machinery, vehicles, fabrics and rice. Bhutan's main export partner is India, accounting for 58.6 per cent of its export goods. Hong Kong (30.1 per cent) and Bangladesh (7.3 per cent) are the other two top export partners.

[ 68 ] As its border with Tibet Autonomous Region is closed, trade between Bhutan and China is now almost non-existent. Bhutan's import partners include India (74.5 per cent), Japan (7.4 per cent) and Sweden (3.2 per cent).

Agriculture [ edit ] Main article: Agriculture in Bhutan Rice terraces in one of Bhutan's fertile valleys The share of the agricultural sector in GDP declined from approximately 55% in 1985 to 33% in 2003. In 2013 the government announced the aspiration that Bhutan will become the first country in the world with 100 per cent organic farming .

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] A decade later however this goal has proved elusive with just 1% of agricultural land having achieved organic status.

[ 163 ] Bhutanese red rice is the country's most widely known agricultural export, enjoying a market in North America and Europe. Bangladesh is the largest market of Bhutanese apples and oranges .

[ 164 ] Fishing in Bhutan is mainly centred on trout and carp .

A worker sorts Citrus Mandarin at the Auction Yard of Food Corporation of Bhutan Limited in Samdrup Jongkhar Office of the SAARC Development Fund in Thimphu Cryptocurrency [ edit ] The Thunder Dragon Kingdom became one of a handful of countries to hold over US$1 billion worth of Bitcoin as of November 15, 2024, with around 12,206 BTC. The Himalayan nation has been able to leverage its abundant hydroelectric resources to mine Bitcoin , [ 165 ] with the chief executive officer of Druk Holding and Investments (DHI), Ujjwal Deep Dahal, stating, "we hold assets in the form of Bitcoin and we started mining those assets in 2019 with our green hydropower." Bhutan aims to expand its Bitcoin mining capacity to 600 megawatts by 2025 in partnership with Bitdeer, a leading Nasdaq-listed technology company. According to a World Bank report, Bhutan has invested US$539 million in cryptocurrency mining operations over the last two fiscal years, from July 2021 to June 2023.

[ 166 ] Industry [ edit ] The industrial sector accounts for 22% of the economy. The key manufacturing sectors in Bhutan include production of ferroalloy , cement, metal poles, iron and nonalloy steel products, processed graphite , copper conductors , alcoholic and carbonated beverages , processed fruits, carpets, wood products and furniture.

[ 167 ] The production of ferrosilicon was pioneered by Damchae Dem , CEO of Pelden Group.

[ 168 ] Mining [ edit ] Main article: Mining in Bhutan Bhutan has deposits of numerous minerals. Commercial production includes coal , dolomite , gypsum , and limestone . The country has proven reserves of beryl , copper , graphite, lead , mica , pyrite , tin , tungsten , and zinc . However, the country's mineral deposits remain untapped, as it prefers to conserve the environment.

[ 169 ] Energy [ edit ] Main article: Energy in Bhutan Bhutan electricity production by year Bhutan's largest export is hydroelectricity. As of 2015 [update] , it generates about 2,000 MW of hydropower from dams in Himalayan river valleys.

[ 170 ] The country has a potential to generate 30,000 MW of hydropower.

[ 170 ] Power is supplied to various states in India. Future projects are being planned with Bangladesh.

[ 170 ] Hydropower has been the primary focus for the country's five-year plans . As of 2015 [update] , the Tala Hydroelectric Power Station is its largest power plant, with an installed capacity of 1,020 MW. It has received assistance from India, Austria and the Asian Development Bank in developing hydroelectric projects.

Besides hydropower, it is also endowed with significant renewable energy resources such as solar, wind and bioenergy. Technically viable solar energy generation capacity is around 12,000 MW and wind around 760 MW. More than 70% of its land is under forest cover, which is an immense source of bioenergy in the country.

[ 171 ] Financial sector [ edit ] See also: Banking in Bhutan The Le Méridien Thimphu is part of Bhutan's burgeoning tourism industry .

There are five commercial banks in the country and the two largest banks are the Bank of Bhutan and the Bhutan National Bank which are based in Thimphu. Other commercial banks are Bhutan Development Bank, T-Bank and Druk Punjab National Bank . The country's financial sector is also supported by other non-banking Financial Institutions. They are Royal Insurance Corporation of Bhutan , National Pension and Provident Fund (NPPF), and Bhutan Insurance Limited (BIL). The central bank of the country is the Royal Monetary Authority of Bhutan (RMA). The Royal Securities Exchange of Bhutan is the main stock exchange .

The SAARC Development Fund is based in Thimphu.

[ 172 ] Tourism [ edit ] Main article: Tourism in Bhutan In 2014, Bhutan received 133,480 foreign visitors.

[ 173 ] Bhutan is a high-value destination. It imposes a daily sustainable development fee of US$100 a day on all nationals except Indians, Maldivians, and Bangladeshis.

[ 174 ] Indians can apply for a permit to enter Bhutan which costs 1,200 INR per day (about US$14 in 2024). The industry employs 21,000 people and accounts for 1.8% of GDP.

[ 175 ] The country currently has no UNESCO World Heritage Sites , but it has eight declared tentative sites for UNESCO inclusion since 2012. These sites include: Ancient Ruin of Drukgyel Dzong , [ 176 ] Bumdelling Wildlife Sanctuary , [ 177 ] Dzongs : the centre of temporal and religious authorities ( Punakha Dzong , Wangdue Phodrang Dzong , Paro Dzong , Trongsa Dzong and Dagana Dzong ), [ 178 ] Jigme Dorji National Park (JDNP), [ 179 ] Royal Manas National Park (RMNP), [ 180 ] Sacred Sites associated with Phajo Drugom Zhigpo and his descendants, [ 181 ] Sakteng Wildlife Sanctuary (SWS), [ 182 ] and Tamzhing Monastery .

[ 183 ] Bhutan also has numerous tourist sites that are not included in its UNESCO tentative list. Bhutan has one element, the Mask dance of the drums from Drametse , registered in the UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage List.

[ 184 ] Transport [ edit ] Main article: Transport in Bhutan A Drukair Airbus A319 at Paro Airport Air [ edit ] Paro Airport (PBH) is the only international airport in Bhutan. National carrier Drukair operates flights between Paro Airport and Bathpalathang Airport in Jakar (Bumthang Dzongkhag), central Bhutan, Gelephu Airport in Gelephu (Sarpang Dzongkhag) in the south and Yongphulla Airport in the east (Trashigang Dzongkhag) on a weekly basis.

[ 185 ] Road [ edit ] The Lateral Road is Bhutan's primary east–west corridor, connecting the towns of Phuentsholing in the southwest to Trashigang in the east. Notable settlements that the Lateral Road runs through directly are Wangdue Phodrang and Trongsa . The Lateral Road also has spurs connecting to the capital Thimphu and other population centres such as Paro and Punakha . As with other roads in Bhutan, the Lateral Road presents serious safety concerns due to pavement conditions, sheer drops, hairpin turns, weather, and landslides.

[ 186 ] [ 187 ] [ 188 ] Since 2014, road widening has been a priority across Bhutan, in particular for the north-east–west highway from Trashigang to Dochula. The widening project is expected to be completed by the end of 2017 and will make road travel across the country substantially faster and more efficient. In addition, it is projected that the improved road conditions will encourage more tourism in the more inaccessible eastern region of Bhutan.

[ 189 ] [ 190 ] [ 191 ] Currently, the road conditions appear to be deterring tourists from visiting Bhutan due to the increased instances of road blocks, landslides, and dust disruption caused by the widening project.

[ 192 ] Rail [ edit ] Bhutan does not have a railway network primarily due to its rugged and mountainous terrain. The country is nestled in the Eastern Himalayas, which are characterised by steep cliffs, deep gorges, and imposing mountains. Constructing railways in such challenging topography would be extremely difficult and costly. Although Bhutan currently has no railways, it has entered into an agreement with India to link southern Bhutan to India's vast network by constructing an 18-kilometre-long (11 mi), 5 ft 6 in ( 1,676 mm ) broad gauge rail link between Hasimara in West Bengal and Gelephu in Bhutan. The construction of the railway via Satali, Bharna Bari and Dalsingpara by Indian Railways will be funded by India.

[ 193 ] Bhutan's nearest railway station is Hasimara. The planned Gelephu Green city will be linked by railway, connecting Indian state of Assam.

Demographics [ edit ] Main article: Demographics of Bhutan Historical population Year Pop.

±% 1960 224,000 — 1980 413,000 +84.4% 1990 536,000 +29.8% 1995 509,000 −5.0% 2005 650,000 +27.7% 2017 735,553 +13.2% Source: [ 194 ] Bhutan had a population of 777,486 people in 2021.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Bhutan has a median age of 24.8 years.

[ 68 ] There are 1,070 males to every 1,000 females. The literacy rate in Bhutan is around 66%.

[ 195 ] Ethnic groups [ edit ] Main article: Ethnic groups in Bhutan Bhutanese people in national dress at the Wangdi Phodrang festival Bhutanese people primarily consist of the Ngalops and Sharchops , called the Western Bhutanese and Eastern Bhutanese, respectively. Although the Sharchops are slightly larger in demographic size, the Ngalops dominate the political sphere, as the King and the political elite belong to this group.

[ 196 ] Ngalops culture is closely related to that of Tibet. Much the same could be said of the Sharchops, the largest group, who traditionally follow the Nyingmapa rather than the official Drukpa Kagyu form of Tibetan Buddhism . In modern times, with improved transportation infrastructure, there has been much intermarriage between these groups.

The Lhotshampa , meaning "southerner Bhutanese", are a heterogeneous group of mostly Nepalese ancestry who have sought political and cultural recognition including equality in rights to abode, language, and dress. Unofficial estimates claimed that they constituted 45% of the population in the 1988 census.

[ 197 ] Starting in the 1980s, Bhutan adopted a policy of "One Nation One People" in order to propagate the cultural (e.g. language, dress and religion) and political dominance of the majority Drukpa people.

[ 138 ] This policy manifested with a ban on the teaching of Nepali language in schools and the denial of citizenship to those who were unable to prove officially issued land holding title prior to 1950.

[ 139 ] These actions specifically targeted ethnic Nepali-speaking minority groups, representing one-third of the population at the time, [ 140 ] resulting in widespread unrest and political demonstrations.

[ 124 ] [ 141 ] In 1988, the Bhutanese authorities carried out a special census [ 142 ] in southern Bhutan, a region of high Lhotshampa population, resulting in mass denationalisation, followed by the forcible deportation of 107,000 Lhotshampas, approximately one-sixth of the total population at the time.

[ 143 ] [ 60 ] [ 144 ] Deportees were stripped of their citizenship, which had been granted by the 1958 Nationality Law . Members of the Bhutanese police and army were involved in the burning of homes, land confiscation and other widespread human rights abuses including the arrest, torture and rape of Lhotshampas involved in political protests.

[ 125 ] [ 146 ] Following their forcible deportation from Bhutan, the Lhotshampas spent almost two decades in refugee camps in Nepal . Large-scale resettlement to various western countries such as the United States took place between 2007 and 2012.

[ 147 ] Cities and towns [ edit ] Main article: List of cities in Bhutan Thimphu , the largest city and capital of Bhutan.

Damphu , the administrative headquarters of Tsirang District .

Jakar , the administrative headquarters of Bumthang District and the place where Buddhism entered Bhutan.

Mongar , the eastern commercial hub of the country.

Paro , site of the international airport .

Phuentsholing , Bhutan's commercial hub.

Punakha , the old capital.

Samdrup Jongkhar , the southeastern town on the border with India.

Trashigang , administrative headquarters of Trashigang District , the most populous district in the country.

Trongsa , in central Bhutan, which has the largest and the most magnificent of all the dzongs in Bhutan.

Largest cities or towns in Bhutan According to the 2017 Census [ 198 ] Rank Name District Pop.

1 Thimphu Thimphu 114,551 2 Phuntsholing Chukha 27,658 3 Paro Paro 11,448 4 Gelephu Sarpang 9,858 5 Samdrup Jongkhar Samdrup Jongkhar 9,325 6 Wangdue Phodrang Wangdue Phodrang 8,954 7 Punakha Punakha 6,626 8 Jakar Bumthang 6,243 9 Nganglam Pemagatshel 5,418 10 Samtse Samtse 5,396 Religion [ edit ] Main article: Religion in Bhutan Religion in Bhutan ( ARDA ) 2020 [ 199 ] [ 200 ] Buddhism (74.7%) Hinduism (22.6%) Bon (1.90%) Others (0.80%) It is estimated that between two-thirds and three-quarters of the Bhutanese population follow Vajrayana Buddhism , which is also the state religion .

Hinduism accounts for 22.6% of the population.

[ 201 ] The current legal framework in principle guarantees freedom of religion ; proselytism , however, is forbidden by a royal government decision [ 201 ] and by judicial interpretation of the Constitution .

[ 202 ] Buddhism was introduced to Bhutan in 746 AD, when Guru Padmasambhava visited Bumthang District . Tibetan king Songtsän Gampo (reigned 627–649), a convert to Buddhism, ordered the construction of two Buddhist temples, Jambay Lhakhang at Bumthang in central Bhutan and Kyichu Lhakhang (near Paro ) in the Paro Valley .

[ 36 ] Languages [ edit ] Main article: Languages of Bhutan Dzongkha Bumthang Kurtöp Dzala Khampa Tibetan Lakha Nyenkha 'Olekha (Monpa) Brokkat Chocangacakha Chali Dakpa Brokpa Nepali Nepali Nepali Lepcha Lhokpu Kheng Gongduk Tshangla (Sharchopkha) Languages of Bhutan The national language is Dzongkha (Bhutanese), one of 53 languages in the Tibetan language family. The script, locally called Chhokey (literally, "Dharma language"), is identical to classical Tibetan. In Bhutan's education system, English is the medium of instruction, while Dzongkha is taught as the national language.

Ethnologue lists 24 languages currently spoken in Bhutan, all of them in the Tibeto-Burman family, except Nepali , an Indo-Aryan language .

[ 127 ] Until the 1980s, the government sponsored the teaching of Nepali in schools in southern Bhutan. With the adoption of the Driglam Namzhag (Bhutanese code of etiquette) and its expansion into the idea of strengthening the role of Dzongkha, Nepali was dropped from the curriculum. The languages of Bhutan are still not well characterised, and several have yet to be recorded in an in-depth academic grammar. Before the 1980s, the Lhotshampa (Nepali-speaking community), mainly based in southern Bhutan, constituted approximately 30% of the population.

[ 127 ] However, after a purge of Lhotshampas from 1990 to 1992 this number might not accurately reflect the current population.

Dzongkha is partially intelligible with Sikkimese and spoken natively by 25% of the population.

Tshangla , the language of the Sharchop and the principal pre-Tibetan language of Bhutan, is spoken by a greater number of people. It is not easily classified and may constitute an independent branch of Tibeto-Burman.

Nepali speakers constituted some 40% of the population as of 2006 [update] . The larger minority languages are Dzala (11%), Limbu (10%), Kheng (8%), and Rai (8%). There are no reliable sources for the ethnic or linguistic composition of Bhutan, so these numbers do not add up to 100%.

Health [ edit ] Main article: Health in Bhutan Bhutan has a life expectancy of 70.2 years (69.9 for males and 70.5 for females) according to the latest data for 2016 from the World Bank .

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] Basic healthcare in Bhutan is free, as provided by the Constitution of Bhutan.

[ 205 ] Education [ edit ] Main article: Education in Bhutan The ILCS Campus Taktse Bhutan Historically, education in Bhutan was monastic , with secular school education for the general population introduced in the 1960s.

[ 206 ] The mountainous landscape poses barriers to integrated educational services.

[ 206 ] Today, Bhutan has two decentralised universities with eleven constituent colleges spread across the kingdom. These are the Royal University of Bhutan and the Khesar Gyalpo University of Medical Sciences of Bhutan , respectively. The first five-year plan provided for a central education authority—in the form of a director of education appointed in 1961—and an organised, modern school system with free and universal primary education.

Education programmes were given a boost in 1990, when the Asian Development Bank (see Glossary) granted a US$7.13 million loan for staff training and development, specialist services, equipment and furniture purchases, salaries and other recurrent costs, and facility rehabilitation and construction at Royal Bhutan Polytechnic .

Since the beginning of modern education in Bhutan, teachers from India—especially Kerala —have served in some of the most remote villages of Bhutan. Thus, 43 retired teachers who had served for the longest length of time were personally invited to Thimphu , Bhutan during the Teachers' Day celebrations in 2018, where they were honoured and individually thanked by His Majesty Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck . To celebrate 50 years of diplomatic relations between Bhutan and India, Bhutan's Education Minister, Jai Bir Rai , honoured 80 retired teachers who served in Bhutan at a special ceremony organised at Kolkata , India, on 6 January 2019.

[ 207 ] Currently, there are 121 teachers from India placed in schools across Bhutan.

Culture [ edit ] Main article: Culture of Bhutan Bhutanese thanka of Mount Meru and the Buddhist universe (19th century, Trongsa Dzong , Trongsa) Bhutan has a rich and unique cultural heritage that has largely remained intact because of its isolation from the rest of the world until the mid-20th century. One of the main attractions for tourists is the country's culture and traditions. Bhutanese tradition is deeply steeped in its Buddhist heritage.

[ 208 ] [ 209 ] Hinduism is the second most dominant religion in Bhutan, being most prevalent in the southern regions.

[ 210 ] The government is increasingly making efforts to preserve and sustain the current culture and traditions of the country. Because of its largely unspoiled natural environment and cultural heritage, Bhutan has been referred to as The Last Shangri-La .

[ 211 ] While Bhutanese citizens are free to travel abroad, Bhutan is viewed as inaccessible by many foreigners. Another reason for it being an unpopular destination is the cost, which is high for tourists on tighter budgets. Entry is free for citizens of India, Bangladesh, and the Maldives, but all other foreigners are required to sign up with a Bhutanese tour operator and pay around US$250 per day that they stay in the country, though this fee covers most travel, lodging and meal expenses.

[ 212 ] Bhutan received 37,482 visitor arrivals in 2011, of which 25% were for meetings, incentives, conferencing, and exhibitions.

[ 213 ] Bhutan was the first nation in the world to ban tobacco . It was illegal to smoke in public or sell tobacco, according to Tobacco Control Act of Bhutan 2010 . Violators are fined the equivalent of $232—a month's salary in Bhutan. In 2021, this was reversed with the new Tobacco Control Act 2021 to allow for the import and sale of tobacco products to stamp out cross-border smuggling of tobacco products during the pandemic.

[ 214 ] Dress [ edit ] The national dress for Bhutanese men is the gho , a knee-length robe tied at the waist by a cloth belt known as the kera . Women wear an ankle-length dress, the kira , which is clipped at the shoulders with two identical brooches called the koma and tied at the waist with kera. An accompaniment to the kira is a long-sleeved blouse, the " wonju ", which is worn underneath the kira. A long-sleeved, jacket-like garment called the " toego " is worn over the kira. The sleeves of the wonju and the tego are folded together at the cuffs, inside out. Social status and class determine the textures, colours, and decorations that embellish the garments.

[ 215 ] Jewellery is commonly worn by women, especially during religious festivals (" tsechus ") and public gatherings. To strengthen Bhutan's identity as an independent country, Bhutanese law requires all Bhutanese government employees to wear the national dress at work and all citizens to wear the national dress while visiting schools and other government offices, though many citizens, particularly adults, choose to wear the customary dress as formal attire.

Varicoloured scarves, known as rachu for women and kabney for men, are important indicators of social standing, as Bhutan has traditionally been a feudal society; in particular, red is the most common colour worn by women. The "Bura Maap" (Red Scarf) is one of highest honours a Bhutanese civilian can receive. It, as well as the title of Dasho , comes from the throne in recognition of an individual's outstanding service to the nation.

[ 216 ] On previous occasions, the King himself conferred Bura Maaps to outstanding individuals such as the Director General of Department Hydropower and Power System, Yeshi Wangdi, the Deputy Chairperson of National Council, Dasho Dr. Sonam Kinga, and former National Assembly Speaker, Dasho Ugyen Dorji.

[ 217 ] Architecture [ edit ] Main article: Architecture of Bhutan The National Library of Bhutan during snowfall Bhutanese architecture remains distinctively traditional, employing rammed earth and wattle and daub construction methods, stone masonry, and intricate woodwork around windows and roofs. Traditional architecture uses no nails or iron bars in construction.

[ 47 ] [ 218 ] [ 219 ] Characteristic of the region is a type of castle fortress known as the dzong . Since ancient times, the dzongs have served as the religious and secular administrative centres for their respective districts.

[ 220 ] The University of Texas at El Paso in the United States has adopted Bhutanese architecture for its buildings on campus, as have the nearby Hilton Garden Inn and other buildings in the city of El Paso.

[ 221 ] Public holidays [ edit ] Bhutan has numerous public holidays , most of which coincide with traditional, seasonal, secular or religious festivals. They include the winter solstice (around 1 January, depending on the lunar calendar ), [ 222 ] Lunar New Year (February or March), [ citation needed ] the King's birthday and the anniversary of his coronation, the official end of monsoon season (22 September), [ 223 ] National Day (17 December), [ 224 ] and various Buddhist and Hindu celebrations.

Mass media [ edit ] Main article: Mass media in Bhutan Film industry [ edit ] Main article: Cinema of Bhutan Music and dance [ edit ] Main article: Music of Bhutan Chaam , sacred masked dances, are annually performed during religious festivals.

Dance dramas and masked dances such as the Cham dance are common traditional features at festivals, usually accompanied by traditional music. At these events, dancers depict heroes, demons, dæmons , death heads, animals, gods, and caricatures of common people by wearing colourful wooden or composition face masks and stylised costumes. The dancers enjoy royal patronage, and preserve ancient folk and religious customs and perpetuate the ancient lore and art of mask-making.

The music of Bhutan can generally be divided into traditional and modern varieties; traditional music comprises religious and folk genres, the latter including zhungdra and boedra .

[ 225 ] The modern rigsar is played on a mix of traditional instruments and electronic keyboards, and dates back to the early 1990s; it shows the influence of Indian popular music, a hybrid form of traditional and Western popular influences.

[ 226 ] [ 227 ] Family structure [ edit ] In Bhutanese families, inheritance generally passes matrilineally through the female rather than the male line. Daughters will inherit their parents' house. A man is expected to make his own way in the world and often moves to his wife's home.

Love marriages are more common in urban areas, but the tradition of arranged marriages among acquainted families is still prevalent in most of the rural areas. Although uncommon, polygamy is accepted, often being a device to keep property in a contained family unit rather than dispersing it.

[ 228 ] The previous king, Jigme Singye Wangchuck , who abdicated in 2006, had four queens, all of whom are sisters. The current king, Jigme Khesar Namgyel Wangchuck , wed Jetsun Pema , then 21, a commoner and daughter of a pilot, on 13 October 2011.

Cuisine [ edit ] Main article: Bhutanese cuisine Traditional dish with lemon glazed chicken, sauteed spinach and steamed Bhutanese red rice Rice ( red rice ), buckwheat , and increasingly maize , are the staples of Bhutanese cuisine . The local diet also includes pork, beef, yak meat, chicken, and lamb. Soups and stews of meat and dried vegetables spiced with chilies and cheese are prepared.

Ema datshi , made very spicy with cheese and chilies, might be called the national dish for its ubiquity and the pride that Bhutanese have for it. Dairy foods, particularly butter and cheese from yaks and cows, are also popular, and indeed almost all milk is turned into butter and cheese. Popular beverages include butter tea , black tea, locally brewed ara ( rice wine ), and beer.

[ 47 ] Sports [ edit ] Main article: Sports in Bhutan Changlimithang Stadium during a parade Taekwondo between Bhutan and Vietnam A Bhutanese archery competition Bhutan's national and most popular sport is archery .

[ 229 ] Competitions are held regularly in most villages. It differs from Olympic standards in technical details such as the placement of the targets and atmosphere. Two targets are placed over 100 metres (330 ft) apart, and teams shoot from one end of the field to the other. Each member of the team shoots two arrows per round. Traditional Bhutanese archery is a social event, and competitions are organised between villages, towns, and amateur teams. There is usually plenty of food and drink complete with singing and dancing. Attempts to distract an opponent include standing around the target and making fun of the shooter's ability.

Darts ( khuru ) is an equally popular outdoor team sport, in which heavy wooden darts pointed with a 10 cm (3.9 in) nail are thrown at a paperback-sized target 10 to 20 metres (33 to 66 ft) away.

Another traditional sport is the Digor , which resembles the shot put and horseshoe throwing .

Another popular sport is football .

[ 229 ] In 2002, Bhutan's national football team played Montserrat , in what was billed as The Other Final ; the match took place on the same day Brazil played Germany in the World Cup final , but at the time Bhutan and Montserrat were the world's two lowest ranked teams. The match was held in Thimphu's Changlimithang National Stadium , and Bhutan won 4–0. A documentary of the match was made by the Dutch filmmaker Johan Kramer. In 2015, Bhutan won its first two FIFA World Cup Qualifying matches, beating Sri Lanka 1–0 in Sri Lanka and 2–1 in Bhutan.

[ 230 ] Cricket has also gained popularity in Bhutan, particularly since the introduction of television channels from India. The Bhutan national cricket team is one of the most successful affiliate nations in the region.

[ 231 ] [ 232 ] Women in the workforce [ edit ] Women have begun to participate more in the work force and their participation is one of the highest in the region.

[ 121 ] However, the unemployment rates among women are still higher than those of men and women are in more unsecure work fields, such as agriculture.

[ 233 ] Most of the work that women do outside of the home is in family-based agriculture which is insecure and is one of the reasons why women are falling behind men when it comes to income.

[ 121 ] Women also, in general, work lower-quality jobs than men and only earn 75% of men's earnings.

[ 234 ] Women in the household [ edit ] Rooted deep in Bhutan culture is the idea of selflessness and the women of Bhutan take on this role in the context of the household.

[ 235 ] Nearly 1/4 of all women have reported experiencing some form of violence from their husband or partner.

[ 233 ] Some Bhutanese communities have what is referred to as matrilineal communities, where the eldest daughter receives the largest share of the land.

[ 234 ] This is due to the belief that she will stay and take care of her parents while the son will move out and work to get his own land and for his own family.

[ 234 ] Importantly, land ownership does not necessarily equate to economic benefits – despite the eldest daughter having control of the house, it is the husband that is in charge of making decisions.

[ 234 ] However, the younger generation has stepped away from this belief, in splitting the land evenly between the children instead of the eldest daughter inheriting the most land.

[ 234 ] Women's health [ edit ] Throughout Bhutan, there has been an improvement in reproductive health services that has led to a drastic drop in maternal mortality rate, dropping from 1,000 in 1990 to 180 in 2010.

[ 234 ] [ clarification needed ] There has also been an increase in contraceptive use from less than 1/3 in 2003 to 2/3 in 2010.

[ 234 ] See also [ edit ] Bhutanese diaspora Outline of Bhutan Portals : Geography Asia References [ edit ] ^ "Pew Research Center – Global Religious Landscape 2010 – religious composition by country" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 13 December 2016.

^ "Bhutan, Religion And Social Profile | National Profiles | International Data" .

Thearda.com .

Archived from the original on 17 July 2022 . Retrieved 17 July 2022 .

^ "9th Five Year Plan (2002–2007)" (PDF) . Royal Government of Bhutan. 2002. Archived from the original (PDF) on 20 March 2012 . Retrieved 22 August 2011 .

^ a b "National Portal of Bhutan" . Department of Information Technology, Bhutan. Archived from the original on 23 April 2012 . Retrieved 22 August 2011 .

^ a b "World Population Prospects 2022" .

United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs , Population Division . Retrieved 17 July 2022 .

^ a b "World Population Prospects 2022: Demographic indicators by region, subregion and country, annually for 1950–2100" (XSLX) ("Total Population, as of 1 July (thousands)").

United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs , Population Division . Retrieved 17 July 2022 .

^ "World Population Prospects – Population Division – United Nations" .

population.un.org .

Archived from the original on 20 May 2020 . Retrieved 2 January 2021 .

^ "Bhutan" .

City Population .

Archived from the original on 5 October 2003 . Retrieved 7 May 2019 .

^ "World Economic Outlook Database, April 2025" .

^ "World Economic Outlook Database, April 2025" .

^ "World Economic Outlook Database, April 2025" .

^ "World Economic Outlook Database, April 2025" .

^ "Gini Index" . World Bank.

Archived from the original on 9 February 2015 . Retrieved 25 November 2023 .

^ "Human Development Report 2025" (PDF) .

United Nations Development Programme . 6 May 2025.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 March 2024 . Retrieved 13 March 2024 .

^ "Treaty Bodies Database – Document – Summary Record – Bhutan" .

Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (UNHCHR). 5 June 2001.

Archived from the original on 10 January 2009 . Retrieved 23 April 2009 .

^ "World Population Prospects" .

United Nations . 2008. Archived from the original on 7 January 2010 . Retrieved 4 December 2009 .

^ "List of left- & right-driving countries" .

WorldStandards .

Archived from the original on 10 November 2022 . Retrieved 16 November 2022 .

^ Driem, George van (1998).

Dzongkha = Rdoṅ-kha . Leiden: Research School, CNWS. p. 478.

ISBN 978-90-5789-002-4 .

^ Shibani Meta (23 April 2025).

"On Thin Ice: Bhutan's Diplomatic Challenge Amid the India-China Border Dispute" . Retrieved 10 May 2025 .

^ "Human Development Index: Bangladesh moves 2 notches up, remains 5th in South Asia" .

Dhaka Tribune . 21 December 2020.

Archived from the original on 21 December 2020 . Retrieved 2 January 2021 .

^ "2024 GLOBAL PEACE INDEX" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 August 2024 . Retrieved 12 August 2024 .

^ "Bhutan" .

International Hydropower Association .

Archived from the original on 21 May 2022 . Retrieved 2 January 2021 .

^ Tshering, Sonam; Tamang, Bharat.

"Hydropower – Key to sustainable, socio-economic development of Bhutan" (PDF) . United Nations.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 31 October 2020 . Retrieved 23 August 2021 .

^ "Bhutan" .

UNDP Climate Change Adaptation .

Archived from the original on 21 May 2022 . Retrieved 13 April 2021 .

^ Chakravarti, Balaram (1979).

A Cultural History of Bhutan . Vol. 1. Hilltop. p. 7 . Retrieved 18 October 2015 .

^ Taylor, Isaac (1898).

Names and Their Histories: A Handbook of Historical Geography and Topographical Nomenclature . Gale Research Co. p.

69 .

^ a b Savada, Andrea Matles, ed. (1993). "Origins and Early Settlement, A.D. 600–1600".

Nepal and Bhutan: Country Studies . Area handbook series (3rd ed.). Washington, D.C.: Federal Research Division , Library of Congress .

ISBN 0-8444-0777-1 .

OCLC 27429416 .

Archived from the original on 28 April 2021 . Retrieved 2 November 2020 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "Bhutan – Government and society" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 2 June 2022 . Retrieved 15 October 2020 .

^ a b c "History of Bhutan: How Europe heard about Bhutan" .

Kuensel . 24 August 2003. Retrieved 28 September 2011.

^ Grange, Kevin (2011).

Beneath Blossom Rain: Discovering Bhutan on the Toughest Trek in the World . Outdoor Lives. University of Nebraska Press.

ISBN 978-0-8032-3433-8 . Retrieved 18 October 2015 .

^ Clements, William M. (2006).

The Greenwood Encyclopedia of World Folklore and Folklife . The Greenwood Encyclopedia of World Folklore and Folklife: Southeast Asia and India, Central and East Asia, Middle East. Vol. 2. Greenwood Press. p. 105.

ISBN 978-0-313-32849-7 . Retrieved 18 October 2015 .

^ a b "Bhutan" . World Institute for Asian Studies. 21 August 2006. Archived from the original on 1 August 2009 . Retrieved 23 April 2009 .

^ This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

Worden, Robert L (1991). Savada, Andrea Matles (ed.).

Bhutan: A Country Study .

Federal Research Division . Origins and Early Settlement, A.D. 600–1600.

^ a b Padel, Ruth (2009).

Tigers In Red Weather: A Quest for the Last Wild Tigers . Bloomsbury Publishing USA. pp.

139– 140.

ISBN 978-0-8027-1854-9 .

^ Sailen Debnath, Essays on Cultural History of North Bengal, ISBN 978-81-86860-42-7 ; & Sailen Debnath, The Dooars in Historical Transition, ISBN 978-81-86860-44-1 .

^ a b c This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

Worden, Robert L (1991). Savada, Andrea Matles (ed.).

Bhutan: A Country Study .

Federal Research Division . Arrival of Buddhism.

^ Hattaway, Paul (2004).

Peoples of the Buddhist World: a Christian Prayer Diary . William Carey Library. p. 30.

ISBN 978-0-87808-361-9 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2015 .

^ Rennie, Frank; Mason, Robin (2008).

Bhutan: Ways of Knowing . IAP. pp. 18, 58.

ISBN 978-1-59311-734-4 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2015 .

^ Dorji, C. T. (1994).

History of Bhutan Based on Buddhism . Sangay Xam, Prominent Publishers.

ISBN 978-81-86239-01-8 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2015 .

^ Harding, Sarah (2003).

The Life and Revelations of Pema Lingpa . Snow Lion Publications.

ISBN 978-1-55939-194-8 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2015 .

^ Nepal and Bhutan : country studies Savada, Andrea Matles and Harris, George Lawrence. p.256.

^ "The Living Edens: Bhutan – People Culture and History" .

www.pbs.org . Retrieved 19 March 2025 .

^ This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

Worden, Robert L (1991). Savada, Andrea Matles (ed.).

Bhutan: A Country Study .

Federal Research Division . Rivalry among the Sects.

^ "Bengala e o Reino do Dragão – 37" .

O clarim . 20 July 2018.

Archived from the original on 21 September 2020 . Retrieved 29 August 2020 .

^ Cacella, Estêvão. Trans. by Baillie, Luiza Maria.

"Report which Father Estevao Cacella of the Society of Jesus Sent to Father Alberto Laercio, Provincial of the Province of Malabar of East India, about His Journey to Cathay, until He Came to the Kingdom of Bhotanta" Archived 25 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine (1627). Retrieved 28 September 2011.

^ Phuntsho, Karma (2013).

The History of Bhutan . Random House India. pp.

224– 227.

ISBN 9788184003116 .

^ a b c Brown, Lindsay; Armington, Stan (2007).

Bhutan . Country Guides (3 ed.).

Lonely Planet . pp. 26, 36.

ISBN 978-1-74059-529-2 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2015 .

^ Pomplun, Trent (2009).

Jesuit on the Roof of the World: Ippolito Desideri's Mission to Eighteenth-Century Tibet . Oxford University Press. p.

49 .

ISBN 978-0-19-537786-6 . Retrieved 18 October 2015 .

^ This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

Worden, Robert L (1991). Savada, Andrea Matles (ed.).

Bhutan: A Country Study .

Federal Research Division . Administrative Integration and Conflict with Tibet, 1651–1728.

^ Karthikeyan, Ananth (1 October 2017).

"The brief supremacy of a mountain kingdom" .

DNA India .

Archived from the original on 18 April 2021 . Retrieved 27 December 2020 .

^ This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

Worden, Robert L (1991). Savada, Andrea Matles (ed.).

Bhutan: A Country Study .

Federal Research Division . British Intrusion, 1772–1907.

^ Hannavy, John (2013).

Encyclopedia of Nineteenth-Century Photography . Routledge. p. 1496.

ISBN 978-1-135-87327-1 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2015 .

^ a b c Hutt, Michael (December 1996).

"Ethnic Nationalism, Refugees and Bhutan" .

Journal of Refugee Studies .

9 (4): 397– 420.

doi : 10.1093/jrs/9.4.397 .

ISSN 0951-6328 .

Archived from the original on 22 October 2020 . Retrieved 20 October 2020 .

^ "Language policy in Bhutan" (PDF) .

Researchgate.net . January 1994 . Retrieved 26 July 2022 .

In book: Bhutan: Aspects of Culture and Development (pp. 87–105) Publisher: Gartmore: Kiscadale Publications Editors: Michael Aris and Michael Hutt ^ a b Hutt, M. (December 1996). "Ethnic Nationalism, Refugees and Bhutan".

Journal of Refugee Studies .

9 (4): 397– 420.

doi : 10.1093/jrs/9.4.397 .

^ a b Minkow, Anna (April 2011).

An Analysis of Bhutanese Refugees' Experiences in the United States: Understanding the Differences between Urban and Rural Resettlement (Thesis).

hdl : 2345/1956 .

[ page needed ] ^ Hutt, Michael (2005).

"The Bhutanese refugees: between verification, repatriation and royal realpolitik" (PDF) .

Peace and Democracy in South Asia .

1 (1): 44– 55.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 February 2024 . Retrieved 7 April 2024 .

^ Pulla, Venkat (2016). "Who Are the Lhotsampa? What Caused Their Flight from Bhutan?".

The Lhotsampa People of Bhutan . pp.

1– 12.

doi : 10.1057/9781137551429_1 .

ISBN 978-1-349-57630-2 .

^ United States Department of State.

"BHUTAN 2019 HUMAN RIGHTS REPORT" (PDF) .

state.gov/ . Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 2019 United States Department of State • Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 21 October 2020 . Retrieved 20 October 2020 .

^ a b c Hoffman, Klus (1 April 2006).

"Democratization from Above: The Case of Bhutan" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 June 2011 . Retrieved 24 April 2010 .

^ Larmer, Brook (March 2008).

"Bhutan's Enlightened Experiment" .

National Geographic .

ISSN 0027-9358 . Archived from the original on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved 19 June 2010 .

^ Scott-Clark, Cathy; Levy, Adrian (14 June 2003).

"Fast Forward into Trouble" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 1 September 2011 .

^ Kaul, Nitasha (10 November 2008).

"Bhutan Crowns a Jewel" .

UPI Asia . United Press International.

Archived from the original on 15 June 2011 . Retrieved 19 June 2011 .

^ "Bhutan becomes seventh country to graduate out of Least Developed Country category" .

Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing Countries and Small Island Developing States . 30 May 2024 . Retrieved 22 July 2024 .

^ a b "Bhutan" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

Archived from the original on 18 October 2020 . Retrieved 15 October 2020 .

^ "Geography – Royal Bhutanese Embassy, New Delhi" .

www.mfa.gov.bt . Retrieved 22 November 2024 .

^ "The World's 10 Most Mountainous Countries" .

WorldAtlas . 16 December 2022.

Archived from the original on 30 October 2023 . Retrieved 13 October 2023 .

^ a b c d e "Bhutan – The World Factbook" .

Central Intelligence Agency .

Archived from the original on 30 May 2022 . Retrieved 1 February 2008 .

^ "West Bengal Tourism" . 6 August 2013. Archived from the original on 6 August 2013 . Retrieved 26 July 2022 .

^ "List of Parties" .

Archived from the original on 24 January 2011 . Retrieved 8 December 2012 .

^ "Biodiversity Action Plan 2009" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 May 2013 . Retrieved 9 December 2012 .

^ Choudhury, A.U. (1990).

"Primates in Bhutan" .

Oryx .

24 (3): 125.

doi : 10.1017/S0030605300033834 .

^ Choudhury, A.U. (1992).

"Golden langur – Distribution Confusion" .

Oryx .

26 (3): 172– 173.

doi : 10.1017/S0030605300023619 .

^ Choudhury, A.U. (2008).

"Primates of Bhutan and Observations of Hybrid Langurs" .

Primate Conservation .

23 : 65– 73.

doi : 10.1896/052.023.0107 .

S2CID 85925043 .

^ Choudhury, A.U. (2010).

The Vanishing Herds: Wild Water Buffalo . Guwahati, India: Gibbon Books & The Rhino Foundation for Nature in North East India.

ISBN 978-9380652009 .

^ Choudhury, A.U. (2007).

"White-winged duck Cairina (=Asarcornis) scutulata and Blue-tailed Bee-eater Merops philippinus : two new country records for Bhutan" (PDF) .

Forktail .

23 : 153– 155.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 15 July 2014 . Retrieved 13 June 2014 .

^ Walker, Matt (20 September 2010).

"Lost tiger population discovered" .

BBC . Archived from the original on 20 September 2010 . Retrieved 4 June 2023 .

^ Terms and Definitions FRA 2025 Forest Resources Assessment, Working Paper 194 . Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 2023.

Archived from the original on 11 September 2024 . Retrieved 19 September 2024 .

^ "Global Forest Resources Assessment 2020, Bhutan" .

Food Agriculture Organization of the United Nations .

^ Bisht, Ramesh Chandra (2008).

International Encyclopaedia Of Himalayas (5 Vols. Set) . Mittal Publications. p. 54.

ISBN 9788183242653 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 16 February 2015 .

^ "New IUCN State Members" . Switzerland: IUCN Newsletter. January 2012. Archived from the original on 14 July 2014 . Retrieved 7 July 2014 .

^ "Parks of Bhutan" .

Bhutan Trust Fund for Environmental Conservation online . Bhutan Trust Fund. Archived from the original on 2 July 2011 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ "The Organisation" .

Bhutan Trust Fund for Environmental Conservation online . Bhutan Trust Fund. Archived from the original on 29 March 2010 . Retrieved 26 March 2011 .

^ a b c "Transcript of "This country isn't just carbon neutral – it's carbon negative" " . 11 March 2016.

Archived from the original on 22 April 2016 . Retrieved 13 April 2016 .

^ a b Kingdom of Bhutan. Royal Government of Bhutan. National Environment Commission. Communication of INDC of the Kingdom of Bhutan. By Yeshay Dorji. Thimphu: NEC, 2015. Print.

^ "Bhutan-Biodiversity Action Plan 2009" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 22 December 2015.

^ a b Pashley, Alex (5 August 2015).

"Bhutan: climate lessons from a Himalayan kingdom" .

Climate Home – climate change news .

Archived from the original on 18 December 2015 . Retrieved 17 December 2015 .

^ Grantham, H. S.; Duncan, A.; Evans, T. D.; Jones, K. R.; Beyer, H. L.; Schuster, R.; Walston, J.; Ray, J. C.; Robinson, J. G.; Callow, M.; Clements, T.; Costa, H. M.; DeGemmis, A.; Elsen, P. R.; Ervin, J.; Franco, P.; Goldman, E.; Goetz, S.; Hansen, A.; Hofsvang, E.; Jantz, P.; Jupiter, S.; Kang, A.; Langhammer, P.; Laurance, W. F.; Lieberman, S.; Linkie, M.; Malhi, Y.; Maxwell, S.; Mendez, M.; Mittermeier, R.; Murray, N. J.; Possingham, H.; Radachowsky, J.; Saatchi, S.; Samper, C.; Silverman, J.; Shapiro, A.; Strassburg, B.; Stevens, T.; Stokes, E.; Taylor, R.; Tear, T.; Tizard, R.; Venter, O.; Visconti, P.; Wang, S.; Watson, J. E. M. (2020).

"Anthropogenic modification of forests means only 40% of remaining forests have high ecosystem integrity – Supplementary Material" .

Nature Communications .

11 (1): 5978.

Bibcode : 2020NatCo..11.5978G .

doi : 10.1038/s41467-020-19493-3 .

ISSN 2041-1723 .

PMC 7723057 .

PMID 33293507 .

^ "Bhutan must consider long term measure on climate change: UNFCCC's head – BBS" .

BBS . 2 May 2014.

Archived from the original on 22 December 2015 . Retrieved 17 December 2015 .

^ Wangchuk, Jigme (8 July 2011).

"Addressing Human-Wildlife Conflict" .

Bhutan Observer online. Archived from the original on 1 September 2011 . Retrieved 13 July 2011 .

^ Cannon, P.F.; Hywel-Jones, N.L.; Maczey, N.; Norbu, L.; Tshitila; Samdup, T. & Lhendup, P. (2009).

"Steps towards sustainable harvest of Ophiocordyceps sinensis in Bhutan" .

Biodivers. Conserv .

18 (9): 2263– 2281.

Bibcode : 2009BiCon..18.2263C .

doi : 10.1007/s10531-009-9587-5 .

S2CID 38146891 .

^ "Plastic Ban Is Back" .

Business Bhutan . 12 February 2019. Archived from the original on 29 July 2020 . Retrieved 29 July 2020 .

^ a b Xavier, Constantino (8 July 2020).

"Bhutan's democratic transition and ties to India" .

Brookings .

Archived from the original on 26 September 2021 . Retrieved 23 August 2021 .

^ "Democracy Report 2025, 25 Years of Autocratization – Democracy Trumped?" (PDF) . Retrieved 14 March 2025 .

^ "Bhutan 2008" .

Constitute .

Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 30 March 2015 .

^ Sharma, Aradhana (25 March 2008).

"Royalist Party Wins Election in Bhutan" . NDTV.com. Archived from the original on 31 July 2013 . Retrieved 1 September 2011 .

^ "Bhutan chooses new party to form government" .

Times of India .

Archived from the original on 2 November 2018 . Retrieved 18 November 2018 .

^ "Opposition party wins Bhutan election amid economic crisis in Himalayan kingdom" .

NBC News . 10 January 2024.

Archived from the original on 4 March 2024 . Retrieved 7 March 2024 .

^ Bhutan profile – Timeline – BBC News Archived 15 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine . Bbc.com (20 May 2015). Retrieved on 4 December 2015.

^ a b Galay, Karma.

"International Politics of Bhutan" (PDF) .

Journal of Bhutan Studies .

10 : 90– 107.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 10 February 2015 . Retrieved 10 February 2015 .

^ Xavier, Constantino (8 July 2020).

"Bhutan's democratic transition and ties to India" .

Brookings . Washington, DC, USA: The Brookings Institution. Archived from the original on 25 May 2024 . Retrieved 7 February 2025 .

Two, Bhutan was never colonised. Therefore, the formation of its national identity did not take place within the context of freedom struggles or wars of independence.

^ Delek, Tashi (25 July 2017).

"Bhutan's Role in Promoting Regional Peace and Prosperity in South Asia" .

Asia Society .

Archived from the original on 21 May 2022 . Retrieved 8 April 2022 .

^ Bhutan PM: India is closest ally Archived 24 April 2013 at the Wayback Machine , NDTV, 16 July 2008.

^ Tshewang, Yeshey (12 July 2012) PM stresses on importance of foreign relations , The Bhutanese .

^ Bhutan: Cautiously Cultivated Positive Perception Archived 15 January 2023 at the Wayback Machine , Caroline Brassard in A Resurgent China: South Asian Perspectives , S. D. Muni, Tan Tai Yong, page 74 ^ "Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Royal Government of Bhutan;" . 14 October 2021.

Archived from the original on 23 January 2022 . Retrieved 23 January 2022 .

^ Wangchuk, Samten (13 December 2006).

"Indo-Bhutan Border Finalised" .

Kuensel online . Archived from the original on 15 May 2011 . Retrieved 23 April 2009 .

^ a b Giri, Pramod (28 October 2005).

"Alarm over Chinese Incursion" . Archived from the original on 24 August 2006 . Retrieved 23 April 2009 .

^ 中国不丹同意平等友好协商早日解决边界问题 [China and Bhutan Agree to Equal and Amicable Talks in Order to Resolve the Border Issue Quickly] (in Chinese). News.china.com. 1 December 2005. Archived from the original on 25 September 2009 . Retrieved 23 April 2009 .

^ Bhutan king arrives in Dhaka Archived 19 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine . bdnews24.com (14 February 2013). Retrieved on 4 December 2015.

^ "Bangladesh–Bhutan joint statement" (PDF) .

The Daily Star . 8 December 2014.

^ "Bangladesh signs preferential trade agreement with Bhutan" .

Dhaka Tribune . 6 December 2020.

Archived from the original on 14 January 2021 . Retrieved 14 January 2021 .

^ Dorji, Gyalsten K (15 February 2011).

"Bhutan establishes ties with Spain" .

Kuensel . Retrieved 29 March 2011 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Overseas Embassies and Consulates of Bhutan" .

Go Abroad.com . Archived from the original on 9 March 2009 . Retrieved 29 March 2011 .

^ "Bhutan Country Specific Information" .

United States Department of State . Archived from the original on 28 March 2008 . Retrieved 24 March 2008 .

^ "2023 Military Strength Ranking" .

www.globalfirepower.com .

Archived from the original on 5 March 2021 . Retrieved 13 October 2023 .

^ Bhattacharjee, Arun (19 December 2003).

"Bhutan Army Sees Action at Last" .

Asia Times . Archived from the original on 17 September 2009 . Retrieved 23 April 2009 .

^ "Bhutan" .

Freedom House .

Archived from the original on 18 January 2021 . Retrieved 2 January 2021 .

^ "Bhutan parliament decriminalizes homosexuality, to delight of activists" .

CNN .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 22 December 2020 . Retrieved 2 January 2021 .

^ a b Dudman, Jane.

"Bhutan's First Female Minister: Engineer, Equality Warrior, Former Civil Servant" . Guardian News and Media.

Archived from the original on 16 December 2018 . Retrieved 27 January 2019 .

^ a b c d e Lhaden, Tenzin (8 March 2018).

"Moving towards Gender Equality in Bhutan" .

Archived from the original on 15 December 2018.

^ a b Human Rights Watch.

"History of the Bhutanese Refugee Situation in Nepal" .

hrw.org .

Archived from the original on 13 December 2020 . Retrieved 16 October 2020 .

^ Sinha, Awadhesh Coomar (2001).

Himalayan kingdom Bhutan: tradition, transition, and transformation . Indus Publishing. pp. 25, 183, 215, 220– 221.

ISBN 81-7387-119-1 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 15 October 2020 .

^ a b c Schultz, Erika (15 October 2016).

"Bhutanese refugee crisis: a brief history" . The Seattle Times. Seattle Times staff photographer.

Archived from the original on 18 October 2020 . Retrieved 16 October 2020 .

^ a b c d Human Rights Watch.

"History of the Bhutanese Refugee Situation in Nepal" .

hrw.org . Human Rights Watch.

Archived from the original on 13 December 2020 . Retrieved 16 October 2020 .

^ "Family Portrait of Bhutan Nepalis in USA" . The Week Republica. 15 April 2011. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved 19 April 2011 .

^ a b c "Assessment for Lhotshampas in Bhutan" .

Database . Center for International Development and Conflict Management, University of Maryland . Archived from the original on 22 June 2012 . Retrieved 9 August 2011 .

^ a b "Refugees from Bhutan Poised for New Start" . UNHCR. 1 February 2008.

Archived from the original on 10 May 2011 . Retrieved 19 April 2011 .

^ "Bhutan: forcible exile" .

Amnesty International . 31 July 1994.

Archived from the original on 7 April 2022 . Retrieved 8 April 2022 .

^ "Bhutan: Human rights violations against the Nepali-speaking population in the south" .

Amnesty International . 1992.

Archived from the original on 19 April 2021 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 .

^ Human Rights Watch.

"History of the Bhutanese Refugee Situation in Nepal" .

hrw.org . HUman Rights Watch.

Archived from the original on 13 December 2020 . Retrieved 16 October 2020 .

^ Frelick, Bill (3 March 2011) For Bhutan's Refugees, There's no Place Like Home Archived 14 June 2015 at the Wayback Machine . Human Rights Watch.

^ Refugee Arrival Data Archived 7 December 2011 at the Wayback Machine . US Department of Health and Human Services, Office of Refugee Resettlement. 17 July 2012. Web. 25 December 2013.

^ a b c d 2009 Human Rights Report: Bhutan Archived 12 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine , U.S. Department of State, 25 February 2009 ^ "Bhutan" .

U.S. Department of State . 14 September 2007.

Archived from the original on 11 December 2019 . Retrieved 15 October 2020 .

^ Monitor, World Watch (14 April 2016).

"Bhutan – a 'happy' place, but not for all" .

World Watch Monitor .

Archived from the original on 21 May 2022 . Retrieved 15 October 2020 .

^ Frelick, Bill (1 February 2008).

"Bhutan's ethnic cleansing" . New Statesman. Human Rights Watch.

Archived from the original on 15 January 2020 . Retrieved 16 October 2020 .

^ a b Mishra, Vidhyapati (28 June 2013).

"Bhutan Is No Shangri-La" .

The New York times .

Archived from the original on 21 May 2022 . Retrieved 16 October 2020 .

^ a b Schultz, Erika (15 October 2016).

"Bhutanese refugee crisis: a brief history" .

The Seattle Times staff photographer . The Seattle Times.

Archived from the original on 18 October 2020 . Retrieved 16 October 2020 .

^ a b "The Bhutan insurgencies" .

Public Radio International . 10 March 2017.

Archived from the original on 19 October 2020 . Retrieved 15 October 2020 .

^ a b "MAR" .

Mar.umd.edu .

Archived from the original on 19 October 2020 . Retrieved 15 October 2020 .

^ a b Mishra, Vidhyapati (28 June 2013).

"Bhutan Is No Shangri-La" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 21 May 2022 . Retrieved 16 October 2020 .

^ a b Human Rights Watch.

"History of the Bhutanese Refugee Situation in Nepal" .

hrw.org . Human Rights Watch.

Archived from the original on 13 December 2020 . Retrieved 16 October 2020 .

^ a b Frelick, Bill (February 2008).

"Director, Refugee and Migrant Rights Division" .

Human Rights Watch .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2020 . Retrieved 10 October 2020 .

^ "Bhutan: Human rights violations against the Nepali-speaking population in the south" .

Amnesty International . 1994.

Archived from the original on 19 April 2021 . Retrieved 19 April 2021 .

^ a b Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights (UNHCHR).

"Treatment by authorities of ethnic Nepali's in Bhutan" (PDF) .

Refworld .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 October 2020 . Retrieved 15 October 2020 .

^ a b "Lhotshampas" .

Minority Rights Group International . 6 May 2020.

Archived from the original on 21 May 2022 . Retrieved 10 October 2020 .

^ a b "Local Government Act of Bhutan 2009" (PDF) .

Government of Bhutan . 11 September 2009. Archived from the original (PDF) on 6 July 2011.

^ "Delimitation" . Election Commission, Government of Bhutan . 2011. Archived from the original on 20 July 2011 . Retrieved 31 July 2011 .

^ "World development indicators" . The World Bank Group.

Archived from the original on 30 December 2013 . Retrieved 28 December 2013 .

^ "World development indicators: size of economy" . The World Bank Group.

Archived from the original on 16 January 2014 . Retrieved 28 December 2013 .

^ "GNH Survey 2010" (PDF) . The Centre for Bhutan Studies.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 18 March 2013 . Retrieved 17 October 2013 .

^ Sharma, Rajeev (25 January 2011).

"MoUs with Bhutan on Rail Links, Power Projects" .

The Tribune .

Archived from the original on 17 September 2009 . Retrieved 23 April 2009 .

^ "MEMBER INFORMATION: India and the WTO" .

World Trade Organization (WTO).

Archived from the original on 22 April 2009 . Retrieved 23 April 2009 .

^ Balaji, Mohan (12 January 2008).

"In Bhutan, China and India Collide" .

Asia Times . Archived from the original on 13 May 2011 . Retrieved 3 October 2010 .

^ a b "Country Trends" . Global Footprint Network.

Archived from the original on 8 August 2017 . Retrieved 23 June 2020 .

^ Lin, David; Hanscom, Laurel; Murthy, Adeline; Galli, Alessandro; Evans, Mikel; Neill, Evan; Mancini, MariaSerena; Martindill, Jon; Medouar, FatimeZahra; Huang, Shiyu; Wackernagel, Mathis (2018).

"Ecological Footprint Accounting for Countries: Updates and Results of the National Footprint Accounts, 2012–2018" .

Resources .

7 (3): 58.

Bibcode : 2018Resou...7...58L .

doi : 10.3390/resources7030058 .

^ Chester, Ken (2 September 2013).

"A Bhutan tech primer: early signs of startups and e-commerce" .

Tech in Asia .

Archived from the original on 9 October 2013 . Retrieved 29 September 2013 .

^ "BITC – Business Incubator" .

Thimphu TechPark . Archived from the original on 21 March 2013.

^ "BUDGET" . The Tribune (India) online.

Archived from the original on 22 July 2005 . Retrieved 1 September 2011 .

^ "Bhutan set to plough lone furrow as world's first wholly organic country" .

The Guardian . 11 February 2013.

Archived from the original on 9 August 2013 . Retrieved 25 January 2013 .

^ Paull, John (2017) "Four New Strategies to Grow the Organic Agriculture Sector" Archived 4 March 2018 at the Wayback Machine , Agrofor International Journal, 2(3):61–70.

^ Paull, John (2023).

Organic Agriculture in Bhutan: Dream of 100% Organic is stalled at reality of 1% Organic . European Journal of Development Studies, 3 (5), pp. 58–61.

^ Newspaper, Bhutan's Daily.

"Bangladesh wants to expand trade with Bhutan" .

Kuensel Online .

Archived from the original on 18 January 2017 . Retrieved 17 January 2017 .

^ C, Hope (15 November 2024).

"Bhutan Cashes out $33.5[M] in Bitcoin, Still Holds $1.11B in BTC" .

yahoo! Finance .

Archived from the original on 25 November 2024 . Retrieved 23 November 2024 .

^ Zangpo, Thukten (19 November 2024).

"Bhutan's Bitcoin asset value crosses USD 1B, ranks fifth among countries holding BTC" .

Asia News Network . Retrieved 23 November 2024 .

^ Chaudhury, Dipanjan Roy (1 December 2016).

"Demonetisation impacts India's border trade with Bhutan" .

The Economic Times .

Archived from the original on 4 July 2018 . Retrieved 23 September 2018 .

^ "Women rocking international trade – Damchae Dem" .

Gtpalliance.com .

Archived from the original on 30 March 2022 . Retrieved 17 March 2022 .

^ Ads, Ambo Digital.

"Gross National Happiness – an introduction" .

Ambo Travels .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2019 . Retrieved 10 December 2019 .

^ a b c Bhutan offers Bangladesh cheaper hydel Archived 19 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine . En.prothom-alo.com (1 November 2015). Retrieved on 4 December 2015.

^ Siebert, Stephen F.; Belsky, Jill M. (March 2015). "Managed fuelwood harvesting for energy, income and conservation: An opportunity for Bhutan".

Biomass and Bioenergy .

74 : 220– 223.

Bibcode : 2015BmBe...74..220S .

doi : 10.1016/j.biombioe.2015.01.013 .

^ Governing Council | SAARC Development Fund Secretariat Archived 21 November 2015 at the Wayback Machine . Sdfsec.org (2 November 2010). Retrieved on 4 December 2015.

^ BHUTAN TOURISM MONITOR. ANNUAL REPORT Archived 14 August 2015 at the Wayback Machine . Tourism Council of Bhutan (2014).

^ Gopal, Sharma.

"Bhutan cuts daily tourist fee by half to lure more visitors" .

Reuters .

Archived from the original on 27 August 2023 . Retrieved 27 August 2023 .

^ McIntyre, Kris (2011).

"Bhutan: A model for sustainable tourism development" .

International Trade Forum (2): 15– 17.

ProQuest 896728922 . Archived from the original on 19 November 2015.

^ "Ancient Ruin of Drukgyel Dzong" .

UNESCO World Heritage Centre .

Archived from the original on 15 November 2019 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

^ "Bumdeling Wildlife Sanctuary" .

UNESCO World Heritage Centre .

Archived from the original on 8 December 2015 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

^ "Dzongs: the centre of temporal and religious authorities (Punakha Dzong, Wangdue Phodrang Dzong, Paro Dzong, Trongsa Dzong and Dagana Dzong)" .

UNESCO World Heritage Centre .

Archived from the original on 22 June 2020 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

^ "Jigme Dorji National Park (JDNP)" .

UNESCO World Heritage Centre .

Archived from the original on 7 December 2019 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

^ "Royal Manas National Park (RMNP)" .

UNESCO World Heritage Centre .

Archived from the original on 10 July 2018 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

^ "Sacred Sites associated with Phajo Drugom Zhigpo and his descendants" .

UNESCO World Heritage Centre .

Archived from the original on 15 November 2019 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

^ Sakteng Wildlife Sanctuary (SWS) – UNESCO World Heritage Centre Archived 8 December 2015 at the Wayback Machine . Whc.unesco.org (9 July 2015). Retrieved on 4 December 2015.

^ "Tamzhing Monastery" .

UNESCO World Heritage Centre .

Archived from the original on 15 November 2019 . Retrieved 26 December 2019 .

^ Mask dance of the drums from Drametse – intangible heritage – Culture Sector Archived 9 December 2015 at the Wayback Machine . UNESCO. Retrieved on 4 December 2015.

^ "A tale of two airports" . Daily Bhutan.

Archived from the original on 22 November 2022 . Retrieved 22 November 2022 .

^ Zeppa, Jamie (2000).

Beyond the Sky and the Earth: A Journey into Bhutan . Penguin.

ISBN 978-1-101-17420-3 .

[ page needed ] ^ "Icy Roads Claim Lives" .

Kuensel online. 4 December 2004. Archived from the original on 19 March 2012 . Retrieved 10 August 2011 .

^ Yeshi, Samten (24 August 2010).

"Landslide at Dzong Viewpoint" .

Kuensel online. Archived from the original on 19 March 2012 . Retrieved 25 July 2011 .

^ Newspaper, Bhutan's Daily.

"North-East-West highway widening progressing under pre-financing" .

KuenselOnline .

Archived from the original on 10 May 2017 . Retrieved 30 June 2017 .

^ "Welcome to Embassy of India Thimphu, Bhutan" .

indianembassythimphu.bt . Archived from the original on 10 May 2017 . Retrieved 30 June 2017 .

^ Newspaper, Bhutan's Daily.

"East-West highway widening on track" .

KuenselOnline .

Archived from the original on 10 May 2017 . Retrieved 30 June 2017 .

^ "International tourists bemoan bad road conditions in Bhutan" .

Asia News Network . 31 May 2016. Archived from the original on 8 July 2016 . Retrieved 30 June 2017 .

^ Page, Jeremy (30 December 2009).

"Isolated Buddhist kingdom of Bhutan to get its first railway link" .

The Times . Retrieved 10 June 2011 .

^ "Population panel" .

UNPP .

Archived from the original on 20 March 2014 . Retrieved 8 April 2014 .

^ "93 percent of youth are literate" .

Archived from the original on 1 September 2023 . Retrieved 1 September 2023 .

^ GROWup – Geographical Research On War, Unified Platform.

"Ethnicity in Bhutan" . ETH Zurich.

Archived from the original on 24 October 2018 . Retrieved 24 October 2018 .

^ "People & Population" . Bhutan News Service. Archived from the original on 16 November 2011 . Retrieved 10 June 2013 .

^ "Bhutan" .

City Population.de .

Archived from the original on 5 October 2003 . Retrieved 23 August 2021 .

^ "Table: Religious Composition by Country" (PDF) .

Pew Research Center .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 23 March 2018 . Retrieved 20 November 2022 .

^ "National Profiles | World Religion" .

The Association of Religion Data Archives (the ARDA) . Retrieved 26 March 2025 .

^ a b "International Religious Freedom Report 2007–Bhutan" .

U.S. Department of State . 14 September 2007.

Archived from the original on 11 December 2019 . Retrieved 6 January 2008 .

^ "Pastor Sentenced to Three Years in Prison" .

Bhutan News Service online . Bhutan News Service. 12 December 2010. Archived from the original on 16 December 2010 . Retrieved 25 January 2011 .

^ "Life expectancy at birth, total (years)" .

Worldbank .

Archived from the original on 26 August 2018 . Retrieved 25 August 2018 .

^ "World Population Prospects – Population Division – United Nations" .

Archived from the original on 19 September 2016 . Retrieved 15 July 2017 .

^ "The Constitution of the Kingdom of Bhutan" (PDF) .

Government of Bhutan . 18 July 2008. Archived from the original (PDF) on 4 September 2012 . Retrieved 2 March 2011 .

^ a b Wangdi, Sonam; LeGrand, Cathleen; Norbu, Phuntsho; Rinzin, Sonam (1 January 2020).

"What's past is prologue: history, current status and future prospects of library development in Bhutan" (PDF) .

Global Knowledge, Memory and Communication .

70 (4/5): 339– 354.

doi : 10.1108/GKMC-12-2019-0153 .

ISSN 2514-9342 .

S2CID 225114548 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 30 May 2022 . Retrieved 18 May 2022 .

Alt URL Archived 31 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Indian teachers who served in Bhutan honoured" . 8 January 2019.

Archived from the original on 11 January 2019 . Retrieved 11 January 2019 .

^ Kharat, Rajesh (200). "Bhutan's Security Scenario".

Contemporary South Asia .

13 (2): 171– 185.

doi : 10.1080/0958493042000242954 .

S2CID 154802295 .

^ Martin Regg, Cohn. "Lost horizon." Toronto Star (Canada) n.d.: Newspaper Source Plus. Web. 8 December 2011.

^ Zurick, David (4 November 2019). "Gross National Happiness and Environmental Status in Bhutan".

Geographical Review .

96 (4): 657– 681.

doi : 10.1111/j.1931-0846.2006.tb00521.x .

S2CID 145412639 .

^ "Bhutan – the Last Shangri La" . PBS online.

Archived from the original on 24 August 2011 . Retrieved 1 September 2011 .

^ "Travel Requirements" . Tourism Council of Bhutan. Archived from the original on 20 November 2010 . Retrieved 1 June 2011 .

^ "New MICE hardware on the cards for Bhutan" . TTGmice. Archived from the original on 5 June 2013 . Retrieved 16 March 2013 .

^ "Selling and buying of tobacco products are no longer illegal in Bhutan" . DailyBhutan.

Archived from the original on 6 December 2021 . Retrieved 6 December 2021 .

^ Rizal, Dhurba (2015).

The Royal Semi-Authoritarian Democracy of Bhutan . Lexington Books. p. 11.

ISBN 9781498507486 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 17 December 2021 .

^ "Four individuals conferred Bura Maap – BBS" .

Bbs.bt . 17 December 2012.

Archived from the original on 19 October 2020 . Retrieved 16 October 2020 .

^ "His Majesty awards red scarf and medals – BBS" .

Bbs.bt . 17 December 2011.

Archived from the original on 18 April 2021 . Retrieved 15 October 2020 .

^ Rael, Ronald (2008).

Earth Architecture . Princeton Architectural Press. p. 92.

ISBN 978-1-56898-767-5 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2015 .

^ "Country profile – Bhutan: a land frozen in time" .

BBC News . 9 February 1998.

Archived from the original on 11 November 2010 . Retrieved 1 October 2010 .

^ Amundsen, Ingun B (2001).

"On Bhutanese and Tibetan Dzongs" (PDF) .

Journal of Bhutan Studies .

5 (Winter ed.): 8– 41.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 5 October 2011 . Retrieved 19 October 2011 .

( JBS Archived 27 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine ) ^ "1.1 University History" .

UTEP Handbook of Operations . University of Texas, El Paso. Archived from the original on 10 February 2012 . Retrieved 1 September 2011 .

^ "Bhutan Winter Solstice Reminders for Winter Solstice . Get reminders for Winter Solstice – MarkTheDay.com" .

marktheday.com .

Archived from the original on 25 March 2012 . Retrieved 16 December 2016 .

^ "Public Holidays for the year 2011" . Royal Civil Service Commission, Government of Bhutan . 26 April 2011. Archived from the original on 28 March 2012 . Retrieved 26 July 2011 .

^ "Bhutan National Day" .

U.S. Department of State .

Archived from the original on 21 January 2017 . Retrieved 16 December 2016 .

^ Clements, William M. (2006).

The Greenwood Encyclopedia of World Folklore and Folklife: Southeast Asia and India, Central and East Asia, Middle East . Vol. 2. Greenwood Press. pp.

106– 110.

ISBN 978-0-313-32849-7 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2015 .

^ Penjor, Ugyen (19 January 2003).

"From Ngesem Ngesem to Khu Khu Khu ... Rigsar music woos local music fans" .

Kuensel online. Archived from the original on 19 August 2011 . Retrieved 16 October 2011 .

^ "Rigsar Dranyen" .

RAOnline . 17 June 2011.

Archived from the original on 17 July 2012 . Retrieved 16 October 2011 .

^ Coelho, V.H. (1970).

Sikkim and Bhutan . Vikas Publications, Indian Council for Cultural Relations. p. 82.

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2015 .

^ a b "Bhutan at Play" . Impress BHUTAN Travel.

Archived from the original on 21 November 2015 . Retrieved 21 November 2015 .

^ "Bhutan Wins Again! A Match Report from a Deadspin Reader in Bhutan" Archived 20 March 2015 at the Wayback Machine . Screamer.deadspin.com. Retrieved on 4 December 2015.

^ "About Bhutan Cricket – Bhutan Cricket Council Board" . 26 February 2022 . Retrieved 27 December 2024 .

^ icc.

"Bhutan" .

www.icc-cricket.com .

Archived from the original on 12 February 2025 . Retrieved 27 December 2024 .

^ a b "Bhutan Gains Ground on Gender Equality But Challenges Remain in Key Areas" . The Asian Development Bank. 25 August 2014.

Archived from the original on 15 December 2018.

^ a b c d e f g "Bhutan Gender Policy Note | Gender Pay Gap | Gender Role" .

Scribd .

Archived from the original on 10 January 2020 . Retrieved 12 December 2018 .

^ Dayaram, Kandy; Pick, David (22 June 2012). "Entangled between tradition and modernity: the experiences of Bhutanese working women".

Society and Business Review .

7 (2): 134– 148.

doi : 10.1108/17465681211237600 .

Notes [ edit ] ^ English: / b uː ˈ t ɑː n / ⓘ boo- TAHN ; Dzongkha : འབྲུག་ཡུལ , romanised : Druk Yul , IPA: [ʈȕk̚.y̏ː] ; Nepali : भुटान , romanised: bhuṭān , Nepali: [bʱṳʈän] .

^ Dzongkha: འབྲུག་རྒྱལ་ཁབ , romanised: Druk Gyal Khap .

^ Bhutan’s geopolitical position between two Asian giants—India and China—makes it a key player in the regional strategic landscape.

[ 19 ] Further reading [ edit ] General [ edit ] A.P. Agarwala (2003).

Sikkim and Bhutan . Nest and Wings.

ISBN 978-81-7824-008-4 .

Aris, Michael.

Bhutan: the early history of a Himalayan Kingdom (Aris & Phillips, 1979).

Bothe, Winnie (28 January 2015). "In the name of king, country, and people on the Westminster model and Bhutan's constitutional transition".

Democratization .

22 (7): 1338– 1361.

doi : 10.1080/13510347.2014.959437 .

S2CID 143529082 .

Givel, Michael (21 June 2015).

"Mahayana Buddhism and Gross National Happiness in Bhutan" .

International Journal of Wellbeing .

5 (2): 14– 27.

doi : 10.5502/ijw.v5i2.2 .

Archived from the original on 18 June 2020 . Retrieved 10 January 2020 .

Osmani, Siddiqur R.; Bajracharya, B. B.; Tenzing, S.; Wangyal, T. (2007).

Macroeconomics of Poverty Reduction: The Case Study of Bhutan (PDF) . p. 302.

ISBN 978-955-1416-00-3 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 July 2011.

Phuntsho, Karma (2013).

The History of Bhutan . Nodia: Random House India.

ISBN 9788184003116 .

Rizal, Dhurba.

The Royal Semi-authoritarian Democracy of Bhutan (Lexington Books, 2015).

Robles, Chelsea M.

Education and Society in Bhutan: Tradition and Modernisation (Routledge, 2016).

Rose, Leo.

The Nepali Ethnic Community in the Northeast of the Subcontinent . University of California, Berkeley.

Rose, Leo E.

The politics of Bhutan (Cornell University Press, 1977).

Sinha, Awadhesh Coomar.

Himalayan kingdom Bhutan: tradition, transition, and transformation (Indus Publishing, 2001).

Wangchhuk, Lily (2008).

Facts About Bhutan: The Land of the Thunder Dragon . Thimphu: Absolute Bhutan Books.

ISBN 978-99936-760-0-3 .

Revkin, Andrew C. (4 October 2005).

"A New Measure of Well-Being From a Happy Little Kingdom" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 17 April 2009 . Retrieved 4 October 2005 .

"Border tension pushes MEA allocation" .

The Tribune, Chandigarh .

Archived from the original on 22 July 2005 . Retrieved 8 September 2005 .

Bhutan . MSN Encarta. Archived from the original on 28 October 2009 . Retrieved 8 September 2005 .

"BTI 2008 — Bhutan Country Report" . Gütersloh: Bertelsmann Stiftung. 2007. Archived from the original on 24 February 2012 . Retrieved 11 December 2008 .

Datta-Ray, Sunanda K.

(1984).

Smash and Grab: The Annexation of Sikkim . Vikas.

ISBN 978-0-7069-2509-8 .

Foning, A.R. (1987).

Lepcha, My Vanishing Tribe . Sterling Publishers.

ISBN 978-81-207-0685-9 .

Napoli, Lisa (2011).

Radio Shangri-La: What I Learned in Bhutan, the Happiest Kingdom on Earth . Crown.

ISBN 978-0-307-45302-0 .

Niestroy, Ingeborg; Schmidt, Armando García; Esche, Andreas (2013).

"Bhutan: Paradigms Matter" (PDF) . In Stiftung, Bertelsmann (ed.).

Winning Strategies for a Sustainable Future . Brookings Institution Press. pp.

55– 80.

ISBN 978-3-86793-491-6 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 March 2021 . Retrieved 10 January 2020 .

Jordans, Bart (9 September 2010).

Bhutan: A Trekker's Guide . Cicerone Press Limited.

ISBN 978-1-84965-189-9 .

Rennie, Frank; Mason, Robin (2008).

Bhutan: Ways of Knowing . IAP.

ISBN 978-1-59311-734-4 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2015 .

Ramakant; Misra, Ramesh Chandra (1 January 1996).

Bhutan: Society and Polity . Indus Publishing.

ISBN 978-81-7387-044-6 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 8 March 2021 .

Zeppa, Jamie (1 May 2000).

Beyond the Sky and the Earth: A Journey into Bhutan . Penguin Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-1-101-17420-3 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 18 October 2015 .

Ardussi, John A.; Pommaret, Françoise (2007).

Bhutan: Traditions and Changes . BRILL.

ISBN 978-90-04-15551-0 .

Karan, Pradyumna Prasad; Iijima, Shigeru; Pauer, Gyula (1987).

Bhutan: development amid environmental and cultural preservation . Institute for the Study of Languages and Cultures of Asia and Africa.

Hutt, Michael (1994).

Bhutan: Perspectives on Conflict and Dissent . Strachan-Kiscadale.

ISBN 978-1-870838-02-3 .

Zürcher, Dieter; Choden, Kunzang (2004).

Bhutan: Land of Spirituality and Modernization: Role of Water in Daily Life . New Dawn Press, Incorporated.

ISBN 978-1-932705-43-0 .

Carpenter, Russell B.; Carpenter, Blyth C. (1 January 2002).

The Blessings of Bhutan . University of Hawaii Press.

ISBN 978-0-8248-2679-6 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 8 March 2021 .

Sinha, Awadhesh Coomar (2001).

Himalayan Kingdom Bhutan: Tradition, Transition, and Transformation . Indus Publishing.

ISBN 978-81-7387-119-1 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 15 October 2020 .

Dhakal, D. N. S.; Strawn, Christopher (1 January 1994).

Bhutan: A Movement in Exile . Nirala Publications.

ISBN 978-81-85693-41-5 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 8 March 2021 .

Foote, Daisy (2007).

Bhutan . Dramatists Play Service.

ISBN 978-0-8222-2212-5 .

Rustomji, Nari (1978).

Bhutan: the dragon kingdom in crisis . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780195610628 .

Rose, Leo E. (1977).

The Politics of Bhutan . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8014-0909-7 .

Mayhew, Bradley; Whitecross, Richard W (2007).

Bhutan. Ediz. Inglese . Lonely Planet.

ISBN 978-1-74220-314-0 .

Hellum, A. K. (1 January 2001).

A Painter's Year in the Forests of Bhutan . University of Alberta.

ISBN 978-0-88864-323-0 .

Scott, Gregory J. (1983).

Marketing Bhutan's Potatoes: Present Patterns and Future Prospects .

International Potato Center . GGKEY:HEATQBL56TG.

Sinha, Awadhesh Coomar (1 January 1998).

Bhutan: Ethnic Identity and National Dilemma . Reliance Publishing House.

ISBN 978-81-7510-059-6 .

Khandu, Tshoki (2006).

Causes of Rural Urban Migration in Bhutan . Cornell University.

Dorji, Jaġar (2003).

Quality of Education in Bhutan: A Personal Perspective on the Development and Changes in Bhutanese Education System Since 1961 . KMT Publisher.

ISBN 978-99936-10-60-1 .

Bhutan 2020: A Vision for Peace, Prosperity and Happiness . Planning Commission, Royal Government of Bhutan. 1999.

Choden, Kunzang (1994).

Folktales of Bhutan . White Lotus.

ISBN 978-974-8495-96-5 .

History [ edit ] Aris, Michael (1982).

Views of Medieval Bhutan: The Diary and Drawings of Samuel Davis, 1783 . Serinda Publications.

ISBN 0906026105 .

Aris, Michael (1979).

Bhutan: The Early History of a Himalayan Kingdom . Central Asian Studies. Aris & Phillips Ltd.

ISBN 0-85668-082-6 .

Das, Nirmala (1974).

The Dragon Country: The General History of Bhutan . Orient Longman.

ISBN 0861250451 .

Hasrat, Bikrama Jit (1980).

History of Bhutan: Land of the Peaceful Dragon . Education Department.

OCLC 9829078 .

Phuntsho, Karma (23 April 2013).

The History of Bhutan . Random House India.

ISBN 978-81-8400-411-3 .

Archived from the original on 15 January 2023 . Retrieved 8 March 2021 .

White, J. Claude (1909).

Sikhim & Bhutan: Twenty-one Years on the North-East Frontier, 1887–1908 . Asian Educational Services.

ISBN 978-81-206-1183-2 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Geography [ edit ] Fraser, Neil; Bhattacharya, Anima; Bhattacharya, Bimalendu (2001).

Geography of a Himalayan Kingdom: Bhutan . Concept Publishing.

ISBN 8170228875 .

Gansser, Augusto (1983).

Geology of the Bhutan Himalaya . Birkhäuser Verlag.

ISBN 3764313714 .

External links [ edit ] Bhutan at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Travel information from Wikivoyage Data from Wikidata Bhutan.gov.bt Archived 30 December 2005 at the Wayback Machine – Official Government Web Portal of Bhutan Bhutan .

The World Factbook .

Central Intelligence Agency .

Bhutan profile , BBC News .

Bhutan from UCB Libraries GovPubs .

Bhutan , Encyclopædia Britannica entry.

"Bhutan" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 03 (11th ed.). 1911. pp.

846– 848.

Wikimedia Atlas of Bhutan Key Development Forecasts for Bhutan from International Futures .

v t e Bhutan articles History Second Battle of Simtokha Dzong Bhutan War (Duar War) Operation All Clear Military history Geography Borders Climate Ecoregions Environment Extreme points Glaciers Lakes Mountains Protected areas Rivers Valleys Wildlife Subdivisions Cities Chiwogs (electoral precincts) Dzongkhags ( districts ) Dungkhags (subdistricts) Gewogs (village groups) Villages Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Human rights LGBT King Law enforcement Military Parliament National Council National Assembly Political parties Prime Minister Economy Agriculture Companies Energy Ngultrum (currency) Telecommunications Tourism Transport Culture Anthem Architecture Cinema Cuisine ( wine ) Emblem Flag Media Music National symbols Public holidays Sport Squatting Demographics Crime Education Ethnic groups Health care Languages Religion Women Outline Bibliography Category v t e Countries and dependencies of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia 2 Azerbaijan 1 Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus 2 East Timor Egypt 1 Georgia 1 India Indonesia 1 Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan 1 North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia 1 Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Turkey 1 Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia 2 Northern Cyprus 2 Palestine South Ossetia 2 Taiwan Dependent territories Australia Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Greece Kastellorizo United Kingdom Akrotiri and Dhekelia 2 (Sovereign Base Areas) Special administrative regions of China Hong Kong Macau 1 Spans the conventional boundary between Asia and another continent.

2 Considered European for cultural, political and historical reasons but is geographically in West Asia.

Category Asia portal v t e South Asian topics Countries and regions Afghanistan (sometimes not included) Bangladesh Bhutan India Regions Maldives Nepal Pakistan Regions Sri Lanka South Asian regions Northwestern Northern Eastern Southern General geography Ethnic groups Andamanese Austroasiatic Austronesian Dravidian Indo-Aryan Iranic Nuristani Tibeto-Burman Turkic Other groups Afro-Asians Chinese European and Eurasian Semitic Diaspora Culture Architecture‎ Art Cinema Cuisine Cultural sphere Fashion Languages Literature Music Mythology Philosophy Scripts Surnames Environment Monsoon Climate change Economy and Politics Human rights in South Asia Religious nationalism Hindu Muslim Sikh Stock exchanges Caste system History Archaeology Archaeological cultures Bronze Age Iron Age Middle kingdoms Medieval Early modern Colonial era Contemporary era Former countries Religion Dharmic Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Islam Religious persecution Bangladesh India Pakistan Sports Cricket South Asian Football Federation South Asian Games Martial arts Physical culture Traditional games Education South Asian studies History Military Indo-Pakistani conflicts Sino-Indian border dispute Afghanistan–Pakistan skirmishes Science and technology Indian Institutes of Technology Inventions and discoveries History Swords Traditional medicine v t e South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC) Agreements South Asian Free Trade Area Summits Dhaka 1985 Bangalore 1986 Kathmandu 1987 Islamabad 1988 Malé 1990 Colombo 1991 Dhaka 1993 New Delhi 1995 Malé 1997 Colombo 1998 Kathmandu 2002 Islamabad 2004 Dhaka 2005 New Delhi 2007 Colombo 2008 Thimphu 2010 Addu 2011 Kathmandu 2014 Islamabad 2016 (Cancelled) Members Afghanistan Bangladesh Bhutan India Maldives Nepal Pakistan Sri Lanka Observers Australia China European Union Iran Japan Mauritius Myanmar South Korea United States Guests South Africa Russia Specialised agencies SAARC Consortium on Open and Distance Learning SAARC Documentation Centre South Asia Co-operative Environment Programme Foundation of SAARC Writers and Literature SAARC Chamber of Commerce and Industry South Asian Federation of Accountants SAARC COVID-19 Emergency Fund Related Articles SAARC Secretary General SAARC Secretariat SAARC satellite South Asian University South Asian Games SAARC Literary Award SAARC Road SAARC Fountain v t e Monarchies Monarch Imperial, royal and noble ranks List of current sovereign monarchs List of current non-sovereign monarchs List of monarchy referendums Type Absolute Constitutional Diarchy Elective Federal Hereditary Non-sovereign Personal union Regency Topics Abdication Abolition of monarchy Aristocracy Criticism of monarchy Decolonization Democratization Dynasty Government Head of state Legitimacy (political) Oligarchy Order of succession Republicanism Self-proclaimed monarchy Sovereignty Titles Chhatrapati Emperor Khan King Queen regnant Pharaoh Prince regnant Raja Shah Sultan Tsar Current Africa Eswatini Lesotho Morocco list Asia Bahrain Bhutan Brunei Cambodia Japan Jordan Kuwait Malaysia Oman Qatar Saudi Arabia Thailand United Arab Emirates list Europe Andorra Belgium Denmark Liechtenstein Luxembourg Monaco Netherlands Norway Spain Sweden Vatican City (Holy See) Oceania Tonga Commonwealth realms Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Belize Canada Grenada Jamaica New Zealand Cook Islands Niue Papua New Guinea Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Solomon Islands Tuvalu United Kingdom Former Africa Adamawa Ankole Aussa Bagirmi Barotseland Bornu Burundi Central Africa Dahomey Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Gomma Gumma Islands of Refreshment Kaffa Kongo Libya Luba Madagascar Mali Maore Maravi Mwali Ndzuwani Ngazidja Rwanda Shilluk Tunisia Wituland Wassoulou Yeke Zanzibar Zimbabwe and other Americas Araucanía Aztec Brazil Haiti Inca Mexico Miskito Suriname Talamanca Trinidad Thirteen Colonies Asia Afghanistan Asir Bengal Bukhara Burma Cebu Chehab China Dapitan Hejaz Indonesia Iran ( Qajar ) Iraq Jabal Shammar Kathiri Khiva Korea Kumul Kurdistan Laos Maguindanao Mahra Maldives Manchukuo Mongolia Najran Nepal Qu'aiti Ryukyu Sarawak Shan Sikkim Sri Lanka Sip Song Chau Tai Sulu Syria Tibet Taiwan Upper Asir Upper Yafa Vietnam Yemen Emirates of South Arabia South Arabia Europe Albania Aragon Asturias Austria Austria-Hungary Bavaria Bosnia Brittany Bulgaria Catalonia Cilicia Corsica Crimea Cyprus Finland France Galicia Georgia Germany Granada Greece Hanover Hungary Iceland Imereti Ireland Italy Kartli-Kakheti Lithuania Majorca Man Moldavia Montenegro Navarre Neuchâtel Ottoman Empire Papal States Piedmont-Sardinia Poland–Lithuania Portugal Prussia Romania Russia Samos Savoy Saxony Scotland Serbia Tavolara Tuscany Two Sicilies United Baltic Duchy Valencia Württemberg Yugoslavia Oceania Abemama Bora Bora Easter Island Fiji Hawaii Huahine Mangareva Niuē-Fekai Nuku Hiva Raiatea Rapa Iti Rarotonga Rimatara Rurutu Tahiti Tahuata Commonwealth realms Barbados Ceylon (Sri Lanka) Fiji The Gambia Ghana Guyana India ( British Raj , princely states ) Irish Free State / Ireland Kenya Malawi Malta Mauritius Nigeria Pakistan Rhodesia Sierra Leone South Africa Tanganyika Trinidad and Tobago Uganda Authority control databases International VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France 2 BnF data 2 Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Sweden Vatican Israel Geographic MusicBrainz area Artists KulturNav People UK Parliament Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA Yale LUX 27°25′01″N 90°26′06″E ﻿ / ﻿ 27.417°N 90.435°E ﻿ / 27.417; 90.435 NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8mkfc
Cached time: 20250817044142
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.205 seconds
Real time usage: 3.711 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 27357/1000000
Revision size: 206167/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 776223/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 50004/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 80/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1010769/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.940/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24974656/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3134.537      1 -total
 42.23% 1323.769      2 Template:Reflist
 22.75%  712.956    145 Template:Cite_web
 14.64%  458.845      1 Template:Infobox_country
 10.70%  335.280     64 Template:Cite_book
  5.01%  157.083     21 Template:Cite_journal
  4.06%  127.261      3 Template:ISO_3166_code
  3.80%  119.104      1 Template:Bhutan_topics
  3.75%  117.636      1 Template:Country_topics
  3.28%  102.845      1 Template:Raise Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:2421391:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044142 and revision id 1305316715. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bhutan&oldid=1305316715 " Categories : Bhutan Landlocked countries Member states of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation Member states of the United Nations South Asian countries States and territories established in 1907 Countries in Asia Tibetan Buddhist places Buddhist states Former least developed countries Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments Source attribution Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2024 CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from June 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1: unfit URL Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing Dzongkha-language text Pages with Dzongkha IPA Articles containing Nepali (macrolanguage)-language text Pages with Nepali (macrolanguage) IPA Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages move-protected due to vandalism Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use dmy dates from May 2020 Use British English from June 2022 Pages using infobox country or infobox former country with the symbol caption or type parameters Articles containing Sanskrit-language text Articles needing additional references from December 2017 All articles needing additional references Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014 All articles containing potentially dated statements Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2015 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2008 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2012 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2006 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from October 2024 CS1 errors: ISBN date Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Coordinates on Wikidata Geographical articles missing image alternative text This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 10:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bhutan 255 languages Add topic

