Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Utility and characteristics of goods 2 Types of goods Toggle Types of goods subsection 2.1 Bads 3 Goods classified by exclusivity and competitiveness Toggle Goods classified by exclusivity and competitiveness subsection 3.1 Fourfold model of goods 3.1.1 Public goods 3.1.2 Private goods 3.1.3 Common-pool resources 3.1.4 Club goods 3.2 History of the fourfold model of goods 3.3 Expansion of fourfold model: anti-rivalrous 3.4 Expansion of Fourfold model: Semi-Excludable 4 Trading of goods 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Goods 78 languages العربية Asturianu Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Íslenska Italiano Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Kriyòl gwiyannen Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Patois Polski Português Română Русский Саха тыла Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Things that satisfy human wants This article is about goods in the context of economics. For physical goods, see commodities . For other uses, see good (disambiguation) .

Tangible goods stacked in a warehouse Part of the behavioral sciences Economics Outline Index Glossary Economists Principles of Economics Tools and methodology Economic theory Mathematical modeling Game theory Rational choice Cognitive science ( Behavioral ) Economic equilibrium Empirical methods Experimental National accounts Econometrics Time series Spatial Prescriptive and policy Welfare analysis Social choice theory Rational choice theory Cost–benefit analysis Branches and subfields Applied Econometrics International Heterodox Micro Macro Mainstream Mathematical Mech. design Methodology Political Industrial org.

Market design Applications Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Economics portal Society portal v t e In economics , goods are anything that is good , usually in the sense that it provides welfare or utility to someone.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Goods can be contrasted with bads , i.e. things that provide negative value for users, like chores or waste . A bad lowers a consumer's overall welfare.

[ 3 ] Economics focuses on the study of economic goods , i.e. goods that are scarce ; in other words, producing the good requires expending effort or resources. Economic goods contrast with free goods such as air, for which there is an unlimited supply.

[ 4 ] Goods are the result of the Secondary sector of the economy which involves the transformation of raw materials or intermediate goods into goods.

Utility and characteristics of goods [ edit ] The change in utility (pleasure or satisfaction) gained by consuming one unit of a good is called its marginal utility . Goods are commonly considered to have diminishing marginal utility, which means that consuming more gives less utility per amount consumed.

[ 5 ] Some things are useful, but not scarce enough to have monetary value , such as the Earth's atmosphere ; these are referred to as free goods .

[ 6 ] Final goods are items that are ultimately consumed, rather than used in the production of another good. For example, a microwave oven or a bicycle that is sold to a consumer is a final good or consumer good, but the components that are sold to be used in those goods are intermediate goods .

For example, textiles or transistors can be used to make some further goods.

Commercial goods are construed as tangible products that are manufactured and then made available for supply to be used in an industry of commerce. Commercial goods could be tractors, commercial vehicles, mobile structures, airplanes, and even roofing materials. Commercial and personal goods as categories are very broad and cover almost everything a person sees from the time they wake up in their home, on their commute to work to their arrival at the workplace.

Commodities may be used as a synonym for economic goods but often refer to marketable raw materials and primary products .

[ 7 ] Although common goods are tangible , certain classes of goods, such as information , only take intangible forms. For example, among other goods an apple is a tangible object, while news belongs to an intangible class of goods and can be perceived only by means of an instrument such as printers or television .

Types of goods [ edit ] Types of goods in economics Goods' diversity allows for their classification into different categories based on distinctive characteristics, such as tangibility and (ordinal) relative elasticity. A tangible good like an apple differs from an intangible good like information due to the impossibility of a person to physically hold the latter, whereas the former occupies physical space.  Intangible goods differ from services in that final (intangible) goods are transferable and can be traded, whereas a service cannot.

Price elasticity also differentiates types of goods.  An elastic good is one for which there is a relatively large change in quantity due to a relatively small change in price, and therefore is likely to be part of a family of substitute goods ; for example, as pen prices rise, consumers might buy more pencils instead. An inelastic good is one for which there are few or no substitutes, such as tickets to major sporting events, [ 8 ] original works by famous artists, [ 1 ] and prescription medicine such as insulin.

Complementary goods are generally more inelastic than goods in a family of substitutes. For example, if a rise in the price of beef results in a decrease in the quantity of beef demanded, it is likely that the quantity of hamburger buns demanded will also drop, despite no change in buns' prices. This is because hamburger buns and beef (in Western culture) are complementary goods . Goods considered complements or substitutes are relative associations and should not be understood in a vacuum. The degree to which a good is a substitute or a complement depends on its relationship to other goods, rather than an intrinsic characteristic, and can be measured as cross elasticity of demand by employing statistical techniques such as covariance and correlation.

Bads [ edit ] A bad, also known as a dis commodity , [ 9 ] : 58 is the opposite of a good or commodity , because its consumption or presence lowers the customer's utility . With goods, a two-party transaction results in the exchange of money for some object, as when money is exchanged for a car . With a bad, however, both money and the object in question go the same direction, as when a household gives up both money and garbage to a waste collector , meaning the garbage has a negative price (as the waste collector is receiving both garbage and money, thus paying a negative amount for the garbage).

[ 10 ] Goods classified by exclusivity and competitiveness [ edit ] Fourfold model of goods [ edit ] Goods can be classified based on their degree of excludability and rivalry (competitiveness). Considering excludability can be measured on a continuous scale, some goods  would not be able to fall into one of the four common categories used.

There are four types of goods based on the characteristics of rival in consumption and excludability: Public Goods, Private Goods, Common Resources, and Club Goods.

[ 11 ] These four types plus examples for anti-rivalry appear in the accompanying table.

[ 12 ] Excludable Non-excludable Rivalrous Private goods eg. food, clothing, parking spaces Common-pool resources eg. fish stocks, timber Non-rivalrous Club goods eg. cinemas, software, private parks Public goods eg.

free-to-air television , air, national defense Public goods [ edit ] Goods that are both non-rival and non-excludable are called public goods . In many cases, renewable resources, such as land, are common commodities but some of them are contained in public goods. Public goods are non-exclusive and non-competitive, meaning that individuals cannot be stopped from using them and anyone can consume this good without hindering the ability of others to consume them. Examples in addition to the ones in the matrix are national parks, or firework displays. It is generally accepted by mainstream economists that the market mechanism will under-provide public goods, so these goods have to be produced by other means, including government provision. Public goods can also suffer from the Free-Rider problem .

Private goods [ edit ] Private goods are excludable goods, which prevent other consumers from consuming them. Private goods are also rivalrous because one good in private ownership cannot be used by someone else. That is to say, consuming some goods will deprive another consumer of the ability to consume the goods. Private goods are the most common type of goods.  They include what you have to get from the store. For examples food, clothing, cars, parking spaces, etc. An individual who consumes an apple denies another individual from consuming the same one. It is excludable because consumption is only offered to those willing to pay the price.

[ 13 ] Common-pool resources [ edit ] Common-pool resources are rival in consumption and non-excludable. An example is that of fisheries, which harvest fish from a shared common resource pool of fish stock. Fish caught by one group of fishermen are no longer accessible to another group, thus being rivalrous. However, oftentimes, due to an absence of well-defined property rights , it is difficult to restrict access to fishermen who may overfish.

[ 14 ] Club goods [ edit ] Club goods are excludable but not rivalrous in the consumption. That is, not everyone can use the good, but when one individual has claim to use it, they do not reduce the amount or the ability for others to consume the good. By joining a specific club or organization we can obtain club goods; As a result, some people are excluded because they are not members. Examples in addition to the ones in the matrix are cable television, golf courses, and any merchandise provided to club members. A large television service provider would already have infrastructure in place which would allow for the addition of new customers without infringing on existing customers viewing abilities. This would also mean that marginal cost would be close to zero, which satisfies the criteria for a good to be considered non-rival. However, access to cable TV services is only available to consumers willing to pay the price, demonstrating the excludability aspect.

[ 15 ] Economists set these categories for these goods and their impact on consumers. The government is usually responsible for public goods and common goods, and enterprises are generally responsible for the production of private and club goods, although this is not always the case.

History of the fourfold model of goods [ edit ] In 1977, Nobel winner Elinor Ostrom and her husband Vincent Ostrom proposed additional modifications to the existing classification of goods so to identify fundamental differences that affect the incentives facing individuals. Their definitions are presented on the matrix.

[ 16 ] Elinor Ostrom proposed additional modifications to the classification of goods to identify fundamental differences that affect the incentives facing individuals [ 17 ] Replacing the term "rivalry of consumption" with "subtractability of use".

Conceptualizing subtractability of use and excludability to vary from low to high rather than characterizing them as either present or absent.

Overtly adding a very important fourth type of good—common-pool resources—that shares the attribute of subtractability with private goods and difficulty of exclusion with public goods. Forests, water systems, fisheries, and the global atmosphere are all common-pool resources of immense importance for the survival of humans on this earth.

Changing the name of a "club" good to a "toll" good since goods that share these characteristics are provided by small scale public as well as private associations.

Expansion of fourfold model: anti-rivalrous [ edit ] Main article: Rivalry (economics) § Anti-rivalry Consumption can be extended to include "Anti-rivalrous" consumption.

Types of goods based on consumption and excludability Excludable yes no Rivalrous Private good Common-pool good Non-rivalrous Club / toll good Public good Anti-rivalrous "network" good, e.g., data on the internet; good that improves public health "symbiotic" good, e.g., language Expansion of Fourfold model: Semi-Excludable [ edit ] Main article: Excludability § Semi-Excludable The additional definition matrix shows the four common categories alongside providing some examples of fully excludable goods, Semi-excludable goods and fully non-excludeable goods. Semi-excludable goods can be considered goods or services that a mostly successful in excluding non-paying customer, but are still able to be consumed by non-paying consumers.  An example of this is movies, books or video games that could be easily pirated and shared for free.

Fully Excludable Semi-Excludable Fully Non-Excludable Rivalrous Private Goods food, clothing, cars, parking spaces Piracy of copyrighted goods like movies, books, video games Common-pool Resources fish, timber, coal, free public transport Non-Rivalrous Club Goods cinemas, private parks, television, public transport Sharing pay television or streaming subscriptions to more users than what is being paid for Public Goods free-to-air, air, national defense, free and open-source software Trading of goods [ edit ] Main article: Trade Goods are capable of being physically delivered to a consumer . Goods that are economic intangibles can only be stored, delivered, and consumed by means of media .

Goods, both tangibles and intangibles, may involve the transfer of product ownership to the consumer. Services do not normally involve transfer of ownership of the service itself, but may involve transfer of ownership of goods developed or marketed by a service provider in the course of the service. For example, sale of storage related goods, which could consist of storage sheds, storage containers, storage buildings as tangibles or storage supplies such as boxes, bubble wrap, tape, bags and the like which are consumables, or distributing electricity among consumers is a service provided by an electric utility company. This service can only be experienced through the consumption of electrical energy , which is available in a variety of voltages and, in this case, is the economic goods produced by the electric utility company. While the service (namely, distribution of electrical energy) is a process that remains in its entirety in the ownership of the electric service provider, the goods (namely, electric energy) is the object of ownership transfer. The consumer becomes an electric energy owner by purchase and may use it for any lawful purposes just like any other goods.

See also [ edit ] Bad (economics) Commodification Fast-moving consumer goods Final goods Finished goods Goods and services Intangible asset Intangible good List of economics topics Property Tangible property Service (economics) Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Alan V. Deardorff , 2006.

Terms Of Trade: Glossary of International Economics , World Scientific. Online version: Deardorffs' Glossary of International Economics, "good" Archived 2013-03-18 at the Wayback Machine and "service".

Archived 2017-07-01 at the Wayback Machine ^ Harper, Douglas.

"goods" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ Dwivedi, D. N. (2016).

Microeconomics: Theory and Applications . Vikas Publishing House PVT LTD. p. 133.

ISBN 978-93259-8670-1 .

^ Samuelson, P. Anthony., Samuelson, W. (1980). Economics. 11th ed. / New York: McGraw-Hill.

^ "Law of Diminishing Marginal Utility" .

Corporate Finance Institute . 2023-11-22 . Retrieved 2024-12-20 .

^ Steedman, Ian (1989). "Free Goods".

General Equilibrium . London: Palgrave Macmillan UK. p. 158–161.

doi : 10.1007/978-1-349-19802-3_17 .

ISBN 978-0-333-49525-4 .

^ Alan V. Deardorff, 2006, Deardorffs' Glossary of International Economics "commodity".

Archived 2007-12-12 at the Wayback Machine ^ Quotation from Murray Milgate , 2008, "Goods and Commodities". In: Palgrave Macmillan (eds) The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics . Palgrave, Macmillan, London., in referencing an influential parallel definition of 'goods' by Alfred Marshall , 1891.

Principles of Economics ,1961, 9th ed. Section I, page 54, Macmillan.

^ Jevons, W. Stanley (1957) [1871].

The Theory of Political Economy (PDF) (5 ed.).

^ Varian, Hal R.

(2006).

Intermediate Microeconomics . London: W.W. Norton & Company. p. 41.

^ Mankiw, N. Gregory. (2012).

Principles of microeconomics (6th ed.). Mason, OH: South-Western Cengage Learning.

ISBN 978-0-538-45304-2 .

OCLC 742415439 .

^ Pekka Nikander; Ville Eloranta; Kimmo Karhu; Kari Hiekkanen (2 June 2020), Digitalisation, anti-rival compensation and governance: Need for experiments , Wikidata Q106510738 .

^ Hubbard, R.G; Garnett, A; Lewis, P; O'Brien, A (2018).

Essentials of Economics Ebook . Australia: Pearson Education Australia. p. 351.

ISBN 9781488617003 .

^ Perloff, J (2018).

Microeconomics, Global Edition (Eighth ed.). Pearson Education Limited. pp.

635– 636.

ISBN 9781292215693 .

^ Perloff, J (2018).

Microeconomics, Global Edition (Eighth ed.). Pearson Education Limited. p. 637.

ISBN 9781292215693 .

^ Ostrom, E. (2010). Beyond Markets and States : Polycentric Governance of Complex Economic Systems. American Economic Review, 100(June), 408–444.

https://doi.org/10.1080/19186444.2010.11658229 ^ Elinor, Ostrom (2005).

Understanding Institutional Diversity . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

References [ edit ] Bannock, Graham et al.

(1997).

Dictionary of Economics , Penguin Books.

Milgate, Murray (1987), "goods and commodities," The New Palgrave: A Dictionary of Economics , v. 2, pp. 546–48. Includes historical and contemporary uses of the terms in economics.

Vuaridel, R. (1968). Une définition des biens économiques. (A definition of economic goods). L'Année sociologique (1940/1948-), 19, 133–170.

JSTOR 27887387 External links [ edit ] Media related to Goods (economics) at Wikimedia Commons v t e Types of goods Anti-rival goods Capital goods Club goods Common goods Common-pool resource Complementary goods vs.

Substitute goods vs.

Independent goods Composite goods Credence goods (Non-)durable goods (Post-)experience goods Final goods Free goods vs.

Positional goods Giffen goods Global commons Global public goods Inferior goods Information goods Intangible goods Intermediate goods Luxury goods Merit goods and demerit goods Neutral goods Normal goods Necessity goods Ordinary goods Private goods Household goods Public goods Digital public goods (Non-)rivalrous goods and (Non-)excludable goods Search goods Superior goods Used goods Veblen goods v t e Microeconomics Major topics Aggregation Budget set Consumer choice Convexity and non-convexity Cost Average Marginal Opportunity Implicit Social Sunk Transaction Cost–benefit analysis Deadweight loss Distribution Economies of scale Economies of scope Elasticity Cross elasticity of demand Income elasticity of demand Price elasticity of demand Price elasticity of supply Equilibrium General Exchange Externality Firms Goods and services Goods Service Household Income–consumption curve Information Indifference curve Intertemporal choice Market Market failure Market structure Competition Monopolistic Perfect Duopoly Monopoly Bilateral Complementary Monopsony Oligopoly Oligopsony Pareto efficiency Preferences Price Price controls Price ceiling Price floor Price discrimination Price signal Price system / Free Pricing Production Profit Public goods Rationing Rent Returns to scale Risk aversion Scarcity Shortage / Excess supply Substitution effect Surplus Social choice Supply and demand Demand / Law of demand Supply / Law of supply Uncertainty Utility Expected Marginal Wage Subfields Behavioral Business Computational Development Statistical decision theory Econometrics Engineering economics Civil engineering economics Evolutionary Experimental Game theory Green Industrial organization Institutional Labour Law Managerial Mathematical Microfoundations of macroeconomics Operations research Optimization Welfare See also Economics Applied Macroeconomics Political economy Business portal Category v t e Economics Theoretical Microeconomics Decision theory Price theory Game theory Contract theory Mechanism design Macroeconomics Mathematical economics Complexity economics Computational economics Agent-based computational economics Behavioral economics Pluralism in economics Empirical Econometrics Economic statistics Experimental economics Economic history Applied Agriculture Business Cultural Demographic Development Ecological Education Engineering Environmental Evolutionary Financial Geographic Happiness Health History Information Infrastructure Institutions Labour Law Management Non-monetary Organization Participation Personnel Planning Policy Public sector Public choice Social choice Regional Regulatory Resources Rural Service Transport Urban Welfare Schools ( history ) Attention Mainstream Heterodox American (National) Ancient thought Austrian Behavioral Buddhist Chartalism Modern monetary theory Chicago Classical Critique of political economy Democratic Disequilibrium Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgism Happiness Historical Humanistic Institutional Keynesian Neo- ( neoclassical–Keynesian synthesis ) New Post- Circuitism Malthusianism Marginalism Marxian Neo- Mercantilism Mixed Mutualism Neoclassical Lausanne New classical Real business-cycle theory New institutional Physiocracy Socialist Stockholm Supply-side Thermo Economists de Mandeville Quesnay Smith Malthus Say Ricardo von Thünen List Bastiat Cournot Mill Gossen Marx Walras Jevons George Menger Marshall Edgeworth Clark Pareto von Böhm-Bawerk von Wieser Veblen Gesell Fisher Pigou Heckscher von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Knight Polanyi Frisch Sraffa Myrdal Hayek Kalecki Röpke Kuznets Tinbergen Robinson von Neumann Hicks Lange Leontief Galbraith Koopmans Schumacher Friedman Samuelson Simon Buchanan Arrow Baumol Solow Rothbard Greenspan Sowell Becker Ostrom Sen Lucas Stiglitz Thaler Hoppe Krugman Piketty more Lists Glossary Economists Publications ( journals ) Schools Category Index Lists Outline Publications Business portal Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐tn4tq
Cached time: 20250814234035
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.497 seconds
Real time usage: 0.632 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2122/1000000
Revision size: 18954/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 110029/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7430/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 92239/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.308/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9662217/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 2/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  509.007      1 -total
 35.75%  181.980      1 Template:Reflist
 20.40%  103.848      1 Template:Economics_sidebar
 20.12%  102.388      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.93%   75.987      3 Template:Navbox
 12.26%   62.400      2 Template:Cite_web
 11.79%   60.024      1 Template:OEtymD
 10.82%   55.098      1 Template:Short_description
 10.18%   51.832      1 Template:Cite_Q
  9.06%   46.108      1 Template:Economics Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:580039:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814234035 and revision id 1303582480. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Goods&oldid=1303582480 " Categories : Goods (economics) Utility Supply chain management Microeconomics Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 21:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Goods 78 languages Add topic

