Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 1.1 Exploratory engineering 1.2 Science fiction 2 Gallery 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Astronomical engineering 7 languages العربية Deutsch فارسی Français Português Română Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of megascale engineering Not to be confused with astronautical engineering or with engineering of astronomical instruments .

Engineering on an astronomical scale , or astronomical engineering , i.e.

, engineering involving operations with whole astronomical objects ( planets , stars , etc.), is a known theme in science fiction , as well as a matter of recent scientific research and exploratory engineering .

[ 1 ] On the Kardashev scale , Type II and Type III civilizations can harness energy on the required scale.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] This can allow them to construct megastructures .

Examples [ edit ] Exploratory engineering [ edit ] Dyson spheres or Dyson swarm and similar constructs are hypothetical megastructures originally described by Freeman Dyson as a system of orbiting solar power satellites meant to enclose a star completely and capture most or all of its energy output.

[ 4 ] Star lifting is a process where an advanced civilization could remove a substantial portion of a star's matter in a controlled manner for other uses.

Matrioshka brains Stellar engine An Alderson disk [ 5 ] (named after Dan Alderson , its originator) is a hypothetical artificial astronomical megastructure , a giant platter with a thickness of several thousand miles.  The Sun rests in the hole at the center of the disk.  The outer perimeter of an Alderson disk would be roughly equivalent to the orbit of Mars or Jupiter .

A stellaser is a star-powered laser.

Science fiction [ edit ] This section may contain irrelevant references to popular culture .

Please help improve it by removing such content and adding citations to reliable , independent sources .

( March 2024 ) In the Ringworld series by Larry Niven , a ring a million miles wide is built and spun (to simulate gravity) around a star roughly one astronomical unit away.  The ring can be viewed as a functional version of a Dyson sphere with the interior surface area of 3 million Earth-sized planets.  Because it is only a partial Dyson sphere, it can be viewed as a construction of a civilization intermediary between Type I and Type II.  Both Dyson spheres and the Ringworld suffer from gravitational instability, however—a major focus of the Ringworld series is coping with this instability in the face of partial collapse of the Ringworld civilization.

The Morlocks of Stephen Baxter 's The Time Ships occupy a spherical shell around the Sun the diameter of Earth's orbit, spinning for gravity along one band. The shell's inner surface along this band is inhabited by cultures in many lower stages of development, while the K II Morlock civilization uses the entire structure for power and computation.

[ 6 ] In the Star Trek: The Next Generation episode " Relics ", the Enterprise discovers an abandoned Dyson sphere .

[ 7 ] In the Halo universe, the Forerunners created many planet-sized artificial megastructures, such as the Halo ringworlds, the two Arks, and the Shield Worlds, which were micro-Dyson spheres. One of the Precursors' most well known creations were the Star Roads: immense, indestructible cables that connected planets and star systems.

In the movie Elysium , a large-scale space habitat has been built to orbit Earth and is capable of sustaining life permanently.

In the Corellian Trilogy ( Star Wars Legends books), the Corellian system is revealed to have been constructed by an unknown ancient civilization, using Centerpoint Station to transport the planets across interstellar distances, and "planetary repulsors" to maneuver the planets into their orbits.

In Iain M. Banks ' fictional Culture universe, an Orbital is a  purpose-built space habitat forming a ring typically around 3 million km (1.9 million miles) in diameter. The rotation of the ring simulates both gravity and a day-night cycle comparable to a planetary body orbiting a star.

The Dyson shell is the variant of the Dyson sphere most often depicted in fiction . It is a uniform solid shell of matter around the star, as opposed to a swarm of orbiting satellites.

[ 8 ] In response to letters prompted by some papers, Dyson replied, "A solid shell or ring surrounding a star is mechanically impossible. The form of 'biosphere' which I envisaged consists of a loose collection or swarm of objects travelling on independent orbits around the star." [ 9 ] Gallery [ edit ] Dyson shell Orbital with no apparent hub Alderson disk A proposed plan for an orbital ring See also [ edit ] Planetary engineering Terraforming Stellar engineering Megascale engineering Space manufacturing References [ edit ] ^ Adams, Fred (2003).

"Astronomical Engineering" .

Origins of Existence: How Life Emerged in the Universe . The Free Press. p. 153.

ISBN 978-1-4391-3820-5 .

^ Dyson, Freeman J. (1966). Marshak, R. E. (ed.). " The Search for Extraterrestrial Technology ". Perspectives in Modern Physics. New York: John Wiley & Sons.

^ Kardashev, Nikolai . " On the Inevitability and the Possible Structures of Supercivilizations ", The search for extraterrestrial life: Recent developments; Proceedings of the Symposium, Boston, MA, June 18–21, 1984 (A86-38126 17-88). Dordrecht, D. Reidel Publishing Co., 1985, p. 497–504.

^ Dyson, Freeman J.

(1966). "The Search for Extraterrestrial Technology". In Marshak, R. E. (ed.).

Perspectives in Modern Physics: Essays in Honor of Hans Bethe . New York: John Wiley & Sons.

Bibcode : 1966pmp..book..641D .

^ Hadhazy, Adam (5 August 2014).

"Could We Build a Disk Bigger Than a Star?" . Popular Mechanics.

^ Alex Hormann (February 5, 2022).

"BOOK REVIEW: The Time Ships, by Stephen Baxter" .

atboundarysedge.com . Retrieved May 22, 2023 .

^ "Star Trek: The Next Generation Relics (TV episode 1992) - IMDb" . IMDB . Retrieved 2011-11-21 .

^ "Dyson FAQ: What is a Dyson Sphere?" . Retrieved 2007-07-26 .

^ Dyson, F. J.; Maddox, J.; Anderson, P.; Sloane, E. A. (1960). "Letters and Response, Search for Artificial Stellar Sources of Infrared Radiation".

Science .

132 (3421): 250– 253.

doi : 10.1126/science.132.3421.252-a .

PMID 17748945 .

Further reading [ edit ] Korycansky, D.G.; Laughlin, Gregory; Adams, Fred C. (2001). "Astronomical Engineering: A Strategy For Modifying Planetary Orbits".

Astrophysics and Space Science .

275 (4): 349– 366.

arXiv : astro-ph/0102126 .

Bibcode : 2001Ap&SS.275..349K .

doi : 10.1023/A:1002790227314 .

hdl : 2027.42/41972 .

S2CID 5550304 .

McInnes, Colin R. (2002). "Astronomical Engineering Revisited: Planetary Orbit Modification Using Solar Radiation Pressure".

Astrophysics and Space Science .

282 (4): 765– 772.

Bibcode : 2002Ap&SS.282..765M .

doi : 10.1023/A:1021178603836 .

S2CID 118010671 .

v t e Engineering History Outline List of engineering branches Specialties and interdisciplinarity Civil Architectural Coastal Construction Earthquake Ecological Environmental Sanitary Geological Geotechnical Hydraulic Mining Municipal/urban Offshore River Structural Transportation Traffic Railway Mechanical Acoustic Aerospace Automotive Biomechanical Energy Manufacturing Marine Naval architecture Railway Sports Thermal Tribology Electrical Broadcast outline Control Electromechanics Electronics Microwaves Optical Power Radio-frequency Signal processing Telecommunications Chemical Biochemical/bioprocess Biological Bioresource Genetic Tissue Chemical reaction Electrochemical Food Molecular Paper Petroleum Process Reaction Materials Biomaterial Ceramics Corrosion Metallurgy Molecular Nanotechnology Polymers Semiconductors Surfaces Computer AI Computer Cybersecurity Data Networks Robotics Software Engineering education Bachelor of Engineering Bachelor of Science Master's degree Doctorate Graduate certificate Engineer's degree Licensed engineer Related topics Engineer Glossaries Engineering A–L M–Z Aerospace engineering Civil engineering Electrical and electronics engineering Mechanical engineering Structural engineering Other Agricultural Audio Automation Biomedical Bioinformatics Clinical Health technology Pharmaceutical Rehabilitation Building services MEP Design Explosives Facilities Fire Forensic Climate Geomatics Graphics Industrial Information Instrumentation Instrumentation and control Logistics Management Mathematics Mechatronics Military Nuclear Ontology Packaging Physics Privacy Safety Security Survey Sustainability Systems Textile Category Commons Wikiproject Portal v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Astronomical_engineering&oldid=1219788610 " Categories : Exploratory engineering Science fiction themes Megastructures Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with trivia sections from March 2024 This page was last edited on 19 April 2024, at 20:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Astronomical engineering 7 languages Add topic

