Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Beginnings 2 Gallery 3 See also 4 References 5 External Toggle the table of contents Cassini map 12 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Nederlands Occitan Português Русский Slovenščina 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 18th century map of France made by the Cassini family For the map projection, see Cassini projection . For the British WWII era military maps, see Cassini Grid .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Cassini map" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2020 ) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French .

(March 2015) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the French article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:Carte de Cassini]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|fr|Carte de Cassini}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Versailles on the Cassini map The Cassini Map or Academy's Map is the first topographic and geometric map made of the Kingdom of France as a whole. It was compiled by the Cassini family, mainly César-François Cassini (Cassini III) and his son Jean-Dominique Cassini (Cassini IV) in the 1700s.

It was on a scale of one line to 100 toises , i.e. 1/86,400.

The map was, for the time, a real innovation and a decisive technical advance. It is the first map to be based on a geodesic triangulation. Four generations of the Cassini carried out the work, taking more than 6 decades to complete. The map does not precisely locate dwellings or the boundaries of swamps and forests, but the level of precision of the road network represented is such that by superimposing satellite photos onto map sheets of France, spectacular results are obtained.

The work of the Cassinis even left its mark on the land where today you can still find toponyms such as " Signal of Cassini." Such landmarks correspond to the corners of the triangles that formed the backbone of Cassini's map.

Nowadays, researchers frequently consult the Cassini map sheets, in its paper form in the reading room of the maps and plans department of the Bibliothèque nationale de France , or its digital form online.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It is of particular interest to archaeologists, architects, historians, geographers, genealogists, treasure hunters and ecologists who need to retrospect ecology or understand the history of landscape.

Beginnings [ edit ] The genesis of the Cassini Map came during the reign of Louis XIV, with the creation of the Academy of Sciences alongside the ambitions of Jean-Baptiste Colbert for France's navy, the defence of her coasts and fixing the imprecision of the country's maps. At the time, distances between settlements to be portrayed on maps were often estimated by the time of the journey between them or by measuring the length of the road.

[ 3 ] Sometimes, triangulation was used - though often relying on the magnetic pin of a compass without concern for one's latitude.

[ 4 ] This would result in confounded errors when compiling these maps into one.

[ 4 ] Cassini, alongside other scientists like Picard, Roëmer and Richer, investigated movement of the planets relative to Earth. Cassini noted such methods were riddled with instrumental errors and were susceptible to parallax.

[ 5 ] Picard and La Hire write in 1672 that King Louis XIV instructed the Academy of Sciences to, "create a map of all of France with the greatest precision possible.", [ 6 ] Cassini writes that in September 1672, M. Vivier had, "come by order of the King" and was, "employed by order of the King to work on the Map of the Kingdom under the direction of the Academy of Sciences." [ 6 ] Gallery [ edit ] See also [ edit ] French cartography References [ edit ] ^ "Des villages Cassini aux communes d'aujourd'hui" .

cassini.ehess.fr . Retrieved 2021-02-07 .

^ "Géoportail, the French government mapping website (select "Carte de Cassini" in the top left menu)" .

geoportail.gouv.fr/carte . Retrieved 2024-09-10 .

^ Cassini de Thury (1745).

"Sur la description Géométrique de la France" .

Histoire de l'Académie Royale des Sciences (Avec les Mémoires de Mathématique & de Physique, pour la même Année) (in French). p. 554.

Il n'est point douteux que toutes les erreurs que l'on remarque dans les Cartes, tant anciennes que modernes, ne viennent de ce que ceux qui les ont dressées, ont pris chacun des routes différentes; les uns se sont contentez d'estimer les distances par le temps que l'on emploie à aller d'un lieu à l'autre; les autres ont mesuré actuellement la longueur des chemins: ceux enfin qui ont opéré avec plus d'exactitude, ont formé quelques triangles dont ils ont observé les angles avec des planchettes ou d'autres instrumens [sic] encore plus imparfaits...

^ a b Cassini de Thury (1745).

"Sur la description Géométrique de la France" .

Histoire de l'Académie Royale des Sciences (Avec les Mémoires de Mathématique & de Physique, pour la même Année) (in French). p. 555.

la plûpart (sic) ont fait usage de l'aiguille aimantée, sans avoir égard à sa vraie déclinaison à l'égard du meridien qui, comme l'on sçait (sic), n'est pas la même dans tous les temps & dans tous les lieux, & est sujette à des grandes irrégularités, de pareillés erreurs venant à se multiplier dans l'assemblage que l'on fait des opérations pour former une Carte génerale...

^ Cassini (1729).

"Observations Astronomiques Faites en Divers Endroits du Royaume (pendant l'année 1672.)" .

Mémoires de l'Académie des Sciences (Depuis 1666. jusqu'à 1699.) (in French). Vol. Partie I (Tome VII ed.). pp.

349– 351.

^ a b Picard (1729).

"Observations Faites À Brest et À Nantes (pendant l'année 1679)" .

Mémoires de l'Académie des Sciences (Depuis 1666. jusqu'à 1699.) (in French). Vol. Partie I (Tome VII ed.). pp.

376– 380.

External [ edit ] Online portal found here: https://www.geoportail.gouv.fr/donnees/carte-de-cassini v t e Cartography topics History Early world maps Medieval Islamic cartography Early modern Iberian cartography Early modern Netherlandish cartography By area By continent Africa Asia Europe Latin America By country China France India Israel Jamaica New Zealand Palestine Sri Lanka Switzerland Ukraine United States By city Dublin Jerusalem New York York Individual maps Ancient age Ptolemy's world map Soleto Map (Sec. V BC) Middle age Tabula Rogeriana (1154) Catalan Atlas (1375) Early Modern age Map of Juan de la Cosa (1500) Cantino planisphere (1502) Cosmographia (Sebastian Münster) (1544) Contemporary age Cassini map See also Compass rose Points of the compass Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cassini_map&oldid=1291282035 " Categories : Map series by country Maps of France Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2020 All articles needing additional references Geography articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Articles with multiple maintenance issues This page was last edited on 20 May 2025, at 06:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cassini map 12 languages Add topic

