Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Early beginnings 1.2 21st century 2 Literature and comics 3 Films and television 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Africanfuturism 4 languages Afrikaans Asturianu Français Hausa Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia African aesthetic and literary genre This article is about the genre led by natives of Africa. For the similar movement led by the African diaspora, see Afrofuturism .

Africanfuturism is a cultural aesthetic and philosophy of science that centers on the fusion of African culture , history, mythology, point of view, with technology based in Africa and not limiting to the diaspora.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It was coined by Nigerian American writer Nnedi Okorafor in 2019 in a blog post as a single word.

[ 3 ] Nnedi Okorafor  defines Africanfuturism as a sub-category of science fiction that is "directly rooted in African culture, history, mythology and point-of-view..and...does not privilege or center the West ," is centered with optimistic "visions in the future," and is written by (and centered on) "people of African descent" while rooted in the African continent . As such its center is African, often does extend upon the continent of Africa, and includes the Black diaspora , including fantasy that is set in the future, making a narrative "more science fiction than fantasy" and typically has mystical elements.

[ 4 ] It is different from Afrofuturism , which focuses mainly on the African diaspora, particularly the United States. Works of Africanfuturism include science fiction , fantasy , alternate history , horror and magic realism .

Writers of Africanfuturism include Nnedi Okorafor , Tochi Onyebuchi , Oghenechovwe Donald Ekpeki , Tade Thompson , Namwali Serpell , Wole Talabi , and Suyi Davies Okungbowa .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] History [ edit ] Early beginnings [ edit ] Works of Africanfuturism have long existed and have been assigned to Afrofuturism. Themes of Africanfuturism can be traced back to Buchi Emecheta's 1983 novel The Rape Of Shavi and Ben Okri's 1991 novel The Famished Road .

[ 7 ] 21st century [ edit ] Nnedi Okorafor , author credited for coining the word "Africanfuturism" In 2019 and 2020, African writers began to reject the term Afrofuturism because of the differences between both genres with Africanfuturism focusing more on African point of view, culture, themes and history as opposed to Afrofuturism which covers African diaspora history, culture and themes.

[ 8 ] The speculative fiction magazine Omenana and the Nommo Awards presented by The African Speculative Fiction Society launched in 2017 helped to widen the content of the genre.

[ 9 ] In August 2020, Hope Wabuke, a writer and assistant professor at the University of Nebraska–Lincoln of English and Creative Writing, noted that Afrofuturism, coined by Mark Dery , a White critic, in 1993, treats African-American themes and concerns in the "context of twentieth-century technoculture," which was later expanded by Alondra Nelson , arguing that Dery's conception of Blackness began in 1619 and "is marked solely by the ensuing 400 years of violation by whiteness" that he portrayed as "potentially irreparable." [ 7 ] Critical of this definition, saying it lacks the qualities of the "Black American diasporic imagination" and ability to conceive of "Blackness outside of the Black American diaspora" or independent from Whiteness , she noted that "Africanfuturism" is different because it is, according to Nnedi Okorafor , more deeply rooted in "African culture, history, mythology and point-of-view as it then branches into the Black diaspora, and it does not privilege or center the West," while explaining Africanjujuism as a subcategory of fantasy. Wabuke further explains how Africanfuturism is more specific and rids itself of the "othering of the white gaze and the de facto colonial Western mindset ," free from what she calls the "white Western gaze " and saying this is the main difference "between Afrofuturism and Africanfuturism." She adds that, in her view, Africanfuturism has a different outlook and perspective than "mainstream Western and American science fiction and fantasy " and even Afrofuturism which is "married to the white Western gaze ." Wabuke goes on to explain Africanfuturist and Africanjujuist themes in Okorafor's Who Fears Death and Zahrah the Windseeker , Akwaeke Emezi 's Pet , and Buchi Emecheta 's The Rape of Shavi .

[ 7 ] In February 2021, Aigner Loren Wilson of Tor.com explained the difficulty of finding books in the subgenre because many institutions "treat Africanfuturism and Afrofuturism like the same thing" even though the distinction between them is plain. She said that Africanfuturism is "centered in and about Africa and their people" while Afrofuturism is a sci-fi subcategory which is about "Black people within the diaspora," often including stories of those outside Africa, including in "colonized Western societies.".

[ 10 ] Another reviewer called Okorafor's Lagoon , which "recounts the story of the arrival of aliens in Nigeria," as an Africanfuturist work which requires a reader who is "actively engaged in co-creating the alternative future that the novel is constructing," meaning that the reader becomes part of the "creative conversation." [ 11 ] Literature and comics [ edit ] Africanfuturism literature features speculative fiction which narrates events centered on Africa from an African point of view rather than a Western point of view. Works of Africanfuturism literature are still wrongly categorized as Afrofuturism.

[ citation needed ] Works of Nigerian American writer Nnedi Okorafor are often in the Africanfuturism genre with her works like Who Fears Death , Lagoon , Remote Control , The Book of Phoenix and Noor . She won a Hugo and Nebula award for her novella Binti , the first from the Binti trilogy which features a native Himba girl from Namibia in space.

[ 12 ] Tade Thompson won a Arthur C. Clarke award for his Africanfuturist novel Rosewater about an alien dome in Nigeria [ 13 ] and Zambian writer Namwali Serpell 's The Old Drift won the same award.

In 2020, Africanfuturism: An Anthology edited by Wole Talabi was published by Brittle Paper and as of the end of 2022 is currently still offered for free on its website in celebration of the 10th anniversary of this publisher which has been called "the village square of African literature".

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Gary K. Wolfe reviewed this anthology in February 2021.

[ 16 ] He credits Nnedi Okorafor for coining "Africanfuturism," noting its describes "more Africa-centered SF," although saying he is not sure whether her term "Africanjujuism," a parallel term for fantasy, will catch on. While saying that both are useful, he says that he does not like how they have to "do with the root, not the prefix," with "futurism" only describing a bit of science fiction and fantasy. He still calls the book a "solid anthology," saying it challenges the idea of viewing African science fiction as monolithic. Stories in the book include " Egoli " by T. L. Huchu , " Yat Madit " by Dilman Dila , " Behind Our Irises " by Tlotlo Tsamaase , " Fort Kwame " by Derek Lubangakene, " Rainmaker " by Mazi Nwonwu , " Fruit of the Calabash " by Rafeeat Aliyu, " Lekki Lekki " by Mame Bougouma Diene, and "Sunrise" by Nnedi Okorafor .

[ 16 ] When Tor.com outlined a list of stories and books from the genre as of 2021, Tor also highlighted Africanfuturism: An Anthology (edited by Wole Talabi ) along with the individual works of Namwali Serpell 's The Old Drift , Nnedi Okorafor 's Lagoon , Nicky Drayden's The Prey of Gods , Oghenechovwe Donald Ekpeki 's Ife-Iyoku, the Tale of Imadeyunuagbon , and Tochi Onyebuchi 's War Girls .

[ 10 ] In comics, as of the end of 2022, so far a few Africanfuturism comics exist.

Comic Republic Global Network , a Lagos -based publisher, is prominent in creating Africanfuturist superheroes like Guardian Prime .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Laguardia , a comic book by Nnedi Okorafor, is associated with Africanfuturism.

[ 19 ] Films and television [ edit ] Africanfuturism movies are often scarce.

[ 20 ] Films like Black Panther have been criticized by some viewers, [ 21 ] who say that their depiction of Africa "differs little from the colonial view".

[ 1 ] In recent times, Africanfuturist movies include Hello, Rain , Pumzi , and Ratnik . Several Africanfuturism novels have been optioned for live adaptation, including Binti and Who Fears Death .

[ 1 ] [ 20 ] In 2020, Walt Disney Studios and Pan African company Kugali announced that they would be co-producing an africanfuturist animated science fiction series, Iwájú , inspired by the city of Lagos .

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] On July 5, 2023, Kizazi Moto: Generation Fire , an Africanfuturist [ 24 ] [ 25 ] [ 26 ] animated anthology short film series premiered on Disney+ .

[ 27 ] Peter Ramsey was picked as executive producer, while Tendayi Nyeke and Anthony Silverston were supervising producers, and Triggerfish was the primary studio, along with other animation studios in Africa.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Each of the ten films is from an African perspective, on themes such as social media , duality, disability , self-reflection, shared humanity, and other topics, with stories which include time travel , extraterrestrials , and alternate universes.

[ 30 ] [ 25 ] [ 31 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c Pilling, David (2021-02-25).

"African Futurism is partly an attempt to grapple with the past" .

Financial Times . Retrieved 2021-10-07 .

^ "Afrofuturism, African Futurism, and Writing Black Futures" .

theportalist.com . 2021-02-18 . Retrieved 2021-10-08 .

^ Okorafor, Nnedi.

"Africanfuturism defined" .

Nnedi's Wahala Zone Blog . Retrieved 19 July 2025 .

^ "Afrofuturism or African Futurism? Which is it?" .

Afrinomenon . 2020-10-03. Archived from the original on 2021-10-08 . Retrieved 2021-10-08 .

^ Umezurike, Chukwuebuka (January 23, 2022).

"New Nigerian Literature Unsung Heroes" .

This Day . Retrieved March 30, 2022 .

^ "African Futurism Books Every person needs to read" .

Afrinomenon . 2020-09-01 . Retrieved 2021-10-08 .

^ a b c Wabuke, Hope (27 August 2020).

"Afrofuturism, Africanfuturism, and the Language of Black Speculative Literature" .

LA Review of Books .

Archived from the original on 29 August 2020 . Retrieved 25 February 2021 .

^ "Black History Month Spotlight: Afrofuturism and Africanfuturism" .

comicyears.com . Retrieved 2021-10-08 .

^ "Los Angeles Review of Books" .

Los Angeles Review of Books . 2017-10-02 . Retrieved 2021-10-08 .

^ a b Wilson, Aigner Loren (2021-02-10).

"Your Guide to Africanfuturist Science Fiction" .

Tor.com . Retrieved 2021-10-08 .

^ Ncube, Gibson.

"Aliens in Lagos: sci-fi novel Lagoon offers a bold new future" .

The Conversation . Retrieved 2021-10-08 .

^ Okorafor, Nnedi (2012-01-26), "Writers of colour" , The Cambridge Companion to Fantasy Literature , Cambridge University Press, pp.

179– 189, doi : 10.1017/ccol9780521429597.017 , ISBN 9780521429597 , retrieved 2021-10-08 ^ "African speculative fiction is finally getting its due" .

Washingtonpost .

Archived from the original on 2022-02-18 . Retrieved 2021-09-10 .

^ "Brittle Paper Offers Africanfuturism: An Anthology for free in celebration of the publisher's 10th anniversary" .

BrittlePaper.com . Brittle Paper . Retrieved 25 December 2022 .

^ Udenwe, Obinna.

" "The Rise of Brittle Paper: The Village Square of African Literature" " . The Village Square Journal . Retrieved 2 February 2019 .

^ a b Wolfe, Gary K. (16 February 2021).

"Gary K. Wolfe Reviews Africanfuturism: An Anthology, Edited by Wole Talabi" .

Locus Magazine .

Archived from the original on 15 February 2021 . Retrieved 16 February 2021 .

^ "African Avengers: the comic book creators shaking up superhero genre" .

the Guardian . 2016-02-03 . Retrieved 2021-10-08 .

^ Digital comics change the way the world sees Africa - CNN Video , retrieved 2021-10-08 ^ "Nnedi Okorafor's LaGuardia Wins 2020 Hugo Award for Best Graphic Story or Comic" .

Brittle Paper . 2020-08-12 . Retrieved 2021-10-08 .

^ a b Collins, Jason (2021-09-07).

"What Nnedi Okorafor's 'Who Fears Death' Coming to HBO Could Mean for the Acceptance of Africanfuturism in the Mainstream" .

Black Girl Nerds . Retrieved 2022-05-08 .

^ "Black Panther, Whitewashing: Colonialism and Neocolonialism Ideals in Marvel's Black Panther – Writing Anthology" .

central.edu . Retrieved 2023-04-17 .

^ Aisha Salaudeen.

"Disney announces 'first-of-its-kind' collaboration with African entertainment company" .

CNN . Retrieved 2021-10-13 .

^ "Annecy: Disney, Africa's Kugali Present New 'Iwaju' Details – The Hollywood Reporter" . 2021-06-16. Archived from the original on 2021-06-16 . Retrieved 2021-10-13 .

^ "Kizazu Moto Generation Fire Showcases 10 Futuristic Visions for Africa" .

Comicon.com . June 12, 2023.

Archived from the original on July 5, 2023 . Retrieved July 4, 2023 .

Kizazi Moto: Generation Fire adds new stories to African Futurism genre ^ a b Egan, Toussaint (May 2, 2023).

"Afrofuturist animated series Kizazi Moto: Generation Fire coming to Disney Plus" .

Polygon .

Archived from the original on May 3, 2023 . Retrieved June 28, 2023 .

an animated anthology dedicated to imagining the future from an African perspective.

^ Vourlias, Christopher (June 17, 2021).

"Disney Taps Top African Toon Talents for Animated Anthology 'Kizazi Moto' (EXCLUSIVE)" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on May 9, 2023 . Retrieved June 28, 2023 .

presenting 10 bold, wholly original visions of the future from a distinctly African perspective.

^ Vourlias, Christopher (June 26, 2023).

"Why Disney+ Sci-Fi Anthology Series 'Kizazi Moto: Generation Fire' Is a 'Watershed Moment' for African Animation" .

Variety .

Archived from the original on June 27, 2023 . Retrieved June 28, 2023 .

^ Schreibfeder, Lisa (June 27, 2021).

"Animated Anthology "Kizazi Moto: Generation Fire" From Leading African Creators Set To Release On Disney+ In 2022" (Press release). Burbank, California: Disney . Disney Plus.

Archived from the original on April 10, 2023 . Retrieved June 29, 2023 .

^ Tartaglione, Nancy (June 17, 2021).

"Disney+ Sets Animated Sci-Fi Anthology 'Kizazi Moto: Generation Fire', Picks Up 'Kiya And The Kimoja Heroes' – Annecy" .

Deadline .

Archived from the original on May 20, 2023 . Retrieved June 28, 2023 .

^ Cornall, Flo (June 27, 2023).

" 'Kizazi Moto: Generation Fire' brings Afro-futurism to Disney+" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on June 27, 2023 . Retrieved June 28, 2023 .

^ Ramsey, Peter; Vorster, Lesego; Mogajane, Isaac; Green, Catherine (June 26, 2023).

"Kizazi Moto: Generation Fire's Peter Ramsey and Directors on Disney+'s New African Sci-Fi Series" .

CBR (Interview). Interviewed by Sergio Pereira.

Archived from the original on June 28, 2023 . Retrieved June 28, 2023 .

Further reading [ edit ] University of Calabar, Nigeria's Ojima Sunday Nathaniel & Jonas Egbudu Akung's 2022 article "Afrofuturism and Africanfuturism: Black speculative writings in search of meaning and criteria" in Research Journal in Advanced Humanities preferentially supporting Okorafor's 'Africanfuturism' "because Dery’s". . ." inappropriate". . . "Afrofuturism is clearly an African-American signification that provides no space for the African imaginary", then their focus seeks more completion in "a  different  set  of  criteria  for  evaluation  and categorization of both concepts, and proposes five-point criteria—experience,  authorship,  language,  black  heroism  and  technology for their evaluation.".

Tor 2021 Guide to Africanfuturism AfrikaIsWoke's 2021 article "The Difference Between African Futurism & Afrofuturism" which suggests that 'Black' is the perhaps the common general term comprising what have become narrowed in 'African' and 'Afro' when used as ethnic or racial terms, proceeding from Zambian queerist futurist author Masiyaleti Mbewe's distinction that "differences between African Futurism and Afrofuturism can best be understood as a natural byproduct of the fact that Africans in Africa, and Blacks in the diaspora have different life experiences that stem purely from the fact that they exist in different parts of the world." University of Kwazulu-Natal's Brett Taylor Banks' 2021 dissertation on "Okorafor’s Organic Fantasy: An Africanfuturist Approach to Science Fiction and Gender in Lagoon ." by a European-African, reminding us that Africans now are not only Black, and Olive in the North, just as Americans have for half a millennium been not only Red but now Black, Yellow, White, and Brown, so geopolitical labels in the modern era of pervasive presumption of democracy's desirability deems interracial and genetic society politically correct. Overview page with abstract and link to downloadable copy of the actual dissertation. Notable, Banks "adapt[s] Francis Nyamnjoh’s convivial theory (2015) to estrange postmodernism from its western context, providing an African critical vocabulary".

University of Ghana's black Nigerian-Finnish and Swedish Minna Salami's article "The Liquid Space where African Feminism and African Futurism Meet" in Feminist Africa , 2021, a journal of the Institute of African Studies and the University of Ghana, by this SOAS, University of London cross-cultural author who dubs herself a "Ms Afropolitan" and has received an Honorary Fellowship in Writing from The Hong Kong Baptist University.

City College of New York's Damion Kareem Scott's 2021 chapter "Afrofuturism and Black Futurism: Some Ontological and Semantic Considerations" in Critical Black Futures , ed. P Butler.

Africanfuturism: An Anthology edited by Wole Talabi, 2020, Brittle Paper, a defining collection of these newly named genres, has since October 2020 and is currently still offered for free on the publisher's website in celebration of the 10th anniversary of this publisher which has been called "the village square of African literature".

Finnish Päivi Väätänen's 2019 'academic article' "Afro- versus Africanfuturism in Nnedi Okorafor’s 'The Magical Negro' and 'Mother of Invention'" Botswana-born York University's Pamela Phatsimo Sunstrum's 2013 article "Afro-mythology and African Futurism: The Politics of Imagining and Methodologies for Contemporary Creative Research Practices" in Paradoxa's special publication No. 25 – Africa SF , ed. Mark Bould of UWE Bristol, precursing current diction before 'African' and 'Futurism' were concatenated as an emergent term, though titles by her colleagues in this collection use, in 2013, Technofuture, Afrofuturism and AfroSF, and Bould's introduction uses Africa SF.

v t e Africa articles History Chronology Antiquity North Africa Archaeology Pre-colonial kingdoms Empires Sahelian Indian Ocean trade Bantu expansion Muslim conquest European exploration European colonisation Slavery Atlantic Barbary Indian Ocean Trans-Saharan Scramble for Africa Decolonisation By topic Economy Empires Historiography Military conflicts Science and technology By region Central East North South West Geography Countries and territories Highest points Impact craters Islands Natural history Regions Central East North South West Rivers Politics African Union Elections Democracy Heads of government Heads of state Human rights Freedom of religion LGBT rights Linguistic rights Women's rights feminism International organisations Pan-African Parliament Pan-Africanism Politics parties United States of Africa Economy Central banks Countries by GDP (nominal) Countries by GDP (PPP) Countries by HDI Billionaires Education Infrastructure Internet Natural resources Poverty Renewable energy Stock exchanges Society Abortion Birth control Caste systems Climate change Etiquette Health Languages Religion Culture Africanfuturism Architecture Art Cinema Cuisine Literature Media Music Philosophy World Heritage Sites Sport Africa Cricket Association African Games Afro-Asian Games Australian-rules football Confederation of African Football FIBA Africa Rugby Africa Stadiums by capacity Tour d'Afrique Demographics Countries by population density Emigration Ethnic groups HIV/AIDS Life expectancy Urbanization cities urban areas Youth in Africa By year 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 Outline Index Category Portal v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal v t e Speculative fiction Science fiction Media Comics Films list Magazines list Television Creators list Authors Editors Studies Awards Definitions History Subgenres Alternate history Apocalyptic/post-apocalyptic Climate fiction Comic/comedy Cyberpunk ( derivatives ) Dying Earth Feminist Future history ( Speculative evolution ) Military Space opera Space Western Tech-noir Themes Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Aliens AI Parallel universes Time travel Utopia/dystopia Space pirates Subculture Community Gathering list Fantasy Media Anime Art Fantastic Comics Fantasy film Literature Magazines Television Creators Authors Studies High fantasy Tolkien's influence Literature Sources Subgenres Bangsian Comic Contemporary Dark Dying Earth Fairytale Folklore mythology (based) Gaslamp Hard High Historical Lost world Low Medieval Romantic Sword and sorcery Urban Supernatural fiction Tropes Fantasy races Fantasy worlds Legendary creatures Magic (fantasy) Magician (fantasy) Norse mythology Magic item Quest Occult detective Horror Media Comics Films list Magazines Television programs Video games Subgenres Body Goosebumps Lovecraftian Mass hysteria Psychological Splatterpunk Queer Urban legend Occult detective Tropes Gargoyle Vampires list Werewolves Zombie apocalypse General Authors of color Fictional species Gender Japanese authors Masquerade Sexuality Homosexuality Reproduction and pregnancy Women Related Science fantasy Superhero Western Noir Crime Pulps Technofantasy Fantastique Magic realism Slipstream Techno-thriller LitRPG Crossover Portal Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Africanfuturism&oldid=1304409042 " Categories : Africanfuturism 2019 neologisms Art movements Culture of Africa Science fiction genres Pan-Africanism Futurism by region African literature Futurist movements Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2022 This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 21:58 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Africanfuturism 4 languages Add topic

