Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Fernão Lopes de Castanheda 9 languages Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Bahasa Indonesia Latina مصرى Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia "Castanheda" redirects here. For other uses, see Castaneda (disambiguation) .

Portuguese historian Fernão Lopes de Castanheda Fernão Lopes de Castanheda in the Camões Monument Born c.1500 Santarém , Portugal Died 6 June 1559 (1559-06-06) (aged 59) Coimbra , Portugal Occupation Author, bedel and archivist at University of Coimbra Period Renaissance Genre Literature of discovery and conquest Subject History of Portuguese exploration Notable works História do descobrimento e conquista da India pelos portugueses/History of the Discovery and Conquest of India by the Portuguese Fernão Lopes de Castanheda (Santarém, c. 1500 – 1559 in Coimbra) was a Portuguese historian in the early Renaissance .
His "History of the discovery and conquest of India", full of geographic and ethnographic objective information, was widely translated throughout Europe.

Life [ edit ] Castanheda was the natural son of a royal officer, who held the post of judge in Goa . In 1528, he accompanied his father to Portuguese India and to the Moluccas . There he remained ten years, from 1528 to 1538, during which he gathered as much information as he could about the discovery and conquest of India by the Portuguese, in order to write a book on the subject. In 1538, he returned to Portugal, having collected from written and oral sources material for his great historical work. In serious economic difficulties, he settled in Coimbra, where he held a modest post of bedel in the University of Coimbra .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Works [ edit ] Eight of the ten books of Castanheda's "História do descobrimento e conquista da Índia pelos portugueses" (History of the discovery and conquest of India by the Portuguese) were printed in Coimbra: the first volume was issued in 1551, with a second edition in 1554. Six more volumes were published in his lifetime and three posthumously. 
After the eighth volume was issued, regent Queen D. Catarina , pressured by few noblemen who disliked the objectivity of Castanheda, banned the printing of the remaining ninth and tenth volumes. His work, full of geographic and ethnographic information, was soon widely translated throughout Europe, first into French by Nicolas de Grouchy, [ 5 ] a teacher at the University, Spanish (1554), Italian (1578) and English (1582).

References [ edit ] ^ Cf.

pp. V a XXXIV do primeiro volume de CASTANHEDA, Fernão Lopes de.

História do descobrimento & conquista da Índia pelos portugueses. 3.ª ed., rev. e anot. por  Pedro de Azevedo. Coimbra : Imprensa da Universidade, 1924-1933., 4 v.

^ Fernão Lopes de Castanheda Archived 2009-12-26 at the Wayback Machine na página do Projeto Vercial.

^ História do descobrimento e conquista da Índia pelos portugueses na Infopédia.

^ Fernão Lopes de Castanheda na Infopédia.

^ Nicolas de Grouchy (1510–1572) was a French scholar and writer who, after receiving many accolades, was called by John III of Portugal to teach Greek and philosophy at Coimbra until the end of 1549, when he returned to Normandy. He was Montaigne 's instructor at the Collège de Guyenne with André de Gouveia , which could explain at least a partial impact on Montaigne's understanding of the New World, shedding some light on some of the source material for his numerous essays.

External links [ edit ] Works by or about Fernão Lopes de Castanheda at the Internet Archive The first booké of the historie of the discouerie and conquest of the East Indias, enterprised by the Portingales, Book I, 1582 (full text in English).

História do descobrimento e conquista da Índia pelos portugueses, Book I (full text in Portuguese).

História do descobrimento e conquista da Índia pelos portugueses, Book III (full text in Portuguese).

História do descobrimento e conquista da Índia pelos portugueses, Book IV-V (full text in Portuguese).

História do descobrimento e conquista da Índia pelos portugueses, Book VIII (full text in Portuguese).

Fernão Lopes de Castanheda biography Archived 2009-12-26 at the Wayback Machine (in Portuguese).

História do descobrimento e conquista da Índia pelos portugueses - Books I-VIII, first edition (Biblioteca Nacional de Portugal; full text in Portuguese) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Greece Vatican 2 Israel Belgium People Trove DDB Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fernão_Lopes_de_Castanheda&oldid=1305946226 " Categories : 1500s births 1559 deaths Portuguese exploration in the Age of Discovery 16th-century Portuguese historians 16th-century Portuguese male writers Portuguese chroniclers Portuguese travel writers Portuguese Renaissance writers University of Coimbra alumni People from Santarém, Portugal Historians of India Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 01:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fernão Lopes de Castanheda 9 languages Add topic

