Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Influences 3 Development during the 20th century 4 Reception 5 Other uses 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 Bibliography 10 Filmography 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Négritude 31 languages العربية Asturianu Беларуская Български Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Soomaaliga Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Ghanaian Pidgin Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cultural and political movement developed by a francophone African elite "Nigritude" redirects here. For the contest, see Nigritude ultramarine .

See also: Créolité and Antillanité Négritude (from French "nègre" and "-itude" to denote a condition that can be translated as "Blackness") is a framework of critique and literary theory, mainly developed by francophone intellectuals, writers, and politicians in the African diaspora during the 1930s, aimed at raising and cultivating "black consciousness" across Africa and its diaspora. Négritude gathers writers such as sisters Paulette and Jeanne Nardal (known for having laid the theoretical basis of the movement), [ 1 ] Martinican poet Aimé Césaire , Abdoulaye Sadji , Léopold Sédar Senghor (the first President of Senegal ), and Léon Damas of French Guiana .

Négritude intellectuals disavowed colonialism , racism and Eurocentrism . They promoted African culture within a framework of persistent Franco-African ties.

[ 2 ] The intellectuals employed Marxist political philosophy, in the black radical tradition.

[ 3 ] The writers drew heavily on a surrealist literary style, and some say they were also influenced somewhat by the Surrealist stylistics, and in their work often explored the experience of diasporic being, asserting one's self and identity, and ideas of home, home-going and belonging.

Négritude inspired the birth of many movements across the Afro-Diasporic world, including Afro-Surrealism , Créolité in the Caribbean, and black is beautiful in the United States.

Frantz Fanon often made reference to Négritude in his writing.

[ 4 ] Etymology [ edit ] Négritude is a constructed noun from the 1930s based upon the French word nègre , which, like its English counterpart, was derogatory and had a different meaning from "black man".

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The movement's use of the word Négritude was a way of re-imagining the word as an emic form of empowerment. The term was first used in its present sense by Aimé Césaire, in the third issue (May–June 1935) of L'Étudiant noir , [ 7 ] a magazine that he had started in Paris with fellow students Léopold Senghor and Léon Damas, as well as Gilbert Gratiant [ fr ] , Leonard Sainville , Louis T. Achille , Aristide Maugée , and Paulette Nardal . The word appears in Césaire's first published work, "Conscience Raciale et Révolution Sociale", with the heading "Les Idées" and the rubric "Négreries", which is notable for its disavowal of assimilation as a valid strategy for resistance and for its use of the word nègre as a positive term. The problem with assimilation was that one assimilated into a culture that considered African culture to be barbaric and unworthy of being seen as "civilized". The assimilation into this culture would have been seen as an implicit acceptance of this view.

Nègre previously had been used mainly in a pejorative sense. Césaire deliberately incorporated this derogatory word into the name of his philosophy. Césaire's choice of the -itude suffix has been criticized, with Senghor noting that "the term négritude has often been contested as a word before being contested as a concept", [ 8 ] but the suffix allows Césaire to trope the vocabulary of racist science.

[ 6 ] Influences [ edit ] In 1885, Haitian anthropologist Anténor Firmin published an early work De l'égalité des races humaines (On the Equality of Human Races), which was published as a rebuttal to French writer Count Arthur de Gobineau 's Essai sur l'inégalité des Races Humaines ( An Essay on the Inequality of the Human Races ). Firmin influenced Jean Price-Mars , the initiator of Haitian ethnology and developer of the concept of Indigenism , and 20th-century American anthropologist Melville Herskovits . Black intellectuals have historically been proud of Haiti due to its slave revolution commanded by Toussaint Louverture during the 1790s. Césaire spoke, thus, of Haiti as being "where négritude stood up for the first time".

The Harlem Renaissance , a literary style developed in Harlem in Manhattan during the 1920s and 1930s, influenced the Négritude philosophy. The Harlem Renaissance's writers, including Langston Hughes , Richard Wright , Claude McKay , Alain Locke and W.E.B. Du Bois addressed the themes of "noireism", race relations and "double-consciousness".

During the 1920s and 1930s, young black students and scholars primarily from France's colonies and territories assembled in Paris, where they were introduced to writers of the Harlem Renaissance, namely Langston Hughes and Claude McKay, by Paulette Nardal and her sister Jane . The Nardal sisters contributed to the Négritude discussions in their writings and also owned the Clamart Salon, a tea-shop venue of the Afro-French intelligentsia where the philosophy of Négritude was often discussed and where the concept for La Revue du Monde Noir was conceived. Paulette Nardal and the Haitian Dr.

Leo Sajou initiated La Revue du Monde Noir (1931–32), a literary journal published in English and French, which attempted to appeal to African and Caribbean intellectuals in Paris. This Harlem inspiration was shared by the parallel development of negrismo and acceptance of "double-apparantence", double-consciousness, in the Spanish -speaking Caribbean region.

The Nardal sisters were responsible for the introduction of the Harlem Renaissance and its ideas to Césaire, Senghor, and Damas. In a letter from February 1960, Senghor admits the importance of the Nardal sisters, "We were in contact with these black Americans during the years 1929–34 through Mademoiselle Paulette Nardall...kept a literary salon where African Negroestrans, West Indians, and American Negroes used to get together." Jane Nardal's 1929 article "Internationalisme noir" predates Senghor's first critical theory piece "What the Black Man Contributes", itself published in 1939.

[ 9 ] This essay, "Internationalisme noir", focuses on race consciousness in the African diaspora and cultural metissage, double-apparentance; seen as the philosophical foundation for the Négritude movement.

[ 9 ] The Nardal sisters, for all their ideas and the importance of their Clamart Salon, have been minimized in the development of Négritude by the masculinist domination of the movement. Paulette even wrote as much in 1960 when she "bitterly complained" about the lack of acknowledgment to her and her sister Jane regarding their importance to a movement historically and presently credited to Césaire, Senghor, and Damas. The name Nardal belongs in that list.

The Dakar School art movement in Senegal, active from 1960 to 1974, was directly influenced by the philosophy of Négritude, and was also founded under the paternalism of Senegalese President Léopold Sédar Senghor.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] Development during the 20th century [ edit ] Each of the initiators had his own ideas about the purpose and styles of Négritude , the philosophy was characterized generally by opposition to colonialism, denunciation of Europe's alleged inhumanity, and rejection of Western domination and ideas. The movement also appears to have had some Heideggerian strands in the sense that its goal was to achieve black people's' "being-in-the-world", to emphasize that black individuals did have a history and a worthy culture capable of standing alongside the cultures of other countries as equals. Also important was the acceptance of and pride in being black and a celebration of African history, traditions, and beliefs. Their literary style was surrealistic and they cherished Marxist ideas.

Motivation for the Négritude movement was a result of Aimé Césaire 's, Leopold Senghor 's, and Leon Damas 's dissatisfaction, disgust, and personal conflict over the state of the Afro-French experience in France. All three shared a personal sense of revolt for the racism and colonial injustices that plagued their world and their French education. Senghor refused to believe that the purpose of his education was "to build Christianity and civilization in his soul where there was only paganism and barbarism before". Césaire's disgust came as embarrassment when he was accused by some of the people of the Caribbean as having nothing to do with the people of Africa—whom they saw as savages. They separated themselves from Africa and proclaimed themselves as civilized. He denounced the writers from the Caribbean as "intellectually... corrupt and literarily nourished with white decadence". Damas believed this because of the pride these writers would take when a white person could read their whole book and would not be able to tell the author's complexion.

Aimé Césaire Césaire was a poet, playwright, and politician from Martinique . He studied in Paris, where he discovered the black community and "rediscovered Africa". He saw Négritude as the fact of being black, acceptance of this fact, and appreciation of the history and culture, and of black people. It is important to note that for Césaire, this emphasis on the acceptance of the fact of "blackness" was the means by which the "decolonization of the mind" could be achieved. According to him, western imperialism was responsible for the inferiority complex of black people. He sought to recognize the collective colonial experience of black individuals —the slave trade and plantation system. Césaire's ideology was especially important during the early years of Négritude .

Neither Césaire—who after returning to Martinique after his studies was elected mayor of Fort de France , the capital, and a representative of Martinique in France's Parliament—nor Senghor in Senegal, envisaged political independence from France. Césaire called for France's political assimilation of Martinique with the Loi de départementalisation [ fr ] (the Departmentalization Law), which did not entail an abandonment of Martinique's distinct culture.

Leopold Senghor Négritude would, according to Senghor, enable black people in French lands to have a "seat at the give and take of the [French] table as equals". However, the French eventually granted Senegal and its other African colonies independence. Poet and later the first president of Sénégal, Senghor used Négritude to work toward a universal valuation of African people. He advocated a modern incorporation of the expression and celebration of traditional African customs and ideas. This interpretation of Négritude tended to be the most common, particularly during later years.

Leon Damas Damas was a French Guianese poet and National Assembly member. He had a militant style of defending "black qualities" and rejected any kind of reconciliation with Caucasians. Two particular anthologies were pivotal to the movement; one was published by Damas in 1946, Poètes d'expression française 1900–1945 . Senghor would then go on to publish Anthologie de la nouvelle poésie nègre et malgache de langue française in 1948. Damas's introduction to the work and the poetic anthology was meant to be a sort of manifesto for the movement, but Senghor's own anthology eventually took that role. Though it would be the "Preface" written by French philosopher and public intellectual Jean-Paul Sartre for the anthology that would propel Négritude into the broader intellectual conversation.

Damas' introduction was more political and cultural in nature. A distinctive feature of his anthology and beliefs was that Damas felt his message was one for the colonized in general, and included poets from Indochina and Madagascar. This is sharply in contrast to Senghor's anthology. In the introduction, Damas proclaimed that now was the age where "the colonized man becomes aware of his rights and of his duties as a writer, as a novelist or a storyteller, an essayist or a poet." Damas outlines the themes of the work. He says, "Poverty, illiteracy, exploitation of man by man, social and political racism suffered by the black or the yellow, forced labor, inequalities, lies, resignation, swindles, prejudices, complacencies, cowardice, failure, crimes committed in the name of liberty, of equality, of fraternity, that is the theme of this indigenous poetry in French." Damas' introduction was indeed a calling and affirmation for a distinct cultural identification.

Reception [ edit ] In 1948, Jean-Paul Sartre analyzed the Négritude philosophy in an essay called "Orphée Noir" (" Black Orpheus ") [ 13 ] that served as the introduction to a volume of francophone poetry named Anthologie de la nouvelle poésie nègre et malgache , compiled by Léopold Senghor. In this essay, Sartre characterizes négritude as the opposite of colonial racism in a Hegelian dialectic and with it he helped to introduce Négritude issues to French intellectuals. In his opinion, négritude was an "anti-racist racism" ( racisme antiraciste ), a strategy with a final goal of racial unity.

Négritude was criticized by some Black writers during the 1960s as insufficiently militant.

Keorapetse Kgositsile said that the term Négritude was based too much on Blackness according to a European aesthetic, and was unable to define a new kind of perception of African-ness that would free Black people and Black art from Caucasian conceptualizations altogether.

The Nigerian dramatist, poet, and novelists Chinua Achebe and Wole Soyinka opposed Négritude . They believed that by deliberately and outspokenly being proud of their ethnicity, Black people were automatically on the defensive. Chinua Achebe wrote: "A tiger doesn't proclaim its tigerness; it jumps on its prey." [ 14 ] Soyinka in turn wrote in a 1960 essay for the Horn , "the duiker will not paint 'duiker' on his beautiful back to proclaim his duikeritude; you'll know him by his elegant leap." [ 15 ] [ 16 ] After a long period of silence there has been a renaissance of Négritude developed by scholars such as Souleymane Bachir Diagne ( Columbia University ), Donna Jones ( University of California, Berkeley ), [ 17 ] and Cheikh Thiam [ 18 ] ( Ohio State University ) who all continue the work of Abiola Irele (1936–2017). Cheikh Thiam's book is the only book-length study of Négritude as philosophy. It develops Diagne's reading of Négritude as a philosophy of art, and Jones' presentation of Négritude as a lebensphilosophie .

[ citation needed ] Other uses [ edit ] American physician Benjamin Rush , a signer of the United States Declaration of Independence and early abolitionist, is often said to have used the term " Negritude" to imagine a rhetorical "disease" that he said was a mild form of leprosy, the only cure for which was to become white.

[ 19 ] But this attribution has been disputed as a misreading of secondary sources.

[ 6 ] If there was such use, it might not have been known by the Afro-Francophones who developed the philosophy of Négritude during the 20th century. Still, Léopold Sédar Senghor did claim that he and Aimé Césaire were aware of discourse surrounding race and revolution from the US.

[ 6 ] Novelist Norman Mailer used the term to describe boxer George Foreman 's physical and psychological presence in his book The Fight , a journalistic treatment of the legendary Ali vs. Foreman " Rumble in the Jungle " bout in Kinshasa , Zaire (now Democratic Republic of the Congo ) in October 1974.

The word is also used by the rapper Youssoupha in his eponymous album "Négritude" but also before this one.

See also [ edit ] Black Skin, White Masks Black Consciousness Movement Black Surrealism Black Arts Movement Black Power Movement Angolanidade ("Angolan-ness") Authenticité Afro-pessimism Afro-Surrealism Notes [ edit ] ^ Lafon, Cathy (2021-12-10).

"Vidéo. Qui était Paulette Nardal, mise à l'honneur ce mardi par Google ?" .

Sud Ouest (in French).

ISSN 1760-6454 . Retrieved 2021-10-13 .

^ Jansen, Jan C.; Osterhammel, Jürgen (2017).

Decolonization: A Short History . Princeton University Press. p. 45.

ISBN 978-1-4008-8488-9 .

^ Raisa Rexer (Winter 2013). "Black and White and Re(a)d All Over: L'Étudiant noir, Communism, and the Birth of Négritude".

Research in African Literatures 44.4: 1–14.

doi : 10.2979/reseafrilite.44.4.1 .

JSTOR 10.2979/reseafrilite.44.4.1 .

^ Nielsen, Cynthia R. (2013).

"Frantz Fanon and the Négritude Movement: How Strategic Essentialism Subverts Manichean Binaries" .

Callaloo .

36 (2): 342– 352.

doi : 10.1353/cal.2013.0084 .

S2CID 162812806 .

^ Edwards, Brent Hayes (2003).

The Practice of Diaspora: Literature, Translation, and the Rise of Black Internationalism . Harvard University Press. pp.

20– 38.

^ a b c d Reilly, Brian J. (2020).

"Négritude's Contretemps: The Coining and Reception of Aimé Césaire's Neologism" .

Philological Quarterly .

99 (4): 377– 98.

^ Filostrat, Christian (2008).

Negritude Agonistes, Assimilation against Nationalism in the Frenchspeaking Caribbean and Guyane . Africana Homestead.

^ Senghor, Léopold Sédar (1971). "Problématique de la Négritude".

Présence Africaine .

78 (2): 5.

doi : 10.3917/presa.078.0003 .

^ a b Sharpley-Whiting, T. Denean (2000).

"Femme négritude: Jane Nardal, La Dépêche africaine, and the francophone new negro" .

Souls: A Critical Journal of Black Politics, Culture, and Society .

2 (4): 8– 17.

doi : 10.1080/10999940009362232 .

S2CID 146582416 .

^ Abdou, Sylla (July 2002).

"Hommage à L. S. Senghor" [Tribute to LS Senghor].

Ethiopiques no. 69 (in French). Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 3 January 2025 – via Wikiwix.

^ Cohen, Joshua I. (2018).

"Locating Senghor's École de Dakar: International and Transnational Dimensions to Senegalese Modern Art, c. 1959–1980" .

African Arts .

51 (3): 10– 25.

doi : 10.1162/afar_a_00413 .

ISSN 1937-2108 .

JSTOR 48547476 .

^ Njami, Simon (2007).

Africa Remix: Contemporary Art of a Continent . Jacana Media. p. 229.

ISBN 978-1-77009-363-8 .

^ The title subsequently inspired the name of the Nigerian magazine Black Orpheus — see Peter Benson, Black Orpheus, Transition, and Modern Cultural Awakening in Africa , University of California Press, 1986, p. 24.

^ Lauer, Helen; Amfo, Nana Aba Appiah ; Anderson, Jemima Asabea, eds. (2011).

Identity Meets Nationality: Voices from the Humanities . African Books Collective.

ISBN 978-9988-647-96-4 .

^ Maduakor, Obiajuru (1986). "Soyinka as a Literary Critic".

Research in African Literatures .

17 (1): 1– 38.

JSTOR 3819421 .

^ "Tigritude" .

This Analog Life . 2013-08-05 . Retrieved 2018-10-09 .

^ "Donna V. Jones" , English Department, University of California, Berkeley.

^ "Cheikh Thiam Appointed to Dean Post for the School of International Training" .

The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education . 2020-01-06 . Retrieved 2020-06-01 .

^ Randall, Vernellia R.

"An Early History – African American Mental Health" . Institute on Race, Health Care and the Law, The University of Dayton School of Law. Archived from the original on 9 July 2011 . Retrieved 21 December 2008 .

References [ edit ] Christian Filostrat , "La Négritude et la 'Conscience raciale et révolution sociale' d'Aimé Césaire".

Présence Francophone , No. 21, Automne 1980, pp. 119–130.

Sartre, Jean-Paul . "Orphée Noir".

Anthologie de la nouvelle poésie nègre et malgache . ed. Léopold Senghor. Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, p. xiv (1948).

Condé, Maryse (1998), "O Brave New World" , Research in African Literatures , 29 : 1– 7, archived from the original on 2001-04-06 .

Rabanka, Leiland. « The Negritude Movement: W.E.B. Du Bois, Leon Damas, Aimé Césaire,  Léopold Senghor, Frantz Fanon, and the Evolution of an Insurgent Idea. » Lexington Books, 2015.

Sharpley-Whiting, T. Denean. "Femme Négritude: Jane Nardal, La Dépêche Africaine, and the Francophone New Negro." Souls (Boulder, Colo.) , vol. 2, no. 4, Taylor & Francis Group, 2000, pp. 8–17, Bibliography [ edit ] Original texts Césaire, Aimé: Return to My Native Land , Bloodaxe Books , 1997, ISBN 1-85224-184-5 Césaire, Aimé: Discourse on Colonialism , Monthly Review Press (1950), 2000, ISBN 1-58367-025-4 Damas, Léon-Gontran, Poètes d'expression française.

Paris: Editions du Seuil , 1947 Damas, Léon-Gontan, Mine de Rien, Poèmes inédits .

Diop, Birago, Leurres et lueurs.

Paris: Présence Africaine , 1960 Senghor, Léopold Sedar, The Collected Poetry , University of Virginia Press , 1998 Senghor, Léopold Sédar, Ce que je crois.

Paris: Grasset, 1988 Tadjo, Véronique , Red Earth/Latérite.

Spokane, Washington: Eastern Washington University Press , 2006 Secondary literature Filostrat, Christian.

Negritude Agonistes , Africana Homestead Legacy Publishers, 2008, ISBN 978-0-9818939-2-1 Irele, Abiola. "Négritude or black cultural nationalism." Journal of Modern African Studies 3.3 (1965): 321–348.

Le Baron, Bentley. "Négritude: A Pan-African Ideal?." Ethics 76.4 (1966): 267–276 online .

Reilly, Brian J. " Négritude 's Contretemps: The Coining and Reception of Aimé Césaire's Neologism".

Philological Quarterly 99.4 (2020): 377–98.

Rexer, Raisa. "Black and White and Re(a)d All Over: L'Étudiant noir, Communism, and the Birth of Négritude".

Research in African Literatures 44.4 (2013): 1–14.

Sharpley-Whiting, T. Denean.

Negritude Women , University of Minnesota Press , 2002, ISBN 0-8166-3680-X Stovall, Tyler, "Aimé Césaire and the making of black Paris." French Politics, Culture & Society 27#3 (2009): 44–46 Thiam, Cheikh.

Return to the Kingdom of Childhood: Re-envisioning the Legacy and Philosophical Relevance of Negritude (Ohio State University Press,  2014) Thompson, Peter, Negritude and Changing Africa: An Update, in Research in African Literatures , Winter 2002 Thompson, Peter, Négritude et nouveaux mondes—poésie noire: africaine, antillaise et malgache.

Concord, Mass: Wayside Publishing, 1994 Wilder, Gary.

The French Imperial Nation-State: Negritude & Colonial Humanism Between the Two World Wars (University of Chicago Press, 2005) ISBN 0-226-89772-9 Wilder, Gary.

Freedom time: Negritude, decolonization, and the future of the world (Duke University Press, 2015).

Kemi Séba, Supra-négritude , Fiat-Lux éditions 2013, ISBN 979-1091157018 Filmography [ edit ] Négritude: Naissance et expansion du concept a documentary by Nathalie Fave and Jean-Baptiste Fave, first minutes online , with the interventions of Amadou Lamine Sall , Racine Senghor, Lylian Kesteloot , Jean-Louis Roy , Jacqueline Lemoine , Gérard Chenêt, Victor Emmanuel Cabrita , Nafissatou Dia Diouf , Amadou Ly, Youssoufa Bâ, Raphaël Ndiaye, Alioune Badara Bèye , Hamidou Dia , Georges Courrèges, Baba Diop; Maison Africaine de la Poésie Internationale. Shot in Sénégal in 2005, 56' (DVD) External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Négritude .

Noir, Journal Mensuel de l'Association des Etudiants Martiniquais en France, Premiere Annee N. 3 May–June 1935 Archived 2019-06-18 at the Wayback Machine , Césaire et l'introduction de la notion "négritude" v t e Aimé Césaire Bibliography Works Cahier d'un retour au pays natal (1939) Discourse on Colonialism (1950) Une saison au Congo (1966) Une Tempête (1969) Concepts Négritude Imperial boomerang People Suzanne Césaire (ex-wife) Ina Césaire (daughter) Related Martinican Progressive Party Law on Departmentalization v t e Pan-Africanism Ideology Variants African nationalism African socialism Afrocentrism Anti-imperialism Anti-Western sentiment Black nationalism Garveyism Nkrumaism Sankarism Uhuru Movement Zikism Concepts African century Black power Négritude Ubuntu Ujamaa United States of Africa Proponents Politicians Dennis Akumu Idi Amin Nnamdi Azikiwe Amílcar Cabral David Comissiong Jean-Jacques Dessalines Anténor Firmin Muammar Gaddafi Marcus Garvey Alieu Ebrima Cham Joof Kenneth Kaunda Modibo Keïta Jomo Kenyatta Toussaint Louverture Patrice Lumumba Samora Machel Ochola Ogaye Mak'Anyengo Thabo Mbeki Tom Mboya Robert Mugabe Abdias do Nascimento Gamal Abdel Nasser Kwame Nkrumah Julius Nyerere John Nyathi Pokela Thomas Sankara Ahmed Sékou Touré Haile Selassie Robert Sobukwe I. T. A. Wallace-Johnson Others Marimba Ani Molefi Kete Asante Steve Biko Edward Wilmot Blyden Stokely Carmichael Aimé Césaire John Henrik Clarke Martin R. Delany Cheikh Anta Diop W. E. B. Du Bois Frantz Fanon Amy Ashwood Garvey John G. Jackson Leonard Jeffries Yosef Ben-Jochannan Maulana Karenga Alice Kinloch Fela Kuti Malcolm X Archie Mafeje Ali Mazrui Zephania Mothopeng George Padmore Motsoko Pheko Runoko Rashidi Paul Robeson Randall Robinson Walter Rodney Burning Spear Issa Laye Thiaw Frances Cress Welsing Henry Sylvester Williams Amos N. Wilson Omali Yeshitela Organizations Educational African Leadership Academy African Leadership University Political African Unification Front African Union All-African People's Revolutionary Party All-African Trade Union Federation Conseil de l'Entente Convention People's Party East African Community Economic Freedom Fighters First Pan-African Conference International African Service Bureau Organisation of African Trade Union Unity Organisation of African Unity Pan African Association Pan-African Freedom Movement for East and Central Africa Pan-African Congress Pan Africanist Congress of Azania Popular and Social League of the Great Sahara Tribes Rassemblement Démocratique Africain Universal Negro Improvement Association and African Communities League ZANU–PF Symbols Black Star of Africa Le Marron Inconnu Lion of Judah Pan-African colours Pan-African flag Dynamics Ethnic groups of Africa Languages of Africa Religion in Africa Conflicts in Africa Related African philosophy African-American leftism Africanization All-African Peoples' Conference East African Federation Kwanzaa Union of African States United States of Africa United States of Latin Africa Year of Africa Pan-Africanism category Africa category Pan-Africanism portal Africa portal v t e Schools of poetry Acmeism Akhmatova's Orphans Angry Penguins Auden Group The Beats Black Arts Movement Black Mountain poets British Poetry Revival Cairo poets Castalian Band Cavalier poets Chhayavaad Churchyard poets Conceptismo Confessionalists Créolité Cubo-Futurism Culteranismo Cyclic Poets Dada Deep image Della Cruscans Dolce Stil Novo Dymock poets Ecopoetry Ego-Futurism The poets of Elan Flarf Fugitives Garip Gay Saber Generation of '27 Generation of the '30s Generation of '98 Georgian poets Goliard The Group Harlem Renaissance Harvard Aesthetes Hungry generation Imaginism Imagism Informationist poetry İkinci Yeni Jindyworobaks Lake Poets Language poets Marinism Martian poetry Metaphysical poets Misty Poets Modernist poetry The Movement Négritude Neotericism New American Poetry New Apocalyptics New Formalism New York School Oberiu Objectivists Others Parnassian poets La Pléiade Précieuses Rhymers' Club San Francisco Renaissance Scottish Renaissance Sicilian School Sons of Ben Southern Agrarians Spasmodic poets Sung poetry Surrealism Symbolism Uranian poetry Zutiste Poetry portal Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic 2 Latvia Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Négritude&oldid=1294693225 " Categories : 1930s in Africa African and Black nationalism Africana philosophy Black (human racial classification) French Caribbean French West Africa Latin American literature Literary movements Pan-Africanism Postcolonialism Aimé Césaire Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 07:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Négritude 31 languages Add topic

