Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Formation 3 Effects 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ice pellets 32 languages العربية Armãneashti Български Bosanski Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latviešu Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Српски / srpski 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Precipitation consisting of small, translucent balls of ice Part of a series on Weather Temperate and polar seasons Winter Spring Summer Autumn Tropical seasons Dry season Harmattan Wet season Storms Cloud Cumulonimbus cloud Arcus cloud Downburst Microburst Heat burst Derecho Lightning Volcanic lightning Thunderstorm Air-mass thunderstorm Thundersnow Dry thunderstorm Mesocyclone Supercell Tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Dust devil Fire whirl Anticyclone Cyclone Polar low Extratropical cyclone European windstorm Nor'easter Subtropical cyclone Tropical cyclone Atlantic hurricane Typhoon Storm surge Dust storm Simoom Haboob Monsoon Amihan Gale Sirocco Firestorm Winter storm Ice storm Blizzard Ground blizzard Snow squall Precipitation Drizzle Freezing Graupel Hail Megacryometeor Ice pellets Diamond dust Rain Freezing Cloudburst Snow Rain and snow mixed Snow grains Snow roller Slush Topics Air pollution Atmosphere Chemistry Convection Physics River Climate Cloud Physics Fog Mist Season Cold wave Heat wave Jet stream Meteorology Severe weather List Extreme Severe weather terminology Canada Japan United States Weather forecasting Weather modification Glossaries Meteorology Climate change Tornado terms Tropical cyclone terms Weather portal v t e Ice pellets ( Commonwealth English ) or sleet ( American English ) is a form of precipitation consisting of small, hard, translucent balls of ice.  Ice pellets are different from graupel ("soft hail"), which is made of frosty white opaque rime , and from a mixture of rain and snow , which is a slushy liquid or semisolid.  Ice pellets often bounce when they hit the ground or other solid objects, and make a higher-pitched "tap" when striking objects like jackets , windshields , and dried leaves , compared to the dull splat of liquid raindrops.  Pellets generally do not freeze into other solid masses unless mixed with freezing rain .  The METAR code for ice pellets is PL ( PE before November 1998 [ 1 ] ).

Terminology [ edit ] Ice pellets are known as sleet in the United States, the official term used by the U.S.

National Weather Service .

[ 2 ] However, the term sleet refers to a mixture of rain and snow in most Commonwealth countries instead, [ 3 ] including Canada .

[ 4 ] Because of this, Environment Canada never uses the term sleet , and uses the terms "ice pellets" or "wet snow" instead.

[ 5 ] Formation [ edit ] Temperature profile for ice pellet formation Ice pellets form when a layer of above-freezing air is located between 1,500 and 3,000 meters (5,000 and 10,000 ft ) above the ground, with sub-freezing air both above and below it.  This causes the partial or complete melting of any snowflakes falling through the warm layer (the French term for sleet, neige fondue , literally means "melted snow" because of this).  As they fall back into the sub-freezing layer closer to the surface, they re-freeze into ice pellets.  However, if the sub-freezing layer beneath the warm layer is too small, the precipitation will not have time to re-freeze before hitting the surface, so it will become freezing rain and freeze on the surface instead.  A temperature profile showing a warm layer above the ground is most likely to be found in advance of a warm front during the cold season, [ 6 ] but can occasionally be found behind a passing cold front , and often with a stationary front .

An accumulation of ice pellets Ice pellets next to a U.S. penny (19.05 mm diameter) for scale Effects [ edit ] In most parts of the world, ice pellets only occur for brief periods and do not accumulate a significant and troublesome amount.  However, across the eastern United States and southeastern Canada , warm air flowing north from the Gulf of Mexico ahead of a strong synoptic-scale storm system can overrun cold, dense air at the surface for many hundreds of miles for an extended period of time.  In these areas, ice pellet accumulations of 2–5 cm (0.8–2.0 in) are not unheard of.  The effects of a significant accumulation of ice pellets are not unlike an accumulation of snow.  One significant difference however is that for the same volume of snow, an equal volume of ice pellets is significantly heavier and thus more difficult to clear away.  Additionally, a volume of ice pellets takes significantly longer to melt compared to an equal volume of fresh snowfall due to less surface area.

See also [ edit ] Freezing rain Graupel Hail Sleet (disambiguation) References [ edit ] ^ "USA and International Code Change For Ice Pellets" .

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration . Retrieved 2013-09-20 .

^ "Sleet (glossary entry)" .

National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 's National Weather Service . Retrieved 2007-03-20 .

^ "sleet Meaning in the Cambridge English Dictionary" .

cambridge.org .

^ "Weather Glossary" .

Environment Canada . 10 March 2010 . Retrieved 2015-03-30 .

Ice pellets: This is the term Canadians use to describe frozen rain drops which are five millimetres or less in diameter and bounce when they hit a hard surface. Americans call this sleet.

^ Chris St. Clair, Canada's Weather, p. 55, Firefly Books, 2009.

ISBN 1-55407-338-3 ^ Weatherquestions.com.

What causes ice pellets (sleet)?

Retrieved on 2007-12-08.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ice pellets .

Authority control databases National United States Israel Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ice_pellets&oldid=1291066699 " Categories : Precipitation Snow or ice weather phenomena Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 May 2025, at 21:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ice pellets 32 languages Add topic

