Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Duchy of Nysa 11 languages Čeština Deutsch Español Français Italiano Lietuvių Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 50°28′00″N 17°20′00″E ﻿ / ﻿ 50.466667°N 17.333333°E ﻿ / 50.466667; 17.333333 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Silesian duchy (1290–1850) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Duchy of Nysa" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in Czech .

(March 2024) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing Czech Wikipedia article at [[:cs:Niské knížectví]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|cs|Niské knížectví}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Duchy of Nysa Księstwo Nyskie ( pl ) Herzogtum Neisse ( de ) Niské knížectví ( cs ) 1290–1850 Coat of arms Map of Silesia by Martin Helwig , native of Nysa, published in 1645 in Atlas novus of Willem and Joan Blaeu . The Duchy of Nysa (here depicted as DVCATUS GROTKAVIENSIS ) extends to Jeseník ( Freiwaldau ) in the south and Osoblaha ( Hotzenplotz ) in the east.

Status Silesian duchy Capital Nysa Historical era Middle Ages Early modern period • Partitioned from Wrocław 1290 • Vassalized by Bohemia 1342 • Acquired Grodków 1344 • Partitioned by Prussia and Austria 1742 • Incorporated by Prussia 1810 • Seized by Austria 1850 Preceded by Succeeded by Duchy of Silesia Silesia Province Austrian Silesia Today part of Poland Czechia The Duchy of Nysa ( Polish : Księstwo Nyskie , Czech : Niské knížectví ) or Duchy of Neisse ( German : Herzogtum Neisse ) was one of the duchies of Silesia with its capital at Nysa in Lower Silesia . Alongside the Duchy of Siewierz , it was the only ecclesiastical duchy in the Silesian region, as it was ruled by a bishop of the Catholic Church . Nowadays its territory is divided between Poland and the Czech Republic .

History [ edit ] Basilica of St. James and St. Agnes, Nysa , Historic Monument of Poland [ 1 ] Upon his appointment as Bishop of Wrocław in 1198, Jarosław of Opole , elder son of the Silesian duke Bolesław I the Tall , received the territories around the town of Nysa from his father. After Jarosław's death in 1201, his half-brother Duke Henry I the Bearded of Silesia decided to leave Nysa, as well as the castellany of Otmuchów , under the control of the Diocese of Wrocław , while the rest of the late Jarosław's Upper Silesian lands were annexed by his uncle Mieszko IV Tanglefoot in the following year. In 1290 Henry IV Probus , duke of Lower Silesia at Wrocław , gave the bishops privileges of autonomy on their lands in Nysa, creating the legal basis for the Duchy of Nysa. Henry of Wierzbna, Bishop of Wrocław from 1302 to 1319, was the first to actually use the title of a Duke of Nysa.

The duchy in its original form only lasted until 1335, when Silesia passed to the Kingdom of Bohemia by the Treaty of Trentschin . In 1342 Bishop Przecław of Pogorzeli swore the oath of fealty to King John the Blind and afterwards played a vital role in the negotiations for the 1348 Treaty of Namslau between John's successor Charles IV and King Casimir III the Great of Poland. Pogorzeli also significantly enlarged his territory by acquisition of Grodków from Duke Bolesław III the Generous of Brzeg in 1344. For the next two hundred years, the Polish, Czech and German inhabitants of Nysa-Grodków lived in relative harmony, even during the beginnings of the Reformation as the control of the region switched between Protestant and Catholic rulers. This ended with the Thirty Years' War .

[ 2 ] The Duchy of Nysa (yellow) within Austrian Silesia The episcopate was abandoned by the bishops during the Silesian Wars . Following the First Silesian War, the 1742 Treaty of Breslau divided the principality, with the larger northern part (1,231 km 2 , 475 sq mi) including the town of Nysa becoming part of the Kingdom of Prussia and a smaller southern part (900 km 2 , 350 sq mi) remaining with the Austrian-ruled Kingdom of Bohemia. In 1810 the Prussian part was secularized, its autonomy removed and it was incorporated into the Prussian Silesia Province . The small part remaining in the Austrian Empire was likewise secularized to the crown land of Austrian Silesia in 1850 and is today part of Czech Silesia .

See also [ edit ] Bishop of Wrocław References [ edit ] ^ Rozporządzenie Prezydenta Rzeczypospolitej Polskiej z dnia 28 lutego 2011 r. w sprawie uznania za pomnik historii "Nysa - zespół kościoła farnego pod wezwaniem św. Jakuba Starszego Apostoła i św. Agnieszki Dziewicy i Męczennicy" , Dz. U., 2011, vol. 54, No. 279 ^ Mark Salter, Jonathan Bousfield, "Poland", Rough Guides, 2002, pg. 529 External links [ edit ] The Catholic Encyclopedia : Breslau and Silesia v t e Duchies of Silesia Original Duchy of Silesia Lower Silesia Duchy of Bierutów Duchy of Brzeg Duchy of Głogów Duchy of Jawor Duchy of Legnica Duchy of Lwówek Duchy of Nysa Duchy of Oleśnica Duchy of Żagań Duchy of Münsterberg Upper Silesia Duchy of Bielsko Duchy of Bytom Duchy of Cieszyn Duchy of Głogówek and Prudnik Duchy of Głubczyce Duchy of Krnov Duchy of Opava Duchy of Opole Duchy of Opole and Racibórz Duchy of Oświęcim Duchy of Prudnik Duchy of Pszczyna Duchy of Racibórz Duchy of Siewierz Duchy of Zator Other Duchy of Upper and Lower Silesia County of Kladsko 50°28′00″N 17°20′00″E ﻿ / ﻿ 50.466667°N 17.333333°E ﻿ / 50.466667; 17.333333 Authority control databases International VIAF National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Duchy_of_Nysa&oldid=1253615125 " Categories : 13th-century establishments in Poland 1850 disestablishments in Europe States and territories established in 1290 States and territories disestablished in 1850 Duchies of Silesia History of Czech Silesia Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2008 All articles needing additional references History articles needing translation from Czech Wikipedia Articles containing Polish-language text Articles containing Czech-language text Articles containing German-language text Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 26 October 2024, at 23:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Duchy of Nysa 11 languages Add topic

