Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Foundation 2.2 Transylvania, Kingdom of Hungary 2.3 Prussia 2.4 Livonia 2.5 Against Lithuania 2.6 Against Poland 2.7 Battle of Legnica 2.8 Height of power 2.9 Decline 3 Medieval organization Toggle Medieval organization subsection 3.1 Administrative structure about 1350 3.2 Universal leadership 3.2.1 Generalkapitel 3.2.2 Hochmeister 3.2.3 Großgebietige 3.3 National leadership 3.3.1 Landmeister 3.3.2 Regional leadership 3.4 Local leadership 3.4.1 Komtur 3.4.2 Special offices 4 Modern organization Toggle Modern organization subsection 4.1 Evolution and reconfiguration as a Catholic religious order 4.1.1 Honorary Knights 4.2 Protestant Bailiwick of Utrecht 5 Insignia 6 Influence on German and Polish nationalism and Soviet patriotism 7 See also 8 References 9 Bibliography 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Teutonic Order 77 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Türkmençe Українська Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medieval military order This article is about the religious order. For the state, see State of the Teutonic Order . For the historical novel, see The Knights of the Cross . For the film, see Knights of the Teutonic Order (film) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Teutonic Order" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Order of Brothers of the German House of Saint Mary in Jerusalem The coat of arms in the style of the 14th century Active c.

1190 – present Allegiance Holy See ( c.

1190 – present) Austria (1945–present) Germany (1949–present) Czech Republic (1993–present) Historical Holy Roman Empire (1190–1806) Kingdom of Jerusalem (1190–1291) Kingdom of Sicily (1191–1484) Kingdom of Cyprus (1197–1350) Kingdom of Bohemia (1198–1918) Republic of Venice (1209–1500) Kingdom of Hungary (1211–1225; 1429–1432; 1702–1731) State of the Teutonic Order (1226–1525) Terra Mariana & Livonian Confederation (1237–1561) Kingdom of Poland (1466–1525) Grand Duchy of Lithuania (1559–1561) Austrian Empire & Austria-Hungary (1804–1918) German Empire (1871–1918) Kingdom of Bavaria (1805–1809) Kingdom of Württemberg (1805–1809) Confederation of the Rhine (1806–1809) Grand Duchy of Baden (1806–1809) Grand Duchy of Hesse (1806–1809) Republic of German Austria & First Austrian Republic (1918–1934) First & Second Czechoslovak Republic (1918–1939) Federal State of Austria (1934–1938) Type Catholic religious order (1192–1810 as military order ) Headquarters Acre (1190–1291) Venice (1291–1309) Marienburg (1309–1466) Königsberg (1466–1525) Mergentheim (1525–1809) Vienna (1809–present) Nickname(s) Teutonic Knights, German Order Patron Virgin Mary Saint Elizabeth of Hungary Saint George Attire White mantle with a black cross Website deutscher-orden .com Commanders First Grand Master Heinrich Walpot von Bassenheim Current Grand Master Frank Bayard [ 1 ] Military unit v t e Teutonic Order Damietta Sixth Crusade Battle on the Ice 1st Prussian Uprising Krücken Durbe Great Prussian Uprising Königsberg Löbau Bartenstein Karuse Pagastin Aizkraukle Montfort Castle Acre Danzig 1st Polish–Teutonic War Płowce St. George's Night Uprising Strėva Rudau Polish–Lithuanian–Teutonic War Hunger War Gollub War 2nd Polish–Teutonic War Thirteen Years' War War of the Priests 3rd Polish–Teutonic War The Teutonic Order is a Catholic religious institution founded as a military society c.

1190 in Acre , Kingdom of Jerusalem . The Order of Brothers of the German House of Saint Mary in Jerusalem was formed to aid Christians on their pilgrimages to the Holy Land and to establish hospitals . Its members have commonly been known as the Teutonic Knights , having historically served as a crusading military order for supporting Catholic rule in the Holy Land and the Northern Crusades during the Middle Ages , as well as supplying military protection for Catholics in Eastern Europe .

Purely religious since 1810, the Teutonic Order still confers limited honorary knighthoods .

[ 2 ] The Bailiwick of Utrecht of the Teutonic Order , a Protestant chivalric order , is descended from the same medieval military order and also continues to award knighthoods and perform charitable work.

[ 3 ] Name [ edit ] The name of the Order of Brothers of the German House of Saint Mary in Jerusalem [ 4 ] is in German : Orden der Brüder vom Deutschen Haus der Heiligen Maria in Jerusalem and in Latin Ordo domus Sanctae Mariae Theutonicorum Hierosolymitanorum . Thus the term "Teutonic" echoes the German origins of the order ( Theutonicorum ) in its Latin name.

[ 5 ] German-speakers commonly refer to the Deutscher Orden (official short name, literally "German Order"), historically also as Deutscher Ritterorden ("German Order of Knights"), Deutschherrenorden ("Order of the German Lords"), Deutschritterorden ("Order of the German Knights"), Marienritter ("Knights of Mary "), Die Herren im weißen Mantel ("The lords in white capes"), etc.

.

The Teutonic Knights have been known as Zakon Krzyżacki in Polish ("Order of the Cross") and as Kryžiuočių Ordinas in Lithuanian, Vācu Ordenis in Latvian, Saksa Ordu or, simply, Ordu ("The Order") in Estonian.

History [ edit ] Extent of the Teutonic Order in 1300 Teutonic and Livonian Orders in 1422 The fraternity which preceded the formation of the Order was formed in the year 1191 in Acre by German merchants from Bremen and Lübeck . After the capture of Acre they took over a hospital in the city in order to take care of the sick and began to describe themselves as the Hospital of St. Mary of the German House in Jerusalem.

[ 6 ] Pope Clement III approved it and the Order started to play an important role in Outremer (the general name for the Crusader states ), controlling the port tolls of Acre. In 1211, during the second, much weaker Crusader kingdom in the Holy Land , but still long before its final demise in 1291 , the Order was invited to the Burzenland (southeastern Transylvania ) to help defend the southeastern borders of the Kingdom of Hungary against the Cumans . The Order invited German planters to help build up settlements to provide support. As the Order pushed back the invaders, the settlements expanded. King Andrew II of Hungary became concerned he was losing influence. So, in 1225, after Pope Honorius III's papal bull claiming his authority over the Order's territory in Transylvania and its tax exemption toward the king, Andrew expelled the Order.

[ 7 ] The Order's next assignment concerned Konrad I of Masovia , who was settling a frontier around Prussia , a region named for the Prussians who lived there. Konrad was unable to stop the Prussian raids and the Dobrzyń knights he had gathered for this purpose were defeated, in 1228. So, in coordination with the Holy Roman Empire and Konrad, the Grand Master Hermann von Salza and his Teutonic Order arrived in the region, in 1230. Along with Konrad's forces, the Order pushed back the Prussians and began to push further to conquer and Christianize them.

Through the Golden Bull of Rimini and Treaty of Kruszwica , the Order asserted its claims to the territory that was now secure, the Chełmno Land (also: Ziemia Chełmińska or Kulmerland). From this, the Order created the independent State of the Teutonic Order , to which conquered territory was continuously added. Through the incorporation of the Livonian Brothers of the Sword and further crusading, the added territory included Livonia . Over time, certain kings and dukes of Poland would challenge the Order's land claims, specifically Chełmno Land and, later, Pomerelia (also Pomorze Gdańskie or Vistula Pomerania), Kuyavia , and Dobrzyń Land .

Following the Christianization of Lithuania , the Order State was no longer crusading.  It was instead recruiting planters from the Holy Roman Empire and a fighting force to augment feudal levies. There were also wars against the Kingdom of Poland , the Grand Duchy of Lithuania , and the Novgorod Republic . Through its control of port cities and trade, specifically with the Hanseatic League , the Order State built up its economic base. The Order State also built ships and had a naval presence in the Baltic Sea . In 1410, a Polish-Lithuanian army decisively defeated the Order State and broke its military power at the Battle of Grunwald . However, the Order State successfully defended its capital in the following Siege of Marienburg ( Malbork ) and was saved from collapse.

In 1515, Holy Roman Emperor Maximilian I made a marriage alliance with Sigismund I of Poland-Lithuania. Thereafter, the empire did not support the Order against Poland. In 1525, Grand Master Albert of Brandenburg resigned and converted to Lutheranism , becoming Duke of Prussia as a vassal of Poland. Soon after, the Order lost Livonia and its holdings in the Protestant areas of Germany.

[ 8 ] The Order did keep its considerable holdings in Catholic areas of Germany until 1809, when Napoleon Bonaparte ordered its dissolution and the Order lost its last secular holdings.

However, the Order continued to exist as a charitable and ceremonial body. It was outlawed by Nazi Germany in 1938, [ 9 ] but re-established in 1945.

[ 10 ] Today it operates primarily with charitable aims in Central Europe .

The Knights wore white surcoats with a black cross. A cross pattée was sometimes used as their coat of arms ; this emblem was later used for military decoration and insignia by the Kingdom of Prussia and Germany as the Iron Cross . The motto of the Order was: "Helfen, Wehren, Heilen" ("Help, Defend, Heal").

[ 11 ] The Order's Marienburg Castle , Monastic state of the Teutonic Knights , now Malbork , Poland Foundation [ edit ] Hermann von Salza , the fourth Grand Master of the Teutonic Knights (1209–1239) Reliquary made in Elbing in 1388 for Teutonic komtur Thiele von Lorich, military trophy of Polish king Wladislaus in 1410.

In 1143, Pope Celestine II ordered the Knights Hospitaller to take over management of a German hospital in Jerusalem , which, according to the chronicler Jean d'Ypres, accommodated the countless German pilgrims and crusaders who could neither speak the local language nor Latin ( patriæ linguam ignorantibus atque Latinam ).

[ 12 ] Although formally an institution of the Hospitallers, the pope commanded that the prior and the brothers of the domus Theutonicorum (house of the Germans) should always be Germans themselves, so a tradition of a German-led religious institution could develop during the 12th century in the Kingdom of Jerusalem .

[ 13 ] After the loss of Jerusalem in 1187, some merchants from Lübeck and Bremen took up the idea and founded a field hospital for the duration of the Siege of Acre in 1190, which became the nucleus of the order; Pope Celestine III recognized it in 1192 by granting the monks Augustinian Rule . However, based on the model of the Knights Templar , it was transformed into a military order in 1198 and the head of the order became known as the Grand Master ( magister hospitalis ). It received papal orders for crusades to take and hold Jerusalem for Christianity and defend the Holy Land against the Muslim Saracens . During the rule of Grand Master Hermann von Salza (1209–1239) the Order changed from being a hospice brotherhood for pilgrims to primarily a military order.

The Order was founded in Acre, and the Knights purchased Montfort Castle , northeast of Acre, in 1220. This castle, which defended the route between Jerusalem and the Mediterranean Sea , was made the seat of the Grand Masters in 1229, although they returned to Acre after losing Montfort to Muslim control in 1271. The Order received donations of land in the Holy Roman Empire (especially in present-day Germany and Italy ), Frankokratia , and the Kingdom of Jerusalem.

Frederick II, Holy Roman Emperor , elevated his close friend Hermann von Salza to the status of Reichsfürst , or "Prince of the Empire", enabling the Grand Master to negotiate with other senior princes as an equal. During Frederick's coronation as King of Jerusalem in 1225, Teutonic Knights served as his escort in the Church of the Holy Sepulchre ; von Salza read the emperor's proclamation in both French and German . However, the Teutonic Knights were never as influential in Outremer as the older Knights Templar and Knights Hospitaller .

Teutonic Order domains in the Levant: In the Kingdom of Jerusalem : Montfort Castle ( Starkenberg ), 1220–1271; inland from Nahariya in Northern Israel Mi'ilya ( Castellum Regis ), 1220–1271; near Montfort Khirbat Jiddin ( Judin ), 1220–1271; near Montfort Cafarlet , 1255–1291; south of Haifa the Lordship of Toron and Lordship of Joscelin in Northern Israel and Southern Lebanon, both owned by the Teutonic Knights 1220–1229 but under Muslim rule during that period. The Knights retained Maron, a vassal of Toron, after 1229, and in 1261 acquired another Toron-Ahmud, another vassal lordship. They also leased (1256) and bought (1261) the stronghold of Achziv ( Casale Umberti , Arabic Az-Zīb ) on the coast north of Nahariya .

the Lordship of the Schuf , an offshoot of the Lordship of Sidon , 1256–1268; inland from modern Saida in Lebanon In the Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia : Amouda , 1212–1266; near modern Osmaniye , Turkey Düziçi ( Aronia ), 1236–1270s; near Amouda Transylvania, Kingdom of Hungary [ edit ] Tannhäuser in the habit of the Teutonic Knights, from the Codex Manesse In 1211, Andrew II of Hungary accepted the services of the Teutonic Knights and granted them the district of Burzenland in Transylvania , where they would be exempt from fees and duties and could administer their own justice. Andrew had been involved in negotiations for the marriage of his daughter with the son of Hermann, Landgrave of Thuringia , whose vassals included the family of Hermann von Salza. Led by a brother called Theoderich or Dietrich, the Order defended the south-eastern borders of the Kingdom of Hungary against the neighbouring Cumans . Many forts of wood and mud were built for defence. They settled new German peasants among the existing Transylvanian Saxon inhabitants. The Cumans had no fixed settlements for resistance, and soon the Teutons were expanding into their territory. By 1220, the Teutonics Knights had built five castles, some of them made of stone. Their rapid expansion made the Hungarian nobility and clergy, who were previously uninterested in those regions, jealous and suspicious. Some nobles claimed these lands, but the Order refused to share them, ignoring the demands of the local bishop.

After the Fifth Crusade , King Andrew returned to Hungary and found his kingdom full of resentment because of the expenses and losses of the failed military campaign. When the nobles demanded that he cancel the concessions made to the Knights, he concluded that they had exceeded their task and that the agreement should be revised, but did not revert the concessions. However, Prince Béla, heir to the throne, was allied with the nobility. In 1224, the Teutonic Knights, seeing that they would have problems when the Prince inherited the Kingdom, petitioned Pope Honorius III to be placed directly under the authority of the Papal See , rather than that of the King of Hungary. This was a grave mistake, as King Andrew, angered and alarmed at their growing power, responded in 1225 by expelling the Teutonic Knights, although he allowed the ethnically German commoners and peasants settled here by the Order to remain and these became part of the larger group of the Transylvanian Saxons. Lacking the military organization and experience of the Teutonic Knights, the Hungarians failed to replace them with adequate defence against the attacking Cumans. Soon, the steppe warriors would be a threat again.

[ 14 ] Prussia [ edit ] Main article: Prussian Crusade In 1226, Konrad I , Duke of Masovia in north-eastern Poland , appealed to the Knights to defend his borders and subdue the pagan Baltic Old Prussians , allowing the Teutonic Knights use of Chełmno Land as a base for their campaign. This being a time of widespread crusading fervor throughout Western Europe, Hermann von Salza considered Prussia a good training ground for his knights for the wars against the Muslims in Outremer .

[ 15 ] With the Golden Bull of Rimini , Emperor Frederick II bestowed on the Order a special imperial privilege for the conquest and possession of Prussia, including Chełmno Land, with nominal papal sovereignty. In 1235 the Teutonic Knights assimilated the smaller Order of Dobrzyń , which had been established earlier by Christian , the first Bishop of Prussia.

Frederick II allows the order to invade Prussia , by P. Janssen The conquest of Prussia was accomplished with much bloodshed over more than fifty years, during which native Prussians who remained unbaptised were subjugated, killed, or exiled. Fighting between the Knights and the Prussians was ferocious; chronicles of the Order state the Prussians would "roast captured brethren alive in their armour, like chestnuts, before the shrine of a local god".

[ 16 ] The native nobility who submitted to the crusaders had many of their privileges confirmed by the Treaty of Christburg . After the Prussian uprisings of 1260–83, however, much of the Prussian nobility emigrated or were resettled, and many free Prussians lost their rights. The Prussian nobles who remained were more closely allied with the German landowners and were gradually assimilated.

[ 17 ] Peasants in frontier regions, such as Samland , had more privileges than those in more populated lands, such as Pomesania .

[ 18 ] The crusading knights often accepted baptism as a form of submission by the natives.

[ 19 ] Christianity along western lines slowly spread through Prussian culture. Bishops were reluctant to have pagan Prussian religious practices integrated into the new faith, [ 20 ] while the ruling knights found it easier to govern the natives when they were semi-pagan and lawless.

[ 21 ] After fifty years of warfare and brutal conquest, the end result was that most of the Prussian natives were either killed or deported.

[ 22 ] Map of the Teutonic state in 1260 The Order ruled Prussia under charters issued by the Pope and the Holy Roman Emperor as a sovereign monastic state , comparable to the arrangement of the Knights Hospitallers in Rhodes and later in Malta .

To make up for losses from the plague and to replace the partially exterminated native population, the Order encouraged immigration from the Holy Roman Empire (mostly Germans , Flemish , and Dutch ) and from Masovia ( Poles ), the later Masurians . These included nobles, burghers, and peasants, and the surviving Old Prussians were gradually assimilated through Germanization . The settlers founded numerous towns and cities on former Prussian settlements. The Order itself built a number of castles ( Ordensburgen ) from which it could defeat uprisings of Old Prussians , as well as continue its attacks on the Grand Duchy of Lithuania and the Kingdom of Poland, with which the Order was often at war during the 14th and 15th centuries. Major towns founded by the Order included Thorn (Toruń) , Kulm (Chełmno) , Allenstein (Olsztyn) , Elbing (Elbląg) , Memel (Klaipėda) , and Königsberg , founded in 1255 in honor of King Otakar II of Bohemia on the site of a destroyed Prussian settlement.

Livonia [ edit ] Main article: Livonian Crusade Ruins of the Teutonic Order's castle in Paide , Estonia After suffering a devastating defeat in the Battle of Saule , the Livonian Brothers of the Sword were absorbed by the Teutonic Knights in 1237. The Livonian branch subsequently became known as the Livonian Order .

[ 23 ] Although the Northern Crusades were aimed at pagan Balts and Finns , rather than Orthodox Russians, several unsuccessful attempts were made to persuade Novgorod to convert to Catholicism after the capture of Tartu .

[ 24 ] Livonian missionary and Crusade activity in Estonia caused conflicts with Novgorod , which had also attempted to subjugate, raid and convert the pagan Estonians.

[ 25 ] Hoping to exploit Novgorod's weakness in the wake of the Mongol and Swedish invasions, the Teutonic Knights penetrated deep into Novgorodian territory; [ 25 ] however, in 1242, they were defeated in the Battle of the Ice at the hands of Prince Alexander Nevsky . The Livonian Rhymed Chronicle describes the events: [ 26 ] There is a city in Russia called Novgorod, and when its king [Alexandre] heard what had happened he marched towards Pskov with many troops. He arrived there with a mighty force of many Russians to free the Pskovians and these latter heartily rejoiced. When he saw the Germans he did not hesitate long. They drove away the two Brothers, removed them from their governorship and routed their troops. The Germans fled and allowed the land to revert to the Russians. Thus it went for the Teutonic Knights, but if Pskov had been protected it would have benefited Christianity until the end of the world. It is a mistake to take a fair land and fail to occupy it properly. It is deplorable, for the result is sure to be disastrous. The king of Novgorod then returned home.

[ 26 ] — Livonian Rhymed Chronicle Over the next decades the Order focused on the subjugation of the Curonians and Semigallians . In 1260 it suffered a disastrous defeat in the Battle of Durbe against Samogitians , and this inspired rebellions throughout Prussia and Livonia. After the Knights won a crucial victory in the Siege of Königsberg from 1262 to 1265, the war had reached a turning point. The Curonians were finally subjugated in 1267 and the Semigallians in 1290.

[ 23 ] The Order suppressed a major Estonian rebellion in 1343–1345, and in 1346 purchased the Duchy of Estonia from Denmark .

Against Lithuania [ edit ] Main article: Lithuanian Crusade The Teutonic Knights began to direct their campaigns against pagan Lithuania (see Lithuanian mythology ), due to the long existing conflicts in the region (including constant incursions into the Holy Roman Empire's territory by pagan raiding parties) and the lack of a proper area of operation for the Knights, after the fall of the Kingdom of Jerusalem at Acre in 1291 and their later expulsion from Hungary.

[ 27 ] At first the knights moved their headquarters to Venice , from which they planned the recovery of Outremer; [ 28 ] this plan was, however, soon abandoned, and the Order later moved its headquarters to Marienburg, so it could better focus its efforts on the region of Prussia. Because " Lithuania Propria " remained non-Christian until the end of the 14th century, much later than the rest of eastern Europe, the conflicts were dragged out over a longer time, and many Knights from western European countries, such as England and France , journeyed to Prussia to participate in the seasonal campaigns ( reyse ) against the Grand Duchy of Lithuania. In 1348, the Order won a great victory over the Lithuanians in the Battle of Strėva , severely weakening them. In 1370 it won a decisive victory over Lithuania in the Battle of Rudau .

Warfare between the Order and the Lithuanians was particularly brutal. It was common practice for Lithuanians to torture captured enemies and civilians. It is recorded by a Teutonic chronicler that they had the habit of tying captured knights to their horses and having both of them burned alive, while sometimes a stake would be driven into their bodies or the knight would be flayed. Lithuanian pagan customs included ritualistic human sacrifice, the hanging of widows, and the burying of a warrior's horses and servants with him after his death.

[ 29 ] The knights would also, on occasion, take captives from defeated Lithuanians, whose condition (as that of other war captives in the Middle Ages) was extensively researched by Jacques Heers.

[ 30 ] The conflict had much influence in the political situation of the region and was the source of many rivalries between Lithuanians or Poles and Germans; the degree to which it impacted the mentalities of the time can be seen in the lyrical works of men such as the contemporary Austrian poet Peter Suchenwirt .

Overall, the conflict lasted over 200 years (although with varying degrees of active hostility during that time), its front line extending along both banks of the Neman River , with as many as twenty forts and castles between Seredžius and Jurbarkas alone.

Against Poland [ edit ] Main article: Teutonic takeover of Danzig Pomerelia ( Pommerellen ) while part of the monastic state of the Teutonic Knights A dispute over the claims to Pomerelia embroiled the Order in further conflict at the beginning of the 14th century. Duke Władysław I the Elbow-high of Poland wanted the region, citing inheritance from Przemysł II . He was opposed by some Pomeranian nobles, but also a Danish prince , who supported the Margrave of Brandenburg 's claim that the region had been granted to Brandenburg as a fief by King Wenceslaus . Forces from Denmark and Brandenburg had tried and failed to take the site in 1301 and 1306 but, in the summer of 1308, Brandenburg's forces tried again, targeting the present-day site of Gdańsk , where a rebellion had erupted in their favor. Władysław pressed the Teutonic Order for help and the Teutonic Knights, led by Grand Master Siegfried von Feuchtwangen , drove Brandenburg out. The Knights requested payment in exchange and Władysław refused.

By November, the Order forces under a Prussian Landmeister Heinrich von Plötzke took the site for themselves. According to some sources, they massacred the town's inhabitants , although the exact extent of the violence is unknown and widely recognized by historians to be an unsolvable mystery. The estimates range from 60 rebellious leaders, reported by dignitaries of the region and Knight chroniclers, to 10,000 civilians, a number cited in a papal bull (of dubious provenance) that was used in a legal process installed to punish the Order for the event; the legal dispute went on for a time, but the Order was eventually absolved of the charges. In the Treaty of Soldin , the Teutonic Order purchased the castles of Gdańsk, Świecie , and Tczew and their hinterlands from the margraves for 10,000 marks on 13 September 1309.

[ 31 ] Control of Pomerelia allowed the Order to connect their monastic state with the borders of the Holy Roman Empire. Crusading reinforcements and supplies could travel from the Imperial territory of Hither Pomerania through Pomerelia to Prussia, while Poland's access to the Baltic Sea was blocked. While Poland had mostly been an ally of the knights against the pagan Prussians and Lithuanians, the capture of Pomerelia turned the kingdom into a determined enemy of the Order.

[ 32 ] The capture of Gdańsk marked a new phase in the history of the Teutonic Knights. The persecution and abolition of the powerful Knights Templar, which began in 1307, worried the Teutonic Knights, but control of Pomerelia allowed them to move their headquarters in 1309 from Venice to Marienburg (Malbork) on the Nogat River , outside the reach of secular powers. The position of Prussian Landmeister was merged with that of the Grand Master. The Pope began investigating misconduct by the knights, but no charges were found to have substance. Along with the campaigns against the Lithuanians, the knights faced a vengeful Poland and legal threats from the Papacy.

[ 33 ] The Treaty of Kalisz of 1343 ended the open war between the Teutonic Knights and Poland. The Knights relinquished Kuyavia and Dobrzyń Land to Poland, but retained Chełmno Land and Pomerelia with Gdańsk (Germanized as Danzig ).

Battle of Legnica [ edit ] In 1236, the Knights of Saint Thomas , an English order, adopted the rules of the Teutonic Order. A contingent of Teutonic Knights of indeterminate number is traditionally believed to have participated at the Battle of Legnica in 1241 during the first Mongol invasion of Poland . The combined Polish-German army was crushed by the Mongol army and their superior tactics, with few survivors.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] Height of power [ edit ] Map of the Teutonic state in 1410 In 1337, Emperor Louis IV allegedly granted the Order the imperial privilege to conquer all Lithuania and Russia. During the reign of Grand Master Winrich von Kniprode (1351–1382), the Order reached the peak of its international prestige and hosted numerous European crusaders and nobility.

King Albert of Sweden ceded Gotland to the Order as a pledge (similar to a fiefdom ), with the understanding that they would eliminate the pirating Victual Brothers from this strategic island base in the Baltic Sea . An invasion force under Grand Master Konrad von Jungingen conquered the island in 1398 and drove the Victual Brothers out of Gotland and the Baltic Sea.

In 1386, Grand Duke Jogaila of Lithuania was baptised into Christianity and married Queen Jadwiga of Poland , taking the name Władysław II Jagiełło and becoming King of Poland. This created a personal union between the two countries and a potentially formidable opponent for the Teutonic Knights. The Order initially managed to play Władysław II Jagiełło and his cousin Vytautas against each other, but this strategy failed when Vytautas began to suspect that the Order was planning to annex parts of his territory.

The baptism of Jogaila began the official conversion of Lithuania to Christianity. Although the crusading rationale for the Order's state ended when Prussia and Lithuania had become officially Christian, the Order's feuds and wars with Lithuania and Poland continued. The Lizard Union was created in 1397 by Prussian nobles in Chełmno Land to oppose the Order's policy.

In 1407, the Teutonic Order reached its greatest territorial extent and included the lands of Prussia , Pomerelia , Samogitia , Courland , Livonia , Estonia , Gotland , Dagö , Ösel , and the Neumark , pawned by Brandenburg in 1402.

Decline [ edit ] Battle of Grunwald In 1410, at the Battle of Grunwald a combined Polish–Lithuanian army, led by Władysław II Jagiełło and Vytautas , decisively defeated the Order in the Polish–Lithuanian–Teutonic War . Grand Master Ulrich von Jungingen and most (50 out of 60) of the Order's higher dignitaries fell on the battlefield. The Polish–Lithuanian army then began the Siege of Marienburg ( Malbork ), the capital of the Order, but was unable to take Marienburg owing to the resistance of Heinrich von Plauen . When the First Peace of Thorn was signed in 1411, the Order managed to retain essentially all of its territories, although the Knights' reputation as invincible warriors was irreparably damaged.

While Poland and Lithuania were growing in power, that of the Teutonic Knights dwindled through infighting. They were forced to impose high taxes to pay a substantial indemnity  but did not give the cities sufficient requested representation in the administration of their state. The authoritarian and reforming Grand Master Heinrich von Plauen was forced from power and replaced by Michael Küchmeister von Sternberg , but the new Grand Master was unable to revive the Order's fortunes. After the Gollub War the Knights lost some small border regions and renounced all claims to Samogitia in the 1422 Treaty of Melno .

Austrian and Bavarian knights feuded with those from the Rhineland , who likewise bickered with Low German -speaking Saxons , from whose ranks the Grand Master was usually chosen. The western Prussian lands of the Vistula River Valley and the Brandenburg Neumark were ravaged by the Hussites during the Hussite Wars .

[ 37 ] Some Teutonic Knights were sent to battle the invaders but were defeated by the Bohemian infantry. The Knights also sustained a defeat in the Polish-Teutonic War (1431–1435) .

Map of the Teutonic state in 1466 In 1440, the Prussian Confederation was founded by gentry and burghers of the State of the Teutonic Order. In 1454, it rose up against the Order and asked Polish King Casimir IV Jagiellon to incorporate the region into the Kingdom of Poland , to which the King agreed and signed an act of incorporation in Kraków .

[ 38 ] Mayors, burghers and representatives from the region pledged allegiance to the Polish King during the incorporation in March 1454 in Kraków .

[ 39 ] This marked the beginning of the Thirteen Years' War between the Teutonic Order and Poland. The main cities of the incorporated territory were authorized by Casimir IV to mint Polish coins.

[ 40 ] Much of Prussia was devastated in the war, during the course of which the Order returned Neumark to Brandenburg in 1455 to raise funds for war. Because Marienburg Castle was handed over to mercenaries in lieu of their pay, and eventually passed to Poland, the Order moved its base to Königsberg in Sambia . In the Second Peace of Thorn (1466) , the defeated Order renounced any claims to the territories of Gdańsk/Eastern Pomerania and Chełmno Land , which were reintegrated with Poland, [ 41 ] and the region of Elbląg and Malbork, and the Prince-Bishopric of Warmia , which were also recognized as part of Poland, [ 42 ] while retaining the eastern territories in historic Prussia, but as a fief and protectorate of Poland, also considered an integral part of "one and indivisible" Kingdom of Poland.

[ 43 ] From now on, every Grand Master of the Teutonic Order was obliged to swear an oath of allegiance to the reigning Polish king within six months of taking office.

[ 43 ] The Grand Master became a prince and counselor of the Polish king and the Kingdom of Poland.

[ 44 ] After the Polish–Teutonic War (1519–1521) , the Order was completely ousted from Prussia when Grand Master Albert of Brandenburg converted to Lutheranism in 1525. He secularized the Order's remaining Prussian territories and assumed from his uncle Sigismund I the Old , King of Poland, the hereditary rights to the Duchy of Prussia as a personal vassal of the Polish Crown, the Prussian Homage . Ducal Prussia retained its currency, laws and faith. The aristocracy was not present in the Sejm.

Although it had lost control of all of its Prussian lands, the Teutonic Order retained its territories within the Holy Roman Empire and Livonia , although the Livonian branch retained considerable autonomy. Many of the Imperial possessions were ruined in the German Peasants' War from 1524 to 1525 and subsequently confiscated by Protestant territorial princes.

[ 45 ] The Livonian territory was then partitioned by neighboring powers during the Livonian War ; in 1561 the Livonian Master Gotthard Kettler secularized the southern Livonian possessions of the Order to create the Duchy of Courland , also a vassal of Poland.

After the loss of Prussia in 1525, the Teutonic Knights concentrated on their possessions in the Holy Roman Empire. Since they held no contiguous territory, they developed a three-tiered administrative system: holdings were combined into commanderies that were administered by a commander ( Komtur ). Several commanderies were combined to form a bailiwick headed by a Landkomtur . All of the Teutonic Knights' possessions were subordinate to the Grand Master, whose seat was in Bad Mergentheim.

Castle of the Teutonic Order in Bad Mergentheim There were twelve German bailiwicks: Thuringia ; Alden Biesen (in present-day Belgium ); Hesse ; Saxony ; Westphalia ; Franconia; Koblenz; Alsace-Burgundy; An der Etsch und im Gebirge (in Tyrol ); Utrecht; Lorraine; and Austria.

Outside of German areas were the bailiwicks of Sicily; Apulia; Lombardy; Bohemia; "Romania" (in Greece ); and Armenia-Cyprus.

The Order gradually lost control of these holdings until, by 1809, only the seat of the Grand Master at Mergentheim remained.

Following the abdication of Albert of Brandenburg, Walter von Cronberg became Deutschmeister in 1527, and later Administrator of Prussia and Grand Master in 1530. Emperor Charles V combined the two positions in 1531, creating the title Hoch- und Deutschmeister , which also had the rank of Prince of the Empire .

[ 46 ] A new Grand Magistery was established in Mergentheim in Württemberg , which was attacked during the German Peasants' War. The Order also helped Charles V against the Schmalkaldic League . After the Peace of Augsburg in 1555, membership in the Order was open to Protestants, although the majority of brothers remained Catholic.

[ 47 ] The Teutonic Knights became tri-denominational, with Catholic, Lutheran and Reformed bailiwicks.

The Grand Masters, often members of the great German families (and, after 1761, members of the House of Habsburg-Lorraine ), continued to preside over the Order's considerable holdings in Germany. Teutonic Knights from Germany, Austria, and Bohemia were used as battlefield commanders leading mercenaries for the Habsburg monarchy during the Ottoman wars in Europe .

The military history of the Teutonic Knights was to end in 1805 by the Article XII of the Peace of Pressburg , which ordered the German territories of the Knights converted into a hereditary domain and gave the Austrian Emperor responsibility for placing a Habsburg prince on its throne. These terms had not been fulfilled by the time of the Treaty of Schönbrunn in 1809, and therefore Napoleon Bonaparte ordered the Knights' remaining territory to be disbursed to his German allies, which was completed in 1810.

Medieval organization [ edit ] Administrative structure about 1350 [ edit ] Generalkapitel Ratsgebietiger Hochmeister Kanzlei des Hochmeisters Großkomtur (Magnus Commendator) Ordensmarschall (Summus Marescalcus) Großspittler (Summus Hospitalarius) Ordenstressler (Summus Thesaurarius) Ordenstrappier (Summus Trappearius) Großschäffer (Marienburg) Großschäffer (Königsberg) Komtur (Preußen) Komtur (Preußen) Deutschmeister (Magister Germaniae) Landmeister in Livland (Magister Livoniae) Komtur (Livland) Komtur (Livland) Landkomtur Landkomtur Komtur (in the Holy Empire) Komtur (in the Holy Empire) Hauskomtur Pfleger Vogt Karwansherr Trappierer Kellermeister Küchenmeister Wachhauptmann Gesindemeister Fischmeister [ 48 ] [ 49 ] Universal leadership [ edit ] Generalkapitel [ edit ] The Generalkapitel (general chapter) was the collection of all the priests, knights and half-brothers (German: Halbbrüder ). Because of the logistical problems in assembling the members, who were spread over large distances, only deputations of the bailiwicks and commandries gathered to form the General chapter. The General chapter was designed to meet annually, but the conventions were usually limited to the election of a new Grandmaster. The decisions of the Generalkapitel had a binding effect on the Großgebietigers of the order.

Hochmeister [ edit ] Main article: Grand Master of the Teutonic Order The Hochmeister ( Grand Master ) was the highest officer of the order. Until 1525, he was elected by the Generalkapitel . He had the rank of the ruler of an ecclesiastic imperial state and was sovereign prince of Prussia until 1466. Despite this high formal position, in practice, he was only a kind of first among equals .

Großgebietige [ edit ] The Großgebietige were high officers with competence on the whole order, appointed by the Hochmeister . There were five offices.

The Großkomtur ( Magnus Commendator ), the deputy of the Grandmaster The Treßler , the treasurer The Spitler ( Summus Hospitalarius ), responsible for all hospital affairs The Trapier , responsible for dressing and armament The Marschall ( Summus Marescalcus ), the chief of military affairs National leadership [ edit ] Landmeister [ edit ] The order was divided into three national chapters, Prussia , Livonia and the territory of the Holy Roman Empire of the German Nation . The highest officer of each chapter was the Landmeister (country master). They were elected by the regional chapters. In the beginning, they were only substitutes of the Grandmaster but were able to create a power of their own so that, within their territory, the Grandmaster could not decide against their will. At the end of their rule over Prussia, the Grandmaster was only Landmeister of Prussia. There were three Landmeisters: The Landmeister in Livland , the successor of the Herrenmeister (lords master) of the former Livonian Brothers of the Sword .

The Landmeister of Prussia , after 1309 united with the office of the Grandmaster, who was situated in Prussia from then.

The Deutschmeister , the Landsmeister of the Holy Roman Empire. When Prussia and Livland were lost, the Deutschmeister also became Grandmaster.

Regional leadership [ edit ] Because the properties of the order within the rule of the Deutschmeister did not form a contiguous territory, but were spread over the whole empire and parts of Europe, there was an additional regional structure, the bailiwick.

Kammerballeien ("Chamber Bailiwicks") were governed by the Grandmaster himself. Some of these bailiwicks had the rank of imperial states: [ 50 ] Bailiwick of Thuringia (Seat: Zwätzen ) Bailiwick of Hesse . (Seat: Marburg ) Bailiwick of Saxonia (Seat: Elmsburg from 1221 until 1260 moved to Lucklum) Brandenburg Bailiwick of Westphalia (Seat: Mülheim ) Bailiwick of Franconia . (Seat: Ellingen ) Chamber Bailiwick of Koblenz Bailiwick of Swabia - Alsace - Burgundy . (Seat: Rouffach (1235-1245), Beuggen Castle (1288-1455), Altshausen (1455-1806)) Bailiwick at the Etsch and in the Mountains ( South Tyrol ). (Seat: Bolzano ) Bailiwick of Utrecht Bailiwick of Lorraine (Seat: Trier ) Bailiwick of France Bailiwick of Spain Chamber Bailiwick of Austria . (Seat: Vienna ) Bailiwick of Alden Biesen Bailiwick of Sicily Bailiwick of Apulia . (Seat: Brindisi (?-1233), Barletta (1233-1350), San Leonardo di Siponto (1350-1483)) Bailiwick of Central Italy Bailiwick of Lombardy (also called Lamparten) Chamber Bailiwick of Bohemia Bailiwick of Romania (Greece) Bailiwick of Armenia (including Cyprus ) Local leadership [ edit ] Komtur [ edit ] The smallest administrative unit of the order was the Kommende . It was ruled by a Komtur , who had all administrative rights and controlled the Vogteien (district of a reeve) and Zehnthöfe (tithe collectors) within his rule. In the commandry, all kinds of brothers lived together in a monastic way. Noblemen served as Knight-brothers or Priest-brothers. Other people could serve as Sariantbrothers, who were armed soldiers, and as Half-brothers, who were working in the economy and healthcare.

Special offices [ edit ] The Kanzler (chancellor) of the Grandmaster and the Deutschmeister. The chancellor took care of the keys and seals and was also the recording clerk of the chapter.

The Münzmeister (master of the mint) of Thorn. In 1226, the order received the right to produce its own coins – the Moneta Dominorum Prussiae – Schillingen. Customary laws for coinage did not come about until the Kulm laws of 1233 were written. And the first coins were not minted until late 1234 or early 1235.

The Pfundmeister (customs master) of Danzig. The Pfund was a local customs duty.

The Generalprokurator the representative of the order at the Holy See .

The Großschäffer , a trading representative with special authority.

Modern organization [ edit ] Evolution and reconfiguration as a Catholic religious order [ edit ] The Catholic order continued to exist in the various territories ruled by the Austrian Empire , out of Napoleon's reach. From 1804 the Order was headed by members of the Habsburg dynasty.

The collapse of the Habsburg monarchy and the Empire it governed in Austria, the Italian Tyrol, Bohemia and the Balkans brought a shattering crisis to the Order. While in the new Austrian Republic, the Order seemed to have some hope of survival, in the other former parts of the Habsburg territories, the tendency was to regard the Order as an honorary chivalric Order of the House of Habsburg . The consequence of this risked being the confiscation of the Order's property as belongings of the House of Habsburg. So as to make the distinction clearer, in 1923 the then High Master, Field Marshal Eugen of Austria-Teschen, Archduke of Austria , a member of the House of Habsburg and an active army commander before and during the First World War, had one of the Order's priests, Norbert Klein, at the time Bishop of Brno (Brünn) elected his Coadjutor and then abdicated, leaving the Bishop as High Master of the Order.

As a result of this move, by 1928 the now-independent former Habsburg territories all recognized the Order as a Catholic religious order . The Order itself introduced a new Rule, approved by Pope Pius XI in 1929, according to which the government of the Order would in the future be in the hands of a priest of the Order, as would its constituent provinces, while the women religious of the Order would have women superiors. In 1936 the situation of the women religious was further clarified and the Congregation of the Sisters of the Order was given as their supreme moderator the High Master of the Order, the Sisters also having representation at the Order's general chapter.

This completed the transformation of what remained in the Catholic Church of the Teutonic knights into a Catholic religious order now renamed simply the Deutscher Orden ("German Order").

[ 51 ] However, further difficulties were in store.

The promising beginnings of this reorganization and spiritual transformation suffered a severe blow through the expansion of German might under the National Socialist regime. After Austria's annexation by Germany in 1938 , and similarly the Czech lands in 1939 the Teutonic Order was suppressed throughout the Großdeutsches Reich until Germany's defeat. This did not prevent the National Socialists from using imagery of the medieval Teutonic knights for propagandistic purposes.

[ 52 ] The Fascist rule in Italy, which since the end of the First World War had absorbed the Southern Tyrol, was not a propitious setting, but following the end of hostilities, a now democratic Italy provided normalized conditions, In 1947 Austria legally abolished the measures taken against the Order and restored confiscated property. Despite being hampered by the Communist regimes in Yugoslavia and in Czechoslovakia, the Order was now broadly in a position to take up activities in accordance with elements of its tradition, including care for the sick, for the elderly, for children, including work in education, in parishes and in its own internal houses of study. In 1957 a residence was established in Rome for the Order's Procurator General to the Holy See, to serve also as a pilgrim hostel. Conditions in Czechoslovakia gradually improved and in the meanwhile, the forced exile of some members of the Order led to the Order's re-establishing itself with some modest, but historically significant, foundations in Germany. The Sisters, in particular, gained several footholds, including specialist schools and care of the poor and in 1953 the former house of Augustinian Canons, St. Nikola, in Passau became the Sisters' Motherhouse. Although the reconstruction represented by the reformed Rule of 1929 had set aside categories such as the knights, over time the spontaneous involvement of laypeople in the Order's apostolates has led to their revival in a modernized form, a development formalized by Pope Paul VI in 1965.

With the official title of "Brethren of the German House of St Mary in Jerusalem", the Order today is unambiguously a Catholic religious order , though sui generis. Various features of its life and activities recall those of monastic and mendicant orders. At its core are priests who make a solemn religious profession, along with lay brothers who make a perpetual simple profession. Also part of the Order are the Sisters, with internal self-government within their own structures but with representation in the Order's General Chapter. Their ultimate superior is the High Master of the Order. The approximately 100 Catholic priests and 200 nuns of the Order are divided into five provinces, namely, Austria-Italy, [ 53 ] Slovenia, Germany, Czech Republic and Slovakia. While the priests predominantly provide spiritual guidance, the nuns primarily care for the ill and the aged. Many of the priests care for German-speaking communities outside of Germany and Austria, especially in Italy and Slovenia; in this sense, the Teutonic Order has returned to its 12th-century roots: the spiritual and physical care of Germans in foreign lands.

[ 54 ] There is an Institute of "Familiares", most of whom are laypeople, and who are attached by spiritual bonds to the Order but do not take vows. The "Familiares" are grouped especially into the bailiwicks of Germany, Austria, Southern Tyrol, Ad Tiberim (Rome), and the bailiwick of the Czech Republic and Slovakia, as also in the independent commandry of Alden Biesen in Belgium, though others are dispersed throughout the world. Overall, there are in recent years some 700.

By the end of the 20th century, then, this religious Order had developed into a charitable organization and established numerous clinics, as well as sponsoring excavation and tourism projects in Israel . In 2000, the German chapter of the Teutonic Order declared bankruptcy, and its upper management was dismissed; an investigation by a special committee of the Bavarian parliament in 2002 and 2003 to determine the cause was inconclusive.

The current Abbot General of the Order, who also holds the title of High Master, is Father Frank Bayard . The current seat of the High Master is the Church of the German Order ("Deutschordenskirche") in Vienna . Near the St Stephen's Cathedral ("Stephansdom") in the Austrian capital is the Treasury of the Teutonic Order, which is open to the public, and the Order's central archive. Since 1996, there has also been a museum dedicated to the Teutonic Knights at their former castle in Bad Mergentheim in Germany, which was the seat of the High Master from 1525 to 1809.

Honorary Knights [ edit ] Order of Brothers of the German House of Saint Mary in Jerusalem Coat of arms of the order Awarded by Pope Leo XIV Type Dynasty order of chivalry Established 1190 Country Holy See Religious affiliation Catholic Church Ribbon Black Motto Helfen, Wehren, Heilen Grand Master Frank Bayard Grades Honorary Knight Statistics Total inductees 11?

Precedence Next (higher) Sovereign Military Order of Malta Next (lower) Pro Ecclesia et Pontifice Ribbon bar Honorary Knights of the Teutonic Order have included: Konrad Adenauer Udo Arnold Franz Josef II Rudolf Graber Otto von Habsburg Karl Habsburg-Lothringen Joachim Meisner Eduard Gaston Pöttickh von Pettenegg Eduard Schick Christoph Schönborn Carl Herzog von Württemberg Protestant Bailiwick of Utrecht [ edit ] A portion of the Order retains more of the character of the knights during the height of its power and prestige. Der Balije van Utrecht (" Bailiwick of Utrecht ") of the Ridderlijke Duitsche Orde ("Chivalric German [i.e., 'Teutonic'] Order") became Protestant at the Reformation , and it remained an aristocratic society. The relationship of the Bailiwick of Utrecht to the Catholic Deutscher Orden resembles that of the Protestant Bailiwick of Brandenburg to the Catholic Order of Malta : each is an authentic part of its original order, though differing from and smaller than the Catholic branch.

[ 55 ] Insignia [ edit ] The Knights wore white surcoats with a black cross, granted by Innocent III in 1205. A cross pattée was sometimes used.

[ year needed ] The coat of arms representing the grandmaster ( Hochmeisterwappen ) [ 56 ] is shown with a golden cross fleury or cross potent superimposed on the black cross, with the imperial eagle as a central inescutcheon. The golden cross fleury overlaid on the black cross became widely used in the 15th century. A legendary account attributes its introduction to Louis IX of France , who is said to have granted the master of the order this cross as a variation of the Jerusalem cross , with the fleur-de-lis symbol attached to each arm, in 1250 . While this legendary account cannot be traced back further than the early modern period (Christoph Hartknoch, 1684), there is some evidence that the design does indeed date to the mid 13th century.

[ 57 ] The black cross pattée was later used for military decoration and insignia by the Kingdom of Prussia and Germany as the Iron Cross .

The motto of the Order is "Helfen, Wehren, Heilen" ("to help, to defend, to heal").

[ year needed ] [ 11 ] 14th-century brass stamp with the shield insignia.

In the 16th century, officers of the order would quarter their family arms with the order's arms.

[ 58 ] Example of the Deutschmeisterwappen on the gate of the Bad Mergentheim residence Coat of arms of Prince Charles Alexander of Lorraine , Grand Master from 1761 to 1780.

Modern (20th century) medal Procession in honour of Saint Liborius of Le Mans with Knights of the Holy Sepulchre together with Teutonic Knights in Paderborn , Germany.

Influence on German and Polish nationalism and Soviet patriotism [ edit ] ^α A German National People's Party poster from 1920 showing a Teutonic knight being attacked by Poles and socialists. The caption reads "Rescue the East".

The State of the Teutonic Order (whose flag is shown here) greatly influenced the history of Prussia, which became the dominant German state and the source for most of the new war ensign's visual elements.

β A Nazi propaganda poster in the Belarussian language. It shows the image of a tank under the Nazi flag.

1935–1938 war ensign 1938–1945 war ensign The German historian Heinrich von Treitschke used imagery of the Teutonic Knights, a Germanic myth , to promote pro-German and anti-Polish rhetoric . Many middle-class German nationalists adopted this imagery and its symbols. During the Weimar Republic , associations and organisations of this nature contributed to laying the groundwork for the formation of Nazi Germany.

[ 59 ] An organization predating the Nazi Party itself, α as well as Nazi-supported preceding [ 60 ] and Nazi preceding [ 61 ] and during [β] World War II propaganda made use of the Teutonic Knights' imagery, with the common goal of instilling the importance of Lebensraum for the future of Germany and the German people.

[ 62 ] According to medieval historian Erik Christiansen , " Himmler 's plan to mould the SS as a reincarnation of [The Teutonic Order] proved [...] the irresistible strength of bad history." [ 63 ] Though gradually taking hold ever since with one of Prince Adalbert of Prussia 's 1849 proposals, after a lull during the Weimar Republic, whereupon it reverted to a simple tricolor overlayed with an Iron Cross , (though itself also derivative,) a version of Germany's Reichskriegsflagge (war ensign) [β] emerged with a more closely resembling The State of the Teutonic Order's cross's original shape with a circle-overlaid balkenkreuz . Hitler based his German Order on the Teutonic Order, while especially the Hochmeister's ceremonial regalia, also the Marian Cross of the Teutonic Order, the Knight's Cross of the Iron Cross and of the cross of the Knight of Justice of the Order of St. John (Bailiwick of Brandenburg) .

[ 64 ] After Hitler approved the Generalplan Ost (GPO), Germanization campaigns were extolled as the modern adaptation of what it portrayed as " civilizing missions " of the Teutonic Order.

[ 65 ] Yet, despite these references to the Teutonic Order's history in Nazi propaganda, the Order itself was abolished in 1938 and its members were persecuted by the German authorities. This occurred mostly due to Hitler's and Himmler's belief that, throughout history, Catholic military-religious orders had been tools of the Holy See and as such constituted a threat to the Nazi regime.

[ 66 ] The converse was true for Polish nationalism , for example The Knights of the Cross by Henryk Sienkiewicz , which used the Teutonic Knights as symbolic shorthand for Germans in general, conflating the two into an easily recognisable image of the hostile. After the Battle of Grunwald , the Teutonic Order was portrayed as the medieval forerunners of Hitler's armies.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] In the Soviet Union , the image of Alexander Nevsky became a national symbol of the struggle against German occupation during World War II, and many Soviet historians portrayed him as a Russian bastion against both German and papal aggression.

[ 69 ] The government sought historical continuity by referring to the Soviet struggle as the Great Patriotic War .

[ 70 ] The Order of Alexander Nevsky was re-established in 1942 by the Soviet government during the war, which would be awarded to servicemen in the Soviet army.

[ 70 ] The 1938 film Alexander Nevsky by Sergei Eisenstein , which depicts the Battle on the Ice , was re-released in 1941 following the German invasion.

[ 71 ] Joseph Stalin used the film to mobilize feelings of Russian patriotism.

[ 72 ] See also [ edit ] Prussian virtues Teutonic Knights in popular culture References [ edit ] ^ "Deutscher Orden: Brüder und Schwestern vom Deutschen Haus St. Mariens in Jerusalem" .

www.deutscher-orden.at .

^ Redazione.

"La Santa Sede e gli Ordini Cavallereschi: doverosi chiarimenti (Seconda parte)" .

^ Riley-Smith, Jonathan Simon Christopher (1999).

The Oxford History of the Crusades . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0192853646 .

Teutonic knights are still to be found only in another interesting survival, Ridderlijke Duitse Orde Balije van Utrecht (The Bailiwick of Utrecht of the Teutonic Order). Like the Hospitaller Bailiwick of Brandenburg, this commandery turned itself into a noble Protestant confraternity at the time of the Reformation.

^ Van Duren, Peter (1995).

Orders of Knighthood and of Merit . C. Smythe. p. 212.

ISBN 0-86140-371-1 .

^ Innes-Parker 2013 , p. 102.

^ "Teutonic Order | religious order" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 17 February 2022 .

^ Sterns 1985 , pp. 361–362.

^ "History of the German Order" .

Teutonic Order, Order of the Teutonic Knights of St. Mary's Hospital in Jerusalem . Archived from the original on 18 July 2011 . Retrieved 30 January 2011 .

The 15th and early 16th century brought hard times for the Order. Apart from the drastic power loss in the East as of 1466, the Hussite attacks imperiled the continued existence of the bailiwick of Bohemia. In Southern Europe, the Order had to give up important outposts – such as Apulia and Sicily. After the coup d'état of Albrecht von Brandenburg, the only remaining territory of the Order were the bailiwicks located within the empire.

^ Sainty, Guy Stair.

"The Teutonic Order of Holy Mary in Jerusalem" .

Almanach de la Cour . www.chivalricorders.org . Retrieved 30 January 2011 .

This tradition was further perverted by the Nazis who, after the occupation of Austria suppressed it by an act of 6 September 1938 because they suspected it of being a bastion of pro-Habsburg legitimism.

^ "Restart of the Brother Province in 1945" .

Teutonic Order, Order of the Teutonic Knights of St. Mary's Hospital in Jerusalem . deutscher-orden.de. Archived from the original on 18 July 2011 . Retrieved 30 January 2011 .

^ a b Demel, Bernhard (1999). Vogel, Friedrich (ed.).

Der Deutsche Orden Einst Und Jetzt: Aufsätze Zu Seiner Mehr Als 800 jahrigen Geschichte . Europäische Hochschulschriften: Geschichte und ihre Hilfswissenschaften. Vol. 848. Frankfurt-am-Main: Peter Lang. p. 80.

ISBN 978-3-631-34999-1 .

^ Monumenta Germaniae Historica , SS Bd. 25, S. 796.

^ Kurt Forstreuter. "Der Deutsche Orden am Mittelmeer".

Quellen und Studien zur Geschichte des Deutschen Ordens, Bd II .

Bonn 1967, S. 12f.

^ Urban, p.

[ page needed ] ^ Seward, p. 100 ^ Seward, p. 104 ^ Christiansen, pp. 208–209 ^ Christiansen, pp. 210–211 ^ Barraclough, p. 268 ^ Urban, p. 106 ^ Christiansen, p. 211 ^ The German Hansa P. Dollinger, p. 34, 1999 Routledge [ ISBN missing ] ^ a b Plakans, Andrejs (2011).

A Concise History of the Baltic States .

Cambridge University Press . pp.

44– 45.

ISBN 978-0521833721 .

^ Nicolle 1997 , pp. 11–15.

^ a b Martin 2007 , pp. 175–219.

^ a b Nicolle 1997 , pp. 60–61.

^ Seward, Desmond (1995).

The monks of war : the military religious orders (2nd, Rev. ed.). England: Penguin Books. p. 98.

ISBN 0140195017 .

^ Christiansen, p. 150 ^ Seward, Desmond (1995).

The Monks of War: The Military Religious Orders (2nd, Rev. ed.). England: Penguin Books. p. 100.

ISBN 0140195017 .

^ Heers, Jacques (1981).

Esclaves et domestiques au Moyen Age dans le monde méditerranéen . France: Fayard.

ISBN 2213010943 .

^ McKitterick, Rosamond (1995–2005).

The New Cambridge medieval history . Cambridge [England]: Cambridge University Press. pp.

752 .

ISBN 0521362911 .

OCLC 29184676 .

^ Urban, p. 116 ^ Christiansen, p. 151 ^ The Mongols and the West, 1221–1410 , Peter Jackson, Routledge, New York, 2018, pp. 66–78 ^ The Rise and Fall of the Second Largest Empire in History , Thomas Craughwell, Quayside Publishing Group, Massachusetts, 2010, pp. 193–195 ^ Encyclopedia of Mongolia and the Mongolian Empire , Christopher Atwood, Indiana Univ. Press, Bloomington, 2004, p. 79 ^ Westermann, p. 93 ^ Górski 1949 , p. 54.

^ Górski 1949 , pp. 71–72.

^ Górski 1949 , p. 63.

^ Górski 1949 , pp. 88–90, 206–207.

^ Górski 1949 , pp. 91–92, 209–210.

^ a b Górski 1949 , pp. 96–97, 214–215.

^ Górski 1949 , pp. 96, 103, 214, 221.

^ Christiansen, p. 248 ^ Seward, p. 137 ^ Urban, p. 276 ^ Dieter Zimmerling: Der Deutsche Orden, S. 166 ff.

^ "Der Deutschordensstaat" .

^ Militzer, Klaus (2012).

Die Geschichte des Deutschen Ordens (2. Aufl.) . Stuttgart: Kohlhammer.

ISBN 978-3-17-022263-2 .

^ Cartwright, Mark (11 July 2018).

"Teutonic Knight" .

World History Encyclopedia . Retrieved 10 June 2023 .

^ Sainty, Guy Stair.

"The Teutonic Order of Holy Mary in Jerusalem" .

Almanach de la Cour . www.chivalricorders.org . Retrieved 30 January 2011 .

[T]he Nazis...after the occupation of Austria suppressed [the Order] by an act of 6 September 1938 because they suspected it of being a bastion of pro-Habsburg legitimism. On Germany's occupying Czechoslovakia the following year, the Order was also suppressed in Moravia although the hospitals and houses in Yugoslavia and south Tyrol were able to continue a tenuous existence. The National Socialists, motivated by Himmler's fantasies of reviving a German military elite then attempted to establish their own "Teutonic Order" as the highest award of the Third Reich. The ten recipients of this included Reinhard Heydrich and several of the most notorious National Socialists. Needless to say, although its badge was modelled on that of the genuine Order, it had absolutely nothing in common with it.

^ katholisch.at.

"Deutscher Orden fusionierte Provinzen für Österreich und Italien" .

www.katholisch.at (in German) . Retrieved 11 May 2025 .

^ Urban, p. 277 ^ "Official website of the Bailiwick of Utrecht, accessed March 15, 2010" .

^ The offices of Hochmeister (grandmaster, head of the order) and Deutschmeister ( Magister Germaniae ) were united in 1525. The title of Magister Germaniae had been introduced in 1219 as the head of the bailiwicks in the Holy Roman Empire, from 1381 also those in Italy, raised to the rank of a prince of the Holy Roman Empire in 1494, but merged with the office of grandmaster under Walter von Cronberg in 1525, from which time the head of the order had the title of Hoch- und Deutschmeister .

Bernhard Peter (2011) ^ Helmut Nickel, "Über das Hochmeisterwappen des Deutschen Ordens im Heiligen Lande", Der Herold 4/1990, 97–108 ( mgh-bibliothek.de ). Marie-Luise Heckmann, "Überlegungen zu einem heraldischen Repertorium an Hand der Hochmeisterwappen des Deutschen Ordens" in: Matthias Thumser, Janusz Tandecki, Dieter Heckmann (eds.) Edition deutschsprachiger Quellen aus dem Ostseeraum (14.–16. Jahrhundert) , Publikationen des Deutsch-Polnischen Gesprächskreises für Quellenedition. Publikacje Niemiecko-Polskiej Grupy Dyskusyjnej do Spraw Edycij Zrodel 1, 2001, 315–346 ( online edition ). "Die zeitgenössische Überlieferung verdeutlicht für dieses Wappen hingegen einen anderen Werdegang. Der Modelstein eines Schildmachers, der unter Hermann von Salza zwischen 1229 und 1266 auf der Starkenburg ( Montfort ) im Heiligen Land tätig war, und ein rekonstruiertes Deckengemälde in der Burgkapelle derselben Festung erlaubten der Forschung den Schluss, dass sich die Hochmeister schon im 13. Jahrhundert eines eigenen Wappens bedient hätten. Es zeigte ein auf das schwarze Ordenskreuz aufgelegtes goldenes Lilienkreuz mit dem bekannten Adlerschildchen. Die Wappensiegel des Elbinger Komturs von 1310 bzw. 1319, ein heute in Innsbruck aufbewahrter Vortrageschild des Hochmeisters Karl von Trier von etwa 1320 und das schlecht erhaltene Sekretsiegel desselben Hochmeisters von 1323 sind ebenfalls jeweils mit aufgelegtem goldenem Lilienkreuz ausgestattet." ^ In this example (dated 1594), Hugo Dietrich von Hohenlandenberg, commander of the bailiwick of Swabia-Alsace-Burgundy, shows his Landenberg family arms quartered with the order's black cross.

^ (in Polish) Mówią wieki . " Biała leganda czarnego krzyża Archived 2008-02-27 at the Wayback Machine ". Accessed 6 June 2006.

^ Digital Collections, Hoover Institution Library & Archives.

"Polen, Tschecho-Slovakei. Bund Deutscher Osten... (1938?)" . Hoover Institution Library & Archives . Retrieved 15 June 2024 .

^ Berg, Lisa (2010).

Education in Nazi Germany . Oxford.

ISBN 978-1-84788-764-1 . Retrieved 15 June 2024 .

Finally, at Marienburg, the students were to learn about [...] the need for 'living space'. [...] A contemporary foreign reporter commented on this: 'The young men are told that they form a Nordic Crusading Order [...]' ^ Fritz Bennecke, ed. (1940).

"You and Your People ( Volk )" .

Vom deutschen Volk und seinem Lebensraum, Handbuch für die Schulung in der HJ (in German). Munich: Franz Eher, 1937.

^ Christiansen, p. 5 ^ Angolia, John (1989).

For Führer and Fatherland: Political & Civil Awards of the Third Reich . R. James Bender Publishing. p. 224.

ISBN 978-0912138169 .

^ Longerich, Peter (2012).

Heinrich Himmler: A Life . OUP Oxford. p. 527–530, 577–580.

ISBN 978-0-19-959232-6 .

^ Desmond Seward, Mnisi Wojny , Poznań 2005, p. 265.

^ Johnson, Lonnie (1996).

Central Europe: Enemies, Neighbors, Friends . Oxford University Press. p. 43.

ISBN 978-0-19-510071-6 .

^ Davies, Norman (2005).

God's Playground. A History of Poland. The Origins to 1795 . Vol. I (Revised ed.). Oxford University Press. p. 99.

ISBN 978-0-19-925339-5 .

^ Fennell, John (13 October 2014).

The Crisis of Medieval Russia 1200-1304 . Routledge. p. 106.

ISBN 978-1-317-87313-6 .

^ a b Haughton, Tim (23 March 2016).

Aftermath: Legacies and Memories of War in Europe, 1918–1945–1989 . Routledge. p. 175.

ISBN 978-1-317-18391-4 .

^ Harty, Kevin J. (13 August 2015).

The Reel Middle Ages: American, Western and Eastern European, Middle Eastern and Asian Films About Medieval Europe . McFarland. p. 16.

ISBN 978-1-4766-0843-3 .

^ Donskis, L. (25 May 2009).

Troubled Identity and the Modern World . Springer. p. 83.

ISBN 978-0-230-62173-2 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Christiansen, Erik (1997).

The Northern Crusades . London: Penguin Books. pp.

287 .

ISBN 0-14-026653-4 .

Górski, Karol (1949).

Związek Pruski i poddanie się Prus Polsce: zbiór tekstów źródłowych (in Polish and Latin). Poznań: Instytut Zachodni.

Innes-Parker, Catherine (2013).

Anchoritism in the Middle Ages: Texts and Traditions . Cardiff: University of Wales Press. p. 256.

ISBN 978-0-7083-2601-5 .

Martin, Janet (2007).

Medieval Russia, 980–1584 . Cambridge University Press. pp.

175– 219.

ISBN 9780511811074 .

Nicolle, David (15 March 1997).

Lake Peipus 1242: Battle of the ice . Bloomsbury USA.

ISBN 978-1-85532-553-1 .

Selart, Anti (2015).

Livonia, Rus' and the Baltic Crusades in the Thirteenth Century . Leiden: Brill. p. 400.

ISBN 978-9-00-428474-6 .

Seward, Desmond (1995).

The Monks of War: The Military Religious Orders . London: Penguin Books. p. 416.

ISBN 0-14-019501-7 .

Sterns, Indrikis (1985). "VIII: The Teutonic Knights in the Crusader States". In Zacour, Norman P.; Hazard, Harry W. (eds.).

A History of the Crusades: The Impact of the Crusades on the Near East . Vol. V. Madison: The University of Wisconsin Press. pp. 315–378 (see 361 –362 on Transylvania intermezzo).

ISBN 0299091449 .

Urban, William (2003).

The Teutonic Knights: A Military History . London: Greenhill Books. p. 290.

ISBN 1-85367-535-0 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Teutonic Order .

The order's homepage in Germany (in German) The order's homepage in Austria (in English) Territorial extent of the Teutonic Knights in Europe (map) An Historical Overview of the Crusade to Livonia , by William Urban "The Early Years of the Teutonic Order" , by William Urban Museum in the residential castle of the Teutonic Order in Bad Mergentheim (in German) Zwaetzen and the German Order in Central Germany (in German) "Massive Ceremonial Hall Discovered Under Crusader Castle in Northern Israel" – Haaretz, Nov. 22, 2018 Barker, Ernest (1911).

"Teutonic Order, The" . In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 26 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

676– 679.

This contains a detailed chronological history of the Order, and is itself based on Heinrich von Treitschke Das deutsche Ordensland Preussens , in Historische und politische Aufsätze , vol. II. (Leipzig, 1871), and on Johann Loserth Geschichte des späteren Mittelalters (Munich and Berlin, 1903).

v t e Crusader states List of Crusader states Levant Kingdom of Jerusalem vassals Principality of Antioch Antioch County of Edessa Marash County of Tripoli Armenian Kingdom of Cilicia Kingdom of Cyprus Greece Latin Empire of Constantinople Duchy of Philippopolis Kingdom of Thessalonica Principality of Achaea Duchy of Athens Duchy of Neopatras Duchy of the Archipelago Triarchy of Negroponte County Palatine of Cephalonia and Zakynthos Lordship of Argos and Nauplia Venetian Stato da Màr Knights Hospitaller Hospitaller Rhodes Genoese colonies Prussia and Livonia State of the Teutonic Order * Teutonic Order Livonian Order Livonian Brothers of the Sword * Archbishopric of Riga Bishopric of Courland Bishopric of Dorpat Bishopric of Ösel–Wiek Bishopric of Reval Dobrzyń Land Order of Dobrzyń Free City of Riga Military orders Crusading movement Crusades v t e Crusader sites Sorted by modern states, with crusader names in parentheses () Cyprus More Egypt More Greece More Israel Abu Ghosh ( Fontenoid ) Achziv ( Casal Imbertia ) Acre ( Saint Jean d'Acre ) Apollonia–Arsuf ( Arsur ) Ascalon Ateret Fortress ( siege ) Yazur Bayt 'Itab ( Bethaatap ) Bayt Jibrin ( Beth Gibelin ) Beit She'an ( Bethsan ) Belvoir Fortress Burgata Caesarea Maritima Cafarlet Château Pèlerin Destroit Castle Arnold Ein Hemed Jerusalem Haifa ( Caypha ) Jaffa Latrun ( Toron ) Hunin ( Château Neuf ) Mi'ilya ( Castellum Regis ) Migdal Afek ( Mirabel ) Montfort Qalansawe ( Calanson ) Qaqun ( Caco ) Qastal ( Beauverium ) Qula Safed ( Saphet ) Taibe Tel Afek Tel Hanaton Tell es-Safi ( Blanche Garde ) Tel Tanninim ( Torin Selin ) Suba ( Belmont ) Tel Yokneam ( Caymont ) Yavne ( Ibelin ) Tiberias Sepphoris ( La Sephorie ) Umm Khalid Khirbat Jiddin ( Judin ) Jordan Ajloun Castle Kerak Castle Montreal Tafilah Vaux Moise Lebanon Arqa Batroun Beaufort Castle Beirut Castle Belhacem Byblos Castle Citadel of Tripoli Dubay Castle Gibelacar Coliath Deir Kifa Castle Hasbaya Castle Moinetre Puy du Connétable, Castrum Constabularii Nephin Saint Louis Castle Scandelion Castle Sidon Sea Castle Toron Syria More Turkey More Associations Kingdom of Jerusalem County of Tripoli Knights Hospitaller Order of the Holy Sepulchre Knights Templar Order of Saint Lazarus Teutonic Order Catholicism portal v t e Germanic peoples Ethnolinguistic group of Northern European origin primarily identified as speakers of Germanic languages History Nordic Bronze Age Germania Pre-Roman Iron Age Roman Iron Age Romano-Germanic culture Germanic Iron Age Viking Age Early culture Architecture Art Calendar Clothing Family Festivals Folklore Proto-Germanic folklore Anglo-Saxon mythology Continental Germanic mythology Norse mythology ) Funerary practices Anglo-Saxon Norse Law Anglo-Saxon Norse Literature Anglo-Saxon Norse Names Gothic Numbers Paganism Anglo-Saxon Gothic Norse Rings Scripts Gothic alphabet Runes Sippe Symbology Warfare Anglo-Saxon Gothic and Vandal Viking Languages Germanic parent language Proto-Germanic language East Germanic languages North Germanic languages West Germanic languages Groups Alemanni Brisgavi Bucinobantes Lentienses Raetovari Adrabaecampi Angles Anglo-Saxons Ambrones Ampsivarii Angrivarii Armalausi Auiones Avarpi Baemi Baiuvarii Banochaemae Bastarnae Batavi Belgae Germani cisrhenani Atuatuci Caeroesi Condrusi Eburones Paemani Segni Morini Nervii Bateinoi Betasii Brondings Bructeri Burgundians Buri Cananefates Caritni Casuari Chaedini Chaemae Chamavi Chali Charudes Chasuarii Chattuarii Chatti Chauci Cherusci Cimbri Cobandi Corconti Cugerni Danes Dauciones Dulgubnii Favonae Firaesi Fosi Franks Ripuarian Franks Salian Franks Frisiavones Frisii Gambrivii Geats Gepids Goths Crimean Goths Greuthungi Gutones Ostrogoths Thervingi Thracian Goths Visigoths Gutes Harii Hermunduri Heruli Hilleviones Ingaevones Irminones Istvaeones Jutes Juthungi Lacringi Lemovii Lombards Heaðobards Lugii Diduni Helisii Helveconae Manimi Nahanarvali Marcomanni Marsacii Marsi Mattiaci Nemetes Njars Nuithones Osi Quadi Reudigni Rugii Rugini Saxons Semnones Sicambri Sciri Sitones Suarines Suebi Sunici Swedes Taifals Tencteri Teutons Thelir Thuringii Toxandri Treveri Triboci Tubantes Tulingi Tungri Ubii Usipetes Vagoth Vandals Hasdingi Silingi Vangiones Varisci Victohali Vidivarii Vinoviloth Warini Christianization Gothic Christianity Christianization of the Franks Christianisation of Anglo-Saxon England Christianization of Scandinavia Christianization of Iceland Category v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of Austria-Hungary Ancient Order of the Braid Empire (Male head) Order of the Golden Fleece Military Order of Maria Theresa Order of Saint Stephen of Hungary Order of Leopold Order of the Iron Crown Order of Franz Joseph Teutonic Order Empire (Female head) Order of Elizabeth and Theresa (but male recipients) Empire (Female head) Order of the Slaves of the Virtue Order of the Starry Cross Order of Love of the Neighbour Order of Elizabeth Category:Orders, decorations, and medals of Austria-Hungary v t e Orders, decorations, and medals of the Holy See Orders of the Holy See Supreme Order of Christ Order of the Golden Spur Order of Pope Pius IX Order of St. Gregory the Great Order of St. Sylvester Orders under protection of the Holy See (with distinctions) Order of the Holy Sepulchre Palm of Jerusalem Pilgrim Shell Cross of Merit Sovereign Military Order of Malta Order pro Merito Melitensi Medal of the Order pro Merito Melitensi Other distinctions Golden Rose Pro Ecclesia et Pontifice Benemerenti medal Jerusalem Pilgrim's Cross Defunct/dormant distinctions (selection) Order of Saint John of the Lateran Order of Saint Cecilia (1870) Order of the Moor (1870) Order of Saint Sylvester and the Militia Aurata (1905) Advocates of Saint Peter (1909) Blessed sword and hat (1823) Pro Petri Sede (1860) Fidei et Virtuti (1867) Lauretan Cross ( c.

1980s ) Papal Lateran Cross (1977) See also Papal household Papal nobility Black nobility Pontifical academies Swiss Guard Other Catholic orders of chivaly Vatican City portal Catholicism portal v t e Orders of the Italian States before the Unification of Italy (1871) Kingdom of Sardinia Supreme Order of the Most Holy Annunciation Order of Saints Maurice and Lazarus Military Order of Savoy Civil Order of Savoy Republic of Genoa Military Order of Saint George (Red-coloured cross) Kingdom of Lombardy–Venetia ( Austrian orders ) Order of the Golden Fleece Order of Saint Stephen of Hungary Military Order of Maria Theresa Order of the Iron Crown Order of Leopold Order of Franz Joseph Order of the Starry Cross Order of Elizabeth and Theresa Republic of Venice Order of Saint Mark Order of the Golden Stole Company of the Hose Duchy of Lucca Order of Saint George for Military Merit Order of Saint Louis for Civil Merit Duchy of Parma Sacred Military Constantinian Order of Saint George Order of Saint Louis for Civil Merit Duchy of Modena and Reggio Order of the Eagle of Este Cross of Seniority of Service Grand Duchy of Tuscany Order of Saint Stephen Order of Saint Joseph Order of the Civil and Military Merit Papal States Holy See Supreme Order of Christ Order of the Golden Spur Order of Pope Pius IX Order of St. Gregory the Great Order of St. Sylvester Protected by the Holy See Order of the Holy Sepulchre Teutonic Order See also Sovereign Military Order of Malta Kingdom of the Two Sicilies Order of Saint Januarius Sacred Military Constantinian Order of Saint George Order of Saint Ferdinand and of Merit Royal Order of the Two-Sicilies Order of Saint George of the Reunion Royal Order of Francis I See also: Template:Italian orders, decorations, and medals Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Catalonia Other IdRef Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐zn4pm
Cached time: 20250817043746
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.607 seconds
Real time usage: 1.968 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 13013/1000000
Revision size: 87735/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 404718/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 28904/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 229923/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.810/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27844055/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1404.723      1 -total
 21.97%  308.680      1 Template:Reflist
 13.03%  182.978      8 Template:Navbox
 11.58%  162.703     27 Template:Cite_book
  9.89%  138.950      2 Template:Infobox
  9.01%  126.634      1 Template:Infobox_military_unit
  8.84%  124.223     13 Template:Cite_web
  7.56%  106.185      2 Template:Langx
  6.34%   89.062     15 Template:Sfn
  6.25%   87.855      2 Template:Short_description Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:30776:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043746 and revision id 1304578149. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Teutonic_Order&oldid=1304578149 " Categories : Teutonic Order 1190 establishments in Asia 1190 establishments in Europe Christian religious orders established in the 12th century Kingdom of Jerusalem Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from July 2023 Pages with missing ISBNs CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with Polish-language sources (pl) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2022 Articles needing additional references from April 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Polish-language text Articles containing Lithuanian-language text Articles containing Latvian-language text Articles containing Estonian-language text Articles needing the year an event occurred from February 2015 CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with German-language sources (de) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 22:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Teutonic Order 77 languages Add topic

