Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation 2 Types 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle External links subsection 5.1 Research 5.2 News reports Toggle the table of contents Polar stratospheric cloud 33 languages العربية Беларуская भोजपुरी Български Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Hrvatski Íslenska Italiano Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Lombard Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Nacreous cloud ) Clouds occurring in the stratosphere in high-latitude regions Polar stratospheric cloud Antarctic stratospheric cloud (nacreous clouds) Abbreviation PSC Altitude 15,000–25,000 m (49,000–82,000 ft) Classification Other Appearance Glowing brightly with vivid iridescent colors Precipitation No First documented appearance of a polar stratospheric cloud over Switzerland and Italy, seen from Brissago, Ticino, Switzerland on December 22, 2023 A polar stratospheric cloud ( PSC ) is a cloud that forms in the winter polar stratosphere at altitudes from 15,000 to 25,000 m (49,000 to 82,000 ft). They are best observed during civil twilight , when the Sun is between 1° and 6° below the horizon , as well as in winter and in more northerly latitudes.

[ 1 ] One main type of PSC is composed of mostly supercooled droplets of water and nitric acid and is implicated in the formation of ozone holes .

[ 2 ] The other main type consists only of ice crystals , which are not harmful. This type of PSC is also called nacreous ( / ˈ n eɪ k r i ə s / ; from nacre , or mother of pearl ), due to its iridescence .

Formation [ edit ] Polar stratospheric clouds over Western Norway The stratosphere is very dry; unlike the troposphere , it rarely allows clouds to form. In the extreme cold of the polar winter, however, stratospheric clouds of different types may form, which are classified according to their physical state (super-cooled liquid or ice) and chemical composition .

[ 3 ] Due to their high altitude and the curvature of the surface of the Earth , these clouds will receive sunlight from below the horizon and reflect it to the ground, shining brightly well before dawn or after dusk .

PSCs form at very low temperatures, below −78 °C (−108 °F). These temperatures can occur in the lower stratosphere in polar winter. In the Antarctic , temperatures below −88 °C (−126 °F) frequently cause type II PSCs. Such low temperatures are rarer in the Arctic . In the Northern hemisphere , the generation of lee waves by mountains may locally cool the lower stratosphere and lead to the formation of lenticular (lens-shaped) PSCs.

Polar stratospheric cloud in Elverum, Norway.

Forward scattering of sunlight within the clouds produces a pearly-white appearance. Particles within the optically thin clouds cause colored interference fringes by diffraction . The visibility of the colors may be enhanced with a polarising filter .

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] Types [ edit ] A lenticular type II (water) PSC showing iridescence PSCs are classified into two main types, each of which consists of several subtypes.

Type I clouds have a generally stratiform appearance resembling cirrostratus or haze.

[ 5 ] They are sometimes sub-classified according to their chemical composition which can be measured using LIDAR . The technique also determines the height and ambient temperature of the cloud.

[ 4 ] They contain water, nitric acid and/or sulfuric acid and are a source of polar ozone depletion .

[ 6 ] The effects on ozone depletion arise because they support chemical reactions that produce active chlorine which catalyzes ozone destruction, and also because they remove gaseous nitric acid , perturbing nitrogen and chlorine cycles in a way which increases ozone depletion.

[ 7 ] Type Ia clouds consist of large, aspherical particles, consisting of nitric acid trihydrate (NAT).

[ 4 ] Type Ib clouds contain small, spherical particles (non-depolarising), of a liquid supercooled ternary solution (STS) of sulfuric acid, nitric acid, and water.

[ 4 ] Type Ic clouds consist of metastable water-rich nitric acid in a solid phase.

[ 8 ] Type II clouds, which are very rarely observed in the Arctic, have cirriform and lenticular sub-types [ 9 ] and consist of water ice only.

[ 4 ] A stratiform type I PSC (white cloud above the orange tropospheric clouds), showing fine horizontal structures in the veil Only Type II clouds are necessarily nacreous [ 1 ] whereas Type I clouds can be iridescent under certain conditions, just as any other cloud .  The World Meteorological Organization no longer uses the alpha-numeric nomenclature seen in this article, and distinguishes only between super-cooled stratiform acid-water PSCs and cirriform-lenticular water ice nacreous PSCs.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Aurora Circumhorizontal arc Cloud iridescence Noctilucent clouds References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Polar stratospheric clouds / Observations" .

Australian Antarctic Division . Archived from the original on June 2, 2011.

^ "Why is the ozone hole over Antarctica?" .

EPA . Archived from the original on 2006-09-30.

^ Lowe, Douglas; MacKenzie, A. Robert (2008).

"Polar stratospheric cloud microphysics and chemistry" (PDF) .

Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics .

70 (1): 13– 40.

Bibcode : 2008JASTP..70...13L .

doi : 10.1016/j.jastp.2007.09.011 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-03-14 . Retrieved 2018-03-14 .

^ a b c d e Maturilli, Maturilli.

"Polar Stratospheric Clouds Above Spitsbergen" .

Alfred Wegener Institute for Polar and Marine Research . Archived from the original on 2007-08-24.

^ World Meteorological Organization, ed. (2017).

"Nitric acid and water PSC, International Cloud Atlas" . Retrieved 3 April 2019 .

^ "Nacreous and Polar Stratospheric Clouds" .

atoptics.co.uk . 16 September 2023 . Retrieved 24 December 2023 .

^ "Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion" (PDF) .

World Meteorological Organization . 2002. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-03-13 . Retrieved 2006-10-28 .

particularly section 3.2.2 (pages 3.21, i.e. 195 of the PDF file, and following).

^ "The presence of metastable HNO 3 /H 2 O solid phases in the stratosphere inferred from ER 2 data" (PDF) .

Journal of Geophysical Research . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2020-01-26 . Retrieved 2012-08-17 .

^ World Meteorological Organization, ed. (2017).

"Nacreous PSC, International Cloud Atlas" . Retrieved 3 April 2019 .

^ World Meteorological Organization, ed. (2017).

"Upper atmospheric clouds, International Cloud Atlas" . Retrieved 31 July 2017 .

ETH PSC page meteoros.de External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to: Polar stratospheric cloud ( category ) Research [ edit ] Nacreous Clouds at atoptics.co.uk Polar Stratospheric Clouds Above Spitsbergen at Alfred Wegener Institute News reports [ edit ] "Rare cloud spotted" . Sydney Morning Herald. AAP. August 1, 2006.

https://news.yahoo.com/s/ap/20060801/ap_on_sc/antarctica_clouds_4 [ dead link ] http://www.cnn.com/2006/TECH/science/08/01/antarctica.clouds.ap/index.html [ dead link ] v t e Cloud genera and selected species, supplementary features, and other airborne hydrometeors - WMO Latin terminology except where indicated Mesospheric Extreme-level 80–85 km Noctilucent (NLC) Polar mesospheric clouds Noctilucent type I veils Noctilucent type II bands Noctilucent type III billows Noctilucent type IV whirls Stratospheric Very high-level 15–30 km Nacreous polar stratospheric clouds (PSC) Cirriform nacreous Lenticular nacreous Nitric acid and water polar stratospheric clouds (PSC) No differentiated sub-types; tends to resemble cirrostratus Tropospheric High-level 3–18 km Cirrus (Ci) Species Cirrus castellanus (Ci cas) Cirrus fibratus (Ci fib) Cirrus floccus (Ci flo) Cirrus spissatus (Ci spa) Cirrus uncinus (Ci unc) Ci-only varieties Cirrus intortus (Ci in) Cirrus vertebratus (Ci ve) Cirrocumulus (Cc) Species Cirrocumulus castellanus (Cc cas) Cirrocumulus floccus (Cc flo) Cirrocumulus lenticularis (Cc len) Cirrocumulus stratiformis (Cc str) Cirrostratus (Cs) Species Cirrostratus fibratus (Cs fib) Cirrostratus nebulosus (Cs neb) High-level-only mutatus cloud Mutatus non-height specific (see below) Medium-level 2–8 km Altocumulus (Ac) Species Altocumulus castellanus (Ac cas) Altocumulus floccus (Ac flo) Altocumulus lacunosus (Ac la) Altocumulus lenticularis (Ac len) Altocumulus stratiformis (Ac str) Altocumulus volutus (Ac vol) Altostratus (As) Altostratus undulatus Nimbostratus (Ns) Multi-level Varieties Nimbostratus virga (Ns vir) Low-level 0–2 km Cumulonimbus (Cb) Towering vertical Species Cumulonimbus calvus (Cb cal) Cumulonimbus capillatus (Cb cap) Cb-only supplementary features Cumulonimbus cauda ((cau) Tail cloud) Cumulonimbus incus (inc) Cumulonimbus murus ((mur) Wall cloud) Cb-only accessories and other Cumulonimbus flumen ((Cb flu) Beaver tail) Overshooting top Hot tower Cumulus (Cu) Variable vertical extent Species Fractus Cumulus humilis (Cu hum) Cumulus mediocris (Cu med) ( Cumulus congestus (Cu con) ( Cumulus castellanus (unofficial alternative name for Cu con)) ( ICAO term for Cu con and "Cu cas" is  Towering cumulus [Tcu])) Other Horseshoe Trade wind cumulus Stratus (St) Species Stratus fractus (St fra) Stratus nebulosus (St neb) St-only genitus cloud and other Stratus silvagenitus (St sil) Fog (Fg) Surface level Stratocumulus (Sc) Species Stratocumulus castellanus (Sc cas) Stratocumulus floccus (Sc flo) Stratocumulus lenticularis (Sc len) Stratocumulus stratiformis (Sc str) Stratocumulus Undulatus Stratocumulus volutus (Sc vol) Low-level-only supplementary features Arcus ((arc) Shelf) Tuba ((tub) Funnel cloud) Low-level-only accessory cloud and other Pileus (pil) Velum (vel) Pannus (pan) Other- Actinoform cloud (Stratocumulus) Non-height specific Varieties Duplicatus (du) Lacunosus (la) Opacus (op) Perlucidus (pe) Radiatus (ra) Translucidus (tr) Undulatus (un) Supplementary features Asperitas (asp) Cavum (cav) Fluctus (flu) Mamma (mam) Praecipitatio (pra) Virga (vir) Mother clouds and human-made clouds (Mother cloud)+genitus (e.g. cumulogenitus (cugen) (Mother cloud)+mutatus (e.g. cumulomutatus (cumut) Homogenitus (hogen) Homomutatus (homut) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Polar_stratospheric_cloud&oldid=1275676730 " Categories : Cloud types Ozone depletion Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2018 This page was last edited on 14 February 2025, at 11:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Polar stratospheric cloud 33 languages Add topic

