Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Bioresources Toggle Bioresources subsection 1.1 Example 2 Categorization 3 Bioproducts engineering Toggle Bioproducts engineering subsection 3.1 Alternative definitions 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Bioproduct 5 languages العربية Български فارسی Français ქართული Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Biological materials Bioproducts or bio-based products are materials , chemicals and energy derived from biological material.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Bioresources [ edit ] Biological resources include agriculture , forestry , and biologically derived waste , and there are many other renewable bioresource examples.

Example [ edit ] One of the examples of renewable bioresources is lignocellulose . Lignocellulosic tissues are biologically derived natural resources containing some of the main constituents of the natural world.

[ 4 ] Holocellulose is the carbohydrate fraction of lignocellulose that includes cellulose , a common building block made of sugar ( glucose ) that is the most abundant biopolymer, as well as hemicellulose . Recent advances in the catalytic conversion of platform chemicals from this biomass fraction have attracted industry and academia alike.

[ 5 ] Lignin is the second most abundant biopolymer. Cellulose and lignin are two of the primary natural polymers used by plants to store energy as well as to give strength, as is the case in woody plant tissues. Other energy storage chemicals in plants include oils , waxes , fats , etc., and because these other plant compounds have distinct properties, they offer potential for a host of different bioproducts.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Categorization [ edit ] Conventional bioproducts and emerging bioproducts are two broad categories used to categorize bioproducts.
Examples of conventional bio-based products include building materials, pulp and paper , and forest products . Examples of emerging bioproducts or biobased products include biofuels , bioenergy , starch-based and cellulose-based ethanol , bio-based adhesives, biochemicals, bioplastics , etc.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Emerging bioproducts are active subjects of research and development, and these efforts have developed significantly since the turn of the 20/21st century, in part driven by the price of traditional petroleum-based products, by the environmental impact of petroleum use, and by an interest in many countries to become independent from foreign sources of oil. Bioproducts derived from bioresources can replace much of the fuels, chemicals, plastics etc. that are currently derived from petroleum [ 10 ] Bioproducts engineering [ edit ] Bioproducts engineering (also referred to as bioprocess engineering ) refers to engineering of bio-products from renewable bioresources. This pertains to the design, development and implementation of processes, technologies for the sustainable manufacture of materials, chemicals and energy from renewable biological resources.

Alternative definitions [ edit ] Bioprocess Engineering is a specialization of Biotechnology, Chemical Engineering or Biological Engineering or of Agricultural Engineering. It deals with the design and development of equipment and processes for the manufacturing of products such as food, feed, pharmaceuticals, nutraceuticals , chemicals, and polymers and paper from biological materials. Bioprocess engineering is a conglomerate of mathematics, biology and industrial design, and consists of various spectrums like designing of Fermentors, study of fermentors (mode of operations etc.). It also deals with studying various biotechnological processes used in industries for large scale production of biological product for optimization of yield in the end product and the quality of end product. Bio process engineering may include the work of mechanical, electrical and industrial engineers to apply principles of their disciplines to processes based on using living cells or sub component of such cells [ 11 ] Bioresource engineering is related to the applications of biological engineering, chemical engineering and agricultural engineering usually based on biological and/or agricultural feedstocks. Bioresource engineering is more general and encompasses a wider range of technologies and various elements such as biomass, biological waste treatment, bioenergy, biotransformations and bioresource systems analysis, and technologies associated with Thermochemical conversion technologies: combustion, pyrolysis, gasification, catalysis, etc. Biochemical conversion technologies: aerobic methods, anaerobic digestion, microbial growth processes, enzymatic methods, composting Products: fibre, fuels, feedstocks, fertilisers, building materials, polymers and other industrial products Management: modelling, systems analysis, decisions, support systems. The impact of urbanization and increasing demand for land, food, and water presents engineers in a world with serious challenges. Little attention has been given to the interface between the biological world and traditional engineering in the past. It is the job of bioresource engineers to fill that gap. Agricultural and bioresource engineers develop efficient and environmentally-sensitive methods of producing food, fiber, timber, bio-based products and renewable energy sources for an ever-increasing world population.

See also [ edit ] Environment portal Ecology portal Earth sciences portal Biology portal Biofact (biology) Biomass Biomass (ecology) Bioprocess Forest Outline of forestry Biogas Biorefining Bioenergy Biofuels Biochemicals Bioprocess engineering Bioresource engineering Non-timber forest products European Biomass Association References [ edit ] ^ Singh, S.P.; Ekanem, E.; Wakefield, T. Jr.; Comer S. (2003).

"Emerging importance of bio-based products and bio-energy in the U.S. economy: information dissemination and training of students" (PDF) .

International Food and Agribusiness Management Review .

5 (3).

^ Biomass Research and Development Initiative, 2006: Vision for Bioenergy and BioProducts in the United States – Bioeconomy for a Sustainable Future 2006 "Archived copy" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2009-12-29 . Retrieved 2009-01-02 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: archived copy as title ( link ) ^ National Research Council (16 February 2000).

Biobased Industrial Products: Research and Commercialization Priorities . National Academy Press, Washington DC.

doi : 10.17226/5295 .

ISBN 978-0-309-05392-1 .

PMID 25121336 .

^ Chen, Guanqun; Weselake, Randall; Singer, Stacy, eds. (2018).

Plant Bioproducts . New York: Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 978-1-4939-8614-9 .

^ Gómez Millán, Gerardo; Hellsten, Sanna; Llorca, Jordi; Luque, Rafael; Sixta, Herbert; Balu, Alina (21 February 2019). "Recent advances in the catalytic production of platform chemicals from holocellulosic biomass".

ChemCatChem .

11 (8): 2022– 2042.

doi : 10.1002/cctc.201801843 .

hdl : 2117/172794 .

S2CID 104334256 .

^ Bowyer, J.L., Ramaswamy, S., 2005: “Redefining undergraduate education for the 21st Century: Minnesota moves aggressively to strengthen program” Forest Products Journal, July-Aug 2005, 55 (7-8): 4-10) ^ Ramaswamy, S., Tschirner, U., Chen, Y., 2007: “Transforming Academic Curricula: Pulp and Paper to Biobased Products - Providing Education and Research Training for the Conventional and Emerging Biobased Products Industry and the Bioeconomy” ACS Symposium Series Chapter 4, Section 1, Materials, Chemicals and Energy from Forest Biomass Ed. by Argyropoulos.

^ Bowyer, J.L., Ramaswamy, S., 2005: “Redefining undergraduate education for the 21st Century: Minnesota moves aggressively to strengthen program” Forest Products Journal, July-Aug 2005, 55 (7-8): 4-10) ^ Ramaswamy, S., Tschirner, U., Chen, Y., 2007: “Transforming Academic Curricula: Pulp and Paper to Biobased Products - Providing Education and Research Training for the Conventional and Emerging Biobased Products Industry and the Bioeconomy” ACS Symposium Series Chapter 4, Section 1, Materials, Chemicals and Energy from Forest Biomass Ed. by Argyropoulos.

^ "NREL: Learning - Bioproducts" . Archived from the original on 2009-08-26 . Retrieved 2009-01-02 .

^ Bioprocess engineering- Basic concepts; Shular, Michael A., kargi, Fikret, Prentice Hall of India,2005 Further reading [ edit ] Dunford, Nurhan (2012).

Food and industrial bioproducts and bioprocessing . Chichester, West Sussex, UK Hoboken: Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-0-8138-2105-4 .

OCLC 784124288 .

González, Mónica (2020).

Advances in food bioproducts and bioprocessing technologies . Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group.

ISBN 978-1-000-68293-9 .

OCLC 1104922947 .

External links [ edit ] USDA BioPreferred Program Fostering the Bioeconomic Revolution in Biobased Products and Bioenergy , National Renewable Energy Laboratory U.S. DOE Biomass Program v t e Wood products Lumber / timber Batten Beam Bressummer CLS Cruck Flitch beam Flooring Joist Lath Log building Log cabin Log house Molding Panelling Plank Plate Post Purlin Rafter Railroad ties Reclaimed Shingle Siding Sill Stud Timber truss Treenail Truss Utility pole Engineered wood Cross-laminated timber Glued laminated timber veneer LVL parallel strand I-joist Fiberboard hardboard Masonite MDF Oriented strand board Oriented structural straw board Particle board Plywood Structural insulated panel Wood–plastic composite lumber Fuelwood Charcoal biochar Firelog Firewood Pellet fuel Wood fuel Fibers Cardboard Corrugated fiberboard Paper Paperboard Pulp Pulpwood Rayon Derivatives Birch-tar Cellulose nano Hemicellulose Cellulosic ethanol Dyes Lignin Liquid smoke Lye Methanol Pyroligneous acid Pine tar Pitch Sandalwood oil Tannin Wood gas By-products Barkdust Black liquor Ramial chipped wood Sawdust Tall oil Wood flour Wood wool Woodchips Historical Axe ties Bavin (wood) Billet (wood) Clapboard Dugout canoe Potash Sawdust brandy Split-rail fence Tanbark Timber framing Wooden masts See also Biomass Certified wood Destructive distillation Dry distillation Engineered bamboo Forestry Green building and wood List of woods Mulch Non-timber forest products Natural building Papermaking Reclaimed lumber Timber recycling Wood drying Wood preservation Wood processing Woodworking Yakisugi Category Commons WikiProject Forestry Authority control databases International FAST National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bioproduct&oldid=1302195417 " Categories : Sustainable agriculture Biotechnology Sustainable business Sustainable forest management Hidden categories: CS1 maint: archived copy as title Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 July 2025, at 23:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bioproduct 5 languages Add topic

