Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Gameplay 2 Development 3 Reception 4 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 4.1 Expansion pack 4.2 Lawsuit 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Space (video game) Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1979 video games 1979 video game Space Title screen Developer(s) Edu-Ware Publisher(s) Edu-Ware Designer(s) Steven Pederson Sherwin Steffin Platform(s) Apple II Release NA : 1979 Genre(s) Role-playing Mode(s) Single-player Space (also called Space I ) is a text-based role-playing video game for the Apple II designed  by Steven Pederson and Sherwin Steffin of Edu-Ware Services . It was one of the first science fiction RPGs to appear on personal computers .

[ 1 ] An expansion pack, Space II by David Mullich , was released in the same year.

[ 2 ] The game system was based upon the Traveller role-playing-game, created by Game Designers' Workshop , which sued Edu-Ware for copyright infringement in 1982 .

[ 3 ] In an out-of-court settlement, both Space and Space II were removed from the market.

Gameplay [ edit ] Players begin by creating characters to play in a futuristic interstellar society and then enrolling them in one of the military services: Navy, Army, Scouts, Merchant Marines, and other Services.  While in the service, players choose their character's training, provided they qualify for it.  Depending upon characters' physical and mental abilities, they may learn such skills as brawling, bribery, swordsmanship, computers, interstellar navigation, spaceship piloting, and so on.  Through training and study, characters can also increase their base physical and mental abilities.

Characters have a choice to leave the service after every four years of enlistment, provided that they have not been killed or suffered serious injury.  After retiring from the service, characters can engage in one of the scenarios that are included with each version of the game.  Scenarios can increase a character's wealth or grant possessions, but with the exception of the Psychodelia scenario in Space II , they cannot voluntarily alter a character's abilities.  However, most character traits degrade over time as the character ages during gameplay.  If a character dies during any of the scenarios, the text file defining the character is immediately erased from the game disk.

Development [ edit ] Space was conceived by Pederson and Steffin while the former was still attending college at UCLA . The two used the game concept to convince Rainbow Computing, a computer store that sold Edu-Ware games through its mail order catalog, to provide Pederson with an Apple II in exchange for receiving product at cost.  When Pederson and Steffin learned that Rainbow had announced Space in its catalog before the game was completed, the two spent twenty-four straight hours debugging the game without the benefit of Edu-Ware even owning a printer at the time.

[ 4 ] Reception [ edit ] Both games were well-received critically, earning an "A−" rating in a 1980 Peelings II review.

[ 1 ] Bruce Webster reviewed Space and Space II in The Space Gamer No. 31.

[ 5 ] Webster commented that "I'm afraid I can't recommend these games in their current condition, at least not at their price. If you've got money and time to burn, though, you might get them and rewrite them yourselves - but do so at your own risk." [ 5 ] Legacy [ edit ] Expansion pack [ edit ] David Mullich created Space II , an expansion pack , published in 1979. It was his first game for Edu-Ware. It consists of the character creation module and two additional game scenarios.

[ 6 ] Mullich wrote Space II as an exercise in risk-benefit analysis.

[ citation needed ] The character is presented with dangerous options throughout the game, and the player must determine whether the potential rewards are worth the possible risks.

Lawsuit [ edit ] In 1982 , Game Designers' Workshop successfully sued Edu-Ware for copyright infringement of their Traveller pen-and-paper role-playing game.  In an out of court settlement, Edu-Ware suspended publication of Space and Space II , but the company had already replaced both games with the Empire space trilogy, based on an original role-playing game system.

[ 7 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Martellaro, John (1980). "Space & Space II".

Peelings II .

1 (3): 17– 18.

^ Product Catalog . Edu-Ware Services. March 1, 1980.

^ "AOL - News, Politics, Sports, Mail & Latest Headlines" .

Journal of the Travellers' Aid Society .

13 . 1982 . Retrieved 2006-09-25 .

^ Tommervik, Allen (May 1981). "Exec Edu-Ware".

Softalk : 4, 6, 19.

^ a b Webster, Bruce (September 1980). "Capsule Reviews".

The Space Gamer (31).

Steve Jackson Games : 28– 29.

^ Sherwin, Steffin (1979).

Space II manual . Edu-Ware Services . Retrieved 2006-09-25 .

^ "Tea Leaves: David Mullich: The Interview" . August 16, 2005 . Retrieved 2006-09-25 .

External links [ edit ] Space at IMDb and Space II at IMDb Space at MobyGames and Space II at MobyGames Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Space_(video_game)&oldid=1268996215 " Categories : Role-playing video games Science fiction video games Apple II games Apple II-only games Edu-Ware games Video games developed in the United States Video games with textual graphics 1979 video games Video games set in outer space Single-player video games Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Short description is different from Wikidata Articles using Infobox video game using locally defined parameters Articles using Wikidata infoboxes with locally defined images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 IMDb title ID different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 January 2025, at 14:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Space (video game) Add languages Add topic

