Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contributions Toggle Contributions subsection 1.1 Theurgy 1.2 Mathematics and science 2 Influence 3 Writings 4 References 5 Notes 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ahmad al-Buni 10 languages العربية বাংলা Español Esperanto فارسی Français کٲشُر Русский سرائیکی اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Arab mathematician, philosopher and Sufi Shams al-Ma'arif al-Kubra, a manuscript copy, beginning of 17th century Part of a series on Hermeticism Hermes Trismegistus Hermetic writings Liber Hermetis (astrological) Definitions of Hermes Trismegistus Corpus Hermeticum Poimandres Asclepius Discourse on the Eighth and Ninth Prayer of Thanksgiving Korē kosmou Cyranides The Book of the Secrets of the Stars The Secret of Creation Emerald Tablet Kitāb al-Isṭamākhīs Liber Hermetis de alchemia Historical figures Ancient and medieval Zosimos of Panopolis Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (may be legendary) Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Ibn Umayl Maslama al-Qurṭubī Aḥmad al-Būnī Early modern Marsilio Ficino Lodovico Lazzarelli Giovanni da Correggio Pico della Mirandola Heinrich Cornelius Agrippa Paracelsus John Dee Giordano Bruno Jakob Böhme Robert Fludd Christian Rosenkreuz (legendary, see Rosicrucianism ) Modern offshoots As above, so below Bibliotheca Philosophica Hermetica Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn Hermetic Qabalah Rosicrucianism The Kybalion Hermetism and other religions v t e Sharaf al-Din , Shihab al-Din , or Muḥyi al-Din Abu al-Abbas Aḥmad ibn Ali ibn Yusuf al-Qurashi al-Sufi , better known as Aḥmad al-Būnī al-Malki ( Arabic : أحمد البوني المالكي , d.

1225 ), was a medieval mathematician and Islamic philosopher and a well-known Sufi . Very little is known about him. His writings deal with 'Ilm al-huruf ( Arabic : علم الحروف , the esoteric value of letters ) and topics relating to mathematics , siḥr "sorcery", and spirituality .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Born in Buna in the Almohad Caliphate (now Annaba , Algeria), al-Buni lived in Ayyubid Egypt and learned from many eminent Sufi masters of his time.

[ 3 ] A contemporary of ibn Arabi , [ 4 ] he is best known for reputedly writing one of the most important books of his era; the Shams al-Ma'arif , a book that is still regarded as the foremost occult text on talismans and divination , though his authorship of the text has been questioned.

[ 5 ] Contributions [ edit ] Theurgy [ edit ] Instead occult (sorcery), this kind of magic was called Ilm al-Hikmah (Knowledge of the Wisdom), Ilm al-simiyah (Study of the Divine Names) and Ruhaniyat (Spirituality). Most of the so-called mujarrabât ("time-tested methods") books on sorcery in the Muslim world are simplified excerpts from the Shams al-Ma'arif .

[ 6 ] The book remains the seminal work on Theurgy and esoteric arts to this day.

Mathematics and science [ edit ] In c. 1200, Ahmad al-Buni showed how to construct magic squares using a simple bordering technique, but he may not have discovered the method himself. Al-Buni wrote about Latin squares and constructed, for example, 4 x 4 Latin squares using letters from one of the 99 names of God . His works on traditional healing remain a point of reference among Yoruba Muslim healers in Nigeria and other areas of the Muslim world .

[ 7 ] Influence [ edit ] Main article: Hurufism His work is said to have influenced the Hurufis and the New Lettrist International .

[ citation needed ] Denis MacEoin , in a 1985 article in Studia Iranica , said that al-Buni may also have indirectly influenced the Twelver Shi'i radical movement known as Bábism . MacEoin said that Bābis made widespread use of talismans and magical letters .

[ 8 ] Writings [ edit ] Pages from Al-Buni's Treatise on the Magical Uses of the Ninety-nine Names of God Shams al-Maʿārif al-Kubrā [ 9 ] ( The Great Sun of Gnosis ), Cairo, 1928.

Sharḥ Ism Allāh al-aʿẓam fī al-rūḥānī , printed in 1357 AH or in Egypt al-Maṭbaʿa al-Maḥmudiyya al-Tujjariyya bi'l-Azhar.

Kabs al-iktidā , Oriental Manuscripts in Durham University Library.

Berhatiah , Ancient Magick Conjuration Of Power.

Treatise on the Magical Uses of the Ninety-nine Names of God in the Khalili Collection of Islamic Art [ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ B. G. Martin, Muslim Brotherhoods in Nineteenth-Century Africa, Cambridge University Press, 2003, p.149 ^ Dietrich, A., “al-Būnī”, in: Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition, Edited by: P. Bearman, Th. Bianquis, C.E. Bosworth, E. van Donzel, W.P. Heinrichs, p. 149 ^ By C. J. Bleeker, G. Widengren, Historia Religionum, Volume 2 Religions of the Present , p.156, ^ Vincent J. Cornell, Realm of the Saint: Power and Authority in Moroccan Sufism , University of Texas Press, 1998, p. 221 ^ Coulon, Jean-Charles (2022-04-19), "Amulets and Talismans in the Earliest Works of the Corpus Bunianum" , Amulets and Talismans of the Middle East and North Africa in Context , BRILL, pp.

230– 252, ISBN 978-90-04-47147-4 , retrieved 2025-06-22 ^ Martin van Bruinessen, "Global and local in Indonesian Islam", Southeast Asian Studies (Kyoto) vol. 37, no.2 (1999), 46-63 ^ Sanni, Amidu (2002). "Diagnosis through rosary and sand: Islamic elements in the healing custom of the Yoruba (Nigeria)".

Medicine and Law .

21 (2): 295– 306.

PMID 12184608 .

^ Mac Eoin, D.M. (1985). "Nineteenth-century Babi Talismans".

Studia Iranica .

14 (1): 77– 98.

doi : 10.2143/SI.14.1.2014664 .

^ "Shams ul Maarif ul Kubra Urdu, شمس المعارف الکبریٰ, اردو, لطائف العوارف" . 27 June 2021.

^ Rogers, J. M.

(2008).

The arts of Islam : treasures from the Nasser D. Khalili collection (Revised and expanded ed.). Abu Dhabi: Tourism Development & Investment Company (TDIC). p. 170.

OCLC 455121277 .

Notes [ edit ] Edgar W. Francis, Mapping the Boundaries between Magic. The Names of God in the Writings of Ahmad ibn Ali al-Buni External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ahmad al-Buni .

Shams al-Ma'arif al-Kubra - شمس المعارف ولطائف العوارف Kabs al-iktida - قبس الإقتداء Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Israel People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ahmad_al-Buni&oldid=1305454148 " Categories : 1225 deaths 13th-century Arab people Magic squares Medieval Egyptian mathematicians Muslim occultists Sufi writers People from Annaba People from the Almohad Caliphate Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata Year of birth unknown This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 04:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ahmad al-Buni 10 languages Add topic

