Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography Toggle Biography subsection 1.1 Marriage negotiations 1.2 Wedding celebrations 1.3 Death 1.4 Inheritance 2 Ancestry 3 See also 4 References 5 Sources Toggle the table of contents Madeleine de La Tour d'Auvergne 18 languages Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Français Italiano ქართული Magyar مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål Português Română Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French noblewoman (1498–1519) Madeleine de La Tour d'Auvergne Duchess of Urbino , Countess of Boulogne, Lady of St Saturnin Portrait of Madeleine de la Tour d'Auvergne attributed to Jean Perréal Born 1498 Auvergne, France Died 28 April 1519 (aged 20–21) Florence Noble family La Tour d'Auvergne Spouse(s) Lorenzo II de' Medici ​ ​ ( m.

1518) ​ Issue Catherine, Queen of France Father John III, Count of Auvergne Mother Jeanne de Bourbon-Vendôme Madeleine de La Tour d'Auvergne (1498 – 28 April 1519) was a younger daughter of Jean III de La Tour (1467– 28 March 1501), Count of Auvergne and Lauraguais , and Jeanne de Bourbon, Duchess of Bourbon (1465–1511).

[ 1 ] She was a penultimate representative of the senior branch of an ancient French House of La Tour d'Auvergne . Madeleine is best known for being the mother of Catherine de' Medici , the future Queen of France .

Biography [ edit ] Marriage negotiations [ edit ] As part of his efforts to gain power in Italy, Francis I of France turned to making certain strategic alliances. On 8 December 1515, he and Pope Leo X met and signed an agreement of friendship, in which Francis agreed to ensure the Vatican's authority over the Catholic Church in France, and Leo promised to support Francis' claim to the throne of Naples .

[ 2 ] This agreement, like most others of the time, was cemented with a marriage alliance. Leo's nephew Lorenzo II de' Medici had just become the leader of the Florentine Republic in 1516. Francis wrote to congratulate him by stating, "I intend to help you with all my power. I also wish to marry you off to some beautiful and good lady of noble birth and of my kin, so that the love which I bear you may grow and be strengthened".

[ 3 ] The "good lady" Francis proposed: his wealthy and distant relative Madeleine de La Tour d'Auvergne. Lorenzo duly accepted, as it was a great honor to be tied to the French royal family, especially since he was of lesser nobility (the Medici being ennobled only recently), albeit an extremely wealthy one.

[ 4 ] For Madeleine and her family, they were delighted to be tied into the sphere of the Pope himself.

Wedding celebrations [ edit ] She married Duke Lorenzo II de' Medici in Château d'Amboise on 5 May 1518.

[ 5 ] Their wedding was a sumptuous festival that marked not only their union, but also the birth of a dauphin for Francis I.

[ 6 ] As with the other festivities Francis put on throughout his life, dancing figured very prominently. Dancing was done mostly in the Italian style. Seventy-two ladies were disguised in Italian, German, and other fashionable costumes, making for quite a rich display of silk and color.

[ 6 ] Francis gave Madeleine 10,000 gold coins, while Lorenzo offered rich gifts to France's nobility.

[ 5 ] Death [ edit ] She died in Italy shortly before her husband on 28 April of the following year, of what is believed to have been the plague (some speculate that she may have been infected by syphilis from her husband).

[ 7 ] She had just given birth to a daughter, Catherine de' Medici (1519–1589), the future Queen of France and consort of Henry II .

[ 7 ] Both she and her husband were said to have been delighted at the birth of Catherine as if she were a boy.

Inheritance [ edit ] As both of their parents were deceased, Madeleine and her elder sister Anne shared extensive properties in Auvergne, Clermont, Berry, Castres, and Louraguais. Anne inherited Auvergne and married John Stewart, 2nd Duke of Albany in 1505. She outlived Madeleine by five years but died childless, after which the Counties of Auvergne and Boulogne as well as the barony of La Tour passed to Madeleine's daughter Catherine de' Medici and were then absorbed into the French Crown .

Ancestry [ edit ] Ancestors of Madeleine de La Tour d'Auvergne 8.

Bertrand V, Count of Auvergne 4.

Bertrand VI, Count of Auvergne 9. Jacquette du Peschin 2.

John IV, Count of Auvergne 10.

Georges de La Trémoille 5.

Louise de La Trémoille 11. Catherine de L'Isle-Bouchard 1.

Madeleine de La Tour d'Auvergne 12.

Louis, Count of Vendôme 6.

John VIII, Count of Vendôme 13. Jeanne de Laval 3.

Jeanne of Bourbon 14.

Louis, Lord of Beauvau 7.

Isabelle de Beauvau 15. Marguerite de Chambley See also [ edit ] House of La Tour d'Auvergne References [ edit ] ^ Wellman 2013 , p. 83.

^ Knecht 1999 , p. 5-6.

^ Knecht 1999 , p. 6.

^ Knecht 1999 , p. 6-7.

^ a b Knecht 1999 , p. 7.

^ a b McGowan 2008 , p. 135.

^ a b Knecht 1999 , p. 8.

Sources [ edit ] McGowan, Margaret M. (2008).

Dance in the Renaissance: European Fashion, French Obsession . Yale University Press.

Wellman, Kathleen (2013).

Queens and Mistresses of Renaissance France . Yale University Press.

Knecht, R.J. (1999).

Catherine de' Medici . Pearson Education Limited.

Authority control databases International VIAF FAST WorldCat National United States People Italian People Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Madeleine_de_La_Tour_d%27Auvergne&oldid=1302326139 " Categories : 1498 births 1519 deaths La Tour d'Auvergne French nobility House of Medici Duchesses of Urbino French suo jure nobility Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 18:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Madeleine de La Tour d'Auvergne 18 languages Add topic

