Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definitions of modern geotourism 2 Geotourism (abiotic nature-based tourism), a new approach 3 Comparison with ecotourism 4 Sectors 5 Geotourism Marketing 6 Geosites 7 The Example of Geotourism 8 Geodiversity 9 Geotrails 10 Geoparks 11 Geoconservation 12 Sustainable Practices and Community Impact in Geotourism 13 See also 14 References 15 Further reading 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Geotourism 16 languages العربية Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά فارسی Français हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Svenska Українська Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Tourism associated with geological attractions and destinations Geological sustainable tourism aims to conserve and promote a place as a geosite , such as the Iguazu Falls in South America Geotourism is tourism associated with geological attractions and destinations.

[ 1 ] Geotourism (tourism with a geological base) deals with the abiotic natural and built environments.

[ 2 ] Geotourism was first defined in England by Thomas Alfred Hose in 1995.

[ 3 ] Definitions of modern geotourism [ edit ] Geopark of Paleorrota, in Brazil Most of the world defines geotourism as purely the study of geological and geomorphological features. The key definitions of modern geotourism (abiotic nature-based tourism) include: "...part of the tourist's activity in which they have the geological patrimony as their main attraction. Their objective is to search for protected patrimony through the conservation of their resources and of the tourist's Environmental Awareness. For that, the use of the interpretation of the patrimony makes it accessible to the lay public, promoting its popularization and the development of the Earth sciences".

[ 4 ] "Geotourism is a knowledge-based tourism, an interdisciplinary integration of the tourism industry with conservation and interpretation of abiotic nature attributes, besides considering related cultural issues, within the geosites for the general public".

[ 2 ] "A form of natural area tourism that specifically focuses on landscape and geology. It promotes tourism to geosites and the conservation of geo-diversity and an understanding of Earth sciences through appreciation and learning. This is achieved through independent visits to geological features, use of geo-trails and viewpoints, guided tours, geo-activities and patronage of geosite visitor centers".

[ 5 ] "The provision of interpretative and service facilities for geosites and geomorphosites and their encompassing topography, together with their associated in-situ and ex-situ artefacts, to constituency-build for their conservation by generating appreciation, learning and research by and for current and future generations ".

[ 3 ] Geotourism (abiotic nature-based tourism), a new approach [ edit ] According to Sadry (2009),in the past, nature-based tourism activities largely focused on living things (namely biotic nature attractions/biodiversity phenomena).As a result, visiting natural areas and their unique flora and fauna, gradually led to the development of ecotourism, wildlife tourism, and other similar tourism types. Recently, in the 21st century, geotourism has emerged to deal with non-living parts of the natural environment. Geological features and landforms are examples of abiotic nature or geodiversity phenomena.

[ 6 ] Geotourism adds to ecotourism 's principal focus on plants (flora) and animals (fauna) by adding a third dimension to the abiotic environment. Thus it is growing around the world through the growth of geoparks as well as independently in many natural and urban areas where tourism focus in on the geological environment.

Official launch of the Dogu'a Tembien geo-trekking guide "Looking at the environment in a simplistic manner, we see that it is made up of Abiotic, Biotic and Cultural(ABC) attributes. Starting with the 'C' or cultural component first, we note that of three features it is this one which is generally the most known and interpreted, that is, through information about the built or cultural environment either in the past (historical accounts) or present (community customs and culture). The 'B' or biotic features of fauna (animals) and flora (plants) has seen a large focus of interpretation and understanding through ecotourism. But it is the first attribute of the 'A' or abiotic features including rocks, landforms and processes that has received the least attention in tourism, and consequently is the least known and understood.
This holistic approach to tourism is growing rapidly around the world and It is powering UNESCO Global Geoparks which are now on virtually every continent [ 7 ] This then is the real power of geotourism, in that it puts the tourist spotlight firmly on geology, and brings it to the forefront of our understanding through tourism".

[ 5 ] Comparison with ecotourism [ edit ] Geotourism is often confused with ecotourism, due to close definitions of the terms. Geotourism is geodiversity-centred while ecotourism is biodiversity-centred. Geotourism activities focus on providing the recreation geology contexts for visitors. Three core elements within the concept of geotourism have been recognised that distinguish this concept from ecotourism, namely: 1. Abiotic nature as the main attraction;2. Geological heritage interpretation; and 3. Positive outcomes for nature and local residents Geotourism is a sister category to ecotourism. Geotourism is distinguished to be focused on abiotic nature and built environments dealing with geology and geomorphology while ecotourism is focused on the living nature dealing with ecology and living things.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Sectors [ edit ] Geotourism sectors include: [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Urban Rural Roadcuts Dinosaurs Meteorites Aerial Volcanoes Wellness Mining Celestial Space Adventure Accessible Underground Geotourism Marketing [ edit ] Geotourism stakeholders are the local people, geo-visitors, travel agencies, business owners, etc., just like the tourism stakeholders. Schools and universities could also be considered as stakeholders in geotourism when discussing geopark development. Marketing strategies practiced in UNESCO Global Geoparks include professional internal and external marketing tools such as brochures, magazines, newsletters, websites, social media platforms; as well as public relation activities, such as participating trade shows; advertising campaigns and even joint marketing through networking on regional, national, and international level.

[ 14 ] Since geotourism emphasizes the abiotic nature, environmental protection, and the local community, it is important that destinations, such as geoparks, focus their marketing efforts for geotourism in a sustainable manner; so that, the environment including the geoheritages and the local community would benefit most.

[ 9 ] Geosites [ edit ] A geosite is a location that has a particular geological or geomorphological significance. As well as its inherent geological characteristics it may also have cultural or heritage significance.

[ citation needed ] Geosites, geological or geomorphological sites with a recognised value determined through an audit, assessment, and selection process, are subject to a range of threats (Prosser et al., 2018).

The Example of Geotourism [ edit ] All UNESCO Global Geoparks and national geoparks around the world and all geotourism sites such as historical mines, caves, and... are manifestations of the geotourism industry.

[ 9 ] Geodiversity [ edit ] Geodiversity is the variety of earth materials, forms, and processes that constitute and shape the Earth, either the whole or a specific part of it. The term geodiversity is strongly linked to other neologisms such as geoconservation, geoheritage or even geo-indicators. All these terms promote the idea that human activities threaten the diversity of rocks, soils, and landforms as well as the dynamics of the processes that generate them.

[ 15 ] Geotrails [ edit ] According to the Geological Society of Australia, a geotrail "delivers geotourism experiences through a journey linked by an area's geology and landscape as the basis for providing visitor engagement, learning and enjoyment".

[ 16 ] Geotrail definition is ‘A guided or self-guided trail of multiple geosites that interprets geology and landscape’.

[ 17 ] Geoparks [ edit ] A geopark is a unified area that advances the protection and use of geological heritage in a sustainable way, and promotes the economic well-being of the people who live there. Geotourism has been developed from an unknown niche trend to an approach in the tourism industry since 2004, due to the UNESCO support for the global geopark movement in the 21st century. 
The potential activities within geoparks ranging from visiting cultural heritage to natural attractions, agriculture, and even dark tourism.

Geoconservation [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( October 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Geoconservation is the practice of recognising, protecting and managing sites and landscapes which have value for their geology or geomorphology. Geoconservation is carried out by a wide range of organisations from local geological societies to government agencies. Typically the conservation of geodiversity at a site or within a landscape takes place alongside that of biodiversity.

[ citation needed ] Sustainable Practices and Community Impact in Geotourism [ edit ] Geotourism emphasizes the conservation and appreciation of a region's geological features while typically fostering sustainable tourism practices. One notable aspect of geotourism is its integration with eco-tourism principles, often promoting both the preservation of unique geological formations but also the education and engagement of visitors. For example, UNESCO Global Geoparks play a vital role in geotourism by serving as hubs for scientific research, local cultural preservation, and community-led development. These parks highlight geological heritage through interpretive centers, guided tours, and interactive exhibits that connect visitors to the Earth's history.

[1] Additionally, geotourism contributes to the socio-economic well-being of local communities. By creating opportunities for small-scale enterprises, such as eco-lodges, craft markets, and guided trekking experiences, geotourism empowers residents to sustain their livelihoods while protecting natural resources [2] . This tourism model also addresses environmental challenges by often encouraging low-impact practices like renewable energy use and waste reduction in tourist operations, ensuring the long-term viability of geosites for future generations [3] .

See also [ edit ] Geoheritage Geology of the Canary Islands#Geotourism Global Geoparks Network References [ edit ] ^ Dowling, R. & Newsome, D. (Eds.)(2006) Geotourism ; Elsevier, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford ^ a b Sadry, B.N.(2009) Fundamentals of Geotourism: with special emphasis on Iran , SAMT Organization publishers,Tehran.220p.(English Summary available Online at: https://journals.openedition.org/physio-geo/4873?lang=en ^ a b Hose, T. A. (2012), "3G's for Modern Geotourism", Geoheritage Journal , 4: 7-24 ^ Ruchkys U de A (2007) Patrimônio Geológico e Geoconservação no Quadrilátero Ferrífero, Minas Gerais: potencial para criação de um geoparque da UNESCO. Tese de Doutorado—Instituto de Geociências, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Minas Gerais, Brazil ^ a b Newsome,D. and Dowling, R.K.(Eds.)(2010) Geotourism: The Tourism of Geology and Landscape , Oxford: Goodfellow Publishers ^ Sadry,B.N.; Mohamed Abdel Maksoud, K.; Zahabnazouri, S. (2023) Geotourism  Development in the Middle East: A comparative study of Iran, Saudi Arabia, Oman and Jordan. In: Stella Kladou and Konstantinos Andriotis and Anna Farmaki and Dimitrios Stylidis  (Ed.) Tourism Development and Planning in the Middle East ; CABI, UK (pp. 126-141) ^ Allan, M., Dowling, R. (eds)(2023) Geotourism in the Middle East (Geoheritage, Geoparks and Geotourism) . Springer, Cham ^ Sadry, B.N. (Ed.) (2021) The Geotourism Industry in the 21st Century: The Origin, Principles, and Futuristic Approach ;Palm Bay, Florida: Apple Academic Press ^ a b c Sadry, B.N. & Fehrest, F. (2022) 'Geotourism Marketing'. In: D. Buhalis (ed.), Encyclopedia of Tourism Management and Marketing ,(Volume 2) Cheltenham, UK and Northampton, MA, USA: Edward Elgar Publishing(pp. 415–418).

^ Sadry,B.N.(2021) Space and Celestial Geotourism.In: B.N.Sadry (Ed.) The Geotourism Industry in the 21st Century: The Origin, Principles, and Futuristic Approach ; Palm Bay,Florida: Apple Academic Press(pp. 481-506) ^ Maghsoudi, M., Moradi, A. & Moradipour, F. Aerial Geotourism: New Branch of Geotourism for Promoting Geoconservation (Examples from Iran).

Geoheritage 13, 4 (2021).

https://doi.org/10.1007/s12371-020-00526-8 ^ Erfurt-Cooper, P.& Cooper, M. (Eds.)(2010) Volcano and Geothermal Tourism:Sustainable Geo-Resources for Leisure and Recreation ; Routledge Publishing ^ Allan, M.(2021) Accessible Geotourism: Constraints and Implications. In: B.N.Sadry (Ed.) The Geotourism Industry in the 21st Century: The Origin, Principles, and Futuristic Approach ; Palm Bay, Florida: Apple Academic Press(pp. 473-479) ^ Frey, M.L., 2021. Geotourism—Examining Tools for Sustainable Development.

Geosciences , 11(1), p.30.

^ GRAY, Murray (2004) Geodiversity, valuing  and conserving abiotic nature . J. Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 434 p.

^ "Geotourism and Geotrails" .

www.gsa.org.au . Archived from the original on 2024-05-29 . Retrieved 2024-12-22 .

^ "What is a Geotrail – Geoparks Australia" .

Further reading [ edit ] In a 500-word news article in 2020, one author (B.N. Sadry) mentioned many books on geotourism and chose their seven major reference books: [ 1 ] Geotourism (2006) Co-edited by R. Dowling & D. Newsome [ 2 ] Global Geotourism Perspectives (2010) Co-edited by R. Dowling & D. Newsome [ 3 ] Geotourism: The Tourism of Geology and Landscape (2010) Co-edited by D. Newsome & R. Dowling [ 4 ] Geoheritage and Geotourism: a European Perspective (2016) Edited by T.A. Hose [ 5 ] Geoheritage: Assessment, Protection and Management (2018) Co-edited by E. Reynard & J. Brilha [ 6 ] A Handbook of Geotourism (2018) Co-edited by R. Dowling & D. Newsome [ 7 ] The Geotourism Industry in the 21st Century (2021) Edited by B.N. Sadry [ 8 ] External links [ edit ] Media related to Geotourism at Wikimedia Commons Fundamentals of Geotourism Geotourism's Global Growth - About Geological Tourism Australian Geotourism Resource Centre Principles of the Geotourism Industry European Federation of Geologists Panel of Experts on Geological Heritage Archived 2013-08-19 at the Wayback Machine v t e Tourism Types Accessible Adventure Agritourism Alternative Astrotourism Atomic Backpacking Beachgoing Bicycle touring Birth Business Crime Culinary Enotourism Cultural Archaeological Film Literary Bookstore Tolkien Music Pop-culture Dark Disaster Holocaust War Domestic Ecotourism Shark Experiential Extreme Fashion Garden Genealogy Heritage Identity Geotourism Industrial Instagram tourism International Volunteering Jungle Justice LGBT Medical MICE (Meetings, Incentives, Conferences, Exhibitions) Nautical Orphanage Recreational drug Red Religious Christian Halal Kosher Pilgrimage Rural Science Sensory Sleep Slum Smart Space Lunar Sports Sustainable Urban Virtual Visiting friends and relatives Wellness Wildlife Safari Scuba Yoga Hospitality industry Bed and breakfast Boutique hotel Convention center Cruise ship Destination spa Front desk Guest house Guest ranch Heuhotel Homestay Hospitality management studies Hostel Hotel Manager Inn Motel Pension Referral chain Resort Hotel Island Seaside Ski Town Restaurant Terminology College tour Convention (meeting) Destination marketing organization Escorted tour Excursion Factory tour Gift shop Grand Tour Holiday Honeymoon Hypermobility Journey planner Package tour Passport Perpetual traveler Road trip Roadside attraction Souvenir Staycation Tour bus service Tour guide Tour operator Tourism geography Tourism minister Tourism region Tourist attraction Tourist gateway Tourist trap Touron Transport Travel Travel agency Travel behavior Travel document Travel insurance Travel medicine Travel survey Travel technology Travel visa Travel warning Vacation Visitor center Travel literature Guide book Outdoor literature Tourism journals Travel magazines Wikivoyage Trade associations American Bus Association American Hotel and Lodging Association American Hotel & Lodging Educational Institute BEST Education Network Caribbean Tourism Organization European Travel Commission Historical Archive on Tourism Life Beyond Tourism Musement Pacific Asia Travel Association South-East Asian Tourism Organisation Tourism Radio Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Report World Federation of Travel Journalists and Writers World Tourism Organization World Tourism rankings World Travel and Tourism Council World Travel Monitor Trade fairs and events Akwaaba African Travel Market Arabian Travel Market Cruise of the Kings Festival del Viaggio FITUR ITB Berlin World Tourism Day Issues Heritage commodification Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on tourism Impacts of tourism Leakage effect Overtourism Tourism improvement district Tourist tax Lists Adjectival tourisms Attractions Bibliography Casino hotels Casinos Cities by international visitors Convention and exhibition centers Cruise lines Hotels Largest Motels Passenger airlines UNESCO Intangible Cultural Heritage Lists World Heritage Sites by country Category Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX ^ Sadry,B.N., Geotourism Books: An overview on Geoconservation Concept through Geotourism, ProGeo News 2020: no.4, p.2 ^ Dowling, R. & Newsome, D. (Eds.)(2006) Geotourism ; Elsevier, Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford ^ Dowling, R. & Newsome, D. (Eds.) (2010) Global Geotourism Perspectives ; Oxford: Goodfellow Publishers ^ Newsome,D. and Dowling, R.K. (Eds.)(2010) Geotourism: The Tourism of Geology and Landscape , Oxford: Goodfellow Publishers ^ Hose, T.A. (Ed.)(2016) Geoheritage and Geotourism: A European Perspective ; Boydell Press, UK ^ Reynard, E. & Brilha, J. (Eds.) (2018) Geoheritage : Assessment, Protection, and Management , Amsterdam: Elsevier ^ Dowling, R. & Newsome, D. (Eds.) (2018) A Handbook of Geotourism , Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing ^ Sadry, B.N. (Ed.) (2021) The Geotourism Industry in the 21st Century: The Origin, Principles, and Futuristic Approach ;Palm Bay,Florida: Apple Academic Press.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Geotourism&oldid=1293129446 " Categories : Geotourism Types of tourism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using div col with small parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 Articles needing additional references from October 2024 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 30 May 2025, at 21:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Geotourism 16 languages Add topic

