Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and thought 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 4.1 English translations 4.2 Studies 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Nicholas of Autrecourt 12 languages Dansk Deutsch Español Français Italiano مصرى Nederlands Polski Português Русский Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French philosopher (c. 1299–1369) Nicholas of Autrecourt ( French : Nicolas d'Autrécourt ; Latin : Nicolaus de Autricuria or Nicolaus de Ultricuria ; c. 1299, Autrecourt – 16 or 17 July 1369, Metz ) was a French medieval philosopher and Scholastic theologian .

Life and thought [ edit ] Born in Autrecourt , near Verdun , he was educated at Paris and earned bachelor's degrees in theology and law and a master's degree in arts.

[ 1 ] Nicholas is known principally for developing skepticism to extreme logical conclusions. He is sometimes considered the sole genuinely skeptic philosopher of medieval times. Nicholas founded his skeptical position on arguments that knowledge claims were not "reducible to the first principle," that is, that it was not contradictory to deny them.

[ 2 ] His views have been compared to those of David Hume , but it has been suggested that the similarities are superficial, and there is no evidence Nicholas influenced Hume, or other modern philosophers such as René Descartes .

[ 1 ] Whether Nicholas was committed to skepticism is unclear, but on 19 May 1346 his views were condemned by Pope Clement VI as heretical . Nicholas was sentenced to burn his books publicly and recant, which he did in Paris in 1347.

[ 1 ] In the 14th century, Nicholas of Autrecourt considered that matter, space, and time were all made up of indivisible atoms, points, and instants and that all generation and corruption took place by the rearrangement of material atoms. The similarities of his ideas with those of al-Ghazali suggest that Nicholas was familiar with the work of al-Ghazali, who was known as "Algazel" in Europe, either directly or indirectly through Averroes .

Much of the extant knowledge of Nicholas of Autrecourt's epistemology derives from one letter written by magister Egidius (master Giles) to Nicholas and an excerpt from his letter in reply to Egidius and from nine letters written by Nicholas to the Franciscan theologian Bernardus Aretinus (Bernard of Arezzo ); however, only two of the nine letters survive. Some fragments of the lost letters are quoted in the records of the condemnatory proceedings against Nicholas. Almost nothing is known about these two correspondents.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] See also [ edit ] William Curti References [ edit ] ^ a b c Zupko, Jack A. (1999). Robert Audi (ed.).

The Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 612.

ISBN 0-521-63722-8 .

^ Franklin, James (2001).

The Science of Conjecture, Evidence and Probability before Pascal . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. pp.

210– 216.

ISBN 9780801865695 .

^ De Rijk, Lambertus Marie (Bertus) (1994).

Nicholas of Autrecourt: His Correspondence with Master Giles and Bernard of Arezzo . Leiden: E. J. Brill.

ISBN 9004099883 .

^ Weinberg, Julius R. (April 1942). "The Fifth Letter of Nicholas of Autrecourt to Bernard of Arezzo".

Journal of the History of Ideas .

3 (2): 220– 227.

doi : 10.2307/2707178 .

JSTOR 2707178 .

Further reading [ edit ] English translations [ edit ] L. A. Kennedy, R. E. Arnold, A. E. Millward, The universal treatise , Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 1971 (English translation of Exigit ordo executionis ).

L. M. De Rijk, Nicholas of Autrecourt. His correspondence with Master Giles and Bernard d’Arezzo , Leiden: Brill, 1994.

Studies [ edit ] Stefano Caroti, Christophe Grellard (eds.), Nicolas d'Autrécourt et la faculté des arts de Paris (1317-1340) , Cesena, Stilgraf Editrice, 2006.

Dutton, B.D., “Nicholas of Autrecourt and William of Ockham on Atomism, Nominalism, and the Ontology of Motion,” Medieval Philosophy and Theology 5 (1996), 63-85.

Christophe Greillard, Croire et savoir: les principes de la connaissance selon Nicolas d'Autrécourt , Parigi, Vrin, 2005.

Christophe Greillard, Nicholas of Autrecourt , in Henrtik Lagerlund (ed.), Encyclopedia of Medieval Philosophy , Dordrecht: Springer, 2011, pp. 876–878.

Zénon Kaluza, Nicolas d‘Autrecourt. Ami de la vérité , in: Histoire littéraire de la France, vol. 42, fasc. 1. Paris, 1995, pp. 1–233.

Hastings Rashdall , Nicholas de Ultracuria: a medieval Hume , Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society N.S. 7 (1906-7), 1-27.

T. K. Scott, Nicholas of Autrecourt, Buridan, and Ockhamism , Journal of the History of Philosophy 9 (1971), 15-41.

J.M.M.H. Thijssen, The ‘Semantic Articles’ of Autrecourt's Condemnation , Archives d‘histoire doctrinale et littéraire du moyen âge, 65 (1990), 155-175.

External links [ edit ] Thijssen, Hans.

"Nicholas of Autrecourt" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Nicholas of Autrecourt at PhilPapers v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican Israel People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nicholas_of_Autrecourt&oldid=1299330021 " Categories : 1299 births 1369 deaths People from Meuse (department) 14th-century French philosophers Scholastic philosophers Nominalists 14th-century writers in Latin Skeptic philosophers French male writers French sceptics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 19:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nicholas of Autrecourt 12 languages Add topic

