Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life Toggle Life subsection 1.1 The great adventure 2 Home at last 3 His work Toggle His work subsection 3.1 Ega 3.1.1 Taxonomy 4 Legacy 5 Notes 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Before Bates 6.2 By Bates 6.3 About Bates 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Henry Walter Bates 36 languages العربية تۆرکجه Беларуская Български Català Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kotava Latina Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikispecies Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English naturalist and explorer For other people named Henry Bates, see Henry Bates (disambiguation) .

Henry Walter Bates FRS FLS FGS Born ( 1825-02-08 ) 8 February 1825 Leicester , England Died 16 February 1892 (1892-02-16) (aged 67) London , England Resting place East Finchley Cemetery , London Known for Amazon voyage Batesian mimicry Spouse Sarah Ann Mason Awards President of the Entomological Society of London , fellow of the Linnaean Society , and of the Royal Society Scientific career Fields Mimicry , natural history , geography Institutions Royal Geographical Society , London Henry Walter Bates (8 February 1825 – 16 February 1892) was an English naturalist and explorer who gave the first scientific account of mimicry in animals. He was most famous for his expedition to the rainforests of the Amazon with Alfred Russel Wallace , starting in 1848. Wallace returned in 1852, but lost his collection on the return voyage when his ship caught fire. When Bates arrived home in 1859 after a full eleven years, he had sent back over 14,712 species (mostly of insects) of which 8,000 were (according to Bates, but see Van Wyhe [ 1 ] ) new to science.

[ 2 ] Bates wrote up his findings in his best-known work, The Naturalist on the River Amazons (1863).

Life [ edit ] Bates was born in Leicester to a literate middle-class family. However, like Wallace, Thomas Henry Huxley and Herbert Spencer , he had a normal education to the age of about 13 when he became apprenticed to a hosiery manufacturer. He joined the Mechanics' Institute (which had a library), studied in his spare time and collected insects in Charnwood Forest . In 1843 he had a short paper on beetles published in the journal Zoologist .

[ 3 ] He became friends with Wallace when the latter took a teaching post in the Leicester Collegiate School. Wallace also became a keen entomologist , (his first interest had been plants) and he read the same kind of books as Wallace, and as Darwin, Huxley and no doubt many others had. These included Thomas Robert Malthus on population, James Hutton and Charles Lyell on geology, Darwin's The Voyage of the Beagle , and above all, the anonymous Vestiges of the Natural History of Creation (by Robert Chambers ), which put evolution into everyday discussion amongst literate folk. They also read William H. Edwards's Voyage Up the River Amazons on his Amazon expedition, [ 4 ] and this started them thinking that a visit to the region would be exciting, and might launch their careers.

[ 5 ] The great adventure [ edit ] In 1847 Wallace and Bates discussed the idea of an expedition to the Amazon rainforest , the plan being to cover expenses by sending specimens back to London. There an agent would sell them for a commission. (The often repeated statement that the main purpose was for the travellers to "gather facts towards solving the problem of the origin of species", and that Wallace put this in a letter to Bates, is almost certainly a myth, originating in a convenient adjustment of history by Bates in The Naturalist on the River Amazons of 1863.

[ 6 ] ) The two friends, who were both by now experienced amateur entomologists, met in London to prepare themselves. They did this by viewing South American plants and animals in the main collections.

[ 7 ] Also they collected "wants lists" of the desires of museums and collectors. All known letters exchanged between Wallace and Bates are available in Wallace Letters Online .

Bates in Amazonia: "Adventure with curl-crested toucans " Bates and Wallace sailed from Liverpool in April 1848, arriving in Pará (now Belém ) at the end of May. For the first year they settled in a villa near the city, collecting birds and insects. After that they agreed to collect independently, Bates travelling to Cametá on the Tocantins River . He then moved up the Amazon , to Óbidos , Manaus and finally to the Upper Amazon (Solimões) .

Tefé was his base camp for four and a half years. His health eventually deteriorated and he returned to Britain in 1859, after having spent nearly eleven years on the Amazon. He sent his collection on three different ships to avoid the fate of his colleague Wallace, who had lost his entire collection in 1852 when his ship sank. Bates spent the next three years writing his account of the trip, The Naturalist on the River Amazons , widely regarded as one of the finest reports of natural history travels.

Home at last [ edit ] In 1863 he married Sarah Ann Mason.

[ 8 ] From 1864 onwards, he worked as assistant secretary of the Royal Geographical Society (effectively, he was the secretary, since the senior post was occupied by a noble figurehead). He sold his personal Lepidoptera collection to Frederick DuCane Godman and Osbert Salvin and began to work mostly on beetles ( cerambycids , carabids , and cicindelids ). From 1868 to 1869 and in 1878 he was president of the Entomological Society of London . In 1871 he was elected a fellow of the Linnaean Society , and in 1881 he was elected a fellow of the Royal Society .

He died of bronchitis in 1892 (in modern terms, that may mean emphysema ). A large part of his collections are in the Natural History Museum (see The Field , London, 20 February 1892). Specimens he collected went to the Natural History Museum, at that time called the British Museum (Natural History), and to private collectors; yet Bates still retained a huge reference collection and was often consulted on difficult identifications. This, and the disposal of the collection after his death, are mentioned in Edward Clodd 's Memories .

[ 9 ] Wallace wrote an obituary of Bates in Nature . He describes Bates's 1861 paper on mimicry in Heliconiidae butterflies as "remarkable and epoch-making", with "a clear and intelligible explanation", briefly addressing its attackers as "persons who are more or less ignorant of the facts". He then praises Bates's contributions to entomology, before regretting, in remarkably bitter words for an official obituary, that the "confinement and constant strain" of "mere drudgery of office work" for the Royal Geographical Society had with "little doubt ... weakened his constitution and shortened a valuable life".

[ 10 ] His work [ edit ] Plate from Bates's 1862 paper "Contributions to an insect fauna of the Amazon Valley: Heliconiidae" Henry Bates was one of a group of outstanding naturalist-explorers who were supporters of the theory of evolution by natural selection ( Charles Darwin and Alfred Russel Wallace 1858).

[ 11 ] Other members of this group included Joseph Dalton Hooker , Fritz Müller , Richard Spruce and Thomas Henry Huxley .

Bates's work on Amazonian butterflies led him to develop the first scientific account of mimicry , especially the kind of mimicry which bears his name: Batesian mimicry .

[ 12 ] This is the mimicry by a palatable species of an unpalatable or noxious species. A common example seen in temperate gardens is the hover-fly , many of which – though bearing no sting – mimic the warning colouration of hymenoptera ( wasps and bees ). Such mimicry does not need to be perfect to improve the survival of the palatable species.

[ 13 ] Bates's grave in East Finchley Cemetery Bates noted of the Heliconids (long-wings) that they were forest dwellers which were: 1. abundant 2. conspicuous and slow-flying. 3. gregarious; and also 4. the adults frequented flowers. 5. the larvae fed together.

And yet, said Bates "I never saw the flocks of slow-flying Heliconidae in the woods persecuted by birds or dragonflies ... nor when at rest did they appear to be molested by lizards, or predacious flies of the family Asilidae [robber-flies] which were very often seen pouncing on butterflies of other families. ... In contrast, the Pieridae (sulfur butterflies), to which Leptalis belongs [now called Dismorphia ] are much persecuted." Bates observed that many Heliconid species are accompanied by other species (Pierids), which mimic them, and often cannot be distinguished from them in flight. They fly in the same parts of the forest as the model (Heliconid) and often in company with them. Local races of the model are accompanied by corresponding races or species of the mimic. So a scarce, edible species takes on the appearance of an abundant, noxious species. Predators, Bates supposed, learn to avoid the noxious species, and a degree of protection covers the edible species, no doubt proportional to its degree of likeness to the model. These testable hypotheses about warning signals and mimicry helped to create the field of evolutionary ecology .

[ 14 ] Bates, Wallace and Müller believed that Batesian and Müllerian mimicry provided evidence for the action of natural selection , a view which is now standard amongst biologists.

[ 15 ] Field and experimental work on these ideas continues to this day; the topic connects strongly to speciation , genetics and development .

[ 16 ] Ega [ edit ] Bates spent the best part of a year at Ega (now Tefé ) in the Upper Amazon ( Solimões ), [ 17 ] where he reported that turtle was eaten regularly, and insect catches were especially abundant. He found upwards of 7,000 species of insects in the area, including 550 distinct species of butterfly.

[ 18 ] Bates nursed a sick toucan back to health. Tocáno (the Indian name, after its cries) proved to be an intelligent and amusing companion, with a voracious appetite. Mainly a fruit eater, he learnt the meal times "to a nicety", and would eat flesh and fish as well as fruit.

[ 19 ] Taxonomy [ edit ] Bates's original work was done on a group of conspicuous butterflies always spelled by Bates as Heliconidae . He divided this assemblage into two groups, the Danaoid Heliconids , having affinities with the tribe Danaini (see also Danainae ); and the Acraeoid Heliconids related to the Acraeini . The former are now known as Ithomiini , closely related to the milkweed butterflies, and were named after the genus Danaus in the Danainae . The latter are now known as the tribe Heliconiini , or longwings, named after the genus Heliconius . Both group within the family Nymphalidae , and both groups tend to feed on poisonous plants. The milkweed plant supplies poisonous glycosides which render both caterpillar and adult danaines noxious. Ithomiines, in contrast gain their toxicity from their adult nectar sources.  Heliconiine caterpillars feed on poisonous Passiflora vines. However, ithomiines gain their toxicity from their adult food plants.

Legacy [ edit ] Henry Walter Bates is commemorated in the scientific name of a species of South American boa, Corallus batesii [ 20 ] and in the name of his theory of mimicry, Batesian mimicry .

Notes [ edit ] ^ Van Wyhe J. (2014) "A Delicate Adjustment: Wallace and Bates on the Amazon and 'The Problem of the Origin of Species ' " Journal of the History of Biology 47: 627-659 ^ Clodd, in Bates H.W. 1892.

The Naturalist on the River Amazons, With a Memoir of the Author by Edward Clodd . Murray, London. pxvii ^ Bates, H.W. (1843).

"Notes on Coleopterous insects frequenting damp places" .

The Zoologist .

1 : 114– 5.

^ Edwards, W.H.

Voyage Up the River Amazons, Including a Residence at Pará . London, 1847.

^ Moon H.P. 1976.

Henry Walter Bates FRS 1825–1892: Explorer, Scientist and Darwinian . Leicestershire Museums, Leicester.

^ Van Wyhe J. (2014) "A Delicate Adjustment: Wallace and Bates on the Amazon and 'The Problem of the Origin of Species ' " Journal of the History of Biology 47: 627-659 ^ Bates H.W. 1863.

The Naturalist on the River Amazons . 2 vols, Murray, London. Preface ^ Crawforth, Anthony (2009).

The Butterfly Hunter: The Life of Henry Walter Bates . Buckingham, England: University of Buckingham Press.

^ Clodd, Edward (1916).

Memories . London: Chapman & Hall.

^ Wallace, Alfred Russel (25 February 1892).

"H. W. Bates, The Naturalist of the Amazons" .

Nature .

45 (1165): 398– 399.

Bibcode : 1892Natur..45..398A .

doi : 10.1038/045398c0 .

^ Darwin, C.; Wallace, A.R. (1958).

"On the Tendency of Species to form Varieties; and on the Perpetuation of Varieties and Species by Natural Means of Selection" .

Zoological Journal of the Linnean Society .

3 (9): 45– 62.

doi : 10.1111/j.1096-3642.1858.tb02500.x .

^ Carpenter GDH and Ford EB 1933.

Mimicry . Methuen, London.

^ Wickler W. 1968.

Mimicry in Plants and Animals . World University Library, London.

^ Ruxton GD , Sherratt TN and Speed MP 2004.

Avoiding Attack: The Evolutionary Ecology of Crypsis, Warning Signals and Mimicry . Oxford.

^ Moon H.P. 1976.

Henry Walter Bates FRS 1825–1892: Explorer, Scientist and Darwinian . Leicestershire Museums, Leicester.

^ Mallet, James (2001).

"The speciation revolution" .

Journal of Evolutionary Biology .

14 (6): 887– 8.

doi : 10.1046/j.1420-9101.2001.00342.x .

^ Ega/Tefé is on the smaller tributary Tefé , nearly opposite the junction of the large tributary Japurá with the main Amazon.

^ Bates H.W. 1892.

The Naturalist on the River Amazons, With a Memoir of the Author by Edward Clodd . Murray, London. Chapters 10–12, esp. p. 349–353.

^ Bates 1892, p. 350.

^ Beolens, Bo; Watkins, Michael; Grayson, Michael (2011).

The Eponym Dictionary of Reptiles . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press. xiii + 296 pp.

ISBN 978-1-4214-0135-5 . ("Bates, H. W.", p. 19).

References [ edit ] Before Bates [ edit ] Edwards W.H. 1847.

Voyage Up the River Amazons, Including a Residence at Pará . London. (The book that sparked Wallace and Bates to travel to the Amazon; scanned copy of US edition at Cornell University Library website.) By Bates [ edit ] Bates, H.W. (1843).

"Notes on Coleopterous insects frequenting damp places" .

The Zoologist .

1 : 114– 5.

Bates H.W. 1863.

The Naturalist on the River Amazons . 2 vols, Murray, London.

Volume 1 ; Volume 2 .

Bates H.W. 1864.

The Naturalist on the River Amazons . 2nd ed as one vol, Murray, London. (This is an abridged edition with much of the natural history cut out; it is this truncated edition which is usually reprinted. The 1863 or 1892 editions are suitable for professional purposes.) (Reissued by Cambridge University Press , 2009; ISBN 978-1-108-00163-2 .) Bates H.W. 1892.

The Naturalist on the River Amazons, With a Memoir of the Author by Edward Clodd . (This edition, published after Bates's death, is valuable for two reasons: it is the only time since 1863 that Murray published the full text, and it includes a good short biography by Clodd.) Bates, H.W. (1862).

"Contributions to an Insect Fauna of the Amazon Valley. Lepidoptera: Heliconidae" .

Transactions of the Linnean Society of London .

23 (3): 495– 566.

doi : 10.1111/j.1096-3642.1860.tb00146.x .

Bates H.W. 1878.

Central America, the West Indies and South America , with ethnological notes by A. H. Keane . Stanford, London; second and revised edition 1882. (Based on Von Hellwald's Die Erde und ihre Volker ; the natural history and geographical relations of fauna and flora are wholly written by Bates; the other aspects he extensively revised and updated.) Bates H.W. 1881–4.

Biologia Centrali-Americana: Insecta Coleoptera . Volume I, Part 1.

Bates H.W. 1886–90.

Biologia Centrali-Americana: Insecta Coleoptera: Pectinicornia and Lamellicornia .  Volume II, Part 2.

Bates H.W. and D. Sharp. 1879–86.

Biologia Centrali-Americana: Insecta Coleoptera: Phytophaga (part). Volume V.

About Bates [ edit ] Bedall B.G. (ed) 1969.

Wallace and Bates in the Tropics: an Introduction to the Theory of Natural Selection . Macmillan, London. (Includes excerpts from Bates's River Amazons .) Clodd, Edward 1892.

Memoir (of Henry Walter Bates) 70 pages plus coloured plate 'illustrations of mimicry between butterflies', xvii–lxxxvii in Bates 1892.

Crawforth, Anthony. 2009.

The Butterfly Hunter: The Life of Henry Walter Bates , University of Buckingham Press, ISBN 978-0-9560716-1-3 .

Dickenson, John. 1992. "The Naturalist on the River Amazons and a wider world: reflections on the centenary of Henry Walter Bates".

The Geographical Journal , 158(2): 207–214. (Fine tribute to Bates on the centenary of his death.) Moon H.P. 1976.

Henry Walter Bates FRS 1825–1892: Explorer, Scientist and Darwinian . Leicestershire Museums, Leicester. (This booklet of about 100 pages by an emeritus professor of zoology can be strongly recommended.) Woodcock G 1969.

Henry Walter Bates, Naturalist of the Amazons . Faber & Faber, London. (This, the only book-length biography, is by an author who was not a biologist. It gives a weak account of Bates's work on mimicry, says nothing about Müller, and remarks about Wallace are undistinguished. It is good on Bates's early life and his marriage, and on the travel aspects of the Amazon. The author dismisses Bates's later life too abruptly.) Further reading [ edit ] Blaisdell, M (1982). "Natural theology and nature's disguises".

Journal of the History of Biology .

15 (2): 163– 189.

doi : 10.1007/bf00233013 .

S2CID 84793241 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Henry Walter Bates .

"Bates, Henry Walter" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

"Bates, Henry Walter" .

Dictionary of National Biography (1st supplement) . 1901.

"Sketch of Henry Walter Bates" .

Popular Science Monthly . Vol. 42. November 1892.

Works by Henry Walter Bates at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Henry Walter Bates at the Internet Archive Works by Henry Walter Bates at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Insecta. Coleoptera Links to three volumes authored or co-authored by Bates Obituary , Proceedings of the Royal Geographical Society , volume 14, 1892, pp, 245–257 Bragg P.E. 2007.

Biographies of Phasmatologists – 1. Henry Walter Bates Archived 14 September 2017 at the Wayback Machine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Portugal Netherlands Norway Israel Academics CiNii Artists Musée d'Orsay Scientific illustrators People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Te Papa (New Zealand) Yale LUX v t e Natural history Pioneering naturalists Classical antiquity Aristotle ( History of Animals ) Theophrastus ( Historia Plantarum ) Aelian ( De Natura Animalium ) Pliny the Elder ( Natural History ) Dioscorides ( De Materia Medica ) Renaissance Ulisse Aldrovandi Gaspard Bauhin ( Pinax theatri botanici ) Otto Brunfels Hieronymus Bock Andrea Cesalpino Valerius Cordus Leonhart Fuchs Conrad Gessner ( Historia animalium ) Frederik Ruysch William Turner ( Avium Praecipuarum , New Herball ) John Gerard ( Herball, or Generall Historie of Plantes ) Enlightenment Robert Hooke ( Micrographia ) Marcello Malpighi Antonie van Leeuwenhoek William Derham Hans Sloane Jan Swammerdam Regnier de Graaf Carl Linnaeus ( Systema Naturae ) Georg Steller Joseph Banks Johan Christian Fabricius James Hutton John Ray ( Historia Plantarum ) Comte de Buffon ( Histoire Naturelle ) Bernard Germain de Lacépède Gilbert White ( The Natural History of Selborne ) Thomas Bewick ( A History of British Birds ) Jean-Baptiste Lamarck ( Philosophie zoologique ) 19th century George Montagu ( Ornithological Dictionary ) Georges Cuvier ( Le Règne Animal ) William Smith Charles Darwin ( On the Origin of Species ) Alfred Russel Wallace ( The Malay Archipelago ) Henry Walter Bates ( The Naturalist on the River Amazons ) Alexander von Humboldt John James Audubon ( The Birds of America ) William Buckland Charles Lyell Mary Anning Jean-Henri Fabre Louis Agassiz Philip Henry Gosse Asa Gray William Jackson Hooker Joseph Dalton Hooker William Jardine ( The Naturalist's Library ) Ernst Haeckel ( Kunstformen der Natur ) Richard Lydekker ( The Royal Natural History ) 20th century Martinus Beijerinck Abbott Thayer ( Concealing-Coloration in the Animal Kingdom ) Hugh B. Cott ( Adaptive Coloration in Animals ) Niko Tinbergen ( The Study of Instinct ) Konrad Lorenz ( On Aggression ) Karl von Frisch ( The Dancing Bees ) Ronald Lockley ( Shearwaters ) Topics Natural history museums ( List ) Parson-naturalists ( List ) Natural History Societies List of natural history dealers Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Henry_Walter_Bates&oldid=1300611357 " Categories : 1825 births 1892 deaths British evolutionary biologists English entomologists English coleopterists English naturalists English explorers Fellows of the Royal Society People from Leicester Fellows of the Geological Society of London Fellows of the Linnean Society of London Deaths from bronchitis Explorers of Amazonia Natural history of Brazil People educated at Leicester Collegiate School Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from September 2013 Use dmy dates from October 2024 Articles with hCards Commons category link from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles incorporating Cite DNB template Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Popular Science Monthly Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 15 July 2025, at 10:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Henry Walter Bates 36 languages Add topic

