Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Genesis 2 References to Greek astrology 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Yavanajataka 6 languages বাংলা Français हिन्दी Italiano Português தமிழ் Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hindu astrological text This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Yavanajataka" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( December 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Yavanajātaka ( Sanskrit : yavana 'Greek' + jātaka ' nativity ' = 'nativity according to the Greeks'), written by Sphujidhvaja , is an ancient text in Indian astrology .

According to David Pingree , it is a later versification of an earlier translation into Sanskrit of a Greek text, thought to have been written around 120 CE in Alexandria , [ 1 ] on horoscopy . Based on Pingree's interpretation and emendations, the original translation, made in 149–150 CE by "Yavanesvara" ("Lord of the Greeks") under the rule of the Western Kshatrapa king Rudrakarman I , is lost; only a substantial portion of the versification 120 years later by Sphujidhvaja under Rudrasena II has survived.

[ 2 ] However, according to the recent research by Mak based on a newly discovered manuscript and other documents, Pingree's date interpretation as well as a number of crucial readings such as zero and other bhūtasaṃkhyā were based on his own emendation, not supported by what was written on the manuscripts. Furthermore, traditionally Yavanesvara and Sphujidhvaja were understood as referring to the same person, the former being an epithet to the latter, according to authors such as Bhaskara and Utpala . The date of the Yavanajātaka according to Mak is now revised to between 4th and 6th century CE.

[ 3 ] Yavanajataka is one of the earliest known Sanskrit works referencing Greek horoscopy.

[ 4 ] It was followed by other works of Greek origin which greatly influenced Indian astrology: the Paulisa Siddhanta ("Doctrine of Paul") and the Romaka Siddhanta ("Doctrine of the Romans "). However, some Indian authors claim the earliest known Sanskrit work on horoscopy is Vedanga Jyotisha [ 5 ] [ 6 ] It was translated by David Pingree into English, which was published as volume 48 of the Harvard Oriental Series in 1978.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Genesis [ edit ] The last verses of the text describe the role of Yavanesvara in the creation of the text, and the role of Sphujidhvaja in its subsequent versification: "Previously Yavanesvara (the lord of the Greeks), whose vision of the truth came by favor of the Sun and whose language is flawless, translated this ocean of words, this jewel-mine of horoscopy, which was guarded by its being written in his tongue (i.e., Greek), but the truth of which was seen by the foremost of kings (in the year) 71; (he translated) this science of genethlialogy for the instruction of the world by means of excellent words." (Chapter 79/60-61 The Yavanajataka of Sphujidhvaja) "There was a wise king named Sphujidhvaja who versified this entire (text), which was seen by him in the year 191, in 4,000 indravajra verses." (Chapter 79/62 The Yavanajataka of Sphujidhvaja) The dates employed in the Yavanajataka are based on the Saka era (see Chapter 79/14 "When 66 years of the Sakas have elapsed..."), meaning that the translation of the text into Sanskrit was made by Yavanesvara in 149 CE (year 71 of the Saka era, which starts in 78 CE). Accordingly, the versification by Sphujidhvaja was made in 269 CE.

The Yavanajataka contains instructions on calculating astrological charts ( horoscopes ) from the time and place of one's birth. Astrology flourished in the Hellenistic world (particularly Alexandria) and the Yavanajataka reflects astrological techniques developed in the Greek-speaking world.  Astronomical mathematical methods, such as the calculate of the 'horoskopos' (zodiac sign on the eastern horizon) was used in the service of astrology.

References to Greek astrology [ edit ] There are various direct references to Greek astrological knowledge in the text, and the nomenclature is clearly taken from the Greek language: "The seventh place from the ascendent, the descendent, is called jamitra (diametros) in the language of the Greeks; the tenth from the ascendent, the mid-heaven, they say, is the mesurana (mesouranema)." (Chapter 1/49 The Yavanajataka of Sphujidhvaja) "This is said to be the method of determining the strength or weakness of the signs and planets according to the teaching of the Greeks; they say that, of the complete set of influences in horoscopy, there is an enormous number..." (Chapter 1/92 The Yavanajataka of Sphujidhvaja) "Thirty-six are the thirds of the zodiacal signs which are called Drekanas (dekanos) by the Greeks. They have various clothes, forms, and colors; I will describe them with all their qualities beginning with their characteristic signs." (Chapter 3/1 The Yavanajataka of Sphujidhvaja) "The rule concerning the actions of people which was described by the foremost (astrologers) of the Greeks with respect to the planetary week-days is to be established in a similar rule with respect to the hours (horai) which pass through the days" (Chapter 77/9 The Yavanajataka of Sphujidhvaja) "If the ascendant is an upacaya of his birth-ascendant and is occupied by a benefit planet, but not conjoined with a malefic, and if the Moon is in a good and favourable sign, the Greeks say that he always succeeds in his undertakings." (Chapter 78/3 The Yavanajataka of Sphujidhvaja) "The wise say that the observed course of the planets is the supreme eye of the entire body of the rules of horoscopy. I shall explain it concisely according to the instruction of the Greeks." (Chapter 79/1 The Yavanajataka of Sphujidhvaja) "Some who are students of the laws (of astronomy) find that it is good to follow the opinion of the sage Vasistha; (but according to) the best of the Greeks (the yuga) should consist of 165 years." (Chapter 79/3 The Yavanajataka of Sphujidhvaja) See also [ edit ] Indo-Greek kingdom Paulisa Siddhanta Romaka Siddhanta Notes [ edit ] ^ Source ^ Pingree (1981) p.81 ^ Mak (2013a, 2013b, 2014) ^ Mc Evilley "The shape of ancient thought", p385 ("The Yavanajataka is the earliest surviving Sanskrit text in horoscopy, and constitute the basis of all later Indian developments in horoscopy", himself quoting David Pingree "The Yavanajataka of Sphujidhvaja" p5) ^ N. P. Subramania Iyer (1991).

Kalaprakasika .

Asian Educational Services . p. 3.

^ Witzel 2001 .

^ Dhavale, D. G. (1984). " The Yavanajataka of Sphujidhvaja by David Pingree".

Annals of the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute .

65 (1/4): 266– 267.

JSTOR 41693124 .

^ Rocher, Ludo (March 1980). " The Yavanajataka of Sphujidhvaja by David Pingree".

Isis .

71 (1): 173– 174.

doi : 10.1086/352443 .

JSTOR 230349 .

References [ edit ] Thomas McEvilley (2002) The Shape of Ancient Thought , Allworth Press, ISBN 1-58115-203-5 David Pingree (1981) " Jyotiḥśāstra ", Jan Gonda (ed) A History of Indian Literature , Vol, VI Fasc. 4, Otto Harrassowitz — Wiesbaden K. V. Sarma (1997), "Sphujidhvaja", Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures edited by Helaine Selin , Springer, ISBN 978-0-7923-4066-9 Bill M. Mak (2014) The ‘Oldest Indo-Greek Text in Sanskrit’ Revisited : Additional Readings from the Newly Discovered Manuscript of the Yavanajātaka, Journal of Indian and Buddhist Studies 62(3): 1101-1105 Bill M. Mak (2013) The Last Chapter of Sphujidhvaja's Yavanajātaka critically edited with notes , SCIAMVS 14, pp. 59-148 Bill M. Mak (2013) The Date and Nature of Sphujidhvaja’s Yavanajātaka reconsidered in the light of some newly discovered materials , History of Science in South Asia 1: pp. 1-20 Witzel, Michael (25 May 2001).

"Autochthonous Aryans? The Evidence from Old Indian and Iranian Texts" .

Electronic Journal of Vedic Studies .

7 (3).

v t e Indian mathematics Mathematicians Ancient Apastamba Baudhayana Katyayana Manava Pāṇini Pingala Yajnavalkya Classical Āryabhaṭa I Āryabhaṭa II Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri Brahmadeva Brahmagupta Govindasvāmi Halayudha Jyeṣṭhadeva Kamalakara Mādhava of Saṅgamagrāma Mahāvīra Mahendra Sūri Munishvara Narayana Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Jagannatha Samrat Nilakantha Somayaji Śrīpati Sridhara Gangesha Upadhyaya Varāhamihira Sankara Variar Virasena Modern Srinivasa Ramanujan Satyendra Nath Bose P.C. Mahalanobis Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar C.R. Rao Veeravalli S. Varadarajan S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan K. R. Parthasarathy (probabilist) M. S. Narasimhan C. S. Seshadri Harish-Chandra Subbayya Sivasankaranarayana Pillai Tilak Raj Prabhakar Manjul Bhargava Akshay Venkatesh Ravi Vakil Kannan Soundararajan Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize recipients in Mathematical Science Treatises Aryabhatiya Bakhshali manuscript Bijaganita Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Ganita Kaumudi Grahalaghava Kanakkusaram Karanapaddhati Līlāvatī Lokavibhaga Pātīgaṇita Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Romaka Siddhanta Sadratnamala Siddhānta Shiromani Śulba Sūtras Surya Siddhanta Tantrasamgraha Vasishtha Siddhanta Veṇvāroha Yuktibhāṣā Yavanajataka Pioneering innovations Brahmi numerals Hindu–Arabic numeral system Symbol for zero (0) Infinite series expansions for the trigonometric functions Centres Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Jantar Mantar ( Jaipur , New Delhi , Ujjain , Varanasi ) Historians of mathematics Bapudeva Sastri (1821–1900) Shankar Balakrishna Dikshit (1853–1898) Sudhakara Dvivedi (1855–1910) M. Rangacarya (1861–1916) P. C. Sengupta (1876–1962) B. B. Datta (1888–1958) T. Hayashi A. A. Krishnaswamy Ayyangar (1892– 1953) A. N. Singh (1901–1954) C. T. Rajagopal (1903–1978) T. A. Saraswati Amma (1918–2000) S. N. Sen (1918–1992) K. S. Shukla (1918–2007) K. V. Sarma (1919–2005) Translators Walter Eugene Clark Henry Thomas Colebrooke David Pingree Other regions Babylon China Greece Islamic mathematics Europe Modern institutions Indian Statistical Institute Bhaskaracharya Pratishthana Chennai Mathematical Institute Institute of Mathematical Sciences Indian Institute of Science Harish-Chandra Research Institute Homi Bhabha Centre for Science Education Ramanujan Institute for Advanced Study in Mathematics TIFR Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Yavanajataka&oldid=1278673428 " Categories : Indian literature Hindu astrological texts Sanskrit texts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from December 2024 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 3 March 2025, at 22:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Yavanajataka 6 languages Add topic

