Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 By field Toggle By field subsection 1.1 Criticism of religion 1.2 Criticism of science 1.3 Critical theory 1.4 Postmodernism 2 Criticism of criticism 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Criticism 57 languages አማርኛ العربية Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Boarisch Brezhoneg Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Frysk Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Kreyòl ayisyen Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Oromoo Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Practice of judging the merits and faults of something Not to be confused with Critical thinking .

La Crítica , a 1906 self-portrait by Julio Ruelas where criticism is depicted as a creature atop his head Criticism is the construction of a judgement about the negative or positive qualities of someone or something. Criticism can range from impromptu comments to a written detailed response.

[ 1 ] Criticism falls into several overlapping types including "theoretical, practical, impressionistic, affective, prescriptive, or descriptive".

[ 2 ] Criticism may also refer to an expression of disapproval of someone or something.

[ 1 ] When criticism of this nature is constructive, it can make an individual aware of gaps in their understanding and it can provide distinct routes for improvement.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Research supports the notion that using feedback and constructive criticism in the learning process is very influential.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Critique vs.

criticism : In French, German, or Italian, no distinction is drawn between ' critique ' and 'criticism'. The two words both translate as critique , Kritik , and critica , respectively.

[ 9 ] In the English language, philosopher Gianni Vattimo suggests that criticism is used more frequently to denote literary criticism or art criticism while critique refers to more general writing such as Kant 's Critique of Pure Reason .

[ 9 ] Another distinction that is sometimes made is that critique is never personalized nor ad hominem [ 9 ] and is presented in a way that encourages rebuttal or expansion of the ideas expressed. Nonetheless, the distinctions are subtle and ambiguous at best.

[ 9 ] The term " brickbat " is sometimes used to mean "an unfavourable criticism, unkind remark or sharp put-down". The term originated in the 17th century, derived from the practice of throwing bricks as projectiles at a person who was disapproved of.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] In some contexts, such as literary criticism and art criticism , the word criticism is used as a neutral word that is synonymous with evaluation.

[ 12 ] By field [ edit ] Criticism of religion [ edit ] These paragraphs are an excerpt from Criticism of religion .

[ edit ] Criticism of religion involves criticism of the validity, concept, or ideas of religion .

[ 13 ] Historical records of criticism of religion go back to at least 5th century BCE in ancient Greece , in Athens specifically, with Diagoras "the Atheist" of Melos . In ancient Rome , an early known example is Lucretius ' De rerum natura from the 1st century BCE.

Criticism of science [ edit ] These paragraphs are an excerpt from Criticism of science .

[ edit ] Criticism of science addresses problems within science in order to improve science as a whole and its role in society. Criticisms come from philosophy , from social movements like feminism , and from within science itself.

Critical theory [ edit ] Critical theory criticizes power structures .

[ 14 ] The critical legal studies include criticism of the distinction between political argument and legal argument ( The personal is political ), [ 15 ] rule of law and separation of powers .

[ 16 ] See also criticism of Critical theory .

Postmodernism [ edit ] Postmodernism criticizes rationalism and objective reality .

[ 17 ] See also criticism of postmodernism .

Criticism of criticism [ edit ] Journalist and writer H. L. Mencken argued that "criticism is little more than a branch of homiletics . They judge a work of art, not by its clarity and sincerity, not by the force and charm of its ideas, not by the technical virtuosity of the artist, not by his originality and artistic courage, but simply and solely by his orthodoxy." [ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Controversy Film criticism Self-criticism Social criticism Theatre criticism References [ edit ] ^ a b "Criticism" . Cambridge Dictionary.

| the act of giving your opinion or judgment about the good or bad qualities of something or someone or the act of saying that something or someone is bad ^ "Criticism" . Oxford Dictionary.

| "The reasoned discussion of literary works, an activity which may include some or all of the following procedures, in varying proportions: the defence of literature against moralists and censors, classification of a work according to its genre, interpretation of its meaning, analysis of its structure and style, judgement of its worth by comparison with other works, estimation of its likely effect on readers, and the establishment of general principles by which literary works can be evaluated and understood." ^ Fong, Carlton J.; Warner, Jayce R.; Williams, Kyle M.; Schallert, Diane L.; Chen, Ling-Hui; Williamson, Zachary H.; Lin, Shengjie (July 2016).

"Deconstructing constructive criticism: The nature of academic emotions associated with constructive, positive, and negative feedback" .

Learning and Individual Differences .

49 : 393– 399.

doi : 10.1016/j.lindif.2016.05.019 .

ISSN 1041-6080 .

^ Winstone, Naomi E.; Nash, Robert A.; Parker, Michael; Rowntree, James (2017-01-02).

"Supporting Learners' Agentic Engagement With Feedback: A Systematic Review and a Taxonomy of Recipience Processes" .

Educational Psychologist .

52 (1): 17– 37.

doi : 10.1080/00461520.2016.1207538 .

hdl : 10536/DRO/DU:30171632 .

ISSN 0046-1520 .

^ Shute, Valerie J. (2008-03-01).

"Focus on Formative Feedback" .

Review of Educational Research .

78 : 153– 189.

doi : 10.3102/0034654307313795 .

hdl : 20.500.12749/2996 .

S2CID 145188268 .

^ Kluger, Avraham N.; DeNisi, Angelo (March 1996).

"The effects of feedback interventions on performance: A historical review, a meta-analysis, and a preliminary feedback intervention theory" .

Psychological Bulletin .

119 (2): 254– 284.

doi : 10.1037/0033-2909.119.2.254 .

ISSN 1939-1455 .

^ The Power of Feedback . 2014-06-27.

doi : 10.4324/9781315813875 .

ISBN 9781315813875 .

^ Brown, Gavin T.L.; Harris, Lois R.; Harnett, Jennifer (October 2012).

"Teacher beliefs about feedback within an assessment for learning environment: Endorsement of improved learning over student well-being" .

Teaching and Teacher Education .

28 (7): 968– 978.

doi : 10.1016/j.tate.2012.05.003 .

ISSN 0742-051X .

^ a b c d Gianni Vattimo Postmodern criticism: postmodern critique in David Wood (1990) Writing the future , pp. 57–58 ^ Tharoor, Shashi (7 February 2020).

"Shashi Tharoor's Word Of The Week: Brickbat" .

Hindustan Times . Retrieved 16 April 2021 .

^ "brickbat" . Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved 10 February 2022 .

^ "Common Errors in English Usage: criticism" . May 31, 2016.

^ Fitzgerald, Timothy (2000).

The Ideology of Religious Studies . New York: Oxford University Press (published 2003). p. 235.

ISBN 978-0195347159 . Retrieved 30 Apr 2019 .

... this book consists mainly of a critique of the concept of religion ... .

^ "Critical theory" .

Britannica . Retrieved 2022-11-28 .

^ Price, David Andrew. "Taking rights cynically: a review of critical legal studies." The Cambridge Law Journal 48.2 (1989): 271-301.

^ Belliotti, Raymond A. "The rule of law and the critical legal studies movement." UW Ontario L. Rev. 24 (1986): 67.

^ Bryant, Ian; Johnston, Rennie; Usher, Robin (2004).

Adult Education and the Postmodern Challenge: Learning Beyond the Limits .

Routledge . p. 203.

^ "Criticism of Criticism of Criticism" .

bactra.org . Retrieved 2022-10-25 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Criticism .

Look up critic , critical , or critique in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Gosse, Edmund William (1911).

"Criticism" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 7 (11th ed.). pp.

468– 470.

v t e Criticism The arts Literary criticism Art criticism Film criticism Theatre criticism Human behavior Self-criticism Social systems Social criticism Advertising Capitalism Conservative Judaism Democracy Fascism Intellectual property Copyright Patents Atheism and religion Atheism Religion Buddhism Christianity Catholic Church Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints Jehovah's Witnesses Jesus Protestantism Hinduism Islam Muhammad Quran Jainism Judaism Modern paganism Monotheism Pandeism Zoroastrianism Corporations Airbnb Amazon AT&T Chevron Coca-Cola Comcast Electronic Arts Facebook Google Huawei IKEA Microsoft McDonalds Netflix Paramount Global Starbucks Tesla, Inc.

Twitter Walmart Walt Disney Company Yahoo!

Mass media BBC CNBC ESPN Fox News MSNBC Washington Post Wikipedia Science, technology, engineering, and mathematics Criticism of science Criticism of technology Software C++ Desktop Linux Java Windows 10 Nations and governments Criticism of Israel United States foreign policy United States government Wars and conflicts Crusading Iraq War Opposition to the Iraq War Opposition to the War in Afghanistan (2001–2021) Opposition to United States involvement in the Vietnam War Opposition to World War I Opposition to World War II War on terror Others and similar concepts Anti-scientific viewpoints Appraisal (discourse analysis) Critique Critique of work Evaluation Review Links to related articles v t e Critical theory Origins Frankfurt School Freudo-Marxism Concepts Outline of critical theory Reconstructivism Derivatives Archetypal literary criticism Deconstructivism New historicism Technocriticism Critical ...

animal studies applied linguistics cartography consciousness criminology data studies design discourse analysis ethnography geography geopolitics historiography international relations theory language awareness legal studies literacy management studies medical anthropology pedagogy mathematics pedagogy university studies practice psychiatry psychology queer theory race theory regionalism security studies social theory social work technical practice terrorism studies Theorists Theodor W. Adorno Walter Benjamin Erich Fromm Jürgen Habermas Axel Honneth Max Horkheimer Otto Kirchheimer Siegfried Kracauer Leo Löwenthal Herbert Marcuse Friedrich Pollock Alfred Schmidt Related Binary opposition Critical rationalism Critical realism perception social sciences Theological Cultural Marxism conspiracy theory Hermeneutics of suspicion Immanent critique Phallogocentrism Privilege (social inequality) 2020s controversies around critical race theory v t e Literary criticism Literary theory Archetypal criticism Biographical criticism Chicago school Cultural materialism Darwinian criticism Deconstruction Descriptive poetics Ecocriticism Feminist criticism Formalism Geneva school Geocriticism Marxist criticism New Criticism New historicism Postcolonial criticism Postcritique Psychoanalytic criticism Reader-response criticism Russian formalism Semiotic criticism Sociological criticism Source criticism Thing theory Theorists and critics Plato Aristotle Horace Longinus Plotinus St. Augustine Boethius Aquinas Dante Boccaccio de Pizan Valmiki Lu Ji Sidney Tasso Bacon Hobbes Corneille Dryden Boileau-Despréaux Locke Pope Addison Vico Burke (Edmund) Hume Johnson Young Lessing Reynolds Diderot Kant Wollstonecraft Blake Schiller Schlegel Wordsworth de Staël Schelling Coleridge von Humboldt Keats Schopenhauer Peacock Shelley von Goethe Hegel Leopardi De Sanctis Carlyle Mill Emerson Sainte-Beuve Lowell Poe Arnold Taine Baudelaire Marx Kierkegaard Nietzsche Pater Zola France Wilde Mallarmé Tolstoy Croce Gramsci Eco Freud de Saussure Lévi-Strauss Hulme Benjamin Shklovsky Eliot Jung Trotsky Woolf Richards Bakhtin Bataille Ransom Lacan Lukács Valéry Burke (Kenneth) Cassirer Brooks Mukařovský Sartre de Beauvoir Adorno Jakobson Frye Bachelard Gombrich Heidegger Chomsky Derrida Barthes Foucault Poulet Williams Trilling Kristeva de Man Bloom Achebe Said Deleuze Guattari Girard Cixous Iser White Gadamer Ricoeur Abrams Geertz Marinetti Tzara Breton Loy de Andrade Hu Paz v t e Arts criticism Topics Architecture criticism Dance criticism Film criticism Literary criticism Music journalism Rockism and poptimism Television criticism Theatre criticism Video game journalism Visual art criticism ( Feminist ) See also Arts journalism v t e Criticism of religion By religion Baháˈí Faith Buddhism Christianity Catholic Jehovah's Witnesses Latter Day Saint movement Protestantism Seventh-day Adventist Unification movement Unification Church in Japan Westboro Baptist Church Hinduism Swaminarayan sect Islam Islamism Twelver Shia Islam Wahhabism Jainism Judaism Monotheism New religious movement Neopaganism Scientology Sikhism Yazdânism Zoroastrianism Religious texts Bible Quran Hadith Mormon sacred texts Book of Mormon Talmud Religious figures Aisha Charles Taze Russell Ellen White Jesus Moses Muhammad Mirza Ghulam Ahmad Saul Religious discrimination Ahmadiyya Atheism Bahá'i Faith Buddhism Catholicism Catholic Church Christianity post–Cold War era Druze Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Islam Persecution Jehovah's Witness Judaism Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Persecution Mormonism Neopaganism Eastern Orthodoxy Oriental Orthodoxy Copts Protestantism Rastafari Sikhism Sunni Islam Shia Islam Sufism Zorostianism Religious violence Buddhism Christianity Mormonism Judaism Islam Terrorism Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Persecution Christian thought on persecution and tolerance War In Islam In Judaism Sectarian violence By country India Anti-Christian violence In Odisha Nigeria Pakistan Books Atheist Manifesto Breaking the Spell Christianity Unveiled God in the Age of Science?

God Is Not Great God: The Failed Hypothesis Letter to a Christian Nation The Age of Reason The Blind Watchmaker The Caged Virgin The End of Faith The God Delusion The Gospel of the Flying Spaghetti Monster Why I Am Not a Christian Why I Am Not a Muslim The Demon-Haunted World Books critical of Christianity Books critical of Islam Books critical of Judaism Books critical of Mormonism Books critical of Scientology Movements Agnosticism Antitheism Atheism Criticism Cārvāka New Atheism Nontheistic religions Parody religion Related topics Abuse Apostasy In Islam In Christianity Criticism of atheism Criticism of monotheism Sexuality Slavery Superstitions Muslim Jewish v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more...

Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Antihumanism Philistinism Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Renaissance humanism Studia Humanitatis Authority control databases National Germany Czech Republic Other NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Criticism&oldid=1292049702 " Categories : Criticism Philosophical methodology Literary concepts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 22:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Criticism 57 languages Add topic

