Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Selected works 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Charles de Rémusat 9 languages Български Deutsch Français مصرى Nederlands Русский Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French politician and writer Portrait of Rémusat by Paul Delaroche Rémusat by Charles Reutlinger, ca. 1865.

Charles François Marie, Comte de Rémusat ( French pronunciation: [ʃaʁl fʁɑ̃swa maʁi kɔ̃t də ʁemyza] ; 13 March 1797 – 6 June 1875), was a French politician and writer.

Biography [ edit ] He was born in Paris . His father, Auguste Laurent, Comte de Rémusat, whose family came from Toulouse , was chamberlain to Napoleon Bonaparte , but acquiesced in the restoration and became prefect first of Haute Garonne , and then of Nord. Charles' mother was Claire Élisabeth Jeanne Gravier de Vergennes, Madame de Rémusat .

[ 1 ] He developed political views more liberal than those of his parents, and having been brought up for a career in law, he published in 1820 a pamphlet on trial by jury . He was an active journalist, showing in philosophy and literature the influence of Victor Cousin , and is said to have furnished to no small extent the original of Honoré de Balzac 's character, Henri de Marsay [ citation needed ] . He signed the journalists' protest against the Ordinances of July 1830, and in the following October was elected deputy for Haute Garonne.

[ 1 ] Becoming a Doctrinaire , he supported most of those measures of restriction on popular liberty which made the July monarchy unpopular with French Radicals. In 1836 he became for a short time undersecretary of state for the interior. He then became an ally of Adolphe Thiers , and in 1840 held the ministry of the interior for a brief period. In the same year he became an Academician. For the rest of Louis Philippe 's reign he was in opposition until he joined Thiers in his attempt at a ministry in the spring of 1848. During this time Rémusat constantly spoke in the chair here, but was still more active in literature, especially on philosophical subjects, the most remarkable of his works being his book on Pierre Abélard (2 vols., 1845). He had to leave France after the coup d'état ; nor did he re-enter political life during the Second Empire until 1869, when he founded a moderate opposition journal at Toulouse.

[ 1 ] Neither the Revolution of 1848 nor the Second Empire was to
his taste. Eventually he gave up hope for the restoration of constitutional monarchy in France and he declared himself in favor of the Third French Republic : "I have never desired anything else than the peaceful triumph of the great principles of the French Revolution. I hoped that the monarchy would bring it forth; today I put my hopes in the Republic, firmly maintained and wisely organized." [ 2 ] In 1871 he refused the Vienna embassy offered him by Thiers, but in August he was appointed minister of foreign affairs in succession to Jules Favre . Although minister he was not a deputy, and on standing for Paris in September 1873 he was beaten by Désiré Barodet . A month later he was elected (having already resigned with Thiers) for Haute Garonne by a great majority. He died in Paris.

[ 1 ] During his abstention from politics Rémusat continued to write on philosophical history, especially English.

Saint Anselme de Cantorbéry appeared in 1854; L'Angleterre au ... son temps , etc., in 1858; John Wesley in 1870; Lord Herbert de Cherbury in 1874; Histoire de la philosophie en Angleterre depuis Bacon jusqu'à Locke in 1875; besides other and minor works. He wrote well, was a forcible speaker and an acute critic; but his adoption of the indeterminate eclecticism of Victor Cousin in philosophy and of the somewhat similarly indeterminate liberalism of Thiers in politics probably limited his powers, though both no doubt accorded with his critical and unenthusiastic turn of mind.

[ 3 ] He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1873.

[ 4 ] Selected works [ edit ] Essais de philosophie (1842) Abélard (2 vol. 1845) Sur la philosophie allemande (1845) Saint Anselme de Cantorbéry (1854). Tableau de la vie monastique et de la lutte du pouvoir spirituel onzième siècle.

Critiques et études littéraires (2 volumes, 1857) Politique libérale ou Fragments pour servir à la défense de la Révolution française (1860) Channing , sa vie et ses œuvres (1862) Philosophie religieuse ; de la théologie naturelle en France et en Angleterre, Éd.

Germer Baillière , coll. « Bibliothèque de philosophie contemporaine »  (1864) John Wesley et le méthodisme (1870) Lord Herbert de Cherbury (1874). Exposition, avec une grande liberté d'esprit, de la doctrine de Lord Herbert, qui peut être regardé comme le fondateur de la religion naturelle en Angleterre.

Casimir Perier (1874) Histoire de la philosophie en Angleterre depuis Bacon jusqu'à Locke (1875) Mémoires de ma vie References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Chisholm 1911 , p. 82.

^ Crăiuțu, Aurelian (2003).

Liberalism Under Siege: The Political Thought of the French Doctrinaires . Lexington Books. pp.

28– 29.

^ Chisholm 1911 , pp. 82–83.

^ "Book of Members, 1780–2010: Chapter R" (PDF) . American Academy of Arts and Sciences . Retrieved 23 September 2016 .

Auden, W.H.; Kronenberger, Louis (1966), The Viking Book of Aphorisms, New York: Viking Press.

Attribution: This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Rémusat, Charles François Marie, Comte de ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 23 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

82– 83.

External links [ edit ] Works by Charles de Rémusat at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Charles de Rémusat at the Internet Archive Political offices Preceded by Charles Duchâtel Minister of the Interior 1840 Succeeded by Charles Duchâtel Preceded by Jules Favre Minister of Foreign Affairs 1871–1873 Succeeded by Duc de Broglie v t e First cabinet of Louis Mathieu Molé (6 September 1836 to 15 April 1837) Head of state: King Louis Philippe I President of the council Louis-Mathieu Molé Louis-Mathieu Molé War Simon, général-baron Bernard Justice Jean-Charles Persil Foreign Affairs Louis-Mathieu Molé Interior Adrien de Gasparin Charles de Rémusat (Sub-secretary of State) Finance Tanneguy Duchâtel Navy and Colonies Claude du Campe de Rosamel Public Education François Guizot Commerce Tanneguy Duchâtel Public Works, Agriculture and Commerce Nicolas Martin du Nord v t e Second cabinet of Adolphe Thiers (1 March 1840 to 29 October 1840) Head of state: King Louis Philippe I President of the council Adolphe Thiers Adolphe Thiers Foreign Affairs Adolphe Thiers Interior Charles de Rémusat Léon de Maleville (Sub-secretary of State) Justice and Religious Affairs Alexandre-François Vivien War Amédée Despans-Cubières Finance Joseph Pelet de la Lozère Navy and Colonies Albin Roussin Public Education Victor Cousin Public Works Hippolyte François Jaubert Agriculture and Commerce Alexandre Goüin Adolphe Billault (Sub-secretary of State) v t e Académie française seat 8 Claude de Malleville (1634) Jean Ballesdens (1648) Géraud de Cordemoy (1675) Jean-Louis Bergeret (1684) Charles-Irénée Castel de Saint-Pierre (1694) Pierre Louis Maupertuis (1743) Jean-Jacques Lefranc, Marquis de Pompignan (1759) Jean-Sifrein Maury (1784) Michel-Louis-Étienne Regnaud de Saint-Jean d'Angély (1803) Pierre-Simon Laplace (1816) Pierre Paul Royer-Collard (1827) Charles de Rémusat (1846) Jules Simon (1875) Adrien Albert Marie de Mun (1897) Alfred-Henri-Marie Baudrillart (1918) Octave Aubry (1946) Édouard Herriot (1946) Jean Rostand (1959) Michel Déon (1978) Daniel Rondeau (2019) v t e Foreign ministers of France Ancien Régime Revol Villeroy A. J. Richelieu Sillery R. Phélypeaux Bouthillier Chavigny Brienne Lionne Pomponne Croissy Torcy Huxelles Dubois Morville Chauvelin Chaillou Noailles Argenson Puisieulx Saint-Contest Rouillé Bernis É. Choiseul C. Choiseul É. Choiseul L. Phélypeaux Aiguillon Bertin Vergennes Montmorin Vauguyon Montmorin Lessart Dumouriez Naillac Chambonas Dubouchage Sainte-Croix First Republic Lebrun-Tondu Deforgues Goujon Herman Delacroix Talleyrand Reinhard Talleyrand First Empire Talleyrand Champagny Bassano Caulaincourt First Restoration Laforest Talleyrand Hundred Days Caulaincourt Bignon Second Restoration Talleyrand A. E. Richelieu Dessolles Pasquier M. Montmorency Chateaubriand Damas La Ferronays Montmorency-Laval Portalis Polignac Mortemart July Monarchy Bignon Jourdan Molé Maison Sébastiani V. Broglie Rigny Bresson Rigny V. Broglie Thiers Molé Montebello Soult Thiers Guizot Second Republic Lamartine Bastide Bedeau Bastide Drouyn de Lhuys Tocqueville Rayneval La Hitte Drouyn de Lhuys Brénier Baroche Turgot Drouyn de Lhuys Second Empire Drouyn de Lhuys Walewski Baroche Thouvenel Drouyn de Lhuys La Valette Moustier La Valette La Tour Auvergne Daru Ollivier Gramont La Tour d'Auvergne Third Republic Favre Rémusat A. Broglie Decazes Banneville Waddington Freycinet Barthélemy-Saint-Hilaire Gambetta Freycinet Duclerc Fallières Challemel-Lacour Ferry Freycinet Flourens Goblet Spuller Ribot Develle Casimir-Perier Hanotaux Berthelot Bourgeois Hanotaux Delcassé Rouvier Bourgeois Pichon Cruppi Selves Poincaré Jonnart Pichon Doumergue Bourgeois Viviani Doumergue Delcassé Viviani Briand Ribot Barthou Pichon Millerand Leygues Briand Poincaré Lefebvre Herriot Briand Herriot Briand Laval Tardieu Herriot Paul-Boncour Daladier Barthou Laval Flandin Delbos Paul-Boncour Bonnet Daladier Reynaud Daladier Reynaud Baudouin Vichy France Baudouin Laval Flandin Darlan Laval Provisional Government Bidault Blum Fourth Republic Bidault Schuman Bidault Mendès France Faure Pinay Pineau Pleven Couve de Murville Fifth Republic Couve de Murville Debré Schumann Bettencourt Jobert Sauvagnargues Guiringaud François-Poncet Cheysson Dumas Raimond Dumas Juppé Charette Védrine Villepin Barnier Douste-Blazy Kouchner Alliot-Marie Juppé Fabius Ayrault Le Drian Colonna Séjourné Barrot Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Norway Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Sycomore Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Charles_de_Rémusat&oldid=1299862366 " Categories : 1797 births 1875 deaths Writers from Paris Politicians from Paris Counts of France Party of Order politicians French interior ministers Members of the 1st Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the 2nd Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the 3rd Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the 4th Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the 5th Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the 6th Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the 7th Chamber of Deputies of the July Monarchy Members of the 1848 Constituent Assembly Members of the National Legislative Assembly of the French Second Republic Members of the National Assembly (1871) Prefects of France Prefects of Haute-Garonne Prefects of Nord (French department) French male writers French liberal politicians Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Members of the Académie Française Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with French IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 21:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Charles de Rémusat 9 languages Add topic

