Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ancient Greek debates 2 Medieval Islamic thought 3 Scholastic thinkers 4 Renaissance 5 Enlightenment 6 Modern thought 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Cosmic pluralism 9 languages العربية Español Italiano پنجابی Română Русский Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Belief in numerous life-bearing "worlds" This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Cosmic pluralism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The earliest depiction of Giordano Bruno , a supporter of cosmic pluralism, is an engraving published in 1715 in Germany, presumed based on a lost contemporary portrait.

[ 1 ] Cosmic pluralism , the plurality of worlds , or simply pluralism , describes the belief in numerous " worlds " ( planets , dwarf planets or natural satellites ) in addition to Earth (possibly an infinite number), which may harbour extraterrestrial life .

The debate over pluralism began as early as the time of Anaximander ( c.

610 – c.

546 BC ) as a metaphysical argument , [ 2 ] long predating the scientific Copernican conception that the Earth is one of numerous planets. It has continued, in a variety of forms, until the modern era.

Ancient Greek debates [ edit ] In Greek times , the debate was largely philosophical and did not conform to present notions of cosmology . Cosmic pluralism was a corollary to notions of infinity, and the purported multitude of life-bearing worlds were more akin to parallel universes (either contemporaneously in space or infinitely recurring in time) than to different solar systems. After Anaximander opened the door to an infinite universe, infinite higher dimensions , and an infinite amount of universes and other classes of verses , a strong pluralist stance was adopted by the atomists , notably Leucippus , Democritus , Epicurus —whose Epistle to Herodotus clearly lays out the Doctrine of Innumerable Worlds—and Lucretius who elaborates this Doctrine in his work De rerum natura .

Anaxarchus told Alexander the Great that there were an infinite number of worlds that each harbored an infinite variety of unknown natural phenomena and extraterrestrial life , leading Alexander to weep, for he had not yet conquered even one.

[ 3 ] While these were prominent thinkers, their opponents— Plato and Aristotle —had greater effect. They argued that the Earth is unique and that there can be no other systems of worlds.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] This stance neatly dovetailed with later Christian ideas, [ 6 ] and pluralism was effectively suppressed for approximately a millennium.

[ citation needed ] Medieval Islamic thought [ edit ] Many medieval Muslim scholars endorsed the idea of cosmic pluralism. Imam Muhammad al-Baqir (676–733) wrote "Maybe you see that God created only this single world and that God did not create humans besides you. Well, I swear by God that God created thousands and thousands of worlds and
thousands and thousands of humankind." [ 7 ] Fakhr al-Din al-Razi (1149–1209), in dealing with his conception of physics and the physical world in his Matalib, rejects the Aristotelian and Avicennian notion of the Earth's centrality within the universe. Instead, he argues that there are "a thousand thousand worlds (alfa alfi 'awalim) beyond this world such that each one of those worlds be bigger and more massive than this world as well as having the like of what this world has." [ 7 ] To support his theological argument, he cites the Qur'anic verse, "All praise belongs to God, Lord of the Worlds," in Surah al-Fatiha emphasizing the term "Worlds." Two Qur'anic verses support the idea of God being Lord of multiple worlds: 1:2 and 41:09. Qur'an 16:8 says "He has created other things of which ye have no knowledge." [ 7 ] However, some scholars argued that the expression used in the verses simply means "The Lord of all people".

[ 8 ] Cosmic pluralism was depicted in fictional Arabic literature . " The Adventures of Bulukiya ", a tale from the One Thousand and One Nights ( Arabian Nights ), depicted a cosmos consisting of different worlds, some larger than Earth and each with their own inhabitants.

[ 9 ] Scholastic thinkers [ edit ] Eventually, the Ptolemaic-Aristotelian system was challenged and pluralism reasserted, first tentatively by scholastics and then more seriously by followers of Copernicus . The telescope appeared to prove that a multitude of life was reasonable and an expression of God's creative omnipotence; still powerful theological opponents, meanwhile, continued to insist that although the Earth may have been displaced from the center of the cosmos, it was still the unique focus of God's creation. Thinkers such as Johannes Kepler were willing to admit the possibility of pluralism without truly supporting it. Medieval philosophers like Nicholas of Cusa and Nicole Oresme wrote the possibility of the plurality of the worlds.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Renaissance [ edit ] Giordano Bruno introduced in his works the idea of multiple worlds instantiating the infinite possibilities of a pristine, indivisible One. Bruno (from the mouth of his character Philotheo) in his De l'infinito universo et mondi (1584) claims that "innumerable celestial bodies, stars, globes, suns and earths may be sensibly perceived therein by us and an infinite number of them may be inferred by our own reason." [ 12 ] Teaching this was among the charges the Inquisition made against him.

[ 13 ] Enlightenment [ edit ] During the Scientific Revolution and the later Enlightenment , cosmic pluralism became a mainstream possibility.

Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle 's Entretiens sur la pluralité des mondes ( Conversations on the Plurality of Worlds ) of 1686 was an important work from this period, speculating on pluralism and describing the new Copernican cosmology.

[ 14 ] Pluralism was also championed by philosophers such as John Locke , astronomers such as William Herschel and even politicians, including John Adams and Benjamin Franklin . As greater scientific skepticism and rigour were applied to the question, it ceased to be simply a matter of philosophy and theology and was properly bounded by astronomy and biology.

The French astronomer Camille Flammarion was one of the chief proponents of cosmic pluralism during the latter half of the nineteenth century. His first book, La pluralité des mondes habités (1862) was a great popular success, going through 33 editions in its first twenty years. Flammarion was one of the first people to put forward the idea that extraterrestrial beings were genuinely alien, and not simply variations of earthly creatures.

[ 15 ] Modern thought [ edit ] In the late nineteenth and twentieth centuries, the term "cosmic pluralism" became largely archaic as knowledge diversified and the speculation on extraterrestrial life focused on particular bodies and observations. The historic debate continues to have modern parallels, however.

Carl Sagan and Frank Drake , for instance, could well be considered "pluralists" while proponents of the Rare Earth hypothesis are modern skeptics.

Modern Islamic scholars like Abdullah Yusuf Ali point to the Qur'an (42:29) to argue for life on other planets: "And among His Signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the living creatures that He has scattered through them". The verses uses the word da’bbah , which denotes living creatures on the surface of a planet.

[ 7 ] Other scholars like Herbert Eisenstein argued however that the word also refer to animals in general.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Space portal Buddhist cosmology Extraterrestrial life Exoplanet Exotheology Extraterrestrial life in fiction Hindu cosmology Mediocrity principle Mormon cosmology Planetary habitability Quiet and loud aliens References [ edit ] ^ Virgilio Salvestrini, Bibliografia di Giordano Bruno , Firenze, 1958 ^ Simplicius , Commentary on Aristotle's Physics , 1121, 5–9 (English translation in: Simplicius, On Aristotle Physics 8.1-5 , Translated by István Bodnár, Michael Chase and Michael Share, New York, Bloomsbury, 2012, p. 22).

^ Plutarch.

De tranquillitate animi .

^ Michael J. Crowe (1999).

The Extraterrestrial Life Debate, 1750–1900 .

Courier Dover Publications .

ISBN 0-486-40675-X .

^ David Darling, "Pluralism (plurality of worlds)" ^ Wiker, Benjamin D. (November 4, 2002).

"Alien Ideas: Christianity and the Search for Extraterrestrial Life" .

Crisis Magazine . Archived from the original on February 10, 2003.

^ a b c d David A. Weintraub (2014). "Islam," Religions and Extraterrestrial Life (pp 161-168). Springer International Publishing.

^ Reynolds, Gabriel Said "The Qur'an and the Bible: Text and commentary" Yale University Press, 2018, p. 30.

^ Irwin, Robert (2003).

The Arabian Nights: A Companion .

Tauris Parke Paperbacks . p. 204 & 209.

ISBN 1-86064-983-1 .

^ Dick, Steven J. Plurality of Worlds: The Extraterrestrial Life Debate from Democritus to Kant. Cambridge University Press (June 29, 1984). pgs 35-42.

^ "Medieval & Renaissance Astronomy", Australia Telescope National Facility. Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation. Retrieved from http://www.atnf.csiro.au/outreach/education/senior/cosmicengine/renaissanceastro.html on March 14, 2014.

^ Hetherington, Norriss S., ed. (April 2014) [1993].

Encyclopedia of Cosmology (Routledge Revivals): Historical, Philosophical, and Scientific Foundations of Modern Cosmology .

Routledge . p. 419.

ISBN 9781317677666 . Retrieved 29 March 2015 .

^ Luigi Firpo, Il processo di Giordano Bruno, 1993.

^ Conversations on the Plurality of Worlds — Bernard Le Bovier de Fontenelle ^ Flammarion, (Nicolas) Camille (1842–1925) — The Internet Encyclopedia of Science ^ Eisenstein, Herbert "Animal life; Encyclopedia of the Qur'an Vol I" Brill, 2001, p. 94.

Further reading [ edit ] Ernst Benz (1978).

Kosmische Bruderschaft. Die Pluralität der Welten. Zur Ideengeschichte des Ufo-Glaubens . Aurum Verlag.

ISBN 3-591-08061-6 .

(later titled "Außerirdische Welten. Von Kopernikus zu den Ufos") v t e Extraterrestrial life Events and objects Shergotty meteorite (1865) Nakhla meteorite (1911) Murchison meteorite (1969) Viking lander biological experiments (1976) Allan Hills 77005 (1977) Allan Hills 84001 (1984) Yamato 000593 (2000) CI1 fossils (2011) Signals of interest Misidentified CP 1919 (misidentified pulsar) CTA-102 (misidentified quasar) Stars KIC 8462852 (unusual light fluctuations) EPIC 204278916 (unusual light fluctuations) VVV-WIT-07 (unusual light fluctuations) HD 164595 signal (unknown origin) Other SHGb02+14a (radio source) Wow! signal (inconclusive) Fast radio burst (unknown origin) BLC1 (radio signal) Life in the Universe Earliest known life forms Planetary habitability in the Solar System Life on Venus Life on Mars Life on Titan Planetary habitability Catalog of Nearby Habitable Systems Circumstellar habitable zone Earth analog Extraterrestrial liquid water Galactic habitable zone Habitability of binary star systems Habitability of natural satellites Habitability of neutron star systems Habitability of red dwarf systems Habitability of K-type main-sequence star systems Habitability of yellow dwarf systems Habitability of F-type main-sequence star systems List of potentially habitable exoplanets Planetary habitability Superhabitable planet Tholin Space missions Beagle 2 Biological Oxidant and Life Detection BioSentinel Curiosity rover Darwin Dragonfly Enceladus Explorer Enceladus Life Finder Europa Clipper ExoMars Rosalind Franklin rover ExoLance EXPOSE Foton-M3 Icebreaker Life Journey to Enceladus and Titan Laplace-P Life Investigation For Enceladus Living Interplanetary Flight Experiment Mars Geyser Hopper Mars sample-return mission Mars 2020 Northern Light Opportunity rover Perseverance rover SpaceX Red Dragon Spirit rover Tanpopo Titan Mare Explorer Venus In Situ Explorer Viking 1 Viking 2 Interstellar communication Active SETI Allen Telescope Array Arecibo message Arecibo Observatory Berkeley SETI Research Center Bracewell probe Breakthrough Initiatives Breakthrough Listen Breakthrough Message Communication with extraterrestrial intelligence Gauss's Pythagorean right triangle proposal Astrolinguistics Lincos language NIROSETI Pioneer plaque Project Cyclops Project Ozma Project Phoenix SERENDIP Search for extraterrestrial intelligence SETI@home setiQuest Voyager Golden Record Water hole Xenolinguistics Types of alleged extraterrestrial beings Energy beings Grey aliens Insectoids Little green men Nordic aliens Reptilian humanoids Hypotheses Cosmic pluralism Directed panspermia Drake equation Extraterrestrial hypothesis Fermi paradox Hypothetical types of biochemistry Interplanetary contamination Kardashev scale Mediocrity principle Non-planetary abiogenesis Panspermia Fermi paradox solutions Aestivation hypothesis Berserker hypothesis Dark forest hypothesis Firstborn hypothesis Great Filter Hart–Tipler conjecture Neocatastrophism Planetarium hypothesis Rare Earth hypothesis Zoo hypothesis Related topics Ancient astronauts Astrobiology Astroecology Biosignature Brookings Report Exotheology Extraterrestrials in fiction Extremophile Hemolithin History of the extraterrestrial life debate Nexus for Exoplanet System Science Noogenesis Planetary protection Potential cultural impact of extraterrestrial contact Post-detection policy San Marino Scale Technosignature UFO religion Xenoarchaeology Authority control databases International FAST National United States France BnF data Spain Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cosmic_pluralism&oldid=1251718396 " Categories : Pluralism (philosophy) Theories Astrobiology Natural philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2008 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2008 This page was last edited on 17 October 2024, at 17:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cosmic pluralism 9 languages Add topic

