Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life (1920–1945) 2 Early political career (1945–1965) 3 Home Secretary (1965–1967) 4 Chancellor of the Exchequer (1967–1970) 5 Shadow Cabinet (1970–1974) 6 Home Secretary (1974–1976) 7 President of the European Commission (1977–1981) 8 Social Democratic Party (1981–1987) 9 Peerage, achievements, books and death (1987–2003) 10 Marriage and personal life 11 In popular culture 12 Works 13 References 14 Further reading 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Roy Jenkins 32 languages العربية Català Čeština Cymraeg Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Italiano Kernowek Latina Lëtzebuergesch مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska Українська Winaray 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British politician (1920–2003) The Right Honourable The Lord Jenkins of Hillhead OM PC Jenkins in 1977 Chancellor of the University of Oxford In office 14 March 1987 – 5 January 2003 Vice‑Chancellor The Lord Neill of Bladen Sir Richard Southwood Sir Peter North Sir Colin Lucas Preceded by The Earl of Stockton Succeeded by The Lord Patten of Barnes President of the European Commission In office 6 January 1977 – 19 January 1981 Preceded by François-Xavier Ortoli Succeeded by Gaston Thorn Home Secretary In office 4 March 1974 – 10 September 1976 Prime Minister Harold Wilson James Callaghan Preceded by Robert Carr Succeeded by Merlyn Rees In office 23 December 1965 – 30 November 1967 Prime Minister Harold Wilson Preceded by Frank Soskice Succeeded by James Callaghan Chancellor of the Exchequer In office 30 November 1967 – 19 June 1970 Prime Minister Harold Wilson Chief Secretary Jack Diamond Preceded by James Callaghan Succeeded by Iain Macleod Junior ministerial offices Minister of Aviation In office 18 October 1964 – 23 December 1965 Prime Minister Harold Wilson Preceded by Julian Amery Succeeded by Fred Mulley Party political offices Leader of the Liberal Democrats in the House of Lords In office 16 July 1988 – 19 December 1997 Leader Paddy Ashdown Preceded by The Baroness Seear Succeeded by The Lord Rodgers of Quarry Bank Leader of the Social Democratic Party In office 7 July 1982 – 13 June 1983 President Shirley Williams Deputy David Owen Preceded by Party established Succeeded by David Owen Deputy Leader of the Labour Party In office 8 July 1970 – 10 April 1972 Leader Harold Wilson Preceded by George Brown Succeeded by Edward Short Shadow Cabinet offices Shadow Home Secretary In office 25 November 1973 – 4 March 1974 Leader Harold Wilson Preceded by Shirley Williams Succeeded by Jim Prior Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer In office 20 June 1970 – 19 April 1972 Leader Harold Wilson Preceded by Iain Macleod Succeeded by Denis Healey Parliamentary offices Member of the House of Lords Lord Temporal Life peerage 1 December 1987 – 5 January 2003 Member of Parliament for Glasgow Hillhead In office 25 March 1982 – 18 May 1987 Preceded by Tam Galbraith Succeeded by George Galloway Member of Parliament for Birmingham Stechford In office 23 February 1950 – 5 January 1977 [ 1 ] Preceded by Constituency established Succeeded by Andrew MacKay Member of Parliament for Southwark Central In office 29 April 1948 – 3 February 1950 Preceded by John Martin Succeeded by Constituency abolished Personal details Born Roy Harris Jenkins ( 1920-11-11 ) 11 November 1920 Abersychan , Monmouthshire , Wales Died 5 January 2003 (2003-01-05) (aged 82) East Hendred , Oxfordshire, England Political party Labour (until 1981) SDP (1981–1988) Liberal Democrats (from 1988) Spouse Mary Jennifer Morris ​ ​ ( m.

1945) ​ Children 3 Parent Arthur Jenkins (father) Alma mater Cardiff University Balliol College, Oxford Military service Allegiance United Kingdom Branch/service British Army Rank Captain Unit Royal Artillery Battles/wars World War II Roy Harris Jenkins, Baron Jenkins of Hillhead (11 November 1920 – 5 January 2003) was a British politician and writer who served as President of the European Commission from 1977 to 1981. At various times a Member of Parliament (MP) for the Labour Party and the Social Democratic Party (SDP), and a peer for the Liberal Democrats , he was Chancellor of the Exchequer and Home Secretary under the Wilson and Callaghan Governments .

The son of Arthur Jenkins , a coal-miner and Labour MP, Jenkins was educated at the University of Oxford and served as an intelligence officer during the Second World War . Initially elected as MP for Southwark Central in 1948, he moved to become MP for Birmingham Stechford in 1950. On the election of Harold Wilson after the 1964 election , Jenkins was appointed Minister of Aviation . A year later, he was promoted to the Cabinet to become Home Secretary . In this role, Jenkins embarked on a major reform programme; he sought to build what he described as "a civilised society", overseeing measures such as the effective abolition in Britain of both capital punishment and theatre censorship , the partial decriminalisation of homosexuality , relaxing of divorce law , suspension of birching and the liberalisation of abortion law .

Following the devaluation crisis in November 1967, Jenkins replaced James Callaghan as Chancellor of the Exchequer . Throughout his time at the Treasury, Jenkins oversaw a tight fiscal policy in an attempt to control inflation, and oversaw a particularly tough Budget in 1968 which saw major tax rises. As a result of this, the Government's current account entered a surplus in 1969. After Labour unexpectedly lost the 1970 election , Jenkins was elected as Deputy Leader of the Labour Party in 1970. He resigned from the position in 1972 after the Labour Party decided to oppose Britain's entry to the European Communities , which he strongly supported.

[ 2 ] When Labour returned to power following the 1974 election , Wilson appointed Jenkins as Home Secretary for the second time. Two years later, when Wilson resigned as prime minister, Jenkins stood in the leadership election to succeed him, finishing third behind Michael Foot and the winner James Callaghan . He subsequently chose to resign from Parliament and leave British politics, to accept appointment as the first-ever (and so far, only) British President of the European Commission , a role he took up in January 1977.

After completing his term at the Commission in 1981, Jenkins announced a surprise return to British politics; dismayed with the Labour Party's move further left under the leadership of Michael Foot, he became one of the " Gang of Four ", senior Labour figures who broke away from the party and founded the SDP.

[ 3 ] In 1982, Jenkins won a by-election to return to Parliament as MP for Glasgow Hillhead, taking the seat from the Conservatives in a famous result. He became leader of the SDP ahead of the 1983 election , during which he formed an electoral alliance with the Liberal Party . Following his disappointment with the performance of the SDP in the election, he resigned as leader. He subsequently lost his seat in Parliament at the 1987 election to Labour's George Galloway , and accepted a life peerage shortly afterwards; he sat in the House of Lords as a Liberal Democrat .

Jenkins was later elected to succeed former prime minister Harold Macmillan as Chancellor of the University of Oxford following the latter's death; he would hold this position until his own death sixteen years later. In the late 1990s, he served as a close adviser to Prime Minister Tony Blair and chaired a major commission on electoral reform . In addition to his political career, he was also a noted historian, biographer, and writer.

David Marquand described Jenkins's autobiography, A Life at the Centre (1991), as one which "will be read with pleasure long after most examples of the genre have been forgotten".

[ 4 ] Early life (1920–1945) [ edit ] Born in Abersychan , Monmouthshire , in southeastern Wales , as an only child, Roy Jenkins was the son of a National Union of Mineworkers official, Arthur Jenkins . His father was imprisoned during the 1926 General Strike for his alleged involvement in disturbances.

[ 5 ] Arthur Jenkins later became President of the South Wales Miners' Federation and Member of Parliament for Pontypool , Parliamentary Private Secretary to Clement Attlee , and briefly a minister in the 1945 Labour government . Roy Jenkins' mother, Hattie Harris, was the daughter of a steelworks foreman.

[ 6 ] Jenkins was educated at Pentwyn Primary School, Abersychan County Grammar School , University College, Cardiff , and at Balliol College, Oxford , where he was twice defeated for the Presidency of the Oxford Union , but took a first-class degree in Politics, Philosophy and Economics (PPE).

[ 7 ] His university colleagues included Tony Crosland , Denis Healey and Edward Heath , and he became friends with all three, although he was never particularly close to Healey.

[ citation needed ] In John Campbell 's biography, A Well-Rounded Life , a romantic relationship between Jenkins and Crosland was detailed.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Other figures whom he met at Oxford who would become notable in public life included Madron Seligman , Nicholas Henderson and Mark Bonham Carter .

[ 10 ] During the Second World War , Jenkins received his officer training at Alton Towers and was posted to the 55th West Somerset Yeomanry at West Lavington, Wiltshire .

[ 11 ] Through the influence of his father, in April 1944, Jenkins was sent to Bletchley Park to work as a codebreaker ; while there he befriended the historian Asa Briggs .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 10 ] Early political career (1945–1965) [ edit ] Having failed to win Solihull in 1945 , after which he spent a brief period working for the Industrial and Commercial Finance Corporation , [ 10 ] he was elected to the House of Commons in a 1948 by-election as the Member of Parliament for Southwark Central , becoming the " Baby of the House ". His constituency was abolished in boundary changes for the 1950 general election , when he stood instead in the new Birmingham Stechford constituency. He won the seat, and represented the constituency until 1977.

In 1947, he edited a collection of Clement Attlee 's speeches, published under the title Purpose and Policy .

[ 14 ] Attlee then granted Jenkins access to his private papers so that he could write his biography, which appeared in 1948 ( Mr Attlee: An Interim Biography ).

[ 15 ] The reviews were generally favourable, including George Orwell 's in Tribune .

[ 16 ] In 1950, he advocated a large capital levy , abolition of public schools and introduction of a measure of industrial democracy to nationalised industries as key policy objectives for the Labour government.

[ 10 ] In 1951 Tribune published his pamphlet Fair Shares for the Rich .

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] Here, Jenkins advocated the abolition of large private incomes by taxing them, graduating from 50 per cent for incomes between £20,000 and £30,000 to 95 per cent for incomes over £100,000.

[ 17 ] He also proposed further nationalisations and said: "Future nationalisations will be more concerned with equality than with planning, and this means that we can leave the monolithic public corporation behind us and look for more intimate forms of ownership and control".

[ 19 ] He later described this "almost Robespierrean " pamphlet as "the apogee of my excursion to the left".

[ 18 ] Jenkins contributed an essay on 'Equality' to the 1952 collection New Fabian Essays .

[ 20 ] In 1953 appeared Pursuit of Progress , a work intended to counter Bevanism . Retreating from what he had demanded in Fair Shares for the Rich , Jenkins now argued that the redistribution of wealth would occur over a generation [ 21 ] and abandoned the goal of public school abolition.

[ 10 ] However, he still proposed further nationalisations: "It is quite impossible to advocate both the abolition of great inequalities of wealth and the acceptance of a one-quarter public sector and three-quarters private sector arrangement. A mixed economy there will undoubtedly be, certainly for many decades and perhaps permanently, but it will need to be mixed in very different proportions from this".

[ 22 ] He also opposed the Bevanites' neutralist foreign policy platform: "Neutrality is essentially a conservative policy, a policy of defeat, of announcing to the world that we have nothing to say to which the world will listen. ... Neutrality could never be acceptable to anyone who believes that he has a universal faith to preach".

[ 23 ] Jenkins argued that the Labour leadership needed to take on and defeat the neutralists and pacifists in the party; it would be better to risk a split in the party than face "the destruction, by schism, perhaps for a generation, of the whole progressive movement in the country".

[ 24 ] Between 1951 and 1956, he wrote a weekly column for the Indian newspaper The Current . Here he advocated progressive reforms such as equal pay, the decriminalisation of homosexuality, the liberalisation of the obscenity laws and the abolition of capital punishment.

[ 25 ] Mr Balfour's Poodle , a short account of the House of Lords crisis of 1911 that culminated in the Parliament Act 1911 , was published in 1954. Favourable reviewers included A. J. P. Taylor , Harold Nicolson , Leonard Woolf and Violet Bonham Carter .

[ 26 ] After a suggestion by Mark Bonham Carter , Jenkins then wrote a biography of the Victorian radical, Sir Charles Dilke , which was published in October 1958.

[ 27 ] Between 1955 and 1958 Jenkins served on the Board of Governors of the British Film Institute .

[ 28 ] During the 1956 Suez Crisis , Jenkins denounced Anthony Eden 's "squalid imperialist adventure" at a Labour rally in Birmingham Town Hall.

[ 29 ] Three years later he claimed that "Suez was a totally unsuccessful attempt to achieve unreasonable and undesirable objectives by methods which were at once reckless and immoral; and the consequences, as was well deserved, were humiliating and disastrous".

[ 30 ] Jenkins praised Anthony Crosland 's 1956 work The Future of Socialism as "the most important book on socialist theory" since Evan Durbin 's The Politics of Democratic Socialism (1940).

[ 31 ] With much of the economy now nationalised, Jenkins argued, socialists should concentrate on eliminating the remaining pockets of poverty and on the removal of class barriers, as well as promoting libertarian social reforms.

[ 32 ] Jenkins was principal sponsor, in 1959, of the bill which became the liberalising Obscene Publications Act , responsible for establishing the "liable to deprave and corrupt" criterion as a basis for a prosecution of suspect material and for specifying literary merit as a possible defence.

[ 33 ] In July 1959, Penguin published Jenkins' The Labour Case , timed to anticipate the upcoming election .

[ 34 ] Jenkins argued that Britain's chief danger was that of "living sullenly in the past, of believing that the world has a duty to keep us in the station to which we are accustomed, and showing bitter resentment if it does not do so". He added: "Our neighbours in Europe are roughly our economic and military equals. We would do better to live gracefully with them than to waste our substance by trying unsuccessfully to keep up with the power giants of the modern world".

[ 35 ] Jenkins claimed that the Attlee government concentrated "too much towards the austerity of fair shares, and too little towards the incentives of free consumers' choice".

[ 36 ] Although he still believed in the elimination of poverty and more equality, Jenkins now argued that these aims could be achieved by economic growth. In the final chapter ('Is Britain Civilised?') Jenkins set out a list of necessary progressive social reforms: the abolition of the death penalty, decriminalisation of homosexuality, abolition of the Lord Chamberlain's powers of theatre censorship, liberalisation of the licensing and betting laws, liberalisation of the divorce laws, legalisation of abortion, decriminalisation of suicide and more liberal immigration laws. Jenkins concluded: Let us be on the side of those who want people to be free to live their own lives, to make their own mistakes, and to decide, in an adult way and provided they do not infringe the rights of others, the code by which they wish to live; and on the side of experiment and brightness, of better buildings and better food, of better music ( jazz as well as Bach ) and better books, of fuller lives and greater freedom. In the long run these things will be more important than the most perfect of economic policies.

[ 37 ] In the aftermath of Labour's 1959 defeat, Jenkins appeared on Panorama and argued that Labour should abandon further nationalisation, question its connection with the trade unions and not dismiss a closer association with the Liberal Party .

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] In November he delivered a Fabian Society lecture in which he blamed Labour's defeat on the unpopularity of nationalisation and he repeated this in an article for The Spectator .

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] His Spectator article also called for Britain to accept its diminished place in the world, to grant colonial freedom , to spend more on public services and to promote the right of individuals to live their own lives free from the constraints of popular prejudices and state interference.

[ 39 ] [ 41 ] Jenkins later called it a "good radical programme, although...not a socialist one".

[ 42 ] In May 1960, Jenkins joined the Campaign for Democratic Socialism , a Gaitskellite pressure group designed to fight against left-wing domination of the Labour Party.

[ 43 ] In July 1960 Jenkins resigned from his frontbench role in order to be able to campaign freely for British membership of the Common Market.

[ 44 ] At the 1960 Labour Party conference in Scarborough , Jenkins advocated rewriting Clause IV of the party's constitution but he was booed.

[ 45 ] In November he wrote in The Spectator that "unless the Labour Party is determined to abdicate its role as a mass party and become nothing more than a narrow sectarian society, its paramount task is to represent the whole of the Leftward-thinking half of the country—and to offer the prospect of attracting enough marginal support to give that half some share of power".

[ 46 ] During 1960–62, his main campaign was British membership of the Common Market, where he became Labour's leading advocate of entry. When Harold Macmillan initiated the first British application to join the Common Market in 1961, Jenkins became deputy chairman of the all-party Common Market Campaign and then chairman of the Labour Common Market Committee.

[ 47 ] At the 1961 Labour Party conference Jenkins spoke in favour of Britain's entry.

[ 48 ] Since 1959, Jenkins had been working on a biography of the Liberal Prime Minister, H. H. Asquith . For Jenkins, Asquith ranked with Attlee as the embodiment of the moderate, liberal intelligence in politics that he most admired. Through Asquith's grandson, Mark Bonham Carter, Jenkins had access to Asquith's letters to his mistress, Venetia Stanley .

[ 49 ] Kenneth Rose , Michael Foot , Asa Briggs and John Grigg all favourably reviewed the book when it was published in October 1964.

[ 50 ] However, Violet Bonham Carter wrote a defence of her father in The Times against the few criticisms of Asquith in the book, [ 51 ] and Robert Rhodes James wrote in The Spectator that "Asquith was surely a tougher, stronger, more acute man...than Mr. Jenkins would have us believe. The fascinating enigma of his complete decline is never really analysed, nor even understood. ... We required a Sutherland : but we have got an Annigoni ".

[ 52 ] John Campbell claims that "for half a century it has remained unchallenged as the best biography and is rightly regarded as a classic".

[ 50 ] Like Healey and Crosland, he had been a close friend of Hugh Gaitskell and for them Gaitskell's death and the elevation of Harold Wilson as Labour Party leader was a setback. For Jenkins, Gaitskell would remain his political hero.

[ 53 ] After the 1964 general election Jenkins was appointed Minister of Aviation and was sworn of the Privy Council. While at Aviation he oversaw the high-profile cancellations of the BAC TSR-2 and Concorde projects (although the latter was later reversed after strong opposition from the French Government). In January 1965 Patrick Gordon Walker resigned as Foreign Secretary and in the ensuing reshuffle Wilson offered Jenkins the Department for Education and Science ; however, he declined it, preferring to stay at Aviation.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] Home Secretary (1965–1967) [ edit ] In the summer of 1965, Jenkins eagerly accepted an offer to replace Frank Soskice as Home Secretary. However Wilson, dismayed by a sudden bout of press speculation about the potential move, delayed Jenkins' appointment until December. Once Jenkins took office – the youngest Home Secretary since Churchill – he immediately set about reforming the operation and organisation of the Home Office . The Principal Private Secretary, Head of the Press and Publicity Department and Permanent Under-Secretary were all replaced. He also redesigned his office, famously replacing the board on which condemned prisoners were listed with a fridge.

[ 56 ] Following the 1966 general election , in which Labour won a comfortable majority, Jenkins pushed through a series of police reforms which reduced the number of separate forces from 117 to 49.

[ 54 ] [ 57 ] The Times called it "the greatest upheaval in policing since the time of Peel ".

[ 58 ] His visit to Chicago in September (to study their policing methods) convinced him of the need to introduce two-way radios to the police; whereas the Metropolitan Police possessed 25 radios in 1965, Jenkins increased this to 2,500, and provided similar numbers of radios to the rest of the country's police forces. Jenkins also provided the police with more car radios, which made the police more mobile but reduced the amount of time they spent patrolling the streets.

[ 59 ] His Criminal Justice Act 1967 introduced more stringent controls on the purchase of shotguns, outlawed last-minute alibis and introduced majority verdicts in juries in England and Wales . The Act was also designed to lower the prison population by the introduction of release under licence, easier bail, suspended sentences and earlier parole.

[ 59 ] Immigration was a divisive and provocative issue during the late 1960s and on 23 May 1966 Jenkins delivered a speech on race relations, which is widely considered to be one of his best.

[ 60 ] Addressing a London meeting of the National Committee for Commonwealth Immigrants he notably defined Integration: ... not as a flattening process of assimilation but as equal opportunity, accompanied by cultural diversity, in an atmosphere of mutual tolerance.

Before going on to ask: Where in the world is there a university which could preserve its fame, or a cultural centre which could keep its eminence, or a metropolis which could hold its drawing power, if it were to turn inwards and serve only its own hinterland and its own racial group?

And concluding that: To live apart, for a person, a city, a country, is to lead a life of declining intellectual stimulation.

[ 60 ] By the end of 1966, Jenkins was the Cabinet's rising star; the Guardian called him the best Home Secretary of the century "and quite possibly the best since Peel", the Sunday Times called him Wilson's most likeliest successor and the New Statesman labelled him "Labour's Crown Prince".

[ 61 ] In a speech to the London Labour Conference in May 1967, Jenkins said his vision was of "a more civilised, more free and less hidebound society" and he further claimed that "to enlarge the area of individual choice, socially, politically and economically, not just for a few but for the whole community, is very much what democratic socialism is about".

[ 62 ] He gave strong personal support to David Steel 's Private Member's Bill for the legalisation of abortion, which became the Abortion Act 1967 , telling the Commons that "the existing law on abortion is uncertain and...harsh and archaic", adding that "the law is consistently flouted by those who have the means to do so. It is, therefore, very much a question of one law for the rich and one law for the poor".

[ 63 ] When the Bill looked likely to be dropped due to insufficient time, Jenkins helped ensure that it received enough parliamentary time to pass and he voted for it in every division.

[ 64 ] Jenkins also supported Leo Abse 's bill for the decriminalisation of homosexuality, which became the Sexual Offences Act 1967 .

[ 65 ] Jenkins told the Commons: "It would be a mistake to think...that by what we are doing tonight we are giving a vote of confidence or congratulation to homosexuality. Those who suffer from this disability carry a great weight of loneliness, guilt and shame. The crucial question...is, should we add to those disadvantages the full rigour of the criminal law? By its overwhelming decisions, the House has given a fairly clear answer, and I hope that the Bill will now make rapid progress towards the Statute Book. It will be an important and civilising Measure".

[ 66 ] Jenkins also abolished the use of flogging in prisons.

[ 67 ] In July 1967 Jenkins recommended to the Home Affairs Select Committee a bill to end the Lord Chamberlain 's power to censor the theatre. This was passed as the Theatres Act 1968 under Jenkins' successor as Home Secretary, James Callaghan.

[ 68 ] Jenkins also announced that he would introduce legislation banning racial discrimination in employment, which was embodied in the Race Relations Act 1968 passed under Callaghan.

[ 69 ] In October 1967 Jenkins planned to introduce legislation that would enable him to keep out the 20,000 Kenyan Asians who held British passports (this was passed four months later under Callaghan as the Commonwealth Immigrants Act 1968 , which was based on Jenkins' draft).

[ 69 ] Jenkins is often seen as responsible for the most wide-ranging social reforms of the late 1960s, with popular historian Andrew Marr claiming "the greatest changes of the Labour years" were thanks to Jenkins.

[ 70 ] These reforms would not have happened when they did, earlier than in most other European countries, if Jenkins had not supported them.

[ 71 ] In a speech in Abingdon in July 1969, Jenkins said that the " permissive society " had been allowed to become a dirty phrase: "A better phrase is the 'civilized society', based on the belief that different individuals will wish to make different decisions about their patterns of behaviour and that, provided these do not restrict the freedom of others, they should be allowed to do so within a framework of understanding and tolerance".

[ 72 ] Jenkins' words were immediately reported in the press as "The permissive society is the civilised society", which he later wrote "was not all that far from my meaning".

[ 73 ] For some conservatives, such as Peter Hitchens , Jenkins' reforms remain objectionable. In his book The Abolition of Britain , Hitchens accuses him of being a "cultural revolutionary" who takes a large part of the responsibility for the decline of "traditional values" in Britain. During the 1980s Margaret Thatcher and Norman Tebbit would blame Jenkins for family breakdowns, the decline of respect for authority and the decline of social responsibility. Jenkins replied by pointing out that Thatcher, with her large parliamentary majorities, never attempted to reverse his reforms.

[ 74 ] Chancellor of the Exchequer (1967–1970) [ edit ] From 1967 to 1970 Jenkins served as Chancellor of the Exchequer , replacing James Callaghan following the devaluation crisis of November 1967. Jenkins' ultimate goal as Chancellor was economic growth, which depended on restoring stability to sterling at its new value after devaluation. This could only be achieved by ensuring a surplus in the balance of payments , which had been in a deficit for the previous five years. Therefore, Jenkins pursued deflation , including cuts in public expenditure and increases in taxation, in order to ensure that resources went into exports rather than domestic consumption.

[ 75 ] Jenkins warned the House of Commons in January 1968 that there was "two years of hard slog ahead".

[ 76 ] He quickly gained a reputation as a particularly tough Chancellor with his 1968 budget increasing taxes by £923 million, more than twice the increase of any previous budget to date.

[ 77 ] Jenkins had warned the Cabinet that a second devaluation would occur in three months if his budget did not restore confidence in sterling.

[ 78 ] He restored prescription charges (which had been abolished when Labour returned to office in 1964) and postponed the raising of the school leaving age to 16 to 1973 instead of 1971. Housing and road building plans were also heavily cut, and he also accelerated Britain's withdrawal East of Suez .

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] Jenkins ruled out increasing the income tax and so raised the taxes on: drinks and cigarettes (except on beer), purchase tax, petrol duty, road tax, a 50 per cent rise in Selective Employment Tax and a one-off Special Charge on personal incomes. He also paid for an increase in family allowances by cutting child tax allowances.

[ 81 ] Despite Edward Heath claiming it was a "hard, cold budget, without any glimmer of warmth" Jenkins' first budget broadly received a warm reception, with Harold Wilson remarking that "it was widely acclaimed as a speech of surpassing quality and elegance" and Barbara Castle that it "took everyone's breath away".

[ 54 ] Richard Crossman said it was "genuinely based on socialist principles, fair in the fullest sense by really helping people at the bottom of the scale and by really taxing the wealthy".

[ 82 ] In his budget broadcast on 19 March, Jenkins said that Britain had been living in a "fool's paradise" for years and that it was "importing too much, exporting too little and paying ourselves too much", with a lower standard of living than France or West Germany.

[ 83 ] Jenkins' supporters in the Parliamentary Labour Party became known as the "Jenkinsites". These were usually younger, middle-class and university-educated ex-Gaitskellites such as Bill Rodgers , David Owen , Roy Hattersley , Dick Taverne , John Mackintosh and David Marquand .

[ 84 ] In May–July 1968, some of his supporters, led by Patrick Gordon Walker and Christopher Mayhew , plotted to replace Wilson with Jenkins as Labour leader but he declined to challenge Wilson.

[ 85 ] A year later his supporters again attempted to persuade Jenkins to challenge Wilson for the party leadership but he again declined.

[ 86 ] He later wrote in his memoirs that the 1968 plot was "for me...the equivalent of the same season of 1953 for Rab Butler . Having faltered for want of single-minded ruthlessness when there was no alternative to himself, he then settled down to a career punctuated by increasingly wide misses of the premiership. People who effectively seize the prime ministership – Lloyd George, Macmillan, Mrs Thatcher – do not let such moments slip".

[ 87 ] In April 1968, with Britain's reserves declining by approximately £500 million every quarter, Jenkins went to Washington to obtain a $1,400 million loan from the International Monetary Fund .

[ 88 ] Following a further sterling crisis in November 1968, Jenkins was forced to raise taxes by a further £250 million.

[ 89 ] After this the currency markets slowly began to settle and his 1969 budget represented more of the same with a £340 million increase in taxation to further limit consumption.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] By May 1969, Britain's current account position was in surplus, thanks to a growth in exports, a drop in overall consumption and, in part, the Inland Revenue correcting a previous underestimation in export figures. In July Jenkins was also able to announce that the size of Britain's foreign currency reserves had been increased by almost $1 billion since the beginning of the year. It was at this time that he presided over Britain's only excess of government revenue over expenditure in the period 1936–7 to 1987–8.

[ 54 ] [ 92 ] Thanks in part to these successes, there was a high expectation that the 1970 budget would be a more generous one. Jenkins, however, was cautious about the stability of Britain's recovery and decided to present a more muted and fiscally neutral budget. It is often argued that this, combined with a series of bad trade figures, contributed to the Conservative victory at the 1970 general election . Historians and economists have often praised Jenkins for presiding over the transformation in Britain's fiscal and current account positions towards the end of the 1960s.

Andrew Marr , for example, described him as one of the 20th century's "most successful chancellors".

[ 70 ] Alec Cairncross considered Jenkins "the ablest of the four Chancellors I served".

[ 93 ] Public expenditure as a proportion of GDP rose from 44 per cent in 1964 to around 50 per cent in 1970.

[ 94 ] Despite Jenkins' warnings about inflation, wage settlements in 1969–70 increased on average by 13 per cent and contributed to the high inflation of the early 1970s and consequently negated most of Jenkins' efforts to obtain a balance of payments surplus.

[ 95 ] [ 96 ] Shadow Cabinet (1970–1974) [ edit ] After Labour unexpectedly lost power in 1970, Jenkins was appointed Shadow Chancellor of the Exchequer by Harold Wilson . Jenkins was also subsequently elected to the deputy leadership of the Labour Party in July 1970, defeating future Labour Leader Michael Foot and former Leader of the Commons Fred Peart at the first ballot.

[ 97 ] At this time he appeared the natural successor to Harold Wilson , and it appeared to many only a matter of time before he inherited the leadership of the party, and the opportunity to become prime minister.

[ 4 ] [ 98 ] This changed completely, however, as Jenkins refused to accept the tide of anti-European feeling that became prevalent in the Labour Party in the early 1970s. After a special conference on the EEC was held by the Labour Party on 17 July 1971, which Jenkins was forbidden to address, he delivered one of the most powerful speeches of his career.

[ 99 ] Jenkins told a meeting of the Parliamentary Labour Party on 19 July: "At conference the only alternative [to the EEC] we heard was 'socialism in one country'. That is always good for a cheer. Pull up the drawbridge and revolutionize the fortress. That's not a policy either: it's just a slogan, and it is one which becomes not merely unconvincing but hypocritical as well when it is dressed up as our best contribution to international socialism".

[ 100 ] This reopened the old Bevanite–Gaitskellite divide in the Party; Wilson told Tony Benn the day after Jenkins' speech that he was determined to smash the Campaign for Democratic Socialism.

[ 101 ] At the 1971 Labour Party conference in Brighton, the NEC's motion to reject the "Tory terms" of entry into the EEC was carried by a large majority. Jenkins told a fringe meeting that this would have no effect on his continued support for Britain's entry.

[ 102 ] Benn said Jenkins was "the figure dominating this Conference; there is no question about it".

[ 103 ] On 28 October 1971, he led 69 Labour MPs through the division lobby in support of the Heath government's motion to take Britain into the EEC. In so doing, they were defying a three-line whip and a five-to-one vote at the Labour Party annual conference.

[ 4 ] Jenkins later wrote: "I was convinced that it was one of the decisive votes of the century, and had no intention of spending the rest of my life answering the question of what did I do in the great division by saying 'I abstained'. I saw it in the context of the first Reform Bill , the repeal of the Corn Laws , Gladstone's Home Rule Bills, the Lloyd George Budget and the Parliament Bill , the Munich Agreement and the May 1940 votes ".

[ 104 ] Jenkins' action gave the European cause a legitimacy that would have otherwise been absent had the issue been considered solely as a party political matter. However, he was now regarded by the left as a "traitor".

James Margach wrote in the Sunday Times : "The unconcealed objective of the Left now is either to humiliate Roy Jenkins and his allies into submission – or drive them from the party".

[ 105 ] At this stage, however, Jenkins would not fully abandon his position as a political insider, and chose to stand again for deputy leader , an act his colleague David Marquand claimed he later came to regret.

[ 4 ] Jenkins promised not to vote with the government again and he narrowly defeated Michael Foot on a second ballot.

[ 106 ] In accordance with the party whip, Jenkins voted against European Communities Bill 55 times.

[ 107 ] However, he resigned both the deputy leadership and his shadow cabinet position in April 1972, after the party committed itself to holding a referendum on Britain's membership of the EEC. This led to some former admirers, including Roy Hattersley , choosing to distance themselves from Jenkins. Hattersley later claimed that Jenkins' resignation was "the moment when the old Labour coalition began to collapse and the eventual formation of a new centre party became inevitable".

[ 108 ] In his resignation letter to Wilson, Jenkins said that if there were a referendum "the Opposition would form a temporary coalition of those who, whatever their political views, were against the proposed action. By this means we would have forged a more powerful continuing weapon against progressive legislation than anything we have known in this country since the curbing of the absolute powers of the old House of Lords".

[ 109 ] Jenkins' lavish lifestyle — Wilson once described him as "more a socialite than a socialist" — had already alienated much of the Labour Party from him.

In May 1972, he collected the Charlemagne Prize , which he had been awarded for promoting European unity.

[ 110 ] In September an ORC opinion poll found that there was considerable public support for an alliance between the 'moderate' wing of the Labour Party and the Liberals; 35 per cent said they would vote for a Labour–Liberal alliance, 27 per cent for the Conservatives and 23.5 per cent for 'Socialist Labour'.

The Times claimed that there were "twelve million Jenkinsites".

[ 111 ] During the spring and summer of 1972, Jenkins delivered a series of speeches designed to set out his leadership credentials. These were published in September under the title What Matters Now , which sold well.

[ 112 ] In the book's postscript, Jenkins said that Labour should not be a narrow socialist party advocating unpopular left-wing policies but must aim to "represent the hopes and aspirations of the whole leftward thinking half of the country", adding that a "broad-based, international, radical, generous-minded party could quickly seize the imagination of a disillusioned and uninspired British public".

[ 113 ] Following Dick Taverne 's victory in the 1973 Lincoln by-election , where he stood as " Democratic Labour " in opposition to the official Labour candidate, Jenkins gave a speech to the Oxford University Labour Club denouncing the idea of a new centre party.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] Jenkins was elected to the shadow cabinet in November 1973 as Shadow Home Secretary .

[ 116 ] During the February 1974 election , Jenkins rallied to Labour and his campaign was described by David Butler and Dennis Kavanagh as sounding "a note of civilised idealism".

[ 117 ] Jenkins was disappointed that the Liberal candidate in his constituency won 6000 votes; he wrote in his memoirs that "I already regarded myself as such a closet Liberal that I naïvely thought they ought nearly all to have come to me".

[ 118 ] Jenkins wrote a series of biographical essays that appeared in The Times during 1971–74 and which were published as Nine Men of Power in 1974. Jenkins chose Gaitskell, Ernest Bevin , Stafford Cripps , Adlai Stevenson II , Robert F. Kennedy , Joseph McCarthy , Lord Halifax , Léon Blum and John Maynard Keynes .

[ 119 ] In 1971 Jenkins delivered three lectures on foreign policy at Yale University , published a year later as Afternoon on the Potomac?

[ 120 ] Home Secretary (1974–1976) [ edit ] When Labour returned to power in early 1974, Jenkins was appointed Home Secretary for the second time. Earlier, he had been promised the treasury; however, Wilson later decided to appoint Denis Healey as Chancellor instead. Upon hearing from Bernard Donoughue that Wilson had reneged on his promise, Jenkins reacted angrily. Despite being on a public staircase, he is reported to have shouted "You tell Harold Wilson he must bloody well come to see me ...and if he doesn't watch out, I won't join his bloody government ... This is typical of the bloody awful way Harold Wilson does things!" [ 121 ] [ 122 ] The Jenkinsites were dismayed by Jenkins' refusal to insist upon the Chancellorship and began to look elsewhere for leadership, thus ending the Jenkinsites as a united group.

[ 123 ] Jenkins served from 1974 to 1976. Whereas during his first period as Home Secretary in the 1960s the atmosphere had been optimistic and confident, the climate of the 1970s was much more fractious and disillusioned.

[ 124 ] After two Northern Irish sisters, Marian Price and Dolours Price , were imprisoned for 20 years for the 1973 Old Bailey bombing , they went on hunger strike in order to be transferred to a prison in Northern Ireland.

[ 125 ] In a television broadcast in June 1974, Jenkins announced that he would refuse to give in to their demands, although in March 1975 he discreetly transferred them to a Northern Irish prison.

[ 125 ] He undermined his previous liberal credentials to some extent by pushing through the controversial Prevention of Terrorism Act in the aftermath of the Birmingham pub bombings of November 1974, which, among other things, extended the length of time suspects could be held in custody and instituted exclusion orders.

[ 126 ] Jenkins also resisted calls for the death penalty to be restored for terrorist murderers.

[ 127 ] On 4 December he told the Cabinet committee on Northern Ireland that "everything he heard made him more convinced that Northern Ireland had nothing to do with the rest of the UK".

[ 128 ] When reviewing Garret FitzGerald 's memoirs in 1991, Jenkins proclaimed: "My natural prejudices, such as they are, are much more green than orange. I am a poor unionist, believing intuitively that even Paisley and Haughey are better at dealing with each other than the English are with either".

[ 129 ] The Sex Discrimination Act 1975 (which legislated for gender equality and set up the Equal Opportunities Commission ) and the Race Relations Act 1976 (which extended to private clubs the outlawing of racial discrimination and founded the Commission for Racial Equality ) were two notable achievements during his second time as Home Secretary.

[ 130 ] Jenkins opposed Michael Foot's attempts to grant pickets the right to stop lorries during strikes and he was dismayed by Anthony Crosland's decision to grant an amnesty to the 11 Labour councillors at Clay Cross who had been surcharged for refusing to increase council rents in accordance with the Conservatives' Housing Finance Act 1972.

[ 131 ] After two trade unionists, Ricky Tomlinson and Des Warren (known as the " Shrewsbury Two "), were imprisoned for intimidation and affray for their part in a strike, Jenkins refused to accede to demands from the labour movement that they should be released. This demonstrated Jenkins' increasing estrangement from much of the labour movement and for a time he was heckled in public by people chanting "Free the Two".

[ 132 ] Jenkins also unsuccessfully tried to persuade the Cabinet to adopt electoral reform in the form of proportional representation and to have the Official Secrets Act 1911 liberalised to facilitate more open government .

[ 133 ] Although becoming increasingly disillusioned during this time by what he considered the party's drift to the left, he was the leading Labour figure in the EEC referendum of June 1975 (and was also president of the 'Yes' campaign). In September 1974 he had followed Shirley Williams in stating that he "could not stay in a Cabinet which had to carry out withdrawal" from the EEC.

[ 134 ] During the referendum campaign, Tony Benn claimed that 500,000 jobs had been lost due to Britain's membership; Jenkins replied on 27 May that "I find it increasingly difficult to take Mr Benn seriously as an economics minister".

[ 135 ] He added that Britain outside the EEC would enter "an old people's home for fading nations. ... I do not even think it would be a comfortable or agreeable old people's home. I do not much like the look of some of the prospective wardens".

[ 136 ] The two men debated Britain's membership together on Panorama , which was chaired by David Dimbleby .

[ 137 ] According to David Butler and Uwe Kitzinger , "they achieved a decidedly more lucid and intricate level of discussion than is commonly seen on political television".

[ 138 ] Jenkins found it congenial to work with the centrists of all parties in the campaign and the 'Yes' campaign won by two to one.

[ 139 ] After the referendum, Wilson demoted Benn to Energy Secretary and attempted to balance the downgrading of Benn with the dismissal of the right-wing minister Reg Prentice from the Department of Education, despite already promising Jenkins that he had no intention of sacking Prentice. Jenkins threatened to resign if Prentice was sacked, telling Wilson that he was "a squalid little man who was using squalid little arguments in order to explain why he was performing so much below the level of events".

[ 140 ] Wilson quickly backed down.

[ 141 ] In September Jenkins delivered a speech in Prentice's constituency of Newham to demonstrate solidarity with him after he was threatened with deselection by left-wingers in the constituency party. Jenkins was heckled by both far-left and far-right demonstrators and he was hit in the chest by a flour bomb thrown by a member of the National Front .

[ 142 ] Jenkins warned that if Prentice was deselected "it is not just the local party that is undermining its own foundations by ignoring the beliefs and feelings of ordinary people, the whole legitimate Labour Party, left as well as right, is crippled if extremists have their way". He added that if "tolerance is shattered formidable consequences will follow. Labour MPs will either have to become creatures of cowardice, concealing their views, trimming their sails, accepting orders, stilling their consciences, or they will all have to be men far far to the left of those whose votes they seek. Either would make a mockery of parliamentary democracy".

[ 143 ] In January 1976, he further distanced himself from the left with a speech in Anglesey , where he repudiated ever-higher public spending: "I do not think you can push public expenditure significantly above 60 per cent [of GNP] and maintain the values of a plural society with adequate freedom of choice. We are here close to one of the frontiers of social democracy".

[ 144 ] A former supporter, Roy Hattersley, distanced himself from Jenkins after this speech.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] In May 1976, he told the Police Federation conference to "be prepared first to look at the evidence and to recognize how little the widespread use of prison reduces our crime or deals effectively with many of the individuals concerned".

[ 147 ] He also responded to the Federation's proposals on law and order: "I respect your right to put them to me. You will no doubt respect my right to tell you that I do not think all the points in sum amount to a basis for a rational penal policy".

[ 147 ] When Wilson suddenly resigned as prime minister in March 1976, Jenkins was one of six candidates for the leadership of the Labour Party but came third in the first ballot, behind Callaghan and Michael Foot. Realising that his vote was lower than expected, and sensing that the parliamentary party was in no mood to overlook his actions five years before, he immediately withdrew from the contest.

[ 4 ] On issues such as the EEC, trade union reform and economic policy he had proclaimed views opposite to those held by the majority of Labour Party activists, and his libertarian social views were at variance with the majority of Labour voters.

[ 148 ] A famous story alleged that when one of Jenkins' supporters canvassed a group of miners' MPs in the Commons' tea-room, he was told: "Nay, lad, we're all Labour here".

[ 149 ] Jenkins had wanted to become Foreign Secretary, [ 150 ] but Foot warned Callaghan that the party would not accept the pro-European Jenkins as Foreign Secretary. Callaghan instead offered Jenkins the Treasury in six months' time (when it would be possible to move Denis Healey to the Foreign Office). Jenkins turned the offer down.

[ 151 ] Jenkins then accepted an appointment as President of the European Commission (succeeding François-Xavier Ortoli ) after Callaghan appointed Anthony Crosland to the Foreign Office.

[ 152 ] President of the European Commission (1977–1981) [ edit ] Jenkins (left) as President of the European Commission with Queen Juliana of the Netherlands in 1977 In an interview with The Times in January 1977, Jenkins said that: "My wish is to build an effective united Europe. ... I want to move towards a more effectively organized Europe politically and economically and as far as I am concerned I want to go faster, not slower".

[ 153 ] The main development overseen by the Jenkins Commission was the development of the Economic and Monetary Union of the European Union from 1977, which began in 1979 as the European Monetary System , a forerunner of the Single Currency or Euro .

[ 154 ] His biographer calls Jenkins "the godfather of the euro" and claims that among his successors only Jacques Delors has made more impact.

[ 155 ] In a speech in Florence in October 1977, Jenkins argued that monetary union would facilitate "a more efficient and developed rationalisation of industry and commerce than is possible under a Customs Union alone". He added that "a major new international currency" would form "a joint and alternative pillar of the world monetary system" which would lead to greater international stability. Monetary union would also combat inflation by controlling the money supply. Jenkins conceded that this would involve the diminution of national sovereignty but he pointed out that "governments which do not discipline themselves already find themselves accepting very sharp surveillance" from the IMF. Monetary union would also promote employment and diminish regional differences. Jenkins ended the speech by quoting Jean Monnet 's statement that politics was "not only the art of the possible, but...the art of making possible tomorrow what may seem impossible today".

[ 156 ] President Jenkins was the first president to attend a G8 summit on behalf of the Community.

[ 157 ] He received an Honorary Degree (Doctor of Laws) from the University of Bath in 1978.

[ 158 ] In October 1978, Tribune reported (falsely) that Jenkins and his wife had not paid their Labour Party subscription for several years. After this was repeated in the national press, Jenkins' drafted his wife's letter to The Times that refuted the allegation.

[ 159 ] [ 160 ] Jenkins blamed the story on a "malicious Trot in the North Kensington Labour Party".

[ 159 ] Jenkins was disillusioned with the Labour Party and he was almost certain that he could not stand again as a Labour candidate; in January 1979 he told Shirley Williams that the "big mistake we had made was not to go and support Dick Taverne in 1973; everything had got worse since then".

[ 161 ] He did not vote in the 1979 election .

[ 162 ] After the Conservatives won the election Margaret Thatcher contemplated appointing Jenkins Chancellor of the Exchequer on the strength of his success at cutting public expenditure when he was Chancellor. However, his friend Woodrow Wyatt claimed that Jenkins "had other and fresh fish to fry".

[ 163 ] [ 164 ] [ 165 ] The Director-General of the BBC, Ian Trethowan , invited Jenkins to deliver the Richard Dimbleby Lecture for 1979, which he did on 22 November.

[ 166 ] The title Jenkins gave to his lecture, "Home Thoughts from Abroad", derived from a Robert Browning poem. He delivered it in the Royal Society of Arts and it was broadcast live on television.

[ 167 ] Jenkins analysed the decline of the two-party system since 1951 and criticised the excessive partisanship of British politics, which he claimed alienated the bulk of voters, who were more centrist.

[ 168 ] He advocated proportional representation and the acceptance of "the broad line of division between the public and private sectors", a middle way between Thatcherism and Bennism .

[ 169 ] Jenkins said that the private sector should be encouraged without too much interference to create as much wealth as possible "but use the wealth so created both to give a return for enterprise and to spread the benefits throughout society in a way that avoids the disfigurements of poverty, gives a full priority to public education and health services, and encourages co-operation and not conflict in industry and throughout society".

[ 170 ] He then reiterated his long-standing commitment to libertarianism: You also make sure that the state knows its place...in relation to the citizen. You are in favour of the right of dissent and the liberty of private conduct. You are against unnecessary centralization and bureaucracy. You want to devolve decision-making wherever you sensibly can. ... You want the nation to be self-confident and outward-looking, rather than insular, xenophobic and suspicious. You want the class system to fade without being replaced either by an aggressive and intolerant proletarianism or by the dominance of the brash and selfish values of a 'get rich quick' society. ... These are some of the objectives which I believe could be assisted by a strengthening of the radical centre.

[ 171 ] The Listener reprinted the text along with assessments by Enoch Powell , Paul Johnson , Jack Jones , J. A. G. Griffith , Bernard Crick , Neil Kinnock and Jo Grimond . They were all critical; Kinnock thought him misguided as Britain had already suffered from centrist rule for thirty years and Grimond complained that Jenkins' clarion call had come 20 years too late.

[ 172 ] Jenkins' last year as President of the European Commission was dominated by Margaret Thatcher 's fight for a rebate on Britain's contribution to the EEC budget.

[ 173 ] He believed that the quarrel was unnecessary and regretted that it soured Britain's relationship with the Community for years.

[ 174 ] In November 1980 Jenkins delivered the Winston Churchill memorial lecture in Luxembourg, where he proposed a solution to the British budgetary question. The proportion of the Community's budget spent on agriculture should be reduced by extending Community spending into new areas where Britain would receive more benefit, such as regional spending. The size of the Community's budget would, in his scheme, be tripled by transferring from the nation states to the Community competence over social and industrial policy.

[ 175 ] Social Democratic Party (1981–1987) [ edit ] Following his Dimbleby Lecture, Jenkins increasingly favoured the formation of a new social democratic party.

[ 176 ] He publicly aired these views in a speech to the Parliamentary Press Gallery in June 1980, where he repeated his criticisms of the two-party system and attacked Labour's move to the left. At the previous month's Wembley conference, Labour had adopted a programme which included non-cooperation with the EEC and "a near neutralist and unilateralist" defence policy that would, Jenkins argued, render meaningless Britain's NATO membership.

[ 177 ] Labour's proposals for further nationalisation and anti-private enterprise policies, Jenkins claimed, were more extreme than in any other democratic country and it was not "by any stretch of the imagination a social democratic programme". He added that a new party could reshape politics and lead to the "rapid revival of liberal social democratic Britain".

[ 177 ] The Labour Party conference at Blackpool in September 1980 adopted a unilateralist defence policy, withdrawal from the EEC and further nationalisation, along with Tony Benn's demands for the mandatory reselection of MPs and an electoral college to elect the party leader.

[ 178 ] In November Labour MPs elected the left-winger Michael Foot over the right-wing Denis Healey [ 179 ] and in January 1981 Labour's Wembley conference decided that the electoral college that would elect the leader would give the trade unions 40 per cent of the vote, with MPs and constituency parties 30 per cent each.

[ 180 ] Jenkins then joined David Owen , Bill Rodgers and Shirley Williams (known as the " Gang of Four ") in issuing the Limehouse Declaration . This called for the "realignment of British politics".

[ 180 ] They then formed the Social Democratic Party (SDP) on 26 March.

[ 181 ] Jenkins delivered a series of speeches setting out the SDP's alternative to Thatcherism and Bennism and argued that the solution to Britain's economic troubles lay in the revenue from North Sea oil , which should be invested in public services.

[ 182 ] He attempted to re-enter Parliament at the Warrington by-election in July 1981 and campaigned on a six-point programme which he put forward as a Keynesian alternative to Thatcherism and Labour's "siege economy", but Labour retained the seat with a small majority.

[ 183 ] Despite it being a defeat, the by-election demonstrated that the SDP was a serious force. Jenkins said after the count that it was the first parliamentary election that he had lost in many years, but was "by far the greatest victory in which I have ever participated".

[ 184 ] At the SDP's first annual conference in October 1981, Jenkins called for "an end to the futile frontier war between public and private sectors" and proposed an "inflation tax" on excessive pay rises that would restrain rising wages and prices. After achieving this, an SDP government would be able to embark on economic expansion to reduce unemployment.

[ 185 ] In March 1982, he fought the Glasgow Hillhead by-election , in what had previously been a Conservative-held seat. Polls at the beginning of the campaign put Jenkins in third place but after a series of ten well-attended public meetings which Jenkins addressed, the tide began to turn in Jenkins' favour, and he was elected with a majority of just over 2,000 on a swing of 19 per cent.

[ 186 ] The evening after his victory in Hillhead Jenkins told a celebration dinner of 200 party members held at the North British Hotel in Edinburgh "that the SDP had a great opportunity to become the majority party".

[ 187 ] Jenkins' first intervention in the House of Commons following his election, on 31 March, was seen as a disappointment.

[ 188 ] The Conservative MP Alan Clark wrote in his diary: Jenkins, with excessive and almost unbearable gravitas, asked three very heavy statesman-like non-party-political questions of the PM. I suppose he is very formidable, but he was so portentous and long-winded that he started to lose the sympathy of the House about halfway through and the barracking resumed. The Lady replied quite brightly and freshly, as if she did not particularly know who he was, or care.

[ 189 ] Whereas earlier in his career, Jenkins had excelled in the traditional set-piece debates in which he spoke from the dispatch box, the focus of parliamentary reporting had now moved to the point-scoring of Prime Minister's Questions, which he struggled with. Seated in the traditional place for third parties in the Commons (the second or third row below the gangway), and without a dispatch box and the gravitas it could have conferred, Jenkins was situated near (and shared the same microphone with) Labour's "awkward squad" that included Dennis Skinner and Bob Cryer , who regularly heckled abuse ("Roy, your flies are undone").

[ 188 ] Seven days after Jenkins' by-election victory, Argentina invaded the Falklands and the Falklands War transformed British politics, increased substantially the public's support for the Conservatives and ended any chance that Jenkins' election would reinvigorate the SDP's support.

[ 190 ] In the SDP leadership election, Jenkins was elected with 56.44 per cent of the vote, with David Owen coming second.

[ 191 ] The SDP's momentum was also seen to have stalled as a result of its poor performance in the 1983 Darlington by-election , shortly before that year's general election, a contest which was seen as one where the party could do well. Despite much campaigning in the Labour-held seat, the SDP candidate finished a poor third.

[ 192 ] During the 1983 election campaign, his position as the prime minister-designate for the SDP–Liberal Alliance was questioned by his close colleagues, as his campaign style was now regarded as ineffective; the Liberal leader David Steel was considered to have a greater rapport with the electorate.

[ 193 ] During the campaign, Steel called Jenkins to a meeting at his home in Ettrickbridge and proposed that Jenkins take a lower profile and that Steel take over as leader of the campaign. According to Steve Richards while Jenkins rejected Steel's view, the meeting meant Jenkins' "confidence was undermined and he staggered to the finishing line with less verve than he had displayed in the early days of the SDP" and showed little sign of his earlier "exuberance".

[ 194 ] Jenkins held on to his seat in Hillhead, which was the subject of boundary changes. While on the old boundaries the Conservatives had held the seat prior to Jenkins' victory, it was estimated by the BBC and ITN that on the new boundaries Labour would have captured the seat with a majority of just over 2,000 votes in 1979 .

[ 195 ] Jenkins was challenged by Neil Carmichael , the sitting Labour MP for the Glasgow Kelvingrove constituency which had been abolished and a ministerial colleague of Jenkins in the Wilson governments. Jenkins defeated Carmichael by 1,164 votes to retain his seat in the House of Commons.

[ 196 ] According to The Glasgow Herald , Labour supporters at the election count in the Kelvin Hall booed and jeered when Jenkins' victory was announced, and he and his wife were "dismayed as police pushed back jostling crowds".

[ 197 ] Following the general election, Owen succeeded him unopposed.

[ 198 ] Jenkins was disappointed with Owen's move to the right, and his acceptance and backing of some of Thatcher's policies. At heart, Jenkins remained an unrepentant Keynesian .

[ 199 ] In his July 1984 Tawney Lecture , Jenkins said that the "whole spirit and outlook" of the SDP "must be profoundly opposed to Thatcherism. It could not go along with the fatalism of the Government's acceptance of massive unemployment".

[ 200 ] He also delivered a series of speeches in the Commons attacking the Thatcherite policies of the Chancellor, Nigel Lawson . Jenkins called for more government intervention to support industry and for North Sea oil revenues to be channelled into rebuilding Britain's infrastructure and into educating a skilled workforce.

[ 201 ] He also attacked the Thatcher government for failing to join the European Exchange Rate Mechanism .

[ 202 ] In 1985, he wrote to The Times to advocate the closing down of the political surveillance role of MI5 .

[ 203 ] During the controversy surrounding Peter Wright 's Spycatcher , in which he alleged that Harold Wilson had been a Soviet spy, Jenkins rubbished the allegation and reiterated his call for the end of MI5's powers of political surveillance.

[ 204 ] In 1986, he won The Spectator' s Parliamentarian of the Year award.

[ 205 ] He continued to serve as SDP Member of Parliament for Glasgow Hillhead until his defeat at the 1987 general election by the Labour candidate George Galloway , after boundary changes in 1983 had changed the character of the constituency.

[ 206 ] After his defeat was announced, The Glasgow Herald reported that he indicated he would not stand for parliament again.

[ 207 ] In 1986, his biography of Harry S. Truman was published and the following year his biography of Stanley Baldwin was published.

[ 208 ] Peerage, achievements, books and death (1987–2003) [ edit ] Jenkins robed as Chancellor of Oxford University From 1987, Jenkins remained in politics as a member of the House of Lords as a life peer with the title Baron Jenkins of Hillhead , of Pontypool in the County of Gwent .

[ 209 ] Also in 1987, Jenkins was elected Chancellor of the University of Oxford .

[ 210 ] He was leader of the Liberal Democrats in the Lords from 1988 until 1997.

In 1988, he fought and won an amendment to the Education Reform Act 1988 , guaranteeing academic freedom of speech in further and higher education establishments. This affords and protects the right of students and academics to "question and test received wisdom" and has been incorporated into the statutes or articles and instruments of governance of all universities and colleges in Britain.

[ 211 ] [ 212 ] In 1991, his memoirs, A Life at the Centre , was published by Macmillan , who paid Jenkins a £130,000 advance.

[ 213 ] He was magnanimous to most of those colleagues with whom he had clashed in the past, except for David Owen, whom he blamed for destroying the idealism and cohesion of the SDP.

[ 214 ] In the last chapter ('Establishment Whig or Persistent Radical?') he reaffirmed his radicalism, placing himself "somewhat to the left of James Callaghan, maybe Denis Healey and certainly of David Owen".

[ 215 ] He also proclaimed his political credo: My broad position remains firmly libertarian, sceptical of official cover-ups and uncompromisingly internationalist, believing sovereignty to be an almost total illusion in the modern world, although both expecting and welcoming the continuance of strong differences in national traditions and behaviour. I distrust the deification of the enterprise culture. I think there are more limitations to the wisdom of the market than were dreamt of in Mrs Thatcher's philosophy. I believe that levels of taxation on the prosperous, having been too high for many years (including my own period at the Treasury), are now too low for the provision of decent public services. And I think the privatisation of near monopolies is about as irrelevant as (and sometimes worse than) were the Labour Party's proposals for further nationalisation in the 1970s and early 1980s.

[ 215 ] A Life at the Centre was generally favourably reviewed: in the Times Literary Supplement John Grigg said it was a "marvellous account of high politics by a participant writing with honesty, irony and sustained narrative verve". In The Spectator Anthony Quinton remarked that Jenkins was "not afraid to praise himself and earns the right to do so by unfudged self-criticism".

[ 216 ] However, there were critical voices: John Smith in The Scotsman charged that Jenkins never had any loyalty to the Labour Party and was an ambitious careerist intent only on furthering his career.

[ 216 ] John Campbell claims that A Life at the Centre is now generally recognised as one of the best political memoirs.

[ 216 ] David Cannadine ranked it alongside Duff Cooper 's Old Men Forget , R. A. Butler's The Art of the Possible and Denis Healey's The Time of My Life as one of the four best political memoirs of the post-war period.

[ 217 ] In 1993, he was appointed to the Order of Merit .

[ 218 ] Also that year, his Portraits and Miniatures was published. The main body of the book is a set of 6 biographical essays ( Rab Butler , Aneurin Bevan , Iain Macleod , Dean Acheson , Konrad Adenauer , Charles de Gaulle ), along with lectures, articles and book reviews.

[ 219 ] Jenkins' grave in Cat Street cemetery, East Hendred , Oxfordshire A television documentary about Jenkins was made by Michael Cockerell , titled Roy Jenkins: A Very Social Democrat , and broadcast on 26 May 1996. Although an admiring portrait overall, Cockerell was frank about Jenkins' affairs and both Jenkins and his wife believed that Cockerell had betrayed their hospitality.

[ 220 ] Jenkins hailed Tony Blair 's election as Labour Party leader in July 1994 as "the most exciting Labour choice since the election of Hugh Gaitskell ". He argued that Blair should stick "to a constructive line on Europe, in favour of sensible constitutional innovation...and in favour of friendly relations with the Liberal Democrats". He added that he hoped Blair would not move Labour further to the right: "Good work has been done in freeing it from nationalisation and other policies. But the market cannot solve everything and it would be a pity to embrace the stale dogmas of Thatcherism just when their limitations are becoming obvious".

[ 221 ] Jenkins and Blair had been in touch since the latter's time as Shadow Home Secretary, when he admired Jenkins' reforming tenure at the Home Office.

[ 222 ] Jenkins told Paddy Ashdown in October 1995: "I think Tony treats me as a sort of father figure in politics. He comes to me a lot for advice, particularly about how to construct a Government".

[ 223 ] Jenkins tried to persuade Blair that the division in the centre-left vote between the Labour and Liberal parties had enabled the Conservatives to dominate the 20th century, whereas if the two left-wing parties entered into an electoral pact and adopted proportional representation, they could dominate the 21st century.

[ 224 ] Jenkins was an influence on the thinking of New Labour and both Peter Mandelson and Roger Liddle in their 1996 work The Blair Revolution and Philip Gould in his Unfinished Revolution recognised Jenkins' influence.

[ 225 ] Before the 1997 election , Blair had promised an enquiry into electoral reform. In December 1997, Jenkins was appointed chair of a Government-appointed Independent Commission on the Voting System, which became known as the " Jenkins Commission ", to consider alternative voting systems for the UK.

[ 226 ] The Jenkins Commission reported in favour of a new uniquely British mixed-member proportional system called " Alternative vote top-up " or "limited AMS" in October 1998, although no action was taken on this recommendation. Blair told Ashdown that Jenkins' recommendations would not pass the Cabinet.

[ 227 ] British membership of the European single currency , Jenkins believed, was the supreme test of Blair's statesmanship.

[ 228 ] However, he was disappointed with Blair's timidity in taking on the Eurosceptic tabloid press. He told Blair in October 1997: "You have to choose between leading Europe or having Murdoch on your side. You can have one but not both".

[ 229 ] Jenkins was also critical of New Labour's authoritarianism, such as the watering down of the Freedom of Information Act 2000 and their intention to ban fox hunting .

[ 230 ] By the end of his life Jenkins believed that Blair had wasted his enormous parliamentary majority and would not be recorded in history as a great prime minister; he ranked him between Harold Wilson and Stanley Baldwin.

[ 231 ] After Gordon Brown attacked Oxford University for indulging in "old school tie" prejudices because it rejected a state-educated pupil, Laura Spence , Jenkins told the House of Lords in June 2000 that "Brown's diatribe was born of prejudice out of ignorance. Nearly every fact he adduced was false".

[ 232 ] Jenkins voted for the equalisation of the homosexual age of consent and for repealing Section 28 .

[ 230 ] Jenkins wrote 19 books, including a biography of Gladstone (1995), which won the 1995 Whitbread Award for Biography, and a much-acclaimed biography of Winston Churchill (2001). His then-designated official biographer, Andrew Adonis , was to have finished the Churchill biography had Jenkins not survived the heart surgery he underwent towards the end of its writing. Historian Paul Johnson called it the best one-volume biography on its subject.

[ 233 ] Jenkins underwent heart surgery in the form of a heart valve replacement on 12 October 2000 [ 234 ] and postponed his 80th birthday celebrations whilst recovering, by having a celebratory party on 7 March 2001. He died on 5 January 2003,  after suffering a heart attack at his home at East Hendred , in Oxfordshire.

[ 235 ] His last words, to his wife, were, "Two eggs, please, lightly poached".

[ 236 ] At the time of his death, Jenkins was working on a biography of US President Franklin D. Roosevelt .

[ 237 ] After his death, Blair paid tribute to "one of the most remarkable people ever to grace British politics", who had "intellect, vision and an integrity that saw him hold firm to his beliefs of moderate social democracy, liberal reform and the cause of Europe throughout his life. He was a friend and support to me".

[ 238 ] James Callaghan and Edward Heath also paid tribute and Tony Benn said that as "a founder of the SDP he was probably the grandfather of New Labour".

[ 239 ] However, he was strongly criticised by others including Denis Healey , who condemned the SDP split as a "disaster" for the Labour Party which prolonged their time in opposition and allowed the Tories to have an unbroken run of 18 years in government.

[ 240 ] Writing in The Guardian , Professor of Government at Oxford University Vernon Bogdanor provided this assessment of Jenkins: Roy Jenkins was both radical and contemporary; and this made him the most influential exponent of the progressive creed in politics in postwar Britain. Moreover, the political creed for which he stood belongs as much to the future as to the past. For Jenkins was the prime mover in the creation of a form of social democracy which, being internationalist, is peculiarly suited to the age of globalisation and, being liberal, will prove to have more staying power than the statism of Lionel Jospin or the corporatist socialism of Gerhard Schröder . ... Roy Jenkins was the first leading politician to appreciate that a liberalised social democracy must be based on two tenets: what Peter Mandelson called an aspirational society (individuals must be allowed to regulate their personal lives without interference from the state); and that a post-imperial country like Britain could only be influential in the world as part of a wider grouping (the EU).

[ 241 ] His alma mater, Cardiff University, honoured the memory of Roy Jenkins by naming one of its halls of residence Roy Jenkins Hall.

Marriage and personal life [ edit ] Jenkins in 1977 On 20 January 1945, Jenkins married Mary Jennifer (Jennifer) Morris (18 January 1921 – 2 February 2017).

[ 242 ] They were married for almost 58 years until his death, although he had "several affairs", [ 243 ] including one with Jackie Kennedy's sister Lee Radziwill .

[ 244 ] Among his long-term mistresses were Leslie Bonham Carter and Caroline Gilmour, wives of fellow MPs and close friends Mark Bonham Carter and Ian Gilmour . However, these extra-marital relationships were conditional on his lovers having a good relationship with his wife: he later stated that he "could not imagine loving anyone who was not very fond of Jennifer".

[ 10 ] She was made a DBE for services to ancient and historical buildings. They had two sons, Charles and Edward, and a daughter, Cynthia.

Early in his life, Jenkins had a relationship with Anthony Crosland .

[ 245 ] [ 246 ] [ 247 ] According to the former Liberal Democrat Leader Vince Cable , Jenkins was bisexual.

[ 248 ] In popular culture [ edit ] Jenkins was a main character in Steve Waters ' 2017 play Limehouse , which premiered at the Donmar Warehouse ; Jenkins was portrayed by Roger Allam .

[ 249 ] Works [ edit ] Roosevelt .

Pan Macmillan . 2005.

ISBN 0-330-43206-0 .

Churchill: A Biography . Macmillan. 2001.

ISBN 0-333-78290-9 .

The Chancellors . Macmillan. 1998.

ISBN 0-333-73057-7 .

Gladstone . Macmillan. 1995.

ISBN 0-8129-6641-4 .

Portraits and Miniatures .

Bloomsbury . 1993.

ISBN 978-1-4482-0321-5 .

A Life at the Centre . Macmillan. 1991.

ISBN 0-333-55164-8 .

European Diary 1977–81 . Collins. 1989.

Gallery of Twentieth Century Portraits and Oxford Papers .

David & Charles . 1988.

ISBN 0-7153-9299-9 .

Truman .

HarperCollins . 1986.

ISBN 0-06-015580-9 .

Baldwin . Collins. 1984.

ISBN 0-00-217586-X .

Nine Men of Power . Hamish Hamilton. 1974.

ISBN 978-0241891384 .

Essays and Speeches . Collins. 1967.

Asquith (2nd rev. ed.). Collins. 1978 [1964].

ISBN 0-00-211021-0 .

The Labour Case . Penguin. 1959.

Sir Charles Dilke: A Victorian Tragedy (2nd rev. ed.). Collins. 1965 [1958].

ISBN 0-333-62020-8 .

Mr. Balfour's Poodle: Peers v. People . Collins. 1954.

OCLC 436484 .

Pursuit of Progress: a Critical Analysis of the Achievement and Prospect of the Labour Party . Heinemann. 1953.

Mr. Attlee: an Interim Biography . London: Heinemann. 1948.

References [ edit ] ^ "Mr Roy Jenkins (Hansard)" .

^ "Jenkins Labour deputy leader" .

The Glasgow Herald . 9 July 1970 . Retrieved 24 August 2012 .

^ Cawood, Ian J. (21 August 2013).

Britain in the Twentieth Century . Routledge. p. 437.

ISBN 978-1-136-40681-2 .

^ a b c d e Marquand, David (8 January 2003).

"Lord Jenkins of Hillhead" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 26 September 2014 .

^ John Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life (London: Jonathan Cape, 2014), p. 9.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 9-11.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 17, 25, 60.

^ Perry, Keith (10 March 2014).

"Roy Jenkins' male lover Tony Crosland tried to halt his marriage" .

The Daily Telegraph . London . Retrieved 5 November 2017 .

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 33.

^ a b c d e f Saunders, Robert (March 2015).

"Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life" .

Reviews in History .

doi : 10.14296/RiH/2014/1741 . Retrieved 20 October 2020 .

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 67, 71.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 78, 81.

^ PBS Nova, "Decoding Nazi Secrets", 27 November 2015 (interview of Jenkins); BBC Obituary: Roy Jenkins, Sunday, 5 January 2003.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 105.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 105–106.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 106.

^ a b Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 126.

^ a b Jenkins, A Life at the Centre , p. 85.

^ Roy Jenkins, Fair Shares for the Rich (Tribune, 1951), p. 16.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 128.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 137.

^ Roy Jenkins, Pursuit of Progress (London: Heinemann, 1953), p. 96.

^ Jenkins, Pursuit of Progress , pp. 44–45.

^ Jenkins, Pursuit of Progress , p. 37.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 153, p. 182.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 148.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 149, p. 151.

^ Campbell.

Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life . p. 75.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 187.

^ Roy Jenkins, The Labour Case (London: Penguin, 1959), p. 14.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 181.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 181–182.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 182–186.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 197.

^ Jenkins, The Labour Case , p. 11.

^ Jenkins, The Labour Case , p. 74.

^ Jenkins, The Labour Case , p. 146.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 204.

^ a b c Jenkins, A Life at the Centre , p. 130.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 205–206.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 206.

^ Jenkins, A Life at the Centre , pp. 130–131.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 212.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 212–213.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 210–211.

^ Roy Jenkins, 'And Fight Again', The Spectator (11 November 1960), p. 8.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 214.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 214–215.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 236.

^ a b Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 239.

^ Violet Bonham Carter, 'Asquith Revealed By Events', The Times (2 November 1964), p. 11.

^ Robert Rhodes James, 'Last of the Romans?', The Spectator (6 November 1964), p. 23.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 230.

^ a b c d Jenkins, Roy (2006).

A Life at the Centre . Politico's.

ISBN 978-1-84275-177-0 .

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 249.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 261.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 267.

^ 'Overhaul For The Police', The Times (19 May 1966), p. 15.

^ a b Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 269.

^ a b MacArthur, Brian, ed. (25 November 1999).

The Penguin Book of Twentieth-Century Speeches . Penguin Adult.

ISBN 978-0-14-028500-0 .

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 285.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 293.

^ "MEDICAL TERMINATION OF PREGNANCY BILL (Hansard, 22 July 1966)" .

api.parliament.uk .

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 295–296.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 297.

^ "Clause 8.—(RESTRICTIONS ON PROSECUTION.) (Hansard, 3 July 1967)" .

api.parliament.uk .

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 260–261.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 300–301.

^ a b Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 273.

^ a b Marr, Andrew (2007).

A History of Modern Britain . Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1-4050-0538-8 .

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 298.

^ 'Chancellor sees no cause for gloom', The Times (21 July 1969), p. 3.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 299.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 299–300.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 311.

^ "PUBLIC EXPENDITURE (Hansard, 17 January 1968)" .

api.parliament.uk .

^ Edmund Dell, The Chancellors: A History of the Chancellors of the Exchequer, 1945–90 (London: HarperCollins, 1996), p. 357.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 318.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 313–314.

^ Dell, The Chancellors , p. 354.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 319.

^ Richard Crossman, The Diaries of a Cabinet Minister, Volume II: Lord President of the Council and Leader of the House of Commons, 1966–69 (Hamish Hamilton, 1976), p. 723.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 323.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 330–331.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 332–335.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 334.

^ Jenkins, A Life at the Centre , p. 260.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 336.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 339.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 340.

^ Dell, The Chancellors , p. 359.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 341–342.

^ Alec Cairncross, Living with the Century (Lynx, 2008), p. 251.

^ Dell, The Chancellors , p. 357.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 346.

^ Dell, The Chancellors , p. 367.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 361.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 361–362.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 375.

^ 'Jenkins attack on Australia staggers party meeting', The Times (20 July 1971), p. 4.

^ Tony Benn, Office Without Power: Diaries, 1968–1972 (London: Hutchinson, 1988), p. 358.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 377.

^ Benn, Office Without Power , p. 377.

^ Jenkins, A Life at the Centre , p. 329.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 380.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 382–383.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 384.

^ Roy Hattersley, Who Goes Home? Scenes From A Political Life (London: Little, Brown, 1995), p. 109.

^ 'Jenkins letter warns Mr Wilson of danger of referendum principle as weapon against progressive legislation', The Times (11 April 1972), p. 11.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 385.

^ 'Twelve Million Jenkinsites', The Times (30 September 1972), p. 15.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 399.

^ Roy Jenkins, What Matters Now (London: Fontana, 1972), p. 122.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 401.

^ 'Mr Jenkins and Mr Taverne reject centre party proposal', The Times (10 March 1973), p. 1.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 407.

^ David Butler and Dennis Kavanagh, The British General Election of February, 1974 (London: Macmillan, 1974), p. 162.

^ Jenkins, A Life at the Centre , p. 367.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 364–365.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 368.

^ Bernard Donoughue, Downing Street Diary: With Harold Wilson in No 10 (London: Jonathan Cape, 2005), p. 53.

^ Sandbrook, Dominic (2010).

State of Emergency – The Way We Were: Britain 1970–1974 .

Allen Lane .

ISBN 978-1-84614-031-0 .

, p. 644.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 415–418.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 420.

^ a b Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 423.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 425.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 426–427.

^ Donoughue, Downing Street Diary , p. 254.

^ Roy Jenkins, Portraits and Miniatures: Selected Writings (London: Macmillan, 1993), pp. 310–311.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 422, pp. 428–429.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 432.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 433.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 434–435, p. 467.

^ David Wood, 'Mr Jenkins says he too would resign if Britain decided to leave EEC', The Times (27 September 1974), p. 1.

^ George Clark, 'Mr Wilson joins in criticism of Mr Benn's figures', The Times (28 May 1975), p. 1.

^ Roger Berthoud, 'Mr Jenkins sees cold world outside Nine', The Times (28 May 1975), p. 3.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 447.

^ David Butler and Uwe Kitzinger, The 1975 Referendum (London: Macmillan, 1976), p. 205.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 448.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 450.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 451.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 452.

^ Michael Hatfield and David Leigh, 'Mr Jenkins attacked from right and left at Prentice rally', The Times (12 September 1975), p. 1.

^ Michael Hatfield, 'Inflation fight goes on, Mr Jenkins tells left', The Times (24 January 1976), p. 2.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 454.

^ Susan Crosland, Tony Crosland (London: Coronet, 1983), p. 315.

^ a b Peter Evans, 'Plain speaking from Mr Jenkins and the police on measures to reduce worsening crime', The Times (19 May 1976), p. 5.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 458.

^ Stephen Haseler, The Tragedy of Labour (Wiley-Blackwell, 1980), p. 119.

^ Leonard, Dick (2001). "Roy Jenkins (Lord Jenkins of Hillhead)". In Rosen, Greg (ed.).

Dictionary of Labour Biography . London: Politicos. pp.

314– 8, 318.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 462–463.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 462–466.

^ 'Roy Jenkins: Scaling the peaks', The Times (5 January 1977), p. 8.

^ "A Concise Encyclopedia of the European Union -J" . Euro-know.org. Archived from the original on 2 September 2013 . Retrieved 25 July 2016 .

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 502, p. 538.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 493–494.

^ "EU and the G8" .

European Commission . Archived from the original on 26 February 2007 . Retrieved 25 September 2007 .

^ "Honorary Graduates 1989 to present" .

University of Bath . Archived from the original on 17 July 2010.

^ a b Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 505.

^ Jennifer Jenkins, 'A Labour Party subscription', The Times (20 October 1978), p. 17.

^ Roy Jenkins, European Diary, 1977–1981 (London: Collins, 1989), p. 387.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 507.

^ Woodrow Wyatt, Confessions of an Optimist (London: Collins, 1987), p. 177.

^ Sarah Curtis (ed.), The Journals of Woodrow Wyatt: Volume Two (London: Pan, 2000), p. 64.

^ John Campbell, Margaret Thatcher, Volume Two: The Iron Lady (London: Jonathan Cape, 2003), p. 10.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 508.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 510–511.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 511–512.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 512–513.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 513–514.

^ "Mr Roy Jenkins sees a British political system 'stranded by the receding tide'", The Times (23 November 1979), p. 5.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 515.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 526.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 534.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 535.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 541–546.

^ a b 'Mr Jenkins will complete his term in Europe', The Times (10 June 1980), p. 2.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 551.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 552.

^ a b Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 557.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 559.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 564–565.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 578–580.

^ Julian Haviland and Philip Webster, 'Roy Jenkins slashes Labour majority: Tory loses his deposit', The Times (17 July 1981), p. 1.

^ Alan Wood, Bernard Withers, Geoffrey Browning and Richard Evans, 'Jenkins demands inflation tax to break wage-price spiral', The Times (10 October 1981), p. 2.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 594.

^ Clark, William (27 March 1982).

"Roy Jenkins gets a hero's welcome" .

The Glasgow Herald . p. 1 . Retrieved 6 April 2021 .

^ a b Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 598.

^ Alan Clark, Diaries: Into Politics, 1972–1982 (London: Phoenix, 2001), p. 310.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 599, p. 609.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 608.

^ Richards, Steve (2021).

The Prime Ministers We Never Had; Success and Failure from Butler to Corbyn . London: Atlantic Books. pp.

70– 71.

ISBN 978-1-83895-241-9 .

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 618.

^ Richards, Steve (2021).

The Prime Ministers We Never Had; Success and Failure from Butler to Corbyn . London: Atlantic Books. p. 71.

ISBN 978-1-83895-241-9 .

^ The Times Guide to the House of Commons June 1983 . London: Times Books. 1983. p. 279.

ISBN 0-7230-0255-X .

^ The Times Guide to the House of Commons June 1983 . London: Times Books Ltd. 1983. p. 119.

ISBN 0-7230-0255-X .

^ Clark, William (10 June 1983).

"Scotland produces a little for everyone" .

The Glasgow Herald . p. 1 . Retrieved 24 February 2021 .

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 626.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 638, n.

^ Philip Webster, "Jenkins and Owen 'role reversal'", The Times (13 July 1984), p. 2.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 638–640.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 640.

^ Roy Jenkins, 'Stemming tide of State surveillance', The Times (12 March 1985), p. 12.

^ "Security Services (Commission) (Hansard, 3 December 1986)" .

api.parliament.uk .

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 638.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 660–661.

^ Parkhouse, Geoffrey (12 June 1987).

"Scotland swims against the Tory tide" .

The Glasgow Herald . p. 1 . Retrieved 26 April 2021 .

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 630.

^ "No. 51132" .

The London Gazette . 25 November 1987. p. 14513.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 652.

^ Hayes, Dennis.

"Tongues truly tied" .

Times Higher Education . The Times. Archived from the original on 4 October 2013 . Retrieved 10 January 2013 .

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 657.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 676.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 676–677.

^ a b Jenkins, A Life at the Centre , p. 617.

^ a b c Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 680.

^ David Cannadine, 'Writer and Biographer', in Andrew Adonis and Keith Thomas (eds.), Roy Jenkins: A Retrospective (Oxford University Press, 2004), p. 295.

^ "No. 53510" .

The London Gazette . 10 December 1993. p. 19644.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 690.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 684–685.

^ Roy Jenkins, 'Labour's most exciting leader since Gaitskell', The Times (23 July 1994), p. 14.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 700.

^ Paddy Ashdown, The Ashdown Diaries: Volume One, 1988–1997 (London: Allen Lane, 2000), p. 346.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 700–701.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 703.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 710.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , pp. 712-714.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 720, p. 725.

^ Paddy Ashdown, The Ashdown Diaries: Volume Two, 1997–1999 (London: Allen Lane, 2001), p. 104.

^ a b Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 719.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 726.

^ "Higher Education (Hansard, 14 June 2000)" .

api.parliament.uk .

^ Johnson, Paul (2003).

Churchill , Simon & Schuster, p. 167.

^ Helliker, Adam (14 October 2000).

"Lord Jenkins has heart surgery" .

Archived from the original on 12 January 2022 – via www.telegraph.co.uk.

^ "Roy Jenkins dies" .

BBC News Online . BBC. 5 January 2003. Archived from the original on 28 September 2013 . Retrieved 14 May 2010 .

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 745.

^ Campbell, Roy Jenkins: A Well-Rounded Life , p. 740.

^ Michael White and Lucy Ward, ' Statesman Jenkins dies at 82 ', The Guardian (6 January 2003).

^ 'What they said', The Times (6 January 2003), p. 4.

^ White, Michael (6 January 2003).

"Roy Jenkins: Gang leader who paved way for Blair" .

The Guardian . London. Archived from the original on 23 April 2010.

^ Vernon Bogdanor, ' The great radical reformer ', The Guardian (12 January 2003).

^ Barker, Dennis (8 February 2017).

"Dame Jennifer Jenkins obituary" .

The Guardian . London.

^ Cockerell, Michael (1996). Cahn, Alison; Tyerman, Anne (eds.).

A Very Social Democrat: A Portrait of Roy Jenkins .

BBC Two (Documentary). London.

^ "Obituary: Roy Jenkins" .

BBC News .

^ Perry, Keith (10 March 2014).

"Roy Jenkins' male lover Tony Crosland tried to halt his marriage" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

^ "Double lives – a history of sex and secrecy at Westminster" .

The Guardian . London. 16 May 2015.

^ McCarthy, James (6 April 2014).

"A string of affairs and a 'gay relationship': the secret life of Roy Jenkins, the best PM Britain never had" .

walesonline .

^ Duffy, Nick (19 October 2017).

"Sir Vince Cable: My Liberal hero Roy Jenkins was a bisexual man" .

Pink News . London.

^ "David Tennant, Roger Allam and more at Limehouse opening night" .

WhatsOnStage.com . 9 March 2017 . Retrieved 23 February 2023 .

Further reading [ edit ] Adonis, Andrew; Thomas, Keith, eds. (2004).

Roy Jenkins: A Retrospective .

Oxford University Press .

ISBN 0-19-927487-8 .

Radice, Giles (2002).

Friends and Rivals: Crosland, Jenkins and Healey . Little, Brown.

ISBN 0-316-85547-2 .

Campbell, John (1983).

Roy Jenkins, a biography .

Weidenfeld & Nicolson .

ISBN 0-297-78271-1 .

Campbell, John (2014).

Roy Jenkins, a Well-Rounded Life .

Jonathan Cape .

ISBN 978-0-224-08750-6 .

Dell, Edmund (1997).

The Chancellors: A History of the Chancellors of the Exchequer, 1945–90 . HarperCollins. pp.

347– 72.

covers his term as Chancellor.

Jenkins, Roy.

European Diary, 1977-1981 (A&C Black, 2011).

Lipsey, David; Jenkins, Roy (2002). Jefferys, Kevin (ed.).

Labour Forces: From Ernie Bevin to Gordon Brown . Bloomsbury Academic. pp.

103 –18.

ISBN 9781860647437 .

Ludlow, N. Piers, ed.

Roy Jenkins and the European commission presidency, 1976–1980: at the heart of Europe (Springer, 2016) excerpt .

Nuttall, Jeremy. "Roy Jenkins and the politics of radical moderation." History 104.362 (2019): 677–709.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Roy Jenkins .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Roy Jenkins .

"Roy Jenkins (The Rt Hon Lord Jenkins of Hillhead)" Archived 28 April 2019 at the Wayback Machine , Fellows Remembered, The Royal Society of Literature Hansard 1803–2005: contributions in Parliament by Roy Jenkins Roy Jenkins: Life Peer – UK Parliament Living Heritage Portraits of Roy Jenkins at the National Portrait Gallery, London Parliament of the United Kingdom Preceded by Edward Carson Baby of the House 1948–1950 Succeeded by Peter Baker Preceded by John Martin Member of Parliament for Southwark Central 1948 – 1950 Constituency abolished New constituency Member of Parliament for Birmingham Stechford 1950 – 1977 Succeeded by Andrew MacKay Preceded by Tam Galbraith Member of Parliament for Glasgow Hillhead 1982 – 1987 Succeeded by George Galloway Political offices Preceded by Frank Soskice Home Secretary 1965–1967 Succeeded by James Callaghan Preceded by James Callaghan Chancellor of the Exchequer 1967–1970 Succeeded by Iain Macleod Preceded by Robert Carr Home Secretary 1974–1976 Succeeded by Merlyn Rees Preceded by François-Xavier Ortoli President of the European Commission 1977–1981 Succeeded by Gaston Thorn Party political offices Preceded by Arthur Skeffington Chair of the Fabian Society 1957–1958 Succeeded by Eirene White Preceded by George Brown Deputy Leader of the Labour Party 1970–1972 Succeeded by Edward Short New post Leader of the Social Democratic Party 1982–1983 Succeeded by David Owen Preceded by The Baroness Seear Leader of the Liberal Democrats in the House of Lords 1988–1997 Succeeded by The Lord Rodgers of Quarry Bank Academic offices Preceded by The Earl of Stockton Chancellor of the University of Oxford 1987–2003 Succeeded by The Lord Patten of Barnes v t e Chancellors of the exchequer England Eustace of Fauconberg Maunsell Leicester Westminster Chishull W. Giffard G. Giffard Chishull de la Leye Willoughby Benstead Sandale Hotham Stanton Harvington Wodehouse Stratford Ashby Ashton Barnham Somer Somerset Browne Witham Thwaites Witham Fowler Catesby Lovell Berners Cromwell Baker Sackville Mildmay Fortescue Dunbar Caesar Greville Portland Barrett Cottington Colepeper Hyde Ashley Duncombe Ernle Delamer Hampden Montagu Smith Boyle Great Britain Boyle Smith Harley Benson Wyndham Onslow Walpole Stanhope Aislabie Pratt Walpole Sandys Pelham Lee Bilson-Legge Lyttelton Bilson-Legge Mansfield Bilson-Legge Barrington Dashwood Grenville Dowdeswell Townshend North Cavendish Pitt Cavendish Pitt Addington Pitt Ellenborough Petty Perceval Vansittart United Kingdom Vansittart Robinson Canning Tenterden Herries Goulburn Althorp Denman Peel Spring Rice Baring Goulburn Wood Disraeli Gladstone Lewis Disraeli Gladstone Disraeli Hunt Lowe Gladstone Northcote Gladstone Childers Hicks Beach Harcourt R. Churchill Goschen Harcourt Hicks Beach Ritchie A. Chamberlain Asquith Lloyd George McKenna Law A. Chamberlain Horne Baldwin N. Chamberlain Snowden W. Churchill Snowden N. Chamberlain Simon Wood Anderson Dalton Cripps Gaitskell Butler Macmillan Thorneycroft Heathcoat-Amory Lloyd Maudling Callaghan Jenkins Macleod Barber Healey Howe Lawson Major Lamont Clarke Brown Darling Osborne Hammond Javid Sunak Zahawi Kwarteng Hunt Reeves Italic: Interim chancellor of the exchequer, as Lord Chief Justice v t e Home secretaries of the United Kingdom Shelburne Townshend North Temple Sydney Grenville Dundas Portland Pelham Yorke Hawkesbury Spencer Liverpool Ryder Sidmouth Peel Sturges Bourne Lansdowne Peel Melbourne Duncannon Wellington Goulburn Russell Normanby Graham Grey Walpole Palmerston Grey Walpole Sotheron-Estcourt Lewis Grey Walpole Hardy Bruce Lowe Cross Harcourt Cross Childers Matthews Asquith Ridley Ritchie Akers-Douglas Gladstone Churchill McKenna Simon Samuel Cave Shortt Bridgeman Henderson Joynson-Hicks Clynes Samuel Gilmour Simon Hoare Anderson Morrison Somervell Chuter Ede Maxwell-Fyfe Lloyd George Butler Brooke Soskice Jenkins Callaghan Maudling Carr Jenkins Rees Whitelaw Brittan Hurd Waddington Baker K. Clarke Howard Straw Blunkett C. Clarke Reid Smith Johnson May Rudd Javid Patel Braverman Shapps Braverman Cleverly Cooper v t e Second Wilson Cabinet Tony Benn James Callaghan Barbara Castle Anthony Crosland Lord Elwyn-Jones Michael Foot Denis Healey Roy Jenkins Harold Lever Roy Mason Bob Mellish John Morris Fred Mulley Stanley Orme Fred Peart Reg Prentice Merlyn Rees Bill Rodgers Willie Ross Lord Shepherd Peter Shore Edward Short John Silkin Eric Varley Shirley Williams Harold Wilson v t e Callaghan Cabinet James Callaghan Joel Barnett Tony Benn Albert Booth Anthony Crosland Edmund Dell Lord Elwyn-Jones David Ennals Michael Foot Roy Hattersley Denis Healey Roy Jenkins Harold Lever Roy Mason Bruce Millan John Morris Fred Mulley Stanley Orme David Owen Lord Peart Reg Prentice Merlyn Rees Bill Rodgers Lord Shepherd Peter Shore John Silkin John Smith Eric Varley Shirley Williams v t e Presidents of the European Commission High Authority of the Coal and Steel Community (1952–1967) Jean Monnet ( Monnet Authority, 1952–55 ) René Mayer ( Mayer Authority, 1955–58 ) Paul Finet ( Finet Authority, 1958–59 ) Piero Malvestiti ( Malvestiti Authority, 1959–63 ) Rinaldo Del Bo ( Del Bo Authority, 1963–67 ) Acting: Albert Coppé ( Coppé Authority, 1967 ) Commission of the Atomic Energy Community (1958–1967) Louis Armand ( Armand Commission, 1958–59 ) Étienne Hirsch ( Hirsch Commission, 1959–62 ) Pierre Chatenet ( Chatenet Commission, 1962–67 ) Commission of the Economic Community (1958–1967) Walter Hallstein ( Hallstein Commission, 1958–67 ) Commission of the Communities (1967–2009) Jean Rey ( Rey Commission, 1967–70 ) Franco Maria Malfatti ( Malfatti Commission, 1970–72 ) Sicco Mansholt ( Mansholt Commission, 1972–73 ) François-Xavier Ortoli ( Ortoli Commission, 1973–77 ) Roy Jenkins ( Jenkins Commission, 1977–81 ) Gaston Thorn ( Thorn Commission, 1981–85 ) Jacques Delors ( Delors Commission, 1985–95 ) Jacques Santer ( Santer Commission, 1995–99 ) Acting: Manuel Marín ( Santer Commission, 1999 ) Romano Prodi ( Prodi Commission, 1999–2004 ) José Manuel Barroso ( Barroso Commission, 2004–09 ) Commission (2009–present) José Manuel Barroso ( Barroso Commission, 2009–14 ) Jean-Claude Juncker ( Juncker Commission 2014–19 ) Ursula von der Leyen ( Von der Leyen Commission, 2019–2024 ) Ursula von der Leyen ( Von der Leyen Commission II, since 2024 ) Commission President President of the European Council Council Presidency President of the European Parliament v t e European commissioners from the United Kingdom Soames Thomson Jenkins Tugendhat Richard Clinton-Davis Cockfield Brittan Millan Kinnock Patten Mandelson Ashton Hill King v t e Labour Party History Main History of the Labour Party Topics Electoral history General election manifestos History of the socialist movement in the United Kingdom European Parliamentary Labour Party Scottish Labour Party (1888) Independent Labour Party Labour Representation Committee Gladstone–MacDonald pact National Labour Organisation Labour Independent Group Campaign for Democratic Socialism Lib–Lab pact Formation of SDP Gang of Four Limehouse Declaration Militant tendency The longest suicide note in history Labour Listens One more heave New Labour Tony's Cronies Blue Labour One Nation Labour Chakrabarti Inquiry Leadership Leaders Hardie Henderson Barnes MacDonald Henderson Adamson Clynes MacDonald Henderson Lansbury Attlee Morrison ^ Gaitskell Brown ^ Wilson Callaghan Foot Kinnock Smith Beckett ^ Blair Brown Harman ^ Miliband Harman ^ Corbyn Starmer Deputy Leaders Clynes Graham Attlee Greenwood Morrison Griffiths Bevan Brown Jenkins Short Foot Healey Hattersley Beckett Prescott Harman Watson Rayner General Secretaries MacDonald Henderson Middleton Phillips Williams Barker ^ Nicholas Hayward Mortimer Whitty Sawyer McDonagh Triesman Carter Watt Collins McNicol Formby Evans Treasurers Henderson MacDonald Henderson Lathan Greenwood Gaitskell Bevan Nicholas Davies Callaghan Atkinson Varley Booth McCluskie Burlison Prosser Elsby Dromey Holland Leaders in the Lords Haldane Cripps Ponsonby Snell Addison Jowitt Alexander Pakenham Shackleton Shepherd Peart Hughes Richard Jay Williams Amos Ashton Royall Smith of Basildon Scottish Labour Leaders Dewar McLeish Jamieson ^ McConnell Jamieson ^ Alexander Jamieson ^ Gray Lamont Sarwar ^ Murphy Gray ^ Dugdale Rowley ^ Baillie ^ Leonard Baillie ^ Sarwar PLP Chairs Hardie Henderson Barnes MacDonald Henderson Hodge * Wardle * Adamson Clynes MacDonald Henderson Lansbury Attlee Lees-Smith * Pethick-Lawrence * Greenwood * Gaitskell Wilson Houghton Mikardo Hughes Willey Dormand Orme Hoyle Soley Corston Clwyd Lloyd Watts Cryer Morden EPLP Leaders Stewart Prescott Castle Lomas Martin Seal Ford Green David Donnelly Murphy Titley Willmott Corbett Party Chairman Clarke Reid McCartney Blears Harman Watson Lavery Rayner Dodds Reeves * = wartime, in opposition ^ Interim/Acting Internal elections and selections Leadership elections 1922 Ramsay MacDonald 1931 Arthur Henderson 1932 George Lansbury 1935 Clement Attlee 1955 Hugh Gaitskell 1960 1961 1963 Harold Wilson 1976 James Callaghan 1980 Michael Foot 1983 Neil Kinnock 1988 1992 John Smith 1994 Tony Blair 2007 Gordon Brown 2010 Ed Miliband 2015 Jeremy Corbyn 2016 2020 Keir Starmer Deputy Leadership elections 1952 Herbert Morrison 1953 1956 Jim Griffiths 1959 Aneurin Bevan 1960 George Brown 1961 1962 1970 Roy Jenkins 1971 1972 Edward Short 1976 Michael Foot 1980 Denis Healey 1981 1983 Roy Hattersley 1988 1992 Margaret Beckett 1994 John Prescott 2007 Harriet Harman 2015 Tom Watson 2020 Angela Rayner Shadow Cabinet elections and reshuffles Sep 1931 (Henderson) Nov 1931 1932 (Lansbury) 1933 1934 1935 (Attlee) 1936 1937 1938 1939 1951 1952 1953 1954 1955 1956 (Gaitskell) 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 1962 1963 (Wilson) 1970 1971 1972 1973 1979 (Callaghan) 1980 (Foot) 1981 1982 1983 (Kinnock) 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 (Smith) 1993 1994 (Blair) 1995 1996 2010 (Miliband) June 2016 (Corbyn) May 2021 (Starmer) November 2021 2023 Party structure Constitution Clause IV Executive National Executive Committee General Secretary Treasurer Parliamentary Parliamentary Labour Party Chief Whip of the Labour Party Conference Labour Party Conference Subnational Scottish Labour Welsh Labour Labour Party in Northern Ireland Directly elected city mayoral authorities London Labour CLPs Constituency Labour Party Labour International Miscellaneous National Policy Forum Affiliated trade unions Trade Union and Labour Party Liaison Organisation Labour Co-operative Co-operative Party Labour – Federation of Labour Groups Associated organisations List Organisations associated with the Labour Party Sectional groups Young Labour Labour International LGBT+ Labour Labour for Trans Rights Labour Students BAME Labour Disability Labour Factional groups Blue Labour Campaign for Labour Party Democracy Christians on the Left Compass Fabian Society Young Fabians Future Britain Centre-Left Grassroots Alliance Jewish Labour Movement Labour Campaign for Electoral Reform Labour CND Labour Friends of Israel Labour Friends of Palestine & the Middle East Labour Growth Group Labour Party Irish Society Labour Representation Committee (2004) Labour Women's Network Momentum Open Labour National Union of Labour and Socialist Clubs Progressive Britain Red Wall Caucus Revolutionary Communist Party Formerly Socialist Appeal Socialist Health Association Socialist Educational Association Socialist Environment and Resources Association Socialist Campaign Group Socialist Youth Network Socialist societies Media publications LabourList Tribune Party alliances Current Party of European Socialists Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats Progressive Alliance Socialist International v t e 1970 Labour Party deputy leadership election Outgoing Deputy Leader: George Brown Elected Roy Jenkins Defeated Michael Foot Fred Peart v t e 1976 Labour Party leadership election Outgoing Leader: Harold Wilson Tony Benn * James Callaghan Tony Crosland Michael Foot Denis Healey Roy Jenkins * * Withdrew after first ballot v t e Liberal Democrats Leadership Leaders Steel (Liberal) (1988) Maclennan (SDP) (1988) Ashdown (1988–1999) Kennedy (1999–2006) Campbell (2006–2007) Clegg (2007–2015) Farron (2015–2017) Cable (2017–2019) Swinson (2019) Davey (from 2020) Deputy Leaders Johnston (1988–1992) Beith (1992–2003) Campbell (2003–2006) Cable (2006–2010) Hughes (2010–2014) Bruce (2014–2015) Swinson (2017–2019) Davey (2019–2020) Cooper (from 2020) Leaders in the Lords Seear (Liberal) (1988) Diamond (SDP) (1988) Jenkins (1988–1997) Rodgers (1997–2001) Williams (2001–2004) McNally (2004–2013) Wallace (2013–2016) Newby (from 2016) Presidents Wrigglesworth (1989–1990) Kennedy (1991–1994) Maclennan (1995–1998) Maddock (1999–2000) Dholakia (2001–2004) Hughes (2005–2008) Scott (2009–2010) Farron (2011–2014) Brinton (2015–2019) Pack (from 2020) Leadership elections Leadership 1988 (Ashdown) 1999 (Kennedy) 2006 (Campbell) 2007 (Clegg) 2015 (Farron) 2017 (Cable) 2019 (Swinson) 2020 (Davey) 2024 (Davey) Deputy leadership 2003 (Campbell) 2006 (Cable) 2010 (Hughes) 2014 (Bruce) 2017 (Swinson) 2019 (Davey) Frontbench team Leader of the Liberal Democrats Deputy Leader of the Liberal Democrats Liberal Democrat Treasury spokesperson Liberal Democrat Home Affairs spokesperson Structure MPs and Frontbench Current members of Parliament Frontbench team Chief whip Frontbench in opposition Frontbench Team of Paddy Ashdown (1997–1999) Frontbench Team of Charles Kennedy (1999–2006) Frontbench Team of Menzies Campbell (2006–2007) First Frontbench Team of Vince Cable (2007) Frontbench Team of Nick Clegg (2007–2010) Frontbench Team of Tim Farron (2015–2017) Second Frontbench Team of Vince Cable (2017–2019) Frontbench Team of Jo Swinson (2019) Frontbench Team of Ed Davey (2020-present) State parties English Liberal Democrats Scottish Liberal Democrats Welsh Liberal Democrats Regional parties London Liberal Democrats Northern Ireland Liberal Democrats Conference Liberal Democrat Conference Committees Federal Board SAOs LGBT+ Liberal Democrats Young Liberals Related organisations Alliance Party of Northern Ireland Beveridge Group Christian Forum Friends of Israel Friends of Turkey History Group Liberal Reform Social Liberal Forum History and related topics Liberal Democrat Headquarters (UK) List of MPs (past and present) General election manifestos Gang of Four Limehouse Declaration Glee Club (UK politics) The Land (song) Liberator (magazine) National Liberal Club Whig Party Peelites Liberal Party Scottish Liberal Party Coalition Coupon Independent Liberal Party (Asquith) National Liberal Party (Lloyd George) Independent Liberals (Lloyd George) National Liberal Party ("Simonites") Lib–Lab pact Liberal Leave One more heave Social Democratic Party SDP–Liberal Alliance Southport Resolution The Orange Book Conservative–Liberal Democrat coalition agreement For a Fair Deal Breakaway parties Liberal Party (UK, 1989) v t e Recipients of the Charlemagne Prize 1950–1975 1950 Richard von Coudenhove-Kalergi 1951 Hendrik Brugmans 1952 Alcide De Gasperi 1953 Jean Monnet 1954 Konrad Adenauer 1955 1956 Winston Churchill 1957 Paul-Henri Spaak 1958 Robert Schuman 1959 George C. Marshall 1960 Joseph Bech 1961 Walter Hallstein 1962 1963 Edward Heath 1964 Antonio Segni 1965 1966 Jens Otto Krag 1967 Joseph Luns 1968 1969 European Commission 1970 François Seydoux de Clausonne 1971 1972 Roy Jenkins 1973 Salvador de Madariaga 1974 1975 1976–2000 1976 Leo Tindemans 1977 Walter Scheel 1978 Konstantinos Karamanlis 1979 Emilio Colombo 1980 1981 Simone Veil 1982 King Juan Carlos I 1983 1984 1985 1986 People of Luxembourg 1987 Henry Kissinger 1988 François Mitterrand / Helmut Kohl 1989 Brother Roger 1990 Gyula Horn 1991 Václav Havel 1992 Jacques Delors 1993 Felipe González 1994 Gro Harlem Brundtland 1995 Franz Vranitzky 1996 Queen Beatrix 1997 Roman Herzog 1998 Bronisław Geremek 1999 Tony Blair 2000 Bill Clinton 2001–present 2001 György Konrád 2002 Euro 2003 Valéry Giscard d'Estaing 2004 Pat Cox / Pope John Paul II 1 2005 Carlo Azeglio Ciampi 2006 Jean-Claude Juncker 2007 Javier Solana 2008 Angela Merkel 2009 Andrea Riccardi 2010 Donald Tusk 2011 Jean-Claude Trichet 2012 Wolfgang Schäuble 2013 Dalia Grybauskaitė 2014 Herman Van Rompuy 2015 Martin Schulz 2016 Pope Francis 2017 Timothy Garton Ash 2018 Emmanuel Macron 2019 António Guterres 2020 Klaus Iohannis 2022 Sviatlana Tsikhanouskaya , Maria Kalesnikava , Veronika Tsepkalo 2023 Volodymyr Zelensky , the Ukrainian people 2024 Pinchas Goldschmidt and the Jewish communities in Europe 2025 Ursula von der Leyen 1 Received extraordinary prize.

v t e Shadow chancellors of the exchequer of the United Kingdom Stanley Butler Gaitskell Wilson Callaghan Maudling Heath Macleod Jenkins Healey Carr Howe Healey Shore Hattersley Smith Brown Clarke Lilley Maude Portillo Howard Letwin Osborne Darling Johnson Balls Leslie McDonnell Dodds Reeves Hunt Stride v t e Shadow home secretaries of the United Kingdom Younger Gordon Walker Brown Soskice Boyle Thorneycroft Hogg Callaghan Williams Jenkins Prior Joseph Gilmour Whitelaw Rees Hattersley Kaufman Hattersley Blair Straw Howard Mawhinney Fowler Widdecombe Letwin Davis Grieve Grayling Johnson Balls Cooper Burnham Abbott Brown (Acting) Abbott Thomas-Symonds Cooper Cleverly Philp v t e Babies of the House of Commons of the United Kingdom Dickson Levy-Lawson Gordon-Lennox Harrison Cavendish F. Smith Curran Milton Scott Hill Rigg Turnour Wodehouse Mills Wolmer Sassoon Esmonde Whitty Stanley Sweeney Harmsworth Evans Rhys Lucas-Tooth Lee Owen Robinson Willoughby de Eresby C. Taylor Macmillan Profumo Millington Carson Jenkins Baker Benn Teevan Benn Eden Woollam Clarke Kirk Kimball Cooke Ferranti Wolrige-Gordon Channon E. Taylor Steel Ryan Huckfield Devlin Thomas Hayman MacKay Alton Dorrell Sands Dorrell Carron Kennedy M. Taylor Leslie Lammy Teather Swinson C. Smith Nash Black Whittome Mather Carling v t e Chancellors of the University of Oxford 1224–1400 Robert Grosseteste Ralph Cole Ralph de Maidstone Richard Batchden Ralph Cole Simon de Bovill John de Rygater Richard of Chichester Ralph de Heyham Simon de Bovill Gilbert de Biham Ralph de Sempringham William de Lodelawe Richard de S. Agatha Thomas de Cantilupe Henry de Cicestre Nicholas de Ewelme Thomas Bek William de Bosco Eustace de Normanville John de Pontissara Henry de Stanton William de Montfort Roger de Rowell William Pikerell Hervey de Saham Robert Winchelsey William de Kingescote John de Ludlow John of Monmouth Simon of Ghent Henry Swayne Roger de Martival Peter de Medburn Roger Weseham Richard de Clyve James de Cobeham Walter de Wetheringsete Simon de Faversham Walter Burdun William de Bosco Henry de Maunsfeld Walter Giffard Henry de Maunsfeld Henry Harclay Richard de Nottingham John Lutterell Henry Gower William de Alburwyke Thomas Hotham Ralph of Shrewsbury Roger de Streton Nigel de Wavere Ralph Radyn Hugh de Willoughby Robert de Stratford Robert Paynink John Leech William de Skelton Walter de Scauren William de Bergeveney John de Northwode William de Hawkesworth William de Palmorna Humphrey de Cherlton Lewis Charlton John de Hotham John Renham John de Hotham Richard FitzRalph Nicholas de Aston John de Renham John de Echingham Adam de Toneworth William Courtenay Adam de Toneworth William de Heytisbury William de Remmyngton John Turke Adam de Toneworth Robert Aylesham Robert Rygge William Berton Robert Rygge Nicholas Hereford William Rugg Robert Rygge Thomas Brightwell Thomas Cranley Robert Rygge Ralph Redruth Thomas Prestbury Robert Arlyngton Thomas Hyndeman Philip Repyngdon Henry Beaufort Thomas Hyndeman 1400–1500 Philip Repyngdon Robert Hallam Richard Courtenay Richard Ullerston William Clynt Thomas Prestbury William Sulburge Richard Courtenay William Sulburge Richard Courtenay William Sulburge William Barrow Richard Snetisham William Barrow Thomas Clare William Barrow Thomas Clare Walter Trengof Robert Colman Walter Trengof Thomas Rodborne Walter Trengof John Castell Thomas Chase Gilbert Kymer Thomas Bourchier John Carpenter Richard Praty John Norton Richard Roderham William Grey Thomas Gascoigne Henry Sever Thomas Gascoigne Robert Thwaits Gilbert Kymer George Neville Thomas Chaundler George Neville Lionel Woodville William Dudley John Russell John Morton 1500 onwards William Smyth Richard Mayew William Warham John Longland Richard Cox John Mason Reginald Pole Henry Fitzalan, 12th Earl of Arundel John Mason Robert Dudley, 1st Earl of Leicester Thomas Bromley Christopher Hatton Thomas Sackville, 1st Earl of Dorset Richard Bancroft Thomas Egerton, 1st Viscount Brackley William Herbert, 3rd Earl of Pembroke Philip Herbert, 4th Earl of Pembroke William Seymour, 2nd Duke of Somerset Philip Herbert, 4th Earl of Pembroke Vacant Oliver Cromwell Richard Cromwell William Seymour, 2nd Duke of Somerset Edward Hyde, 1st Earl of Clarendon Gilbert Sheldon James Butler, 1st Duke of Ormond James Butler, 2nd Duke of Ormonde Charles Butler, 1st Earl of Arran John Fane, 7th Earl of Westmorland George Lee, 3rd Earl of Lichfield Frederick North, Lord North William Cavendish-Bentinck, 3rd Duke of Portland William Grenville, 1st Baron Grenville Arthur Wellesley, 1st Duke of Wellington Edward Smith-Stanley, 14th Earl of Derby Robert Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury George Goschen, 1st Viscount Goschen George Curzon, 1st Marquess Curzon of Kedleston George Cave, 1st Viscount Cave Edward Grey, 1st Viscount Grey of Fallodon Edward Wood, 1st Earl of Halifax Harold Macmillan, 1st Earl of Stockton Roy Jenkins, Lord Jenkins of Hillhead Chris Patten, Lord Patten of Barnes University of Oxford portal v t e Fabian Society Chairs G. D. H. Cole Laski G. D. H. Cole Parker Albu Wilson M. Cole Skeffington Jenkins White Hughes Faringdon Crosland Stewart Abel-Smith Benn Townsend Rodgers Blenkinsop Shore Balogh Bray Hall Lester Judd Bosanquet Crouch Radice Leonard Whitehead Archer Williams Lipsey Meldram Jeger Blackstone McIntosh Mitchell Butler Gould Bean Cook McDonald Hayter Pimlott Dubs Rice Smith Hodge Wright MacDonald Marsden MacShane Richards Twigg Joyce Malhotra Balls Campbell Khan Pushpananthan Asato Malhotra Green Bartoletti Edobor General Secretaries Pease Sanders Galton Parker Monck Filson Chapman Rodgers Williams Ponsonby Hayter Martin Willman Crine Twigg Jacobs Katwala Harrop Presidents Webb Cripps G. D. H. Cole M. Cole Parker Hughes Archer v t e Abortion in the United Kingdom Legislation Malicious Shooting or Stabbing Act 1803 Offences Against the Person Act 1828 Offences Against the Person Act 1837 Offences Against the Person Act 1861 Infant Life (Preservation) Act 1929 Criminal Justice Act (Northern Ireland) 1945 Abortion Act 1967 Human Fertilisation and Embryology Act 1990 Northern Ireland (Executive Formation etc) Act 2019 Advocacy Groups Abortion Law Reform Association (ALRA) British Pregnancy Advisory Service Marie Stopes International National Council for Civil Liberties Amnesty International Family Planning Association Humanists UK Sister Supporter Back Off Scotland Abortion Support Network People Janet Chance Stella Browne Dora Russell Alice Jenkins Joan Malleson Frida Laski Ian MacGillivray Dugald Baird Douglas Vernon Hubble Martin Cole Vera Houghton Douglas Houghton Diane Munday Madeleine Simms François Lafitte David Paintin Walter L. Neustatter Eliot Slater Lewis Silkin John Silkin Samuel Silkin Malcolm Potts Caroline Deys Glanville Williams Peter Diggory David Steel Michael Winstanley John Dunwoody Gwyneth Dunwoody Peter Jackson Renée Short George Sinclair David Owen Roy Jenkins Kenneth Robinson Richard Crossman Ian Mikardo John Marks Jo Richardson Ann Furedi Barbara Hewson Anna Lo Opposition Groups Society for the Protection of Unborn Children (SPUC) Christian Action, Research and Education Both Lives Matter Catholic Church in England and Wales Catholic Church in Scotland ProLife Alliance (defunct) Right to Life UK People Aleck Bourne Phyllis Bowman Bernard Braine James Dunn Jill Knight Simon Mahon Norman St John-Stevas James Dempsey James White Ian Campbell John Corrie Bill Benyon Michael Ancram David Alton Victoria Gillick Jack Scarisbrick Nuala Scarisbrick Joe Benton Jim Dobbin Nadine Dorries Rob Flello Jacob Rees-Mogg Thérèse Coffey Joanna Jepson Heidi Crowter Related Malthusian League British Society for the Study of Sex Psychology World League for Sexual Reform International Planned Parenthood Federation UN Population Fund Marie Stopes Margaret Sanger Abortion in the Republic of Ireland Abortion in Canada Abortion in Australia Abortion in the United States Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove UK Parliament 2 Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Roy_Jenkins&oldid=1306173954 " Categories : 1920 births 2003 deaths 20th-century British biographers Alumni of Balliol College, Oxford Alumni of Cardiff University British European commissioners British abortion-rights activists Chairs of the Fabian Society Chancellors of the Exchequer of the United Kingdom Chancellors of the University of Oxford Labour Party (UK) MPs for English constituencies Liberal Democrats (UK) life peers Members of the Order of Merit Social Democratic Party (UK) MPs for Scottish constituencies Members of the Privy Council of the United Kingdom People from Pontypool Presidents of the European Commission Social Democratic Party (UK) life peers UK MPs 1945–1950 UK MPs 1950–1951 UK MPs 1951–1955 UK MPs 1955–1959 UK MPs 1959–1964 UK MPs 1964–1966 UK MPs 1966–1970 UK MPs 1970–1974 UK MPs 1974 UK MPs 1974–1979 UK MPs 1979–1983 UK MPs 1983–1987 Bisexual male politicians Members of the Parliament of the United Kingdom for Glasgow constituencies Hillhead British political party founders Presidents of the Royal Society of Literature European commissioners (1977–1981) LGBTQ members of the Parliament of the United Kingdom LGBTQ life peers Ministers in the Wilson governments, 1964–1970 British LGBTQ military personnel British Army personnel of World War II Royal Artillery officers 20th-century British LGBTQ people Life peers created by Elizabeth II British bisexual men British bisexual politicians Governors of the British Film Institute Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from May 2013 Use dmy dates from March 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2023 Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 09:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Roy Jenkins 32 languages Add topic

