Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Philosophical work 3 Articles 4 Books 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Christopher Peacocke 2 languages مصرى Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British philosopher This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Christopher Peacocke" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Christopher Peacocke Born Christopher Arthur Bruce Peacocke ( 1950-05-22 ) 22 May 1950 (age 75) Awards the Henry Wilde Prize in Philosophy (1971), Kennedy Memorial Trust Education Alma mater Magdalen College School Exeter College, Oxford Harvard University All Souls College, Oxford Doctoral advisor Michael Dummett Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic Institutions University of California, Berkeley King's College, London University of Oxford New York University Columbia University University College London New College of the Humanities Doctoral students Martin Davies Main interests Epistemology , philosophy of mind Notable ideas Theory of concept possession Christopher Arthur Bruce Peacocke (born 22 May 1950) is a British philosopher known for his work in philosophy of mind and epistemology . His recent publications, in the field of epistemology, have defended a version of rationalism .

Biography [ edit ] Son of the British theologian and biochemist Arthur Peacocke , he was educated at Magdalen College School, Oxford , and Exeter College, Oxford , where he read philosophy, politics and economics as an undergraduate, winning both the Webb Medley Prize in Economics and the Henry Wilde Prize in Philosophy in 1971, and graduated with a first class degree. Later that year, he was awarded a Kennedy Memorial Trust scholarship to study at Harvard University . He then continued at Oxford, gaining a BPhil (1974) and DPhil (1979) in philosophy, the latter under the supervision of Michael Dummett . He was visiting lecturer at University of California, Berkeley , 1975-6, and in 1975, elected to a fellowship at All Souls College, Oxford . He was the Susan Stebbing Professor of Philosophy at King's College London from 1985 to 1989 and Waynflete Professor of Metaphysical Philosophy at Oxford University from 1989 to 2000, at which time he moved to New York University (NYU). He joined the philosophy department at Columbia University in 2004, where he is now Johnsonian Professor of Philosophy. In 2007, he was named to the Richard Wollheim chair in philosophy at University College, London , where he taught in the third (summer) term each year until 2015. He lives with his wife and he has two adult children. He is also visiting professor of philosophy at New College of the Humanities .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Philosophical work [ edit ] Of his earlier work, he is perhaps best known for the first chapter of his 1983 book, Sense and Content , entitled "Sensation and the Content of Experience." In this chapter, Peacocke defends the claim that perceptual experience, over and above its intentional content, has certain "sensational properties". He gives three different examples of visual scenarios where intentional content alone cannot capture every aspect of the experience. Those aspects which elude intentional content are thought to be the sensational properties of the experience. Some of those who defend qualia have used these examples as evidence of their existence. Several philosophers have criticized these examples ( Michael Tye , Fred Dretske ), claiming that the supposed extra quality can indeed be captured in terms of intentional content.

In Sense and Content , Peacocke assumed that the intentional content of mental states is exclusively conceptual content, i.e. the content is such that the subject of the state needs to possess all the concepts that specify the intentional content in question. From about 1986 and onwards, Peacocke abandoned this assumption, arguing that some mental states, in particular perceptual experiences and representational states implicated in subpersonal information processing (for example, in the subconscious parsing of heard speech), have non-conceptual intentional content. Peacocke is now often seen as a leading proponent of this notion of non-conceptual intentional content.

In his 1992 book A Study of Concepts , Peacocke gives a detailed exposition of a philosophical theory of concept possession, according to which the nature and identity conditions for concepts may be given, in a non-circular way, by the conditions a thinker has to satisfy in order to possess the relevant concepts. The theory is a version of a so-called "conceptual" or "inferential role" theory of concepts.

Articles [ edit ] Understanding logical constants: a realist's account (1987), British Academy lecture.

"Truth Definitions and Actual Languages." In: Gareth Evans and John McDowell , eds., Truth and Meaning: Essays in Semantics , Oxford University Press , 1976.

Books [ edit ] Holistic Explanation: Action, Space, Interpretation , Oxford University Press, 1979.

Sense and Content , Oxford, 1983.

Thoughts: An Essay on Content , Blackwell, 1986.

A Study of Concepts , MIT, 1992.

Being Known , Oxford, 1999.

The Realm of Reason , Oxford, 2003.

Truly Understood , Oxford, 2008.

The Mirror of the World: Subjects, Consciousness, and Self-Consciousness , Oxford, 2014.

The Primacy of Metaphysics , Oxford, 2019.

References [ edit ] ^ "Christopher Peacocke joins New College of the Humanities as Visiting Professor | NCH" . Archived from the original on 17 March 2015 . Retrieved 17 March 2015 .

^ "Professor Christopher Peacocke | NCH" . Archived from the original on 17 March 2015 . Retrieved 17 March 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Homepage at Columbia Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH PhilPeople MathSciNet People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christopher_Peacocke&oldid=1277713367 " Categories : 1950 births Living people 20th-century British philosophers 21st-century British philosophers Analytic philosophers Harvard University alumni Columbia University faculty People educated at Magdalen College School, Oxford Academics of King's College London Academics of University College London Alumni of Exeter College, Oxford Fellows of All Souls College, Oxford Waynflete Professors of Metaphysical Philosophy Fellows of Magdalen College, Oxford Henry Wilde Prize winners Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata BLP articles lacking sources from April 2008 All BLP articles lacking sources Use British English from January 2013 Use dmy dates from May 2020 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 26 February 2025, at 07:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christopher Peacocke 2 languages Add topic

