Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Methods of investigation Toggle Methods of investigation subsection 2.1 Macroscopic characters 2.2 Microscopic characteristics 2.3 Separation of components 2.4 Chemical analysis 2.5 Specific gravity 3 Archaeological applications 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Petrography 41 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego Հայերեն Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Plattdüütsch Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of petrology focusing on detailed descriptions of rocks This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Petrography" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2016 ) Not to be confused with petroglyphs .

Petrography is a branch of petrology that focuses on detailed descriptions of rocks . Someone who studies petrography is called a petrographer . The mineral content and the textural relationships within the rock are described in detail. The classification of rocks is based on the information acquired during the petrographic analysis . Petrographic descriptions start with the field notes at the outcrop and include macroscopic description of hand-sized specimens. The most important petrographer's tool is the petrographic microscope . The detailed analysis of minerals by optical mineralogy in thin section and the micro-texture and structure are critical to understanding the origin of the rock.

Electron microprobe or atom probe tomography analysis of individual grains as well as whole rock chemical analysis by atomic absorption , X-ray fluorescence , and laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy are used in a modern petrographic lab. Individual mineral grains from a rock sample may also be analyzed by X-ray diffraction when optical means are insufficient. Analysis of microscopic fluid inclusions within mineral grains with a heating stage on a petrographic microscope provides clues to the temperature and pressure conditions existent during the mineral formation.

History [ edit ] Petrography as a science began in 1828 when Scottish physicist William Nicol invented the technique for producing polarized light by cutting a crystal of Iceland spar , a variety of calcite , into a special prism which became known as the Nicol prism . The addition of two such prisms to the ordinary microscope converted the instrument into a polarizing, or petrographic microscope . Using transmitted light and Nicol prisms, it was possible to determine the internal crystallographic character of very tiny mineral grains, greatly advancing the knowledge of a rock's constituents.

During the 1840s, a development by Henry C. Sorby and others firmly laid the foundation of petrography. This was a technique to study very thin slices of rock. A slice of rock was affixed to a microscope slide and then ground so thin that light could be transmitted through mineral grains that otherwise appeared opaque. The position of adjoining grains was not disturbed, thus permitting analysis of rock texture .

Thin section petrography became the standard method of rock study. Since textural details contribute greatly to knowledge of the sequence of crystallization of the various mineral constituents in a rock, petrography progressed into petrogenesis and ultimately into petrology.

Petrography principally advanced in Germany in the latter 19th century.

Methods of investigation [ edit ] Macroscopic characters [ edit ] The macroscopic characters of rocks, those visible in hand-specimens without the aid of the microscope, are very varied and difficult to describe accurately and fully. The geologist in the field depends principally on them and on a few rough chemical and physical tests; and to the practical engineer, architect and quarry-master they are all-important. Although frequently insufficient in themselves to determine the true nature of a rock, they usually serve for a preliminary classification, and often give all the information needed.

With a small bottle of acid to test for carbonate of lime, a knife to ascertain the hardness of rocks and minerals, and a pocket lens to magnify their structure, the field geologist is rarely at a loss to what group a rock belongs. The fine grained species are often indeterminable in this way, and the minute mineral components of all rocks can usually be ascertained only by microscopic examination. But it is easy to see that a sandstone or grit consists of more or less rounded, water-worn sand grains and if it contains dull, weathered particles of feldspar, shining scales of mica or small crystals of calcite these also rarely escape observation. Shales and clay rocks generally are soft, fine grained, often laminated and not infrequently contain minute organisms or fragments of plants. Limestones are easily marked with a knife-blade, effervesce readily with weak cold acid and often contain entire or broken shells or other fossils. The crystalline nature of a granite or basalt is obvious at a glance, and while the former contains white or pink feldspar, clear vitreous quartz and glancing flakes of mica, the other shows yellow-green olivine, black augite, and gray stratiated plagioclase.

Other simple tools include the blowpipe (to test the fusibility of detached crystals), the goniometer , the magnet, the magnifying glass and the specific gravity balance.

[ 1 ] Microscopic characteristics [ edit ] Photomicrograph of a volcanic sand grain ; upper picture is plane-polarized light, bottom picture is cross-polarized light, scale box at left-center is 0.25 millimeter.

Main article: Optical mineralogy When dealing with unfamiliar types or with rocks so fine grained that their component minerals cannot be determined with the aid of a hand lens, a microscope is used. Characteristics observed under the microscope include colour, colour variation under plane polarised light ( pleochroism , produced by the lower Nicol prism , or more recently polarising films ), fracture characteristics of the grains, refractive index (in comparison to the mounting adhesive, typically Canada balsam ), and optical symmetry ( birefringent or isotropic ).

In toto , these characteristics are sufficient to identify the mineral, and often to quite tightly estimate its major element composition.
The process of identifying minerals under the microscope is fairly subtle, but also mechanistic – it would be possible to develop an identification key that would allow a computer to do it. The more difficult and skilful part of optical petrography is identifying the interrelationships between grains and relating them to features seen in hand-sized specimen, at outcrop, or in mapping.

Separation of components [ edit ] Separation of the ingredients of a crushed rock powder to obtain pure samples for analysis is a common approach. It may
be performed with a powerful, adjustable-strength electromagnet. A weak magnetic field attracts magnetite, then haematite and other iron ores. Silicates that contain iron follow in definite order—biotite, enstatite, augite, hornblende, garnet, and similar ferro-magnesian minerals are successively abstracted. Finally, only the colorless, non-magnetic compounds, such as muscovite, calcite, quartz, and feldspar remain. Chemical methods also are useful.

A weak acid dissolves calcite from crushed limestone, leaving only dolomite, silicates, or quartz. Hydrofluoric acid attacks feldspar before quartz and, if used cautiously, dissolves these and any glassy material in a rock powder before it dissolves augite or hypersthene.

Methods of separation by specific gravity have a still wider application. The simplest of these is levigation , which is extensively employed in mechanical analysis of soils and treatment of ores, but is not so successful with rocks, as their components do not, as a rule, differ greatly in specific gravity. Fluids are used that do not attack most rock-forming minerals, but have a high specific gravity. Solutions of potassium mercuric iodide (sp. gr. 3.196), cadmium borotungstate (sp. gr. 3.30), methylene iodide (sp. gr. 3.32), bromoform (sp. gr. 2.86), or acetylene bromide (sp. gr. 3.00) are the principal fluids employed. They may be diluted (with water, benzene, etc.) or concentrated by evaporation.

If the rock is granite consisting of biotite (sp. gr. 3.1), muscovite (sp. gr. 2.85), quartz (sp. gr. 2.65), oligoclase (sp. gr. 2.64), and orthoclase (sp. gr. 2.56), the crushed minerals float in methylene iodide. On gradual dilution with benzene they precipitate in the order above. Simple in theory, these methods are tedious in practice, especially as it is common for one rock-making mineral to enclose another. Expert handling of fresh and suitable rocks yields excellent results.

[ 1 ] Chemical analysis [ edit ] In addition to naked-eye and microscopic investigation, chemical research methods are of great practical importance to the petrographer. Crushed and separated powders, obtained by the processes above, may be analyzed to determine chemical composition of minerals in the rock qualitatively or quantitatively. Chemical testing, and microscopic examination of minute
grains is an elegant and valuable means of discriminating between mineral components of fine-grained rocks.

Thus, the presence of apatite in rock-sections is established by covering a bare rock-section with ammonium molybdate solution. A turbid yellow precipitate forms over the crystals of the mineral in question (indicating the presence of phosphates). Many
silicates are insoluble in acids and cannot be tested in this way, but others are partly dissolved, leaving a film of gelatinous
silica that can be stained with coloring matters, such as the aniline dyes (nepheline, analcite, zeolites, etc.).

Complete chemical analysis of rocks are also widely used and important, especially in describing new species. Rock analysis has of late years (largely under the influence of the chemical laboratory of the United States Geological Survey) reached a high pitch of refinement and complexity. As many as twenty or twenty-five components may be determined, but for practical purposes a knowledge of the relative proportions of silica, alumina, ferrous and ferric oxides, magnesia, lime, potash, soda and water carry us a long way in determining a rock's position in the conventional classifications.

A chemical analysis is usually sufficient to indicate whether a rock is igneous or sedimentary, and in either case to accurately show what subdivision of these classes it
belongs to. In the case of metamorphic rocks it often establishes whether the original mass was a sediment or of volcanic origin.

[ 1 ] Specific gravity [ edit ] Specific gravity of rocks is determined by use of a balance and pycnometer. It is greatest in rocks containing the most magnesia, iron, and heavy metal while least in rocks rich in alkalis, silica, and water.
It diminishes with weathering. Generally, the specific gravity of rocks with the same chemical composition is higher if highly crystalline and lower if wholly or partly vitreous. The specific gravity of the more common rocks range from about 2.5 to 3.2.

[ 1 ] Archaeological applications [ edit ] Archaeologists use petrography to identify mineral components in pottery .

[ 2 ] This information ties the artifacts to geological areas where the raw materials for the pottery were obtained. In addition to clay, potters often used rock fragments, usually called "temper" or "aplastics", to modify the clay's properties. The geological information obtained from the pottery components provides insight into how potters selected and used local and non-local resources. Archaeologists are able to determine whether pottery found in a particular location was locally produced or traded from elsewhere. This kind of information, along with other evidence, can support conclusions about settlement patterns, group and individual mobility , social contacts, and trade networks. In addition, an understanding of how certain minerals are altered at specific temperatures can allow archaeological petrographers to infer aspects of the ceramic production process itself, such as minimum and maximum temperatures reached during the original firing of the pot.

See also [ edit ] Ceramic petrography References [ edit ] ^ a b c d One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Flett, John Smith (1911). " Petrology ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 21 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

323– 333.

^ Eiland, Murray (1997). "Petrography of Parthian Ceramics".

Archaeological Sciences 1995 Proceedings of a Conference on the Application of Scientific Techniques to the Study of Archaeology . Oxbow Monograph 64. Anthony Sinclair, Elizabeth Slater, John Gowlett. Oxford: Oxbow Books Ltd. pp.

69– 76.

ISBN 978-1-78570-806-0 .

OCLC 1017581916 .

External links [ edit ] Atlas of Rocks, Minerals, and Textures Petrographical description of rocks and minerals.

Uncommon igneous, metamorphic and metasomatic rocks in thin section, in unpolarized light and under crossed polarizers.

Name that Mineral Datatable for comparing observable properties of minerals in thin sections, under transmitted or reflected light.

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐8g2tb
Cached time: 20250812014509
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.218 seconds
Real time usage: 0.296 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 654/1000000
Revision size: 13307/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 17648/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 841/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 11821/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.143/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4741977/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  263.323      1 -total
 42.64%  112.274      1 Template:Reflist
 33.37%   87.871      1 Template:EB1911
 24.62%   64.825      1 Template:Short_description
 22.38%   58.930      1 Template:One_source
 20.84%   54.870      1 Template:Ambox
 14.80%   38.984      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.94%   18.268      1 Template:Distinguish
  5.72%   15.055      3 Template:Main_other
  5.03%   13.238      1 Template:SDcat Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:894729:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014509 and revision id 1301171631. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Petrography&oldid=1301171631 " Categories : Petrology Optical mineralogy Methods in archaeology Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2016 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 12:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Petrography 41 languages Add topic

