Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Publication process Toggle Publication process subsection 1.1 Formats 2 Content 3 Distribution Toggle Distribution subsection 3.1 Overseas distribution 4 Social impact Toggle Social impact subsection 4.1 China 4.2 Africa 4.3 Euro-American contexts 4.4 India 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle External links subsection 8.1 English translations of original text Toggle the table of contents Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung 44 languages Afrikaans العربية বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Қазақша മലയാളം مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Little Red Book ) 1964 book of statements by Mao Zedong "Little Red Book" redirects here. For other uses, see Little Red Book (disambiguation) .

Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung "Chairman Mao's Quotations" 1993 centenary reprint of the 1966 bilingual edition, published by the People's Republic of China Printing Office Editor People's Liberation Army Daily Author Mao Zedong (Mao Tse-tung) Hou Bo (photographer) Original title 毛主席语录 ; Máo Zhǔxí Yǔlù Translator Central Compilation and Translation Bureau Language Chinese Publisher People's Liberation Army General Political Department (initial releases) People's Press (officially and massively since 1965) Publication date 5 January 1964 Publication place People's Republic of China Media type Print ( Hardback and Paperback ) ISBN 978-0-8351-2388-4 OCLC 23380824 Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung Simplified Chinese 毛主席语录 Traditional Chinese 毛主席語錄 Literal meaning "Chairman Mao Quotes" Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Máo Zhǔxí Yǔlù Bopomofo ㄇㄠˊ   ㄓㄨˇ   ㄒㄧˊ   ㄩˇ   ㄌㄨˋ Wade–Giles Mao 2 Chu 3 -hsi 2 yü 3 -lu 4 Tongyong Pinyin Máo Jhǔ-sí Yǔ-lù IPA [mǎʊ ʈʂù.ɕǐ ỳ.lû] Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Mòuh Jyú-jihk Yúh-luhk Jyutping mou4 zyu2 zik6 jyu5 luk6 IPA [mɔw˩ tsy˧˥ tsɪk̚˨ jy˩˧ lʊk̚˨] Southern Min Hokkien POJ Mô͘ Chú-se̍k Gú-lio̍k Alternative Chinese name Simplified Chinese 红宝书 Traditional Chinese 紅寶書 Literal meaning "Treasured Red Book" Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Hóng bǎo shū Bopomofo ㄏㄨㄥˊ ㄅㄠˇ ㄕㄨ Yue: Cantonese Jyutping hung4 bou2 syu1 Quotations from Chairman Mao ( simplified Chinese : 毛主席语录 ; traditional Chinese : 毛主席語錄 ; pinyin : Máo Zhǔxí Yǔlù , commonly known as the "红宝书" pinyin : hóng bǎo shū during the Cultural Revolution [ 1 ] ), colloquially referred to in the English-speaking world as the Little Red Book , [ 2 ] is a compilation book of quotations from speeches and writings by Mao Zedong (formerly romanized as Mao Tse-tung), the former chairman of the Chinese Communist Party , published from 1964 to 1979 and widely distributed during the Cultural Revolution .

Publication process [ edit ] Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung was originally compiled by an office of the PLA Daily ( People's Liberation Army Daily ) as an ideological handbook.

[ 3 ] : xiii It developed out of Lin Biao 's practice of incorporating the study of Mao's texts and model soldiers like Lei Feng into daily drills.

[ 4 ] : 2 Lin's approach became known as the "lively study, lively application" of Mao Zedong Thought .

[ 5 ] : 29 In 1961, Lin had required PLA Daily to publish a Mao quote each day to emphasise the central theme of the day's editorial.

[ 5 ] : 29 To facilitate this, PLA Daily editors used a Tianjin Daily index of Mao's quotes arranged by topic.

[ 5 ] : 29 The daily Mao quote became a popular feature and PLA Daily 's use of the Tianjin Daily index became the core of Quotations from Chairman Mao .

[ 5 ] : 29 In December 1963, a deputy editor-in-chief of the PLA Daily proposed compiling a selection of Mao's quotations in a book for use by the PLA.

[ 5 ] : 29 The response at a General Political Department work conference was strongly positive, and the initial draft was prepared as 200 Quotations from Chairman Mao .

[ 5 ] : 29 It was revised several times over the next few months based on input from conference participants and PLA units that piloted the study of the text.

[ 5 ] : 29 In May 1964, the General Political Department released the internal publication Quotations from Chairman Mao , [ 4 ] : 2 adding a half title page with the slogan " Workers of the world, unite!

" ( 全世界无产者，联合起来！ ) in bold red letters, and endorsement leaves written by Lin Biao , Mao's chosen successor, that included three lines from the diary of model Lei Feng. This version had 30 topics under which 355 quotations were grouped.

[ 5 ] : 30 Following discussions that expanded the book twice more. The definitive 1965 version contained 33 thematic chapters of 427 total quotations excerpted from Mao's speeches and writing over the period 1929–1964.

[ 3 ] : xiii As of August 1965, new copies of the book had their distinct red vinyl covers (as opposed to the previously used white paper binding) to increase durability for fieldwork.

[ 5 ] : 30 Demand for the book increased sharply including for use outside the military and in August 1966 People's Publishing House took over the work of printing Quotations .

[ 5 ] : 34 It was made available to the public through Xinhua Bookstores .

[ 5 ] : 34 The Ministry of Culture held special study meetings to develop a production and distribution plan. It sought assurances that the book would receive publishing priority and that there would be sufficient paper, ink, and printing presses available. The goal was for "ninety-nine percent (of the population of China to) read Chairman Mao's book", according to a catalogue of publication records of the People's Publishing House.

[ citation needed ] Provinces, municipalities, and autonomous regions across China were ordered to build hundreds of new printing houses to publish the Quotations during the second half of 1966, which pushed the limits of the Chinese printing industry.

[ citation needed ] This disrupted plans for publishing any new volumes of The Complete Works of Marx and Engels that was already in progress. It also halted distribution of other ideological works. As late as 1970, more than 8 million copies of the 4-volume set of Selected Works of Marx and Engels that had already been printed (both in cloth hardcover and paperback) remained undistributed in storage warehouses on the grounds that other works "should not interfere with learning Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-Tung ".

[ citation needed ] On the other hand, several other works by Mao had very large printings during the same period, even though these editions were not produced in the large numbers of Quotations from Chairman Mao . These include Selected Works of Mao Zedong (in four volumes, 2.875 million copies in 14 languages), Selected Articles of Mao Zedong (various editions totalling 252 million copies), single article books, and works of poetry.

[ 6 ] The emphasis on Quotations started decreasing after the 9th Party Congress in April 1969.

[ 5 ] : 39 On 12 February 1979, the Publicity Department of the Chinese Communist Party ordered a halt to publishing Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung .

[ 7 ] [ 5 ] : 40 The department stated that Quotations was a distortion of Mao Zedong Thought and had a "widespread and pernicious influence".

[ 5 ] : 40 Formats [ edit ] Earlier versions and predecessors of the compilation book featured blue or white covers and sleeves.

[ 8 ] The most widely produced editions of the Quotations of Chairman Mao were published with a printed red vinyl cover wrapper over cardboard with pages bound in 64 folios that included photos of Mao. Other editions of the book were covered in cloth, silk, leather, paper, and other materials.

[ citation needed ] Most editions were produced in a functional, compact size that fit into a pocket, were easy to carry, and could be taken out at any time "for practice, learning, application." It was published in 32 other common sizes, allegedly the largest format printed on only four pages as large as the newspaper Reference News , and the smallest format the size of a matchbox .

[ citation needed ] Content [ edit ] Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-Tung consists of 427 quotations, organized thematically into 33 chapters.

[ 3 ] : xiii It is also called "Thoughts of Chairman Mao" by many Chinese. The quotations range in length from a sentence to a few short paragraphs, and borrow heavily from a group of about two dozen documents in the four volumes of Mao's Selected Works .

[ citation needed ] Usually the quotations are arranged logically, to deal with one to three themes in the development of a chapter. The table below summarizes the book.

Chapter Number of quotations Title Summary 1 13 The Communist Party The Chinese Communist Party is the core of the Chinese revolution , and its principles are based on Marxism–Leninism . Party criticism should be carried out within the Party.

2 22 Classes and Class Struggle The revolution, and the recognition of class and class struggle , are necessary for peasants and the Chinese people to overcome both domestic and foreign enemy elements. This is not a simple, clean, or quick struggle.

3 28 Socialism and Communism Socialism must be developed in China, and the route toward such an end is a democratic revolution, which will enable socialist and communist consolidation over a length of time. It is also important to unite with the middle peasants, and educate them on the failings of capitalism .

4 16 The Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People There are at least two basic kinds of contradiction: the antagonistic contradictions which exist between communist countries and their capitalist neighbors and between the people and the enemies of the people , and the contradictions among the people themselves, people unconvinced of China's new path, which should be dealt with in a democratic and non-antagonistic fashion.

5 21 War and Peace War is a continuation of politics , and there are at least two types: just (progressive) and unjust wars, which only serve bourgeois interests. While no one likes war, we must remain ready to wage just wars against imperialist agitations.

6 10 Imperialism and All Reactionaries Are Paper Tigers U.S. imperialism , European and Chinese reactionary forces represent real dangers, and in this respect are like real tigers. However, because the goal of our Communism is just, and reactionary interests are self-centered and unjust, after struggle, they will be revealed to be much less dangerous than they were earlier perceived to be.

7 10 Dare to Struggle and Dare to Win Fighting is unpleasant, and the people of China would prefer not to do it at all. At the same time, they stand ready to wage a just struggle of self-preservation against reactionary elements, both foreign and domestic.

8 10 People's War China's masses are the greatest conceivable weapon for fighting against Japanese imperialism and domestic reactionaries. Basic strategic points for war against the Kuomintang are also enumerated.

9 8 The People's Army The People's Army is not merely an organ for fighting; it is also an organ for the political advancement of the Party, as well as of production.

10 14 Leadership of Party Committees Internal life of the Party is discussed. Committees are useful to avoid monopolization by others, and Party members must demonstrate honesty, openness in discussing problems, and the ability to learn and multitask.

11 22 The Mass Line The mass line represents the creative and productive energies of the masses of the Chinese population, which are potentially inexhaustible. Party members should take their cue from the masses, and reinterpret policy with respect to the benefit of the masses.

12 21 Political Work It is necessary for intellectuals, students, soldiers and the average peasant to pay attention and involve themselves with political work. This is particularly true in wartime.

13 7 Relations Between Officers and Men Non-antagonistic and democratic relations between officers and men make for a stronger army.

14 6 Relations Between the Army and the People An army that is cherished and respected by the people, and vice versa, is a nearly invincible force. The army and the people must unite on the grounds of basic respect.

15 8 Democracy in the Three Main Fields Democracy and honesty play roles in the reform of the army, as well as in the life of the Party, and of cadres. " Ultra-democracy ", which is defined as an individualistic bourgeois aversion to discipline, is to be avoided.

16 9 Education and the Training of Troops Education must have a practical and political basis for the army, Party and cadres. Along democratic lines, it will also be possible for the officers to teach the soldiers, for the soldiers to teach the officers, and for the soldiers to teach each other.

17 9 Serving the People It is the duty of the cadres and the Party to serve the people. Without the people's interests constantly at heart, their work is useless.

18 7 Patriotism and Internationalism The patriotism of a communist nation and an internationalist sympathy for just struggles in other countries are in no way exclusive; on the contrary, they are linked deeply, as communism spreads throughout the world . At the same time, it is important for a country to retain modesty, and shun arrogance.

19 8 Revolutionary Heroism The same limitless creative energy of the masses is also visible in the army, in their fighting style and indomitable will.

20 8 Building Our Country Through Diligence and Frugality China's road to modernization will be built on the principles of diligence and frugality. Nor will it be legitimate to relax if, 50 years later, modernization is realized on a mass scale.

21 13 Self-Reliance and Arduous Struggle It is necessary for China to become self-reliant in the course of the revolution, along the usual lines of class struggle. At the same time, it is a mistake for individuals to only see the good or the bad in a system, to the exclusion of all else. The section ends with The Foolish Old Man Who Removed the Mountains (1945), which is the only text reproduced in full in Quotations .

[ 4 ] : 4 22 41 Methods of Thinking and Methods of Work Marxist dialectical materialism , which connotes the constant struggle between opposites in an empirical setting, is the best method toward constant improvement. Objective analysis of problems based on empirical results is at a premium.

23 9 Investigation and Study It is necessary to investigate both the facts and the history of a problem in order to study and understand it.

24 15 Correcting Mistaken Ideas Arrogance, lack of achievement after a prosperous period, selfishness, shirking work, and liberalism , are all evils to be avoided in China's development. Liberalism is taken to mean that one may avoid conflict or work in order to be more comfortable for the moment, while the problem continues to grow.

25 5 Unity Unity of the masses, the Party and the whole country is essential. At the same time, criticism may take place along comradely lines, while at the same time a basic unity is felt and preserved. This is the dialectical method.

26 5 Discipline Discipline is seen not to be exclusive to democratic methods. Basic points of military conduct are also enumerated.

27 15 Criticism and Self-Criticism Criticism is a part of the Marxist dialectical method which is central to Party improvement; as such, communists must not fear it, but engage in it openly.

28 18 Communists A communist must be selfless, with the interests of the masses at heart. He must also possess a largeness of mind, as well as a practical, far-sighted mindset.

29 11 Cadres Cadres , the instrument for uniting with and working for the people, must be leaders versed in Marxist–Leninism. They must have both guidance and the freedom to use their creative initiative in solving problems. Newer cadres and older cadres must work together with a comradely respect, learning from each other.

30 7 Youth The Chinese Youth represent an active, vital force in China, to be drawn upon. At the same time, it is necessary to educate them, and for the Youth League to give special attention to their problems and interests.

31 7 Women Women represent a great productive force in China, and equality among the sexes is one of the goals of communism. The multiple burdens which women must shoulder are to be eased.

32 8 Culture and Art Literature and art are discussed with respect to communism, in an orthodox fashion . (Principally consisting of quotations from Talks at the Yenan Forum on Literature and Art .) 33 16 Study It is the responsibility of all to cultivate themselves, and study Marxism–Leninism deeply. It is also necessary for people to turn their attention to contemporary problems, along empirical lines.

Distribution [ edit ] This article is part of a series about Mao Zedong Personal Early life Former Residence Death and state funeral Memorial Hall Ideology Maoism Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path Leadership Tenure Revolution Land Reform Movement Proclamation Korean War Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Three-anti and Five-anti Campaigns First five-year plan Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence Bandung Conference Sufan movement Hundred Flowers Campaign Anti-Rightist Campaign Canton Fair Great Leap Forward Great Chinese Famine Two Bombs, One Satellite Seven Thousand Cadres Conference Socialist Education Movement Third Front Cultural Revolution Abolition of the presidency UN representation Richard Nixon visit Works Bombard the Headquarters A Critique of Soviet Economics On Contradiction On Guerrilla Warfare On New Democracy On Practice On Protracted War On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People On the People's Democratic Dictatorship On the Ten Major Relationships Oppose Book Worship Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung Reply to Li Shuyi Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan Selected Works of Mao Tse-Tung The Shian Kian Weekly Review Poetry Changsha The Double Ninth Loushan Pass Legacy Cult of personality Chairman Mao en route to Anyuan Portraits overlooking Tiananmen 1989 vandalism incident Statues Young Fuzhou Chengdu Long Live the Victory North Park Commune inspection v t e Cover of the first edition English version of the Little Red Book c.

1966 The book was known as the "Treasured Red Book" (simplified Chinese: 红宝书 ; traditional Chinese: 紅寶書 ; pinyin: hóng bǎoshū ) [ 9 ] or "Little Treasure Book" in China.

[ 10 ] From the mid-1960s through the mid-1970s, it was the most printed book globally.

[ 3 ] : xiii It has produced a wide array of sales and distribution figures. Some sources claim that over 6.5 billion printed volumes have been distributed in total, [ 11 ] others contend that the distribution ran into the "billions", [ 12 ] [ 3 ] : xiii and others cite "over a billion" official volumes between 1966 and 1969 alone as well as "untold numbers of unofficial local reprints and unofficial translations." [ 3 ] : xiii [ 13 ] The initial print run was distributed only within the PLA, with 4.2 million copies printed.

[ 5 ] : 30 During the Learn from the People's Liberation Army campaign, the book became hugely popular among the revolutionary youth.

[ 4 ] : 2 Demand grew so high that the PLA Publishing House's printing resourced became over extended, and after September 1964, printing moulds were provided to civilian printing presses at times to relieve the pressure.

[ 5 ] : 30 Twelve million copies had been printed by August 1965.

[ 5 ] : 30 During the early phase of the Cultural Revolution , copies of quotations were frequently donated to those deemed the revolutionary masses.

[ 5 ] : 36 On National Day in 1966, one million copies were handed out to Red Guards who traveled to Beijing.

[ 5 ] : 36 Overseas distribution [ edit ] Outside China the work was called the "Little Red Book" due to the red cover of its most widely printed version.

[ 8 ] The Foreign Affairs Department of the State Council issued a March 1966 circular requesting any foreigners who had obtained a copy of Quotations to return it, stating that the book was for internal education and study only and was not a complete description of Mao Zedong Thought .

[ 5 ] : 35 This proved not practical and the next month the Central Propaganda Department stated that copies already distributed should not be recalled and that foreign experts and exchange students could request copies to borrow or buy.

[ 5 ] : 35 In 1966, the Publicity Department of the Chinese Communist Party approved Quotations from Chairman Mao for export. To meet overseas requirements, the editors of the Chinese Foreign Languages Press made revisions necessitated by the situation. They added a "second edition preface" endorsement by Lin Biao , dated 16 December 1966 (which was torn out following Lin Biao's death and public disgrace in September 1971). On the last page, they listed the names of the publisher ( PLA General Political Department ) without an ISBN , the printer and distributor (both Xinhua Bookstore ), and the publication year.

[ citation needed ] By May 1967, bookstores in 117 countries and territories around the world—including the United Kingdom , France , Spain , Japan , the Soviet Union , West Germany , Italy , Nepal , Indonesia , Philippines , Burma , Iran , various Arab and African nations and others—were distributing Mao's Quotations . It was translated into more than 50 languages.

[ 3 ] : xiii After the 12 February 1979 directive withdrawing Quotations from circulation, foreigners seeking copies of Quotations were instead to be offered Mao's Selected Works .

[ 5 ] : 40 Social impact [ edit ] A propaganda poster from the Cultural Revolution featuring people holding Mao's Little Red Book and wearing Mao badges .

China [ edit ] During the 1960s, the book was the single most visible icon in mainland China, even more visible than images of Mao himself. In posters and pictures created by CCP's propaganda artists, nearly every painted character, whether smiling or looking determined, was seen with a copy of the book in his or her hand.

[ 14 ] During the Mao era, when people swore oaths they would often do so on Quotations .

[ 15 ] : 49 After the end of the Cultural Revolution in 1976 and the rise of Deng Xiaoping in 1978, the importance of the book waned considerably, and the glorification of Mao's quotations was considered to be left deviationism and a cult of personality .

[ citation needed ] Quotations continues to be a symbol of Mao Zedong Thought in China today. In certain situations, the book is given as a gift, for example, when public funds are involved, or when personal events arise, such as congratulating newlyweds.

[ citation needed ] Today in China, Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-Tung is mostly seen as a piece of nostalgia . It is difficult to find in bookstores.

[ 9 ] Rare and unusual printings can command extremely high prices from collectors. A 1964 version of the book was sold for US$15,000 by Sotheby's .

[ 16 ] [ 9 ] Africa [ edit ] In Africa, Quotations helped inspire political texts including Quotations from President Karume and Axioms of Kwame Nkrumah .

[ 17 ] : 108 Euro-American contexts [ edit ] Assessing its legacy in the French Maoist context, Alain Badiou concludes that "Mao's Little Red Book has been our guide, not, as fools say, in the sense of a dogmatic catechism, but on the contrary, so that we can clarify and invent new behaviors in all sorts of disparate situations that were unfamiliar to us." [ 18 ] : 241 In the United States, Quotations was particularly popular among African American and Asian American radicals, who often viewed the text as a welcome departure from what they regarded as a typically Eurocentric body of theory.

[ 19 ] : 246 According to Bobby Seale , in 1967 he and Huey P. Newton obtained copies of Quotations from the Chinese Book Store in San Francisco to sell at University of California, Berkeley .

[ 19 ] : 245 With the proceeds, they purchased weapons to arm Black Panther Party members for self-defense against police brutality.

[ 19 ] : 245 The Revolutionary Action Movement modeled its Code of Cadres on the "Three Main Rules of Discipline" section of Quotations .

[ 19 ] : 258 India [ edit ] In India, Quotations gained popularity following the 1967 Naxalbari uprising and the beginning of the Naxalite Movement .

[ 20 ] : 117 The leader of the first phase of the Naxalite Movement, Charu Majumdar , placed major emphasis on the text, requiring it to be studied and to be read aloud to illiterate peasants.

[ 20 ] : 117 During this phase of the Naxalite Movement, Quotations was popular among both movement participants and those who sympathized with it.

[ 20 ] : 118 The Indian government banned Quotations beginning in the mid-1970s.

[ 20 ] : 118 See also [ edit ] Chairman Mao badge History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Mao Zedong's cult of personality Little Red Songbook Three Old Articles (China) The Green Book (Gaddafi) References [ edit ] ^ "存档副本" .

Archived from the original on 22 January 2024 . Retrieved 6 January 2024 .

^ "Who, What, Why: What is the Little Red Book?" .

BBC News . 26 November 2015 . Retrieved 18 January 2025 .

^ a b c d e f g Cook, Alexander C., ed. (2013). "Preface".

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

^ a b c d Cook, Alexander C., ed. (2013). "Introduction".

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v Leese, Daniel (2013). "A Single Spark: Origins and Spread of the Little Red Book in China". In Cook, Alexander C. (ed.).

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

^ "How Much Did Mao Zedong, Deng Xiaoping, and Jiang Zemin Get Paid for Their Publications?" . ChinaScope Magazine, September 2005 (Updated 8 February 2008), article by Jiao Guobiao . Retrieved 10 March 2010 .

^ "1979年《毛主席语录》因"流毒甚广"被停止发行" . 胡耀邦史料信息网.

Archived from the original on 11 September 2014 . Retrieved 30 September 2013 .

^ a b Grimes, William (19 November 2014).

"纽约举办《毛主席语录》50周年展" .

纽约时报中文网 (in Chinese) . Retrieved 25 February 2025 .

^ a b c "最"红"不过"红宝书" – DW – 2012年5月11日" .

dw.com (in Chinese) . Retrieved 25 February 2025 .

^ "Little Red Book" .

Encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 15 January 2025 .

^ Zhengyuan Fu, Autocratic Tradition and Chinese Politics , Cambridge University Press 1994, p. 186.

Autocratic Tradition and Chinese Politics ^ Allen Kent , Harold Lancour, Jay E. Daily, Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science, Volume 22 , CRC Press 1977, p.31.

Encyclopedia of Library and Information Science ^ Daniel Leese, Mao Cult: Rhetoric and Ritual in China's Cultural Revolution , Cambridge University Press 2013, p. 108 Mao Cult: Rhetoric and Ritual in China's Cultural Revolution ^ Powell, Patricia; Wong, Joseph (1 June 1997).

"Propaganda Posters from the Chinese Cultural Revolution" .

The Historian .

59 (4): 777– 794.

doi : 10.1111/j.1540-6563.1997.tb01375.x .

ISSN 0018-2370 .

^ Marquis, Christopher ; Qiao, Kunyuan (2022).

Mao and Markets: The Communist Roots of Chinese Enterprise . New Haven: Yale University Press .

doi : 10.2307/j.ctv3006z6k .

ISBN 978-0-300-26883-6 .

JSTOR j.ctv3006z6k .

OCLC 1348572572 .

S2CID 253067190 .

^ 《毛主席语录》成为热门收藏品 (in Chinese). News.xinhuanet.com. Archived from the original on 22 June 2011 . Retrieved 1 March 2011 .

^ Lal, Priya (2013). "Maoism in Tanzania: Material Connections and Shared Imaginiaries". In Cook, Alexander C. (ed.).

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

^ Bourg, Julian (2013). "Principally Contradiction: The Flourishing of French Maoism". In Cook, Alexander C. (ed.).

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

^ a b c d Mullen, Bill V. (2013). "By the Book: Quotations from Chairman Mao and the Making of Afro-Asian Radicalism, 1966-1975". In Cook, Alexander C. (ed.).

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

^ a b c d Chakrabarti, Sreemanti (2013). "Empty Symbol: The Little Red Book in India". In Cook, Alexander C. (ed.).

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

Further reading [ edit ] DeFrancis, John (1975).

Annotated Quotations from Chairman Mao . Yale University Press.

ISBN 0-300-01870-3 .

Han, Oliver Lei.

Sources and Early Printing History of Chairman Mao's "Quotations" Archived 24 January 2022 at the Wayback Machine .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Quotations from Chairman Mao .

English translations of original text [ edit ] Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-Tung , Terebess Asia Online (TAO) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-Tung , Art-bin.com Quotations from Mao Tse-Tung , Mao Tse Tung Internet Archive, Marxists.org v t e Mao Zedong Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party (1943–1976) Chairman of the Central Military Commission (1954–1976) History and politics Overviews Early life Rule as Chinese leader Cult of personality Death and state funeral Chairman Mao Memorial Hall Chronology Chinese Civil War Long March Chinese Soviet Republic Second Sino-Japanese War Second United Front Yan'an Rectification Movement Yan'an Forum 7th National Congress of the Communist Party Chinese Communist Revolution Proclamation of the People's Republic of China Annexation of Tibet by the People's Republic of China Land Reform Movement Korean War People's Volunteer Army Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Three-anti and Five-anti Campaigns First five-year plan First Taiwan Strait Crisis 1954 Constitution Bandung Conference 8th National Congress of the Communist Party Sufan movement Hundred Flowers Campaign Anti-Rightist Campaign Two Bombs, One Satellite Second Taiwan Strait Crisis Great Leap Forward Great Chinese Famine Lushan Conference Seven Thousand Cadres Conference Sino-Soviet split Socialist Education Movement Vietnam War Cultural Revolution Cleansing the Class Ranks Chairman Mao badge Four Olds Gang of Four Red August Red Guards 9th National Congress of the Communist Party Abolition of the presidency Lin Biao incident 1972 visit by Richard Nixon to China 10th National Congress of the Communist Party Concepts Maoism Capitalist roader Continuous Revolution Theory Mass line New Democracy Newborn socialist things One Divides into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Three Worlds Theory Works Political works Bombard the Headquarters A Critique of Soviet Economics On Contradiction On Guerrilla Warfare On New Democracy On Practice On Protracted War On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People On the People's Democratic Dictatorship Oppose Book Worship Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung Reply to Li Shuyi Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan Selected Works of Mao Tse-Tung The Shian Kian Weekly Review Ten Major Relationships Poetry Changsha The Double Ninth Loushan Pass Family Mao Zemin (brother) Mao Zetan (brother) Mao Zejian (cousin) Luo Yixiu (first wife) Yang Kaihui (second wife) Mao Anying (son) Mao Anqing (son) Mao Anlong (son) Yang Yuehua (daughter) Li Min (daughter) Jiang Qing (fourth wife) Li Na (daughter) Mao Xinyu (grandson) Kong Dongmei (granddaughter) Mao Yuanxin (nephew) Category v t e Cultural Revolution Prelude Anti-Rightist Campaign Great Chinese Famine Great Leap Forward Lushan Conference Seven Thousand Cadres Conference Socialist Education Movement Fengqiao experience Taoyuan Experience Major events Down to the Countryside Movement Cleansing the Class Ranks 12-3 incident January Storm February Countercurrent Great Exchange of Revolutionary Experience Wuhan incident Smashing gong-jian-fa 9th Party Congress One Strike-Three Anti Campaign Abolition of the presidency in China Project 571 Lin Biao incident 10th Party Congress Black Painting incident Criticize Lin, Criticize Confucius Snail Incident Hangzhou incident 1975 Banqiao Dam failure Counterattack the Right-Deviationist Reversal-of-Verdicts Trend 1976 Nanjing incident 1976 Tiananmen Incident Smashing the Gang of Four Massacres Red August Daxing Massacre Guangxi Massacre Inner Mongolia incident Guangdong Massacre Yangjiang Massacre Hunan Massacres Daoxian massacre Shaoyang County Massacre Yunnan Massacres Zhao Jianmin spy case Shadian incident Ruijin Massacre Qinghai 223 Incident Key figures Mao Zedong Liu Shaoqi Zhou Enlai Lin Biao Deng Xiaoping Gang of Four ( Jiang Qing Zhang Chunqiao Yao Wenyuan Wang Hongwen ) Peng Dehuai Wu Han Peng Zhen Tao Zhu Chen Boda Wang Dongxing Xie Fuzhi Ji Dengkui Wang Li Qi Benyu Wu Faxian Qiu Huizuo Yang Chengwu Chen Zaidao Kang Sheng Mao Yuanxin Hua Guofeng Ye Jianying Documents 1970 Draft Constitution A List of Cadres to Be Protected Bombard the Headquarters Quotations from Chairman Mao Hai Rui Dismissed from Office May 16 Notification Six Articles of Public Security Sweep Away All Cow Demons and Snake Spirits On Class Origins " With you in charge, I'm at ease " Concepts Four Olds Newborn socialist things Struggle session Feudal fascism Big-character poster Cow demons and snake spirits Bloodline theory Continuous Revolution Theory Seizure of power Violent Struggle One Divides into Two Democracy Wall Eight model plays Loyalty dance Capitalist roader Yiku sitian Learn from Daqing in industry Learn from Dazhai in agriculture Stinking Old Ninth Five Black Categories Five Red Categories Two Newspapers and One Journal Groups Red Guards Conservative Faction Little Red Guards Rebel Faction Scarlet Guards Ultra-Left Faction Xiaoyao Faction May Sixteenth elements Five Man Group Cultural Revolution Group Central Case Examination Group Central Organization and Propaganda Leading Group Hunan Provincial Proletarian Revolutionary Great Alliance Committee Revolutionary committee in Beijing in Fujian in Heilongjiang in Shanghai 8341 Special Regiment Sent-down youth 61 Renegades Barefoot doctor Worker-Peasant-Soldier student May Seventh Cadre School Xiang River Storm and Thunder Related topics Maoism Mao Zedong's cult of personality Mango cult List of campaigns of the Chinese Communist Party Class struggle Sino-Soviet split Two Whatevers Morning Sun (film) Third Plenum of the 11th Central Committee Boluan Fanzheng New Enlightenment Scar literature Evaluation of the Cultural Revolution Category v t e Maoism Concepts Agrarian socialism Antagonistic contradiction Anti-imperialism Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Comprador Continuous Revolution Theory Cultural Revolution Four Olds Marxism–Leninism Mass line Newborn socialist things New Democracy One Divides into Two People's war Probable defeat Proletarian nation Revolutionary base area Seek truth from facts Self-criticism Social imperialism Three Worlds Theory Variants Maoism–Third Worldism Mao-spontex Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Prachanda Path People Mao Zedong Faiz Ahmad Louis Althusser Samir Amin Bob Avakian Alain Badiou Mohan Baidya Afzal Bangash Charles Bettelheim Biplav Bo Xilai Chen Boda Chin Peng Pushpa Kamal Dahal Saroj Dutta Norm Gallagher Abimael Guzmán Harry Haywood Ted Hill İbrahim Kaypakkaya Jiang Qing Kang Sheng Li Minqi Lin Biao Charu Majumdar Pierre Mulele Huey P. Newton Nie Yuanzi Qi Benyu Muppala Lakshmana Rao Narayan Sanyal Siraj Sikder Jose Maria Sison Wang Hongwen Yao Wenyuan Akram Yari Zhang Chunqiao Salmin Theoretical works Report on an Investigation of the Peasant Movement in Hunan (1927) On Contradiction (1937) On Practice (1937) On Guerrilla Warfare (1937) On Protracted War (1938) On the Ten Major Relationships (1956) On the Correct Handling of Contradictions Among the People (1957) A Critique of Soviet Economics (1960) Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung (1964) Historic Eight Documents (1965–1966) Bombard the Headquarters (1966) Settlers: The Mythology of the White Proletariat (1983) History Chinese Soviet Republic Jiangxi Soviet Long March Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present Campaign to Suppress Counterrevolutionaries Korean War Sino-Soviet split Great Leap Forward Black power movement Cultural Revolution 16 May Notification Red August January Storm Down to the Countryside Movement New Communist movement Cambodian Civil War Naxalite–Maoist insurgency Naxalbari uprising New People's Army rebellion Sino-Albanian split Maoist insurgency in Turkey Death and funeral of Mao Cambodian–Vietnamese War Two Whatevers Peruvian Revolution Nepalese Civil War Chongqing model Organizations Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Peru – Shining Path National Democratic Front of the Philippines Communist Party of the Philippines New People's Army Communist Party of Turkey/Marxist–Leninist Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre) Communist Party of India (Maoist) Proletarian Party of East Bengal Communist Party of Burma Communist Party of Ecuador – Red Sun Serve the People – Communist League Black Panther Party Revolutionary Internationalist Movement Communist (Maoist) Party of Afghanistan Related topics Anarchism in China Big-character poster Feudal fascism Hoxhaism Guevarism Juche Left communism in China Mao's cult of personality Nanjie National communism National Democracy Movement Naxalism Nazi-Maoism New Left Chinese Japanese Red Guards Red Star Over China Socialist ideology of the Kuomintang Thought reform in China China portal Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Israel Other IdRef NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐p4xz6
Cached time: 20250817044409
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.191 seconds
Real time usage: 1.419 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 20597/1000000
Revision size: 34345/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 228902/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 19689/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 132682/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.661/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19498283/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1225.691      1 -total
 20.07%  245.945      1 Template:Infobox_book
 18.52%  227.014      1 Template:Infobox
 17.11%  209.756     44 Template:Rp
 16.09%  197.244     44 Template:R/superscript
 12.05%  147.655      1 Template:Reflist
 10.14%  124.328      1 Template:Mao_Zedong_series
  9.94%  121.828      1 Template:Sidebar_person
  9.05%  110.885      1 Template:Noitalics
  8.86%  108.543      2 Template:Lang Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:99707:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044409 and revision id 1301797900. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Quotations_from_Chairman_Mao_Tse-tung&oldid=1301797900 " Categories : 1964 non-fiction books Books of quotations Chinese culture Chinese literature Communist books Cultural Revolution Ideology of the Chinese Communist Party Maoist China propaganda Maoist terminology Culture of the People's Republic of China Propaganda books and pamphlets Works by Mao Zedong Hidden categories: CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from October 2019 Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles containing simplified Chinese-language text Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2018 Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 19:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Quotations from Chairman Mao Tse-tung 44 languages Add topic

