Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Personal life 3 Work on ENIAC 4 Post-war years 5 Death 6 See also 7 Footnotes 8 References Toggle the table of contents Adele Goldstine 18 languages العربية Asturianu Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Italiano مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Português Русский తెలుగు Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American computer programmer (1920–1964) Adele Goldstine Born Adele Katz ( 1920-12-21 ) December 21, 1920 New York City, U.S.

Died November 1964 (1964-11-00) (aged 43) Alma mater Hunter College ( BA ) University of Michigan ( MA ) Known for First manual on electronic digital computer Spouse Herman Goldstine ​ ( m.

1941) ​ Children 2 Scientific career Fields Computer Programming and Mathematics Institutions University of Pennsylvania Los Alamos National Laboratory Adele Goldstine ( née Katz ; December 21, 1920 – November 1964) was an American mathematician and computer programmer. She wrote the manual for the first electronic digital computer, ENIAC . Through her programming work, she was instrumental in converting the ENIAC from a computer that required reprogramming each time it was used to one capable of performing a set of fifty stored instructions .

[ 1 ] Early life and education [ edit ] Goldstine was born in New York City on December 21, 1920, to Yiddish-speaking Jewish parents.

[ 1 ] Her father was a business man and his name was William Katz.

[ 2 ] Her father emigrated from Pandėlys , Lithuania (then Russian Empire ) in 1902.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] She attended Hunter College High School, then Hunter College . After receiving her B.A.

, she attended the University of Michigan , where she earned a Master's in mathematics aged 22.

[ 2 ] Personal life [ edit ] At the University of Michigan, she met Herman Goldstine , who was the military liaison and administrator for the construction of the ENIAC, and they were married in 1941.

[ 2 ] After marriage, Herman had his job as a manager for project ENIAC, while Adele went to the Moore School of Electrical Engineering at the University of Pennsylvania . Together, they had two children, born in 1952 and 1959.

[ 1 ] Work on ENIAC [ edit ] As an instructor of mathematics for the women " computers " at the Moore School, Goldstine also trained some of the six women who were the original programmers of ENIAC to manually calculate ballistic trajectories (complex differential calculations).

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The job of computer was critical to the war effort, and women were regarded as capable of doing the work more rapidly and accurately than men.

[ 7 ] By 1943, and for the balance of World War II, essentially all computers were women as were many of their direct supervisors.

Goldstine wrote the Operators Manual for the ENIAC after the six women ( Kay McNulty , Betty Jean Jennings , Betty Snyder , Marlyn Wescoff , Fran Bilas and Ruth Lichterman ) trained themselves to "program" the ENIAC using its logical and electrical block diagrams. Reconfiguring the machine to solve a different problem involved physically plugging and unplugging wires on the machine; it was called "setting-up," as the modern terminology of "program" had not yet come into use.

[ 8 ] In 1946 Goldstine sat in on programming sessions with Bartik and Dick Clippinger and was hired to help implement Clippinger's stored program modification to the ENIAC.

John von Neumann was a consultant on the selection of the instruction set implemented.  This solved the problem of the programmers having to unplug and replug patch cables for every program the machine was to run; instead the program was entered on the three function tables, which had previously been used only for storage of a trajectory's drag function. ENIAC programmer Jean Bartik called Goldstine one of her three great programming partners along with Betty Holberton and Art Gehring .

[ 9 ] They worked together to program the Taub program for the ENIAC.

[ citation needed ] Post-war years [ edit ] After the war, Goldstine continued her programming work with von Neumann at Los Alamos National Laboratory , where she devised problems for ENIAC to process.

[ 1 ] Death [ edit ] After having two children, in 1953 and 1960, she was diagnosed with cancer in 1962. She died two years later at the age of 43 in 1964.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Kathleen Antonelli Jean Bartik Betty Holberton Marlyn Meltzer Frances Spence Ruth Teitelbaum Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e Jones, J. Sydney. "Adele Katz Goldstine." In Notable Women Scientists.

Gale: 1999, pp. 212–13 ^ a b c "Adele Katz Goldstine" .

Engineering and Technology History Wiki . January 13, 2016 . Retrieved October 15, 2021 .

^ 1930 United States Federal Census ^ New York, State and Federal Naturalization Records, 1794–1943 for William Katz ^ "Adele Katz Goldstine – Engineering and Technology History Wiki" .

ethw.org . January 13, 2016 . Retrieved October 10, 2017 .

^ Brainerd, John G. "Genesis of the ENIAC" Technology and Culture. Vol. 17. No. 3, pp. 482–88.

^ Fritz, W. Barkley (1996).

"The Women of ENIAC" (PDF) .

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing .

18 (3): 13– 28.

doi : 10.1109/85.511940 – via IEEE Explore.

^ Grier, David A. (1996). "The ENIAC, The Verb "to Program" and the Emergence of Digital Computers".

IEEE Annals of the History of Computing .

18 : 51– 55.

doi : 10.1109/85.476561 .

^ "Oral-History:Jean Bartik – Engineering and Technology History Wiki" .

Engineering and Technology History Wiki . January 26, 2021 . Retrieved December 4, 2021 .

References [ edit ] "Women in Computer Science" .

Women's First Roles in the 20th Century Computer World . Archived from the original on March 2, 2006 . Retrieved February 25, 2006 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Academics zbMATH DBLP v t e Software engineering Fields Computer programming DevOps Empirical software engineering Experimental software engineering Formal methods Requirements engineering Search-based software engineering Site reliability engineering Social software engineering Software deployment Software design Software maintenance Software testing Systems analysis Concepts Abstraction CI/CD Compatibility Backward compatibility Compatibility layer Compatibility mode Forward compatibility Software incompatibility Component-based software engineering Data modeling Enterprise architecture Functional specification Modeling language Programming paradigm Software Software archaeology Software architecture Software configuration management Software development process/methodology Software quality Software quality assurance Software system Software verification and validation Structured analysis Essential analysis Orientations Agile Aspect-oriented Object orientation Ontology SDLC Service orientation Models Developmental Agile EUP Executable UML Incremental model Iterative model Prototype model RAD Scrum Spiral model UP V-model Waterfall model XP Model-driven engineering Round-trip engineering Other CMMI Data model ER model Function model Information model Metamodeling Object model SPICE Systems model View model Languages IDEF SysML UML USL Systems design Requirements Functional requirement Non-functional requirement Capacity Users Compute Memory Storage Network Web traffic Interface API SOAP REST GraphQL gRPC Webhook High-level design Client Load balancing Application server Message queue Integration Vertical Peer-to-peer API gateway pub-sub Event source ETL Batch Stream Orchestration Architectures Monolithic Microservices Event-driven Client–server Serverless Circuit breaker Rate limiting Database Relational NoSQL Graph Key–value LSM tree Time series Column oriented Principles Consistency Reliability CAP theorem Maintainability Configurability Modularity Durability Scalability Stateless Asynchronous I/O Loose coupling Availability Fault tolerance Failover Single point of failure Replication Consistent hashing Circuit breaker Latency Cache CDN Shard Database index Pre-caching Storage Object storage Block storage Observability Logging Metrics Tracing Error rate Queries per second Notification system Anomaly detection Related fields Computer engineering Computer science Information science Project management Risk management Systems engineering Commons Category v t e Timelines of computing Computing Before 1950 1950–1979 1980s 1990s 2000s 2010s 2020s Scientific Women in computing Computer science Algorithms Artificial intelligence Binary prefixes Cryptography Machine learning Quantum computing and communication Software Free and open-source software Hypertext technology Operating systems DOS family Windows Linux Programming languages Virtualization development Malware Internet Internet conflicts Web browsers Web search engines Notable people Kathleen Antonelli John Vincent Atanasoff Charles Babbage John Backus Jean Bartik George Boole Vint Cerf John Cocke Stephen Cook Edsger W. Dijkstra J. Presper Eckert Douglas Engelbart Adele Goldstine Lois Haibt Betty Holberton Margaret Hamilton Grace Hopper David A. Huffman Bob Kahn Alan Kay Brian Kernighan Andrew Koenig Semyon Korsakov Donald Knuth Joseph Kruskal Nancy Leveson Ada Lovelace Douglas McIlroy Marlyn Meltzer John von Neumann Klára Dán von Neumann Dennis Ritchie Guido van Rossum Claude Shannon Frances Spence Bjarne Stroustrup Ruth Teitelbaum Ken Thompson Linus Torvalds Alan Turing Paul Vixie Larry Wall Stephen Wolfram Niklaus Wirth Steve Wozniak Konrad Zuse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adele_Goldstine&oldid=1304158447 " Categories : 1920 births 1964 deaths Computer scientists from New York City Hunter College alumni University of Michigan alumni American computer programmers 20th-century American Jews American women computer scientists American computer scientists 20th-century American women scientists American people of Lithuanian-Jewish descent Jewish American scientists Jewish women scientists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use mdy dates from December 2022 Articles with hCards All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2016 Place of death missing This page was last edited on 4 August 2025, at 09:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Adele Goldstine 18 languages Add topic

