Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early career 2 In the Revolution 3 Empire, Restoration, and July Monarchy 4 Works 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 Works cited 9 External links Toggle the table of contents François Barbé-Marbois 8 languages العربية Deutsch Français Italiano Magyar مصرى Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French politician (1745–1837) François Barbé-Marbois Ambassador of France to the United States In office 1784–1785 Minister of the Treasury In office 1801–1806 President of the Cour des Comptes In office 1807–1814 Personal details Born 21 January 1745 Metz Died 12 February 1837 (1837-02-12) (aged 92) François, marquis de Barbé-Marbois (31 January 1745 – 12 February 1837) was a French civil servant, diplomat, and politician.

He was ambassador of France to the United States (1784–1785), where he married the daughter of the Governor of Pennsylvania, William Moore . He then became Napoleon I 's Minister of the Treasury (1801–1806), before Napoleon appointed him First President of the Cour des Comptes , ("Court of Accounts"), France's supreme audit institution (1807–1814).

Early career [ edit ] Born in Metz , where his father was director of the local mint, Barbé-Marbois tutored the children of the Marquis de Castries . In 1779, he was made secretary of the French legation to the United States. In 1780, Barbé-Marbois sent a questionnaire to the governors of all thirteen former American colonies, seeking information about each state's geography, natural resources, history, and government.

Thomas Jefferson , who was then finishing his final term as Virginia's governor, responded to this query with a manuscript that later became his famous Notes on the State of Virginia .

[ 1 ] Barbé-Marbois was elected a Foreign Honorary Member to both the American Academy of Arts and Sciences [ 2 ] and the American Philosophical Society [ 3 ] in 1781. When the minister Chevalier de la Luzerne returned to France in 1783, Barbé-Marbois remained in America as chargé d'affaires in 1784. That year he married Elizabeth Moore, the daughter of William Moore , former governor of Pennsylvania .

In 1785, he became intendant of the colony of Saint-Domingue under the Ancien Régime .

In the Revolution [ edit ] At the close of 1789, he returned to France, and then placed his services at the disposal of the French Revolutionary government. In 1791 he was sent to Regensburg to help the Marquis de Noailles , the French ambassador . Suspected of treason , he was arrested on his return but soon freed.

[ 4 ] In 1795, he was elected to the Council of Ancients , where the general moderation of his attitude, especially in his opposition to the exclusion of nobles and the relations of émigrés from public life, brought him under suspicion of being a royalist, though he pronounced a eulogy on Napoleon Bonaparte for his success in Italy .

[ 5 ] During the anti- Royalist coup d'état of the 18th Fructidor (4 September) 1797, he was arrested and transported to French Guiana . Transferred to the island of Oléron in 1799, he was set free by Bonaparte after the Coup of 18 Brumaire . In 1801, under the Consulate , he became councillor of state and director of the Trésor public (Treasury), and in 1802 a senator .

[ 5 ] US postage stamp (c. 1953) commemorating the Louisiana Purchase ; Barbé-Marbois is pictured alongside James Monroe and Robert Livingston In 1803 he negotiated the Louisiana Purchase treaty by which Louisiana was ceded to the United States, and was rewarded by the First Consul with a gift of 152,000 francs .

[ 5 ] Empire, Restoration, and July Monarchy [ edit ] Loyal to the First Empire , he was made grand officer of the Legion of Honour and a count in 1805, and in 1808 he became president of the Cour des Comptes . His career as Head of the Treasury ended in 1806. In return for these favours, he heaped praise upon Napoleon; yet, in 1814, he helped to draw up the act of abdication of the emperor, and declared to the Cour des Comptes , with reference to the invasion of France by the Sixth Coalition : "...united for the most beautiful of causes, it is long since we have been as free as we are now, in the presence of the foreigner in arms." [ 5 ] In June of that year, under the First Restoration , Barbé-Marbois was made Peer of France by King Louis XVIII , and confirmed in his office as president of the Cour des Comptes . Deprived of his positions by Napoleon during the Hundred Days , he was appointed Minister of Justice under the Duc de Richelieu (August 1815), tried unsuccessfully to gain the confidence of the Ultra-Royalists , and withdrew at the end of nine months (10 May 1816).

[ 5 ] In 1830, when the July Revolution brought Louis Philippe and the Orléans Monarchy , Barbé-Marbois went, as president of the Cour des Comptes , to compliment the new king, and was confirmed in his position. He held his office until April 1834.

[ 5 ] Works [ edit ] In 1829, he wrote the book Histoire de la Louisiane et la cession de cette colonie par la France aux Etats-Unis de l'Amérique septentrionale; précédée d'un discours sur la constitution et le gouvernement des Etats-Unis ("History of Louisiana and of Its Cession to the United States of Northern America; Preceded by a Discourse on the Constitution and Government of the United States").

He published various texts, including: Reflexions sur la colonie de Saint-Domingue ("Thought on the Colony of Saint-Domingue", 1794) De la Guyane , etc. ("On [French] Guiana", 1822) Journal d'un deporté non-jugé ("Diary of a Non-Tried Deportee", 2 vols., 1834) Written in 1780, while secretary to the French legation to the US Army: "D'Complot du Benedict Arnold & Sir Henri Clinton contre Eunas` States du America General George Washington", one of the first accounts of Arnold's treason, was not published until 1816.

See also [ edit ] Respublica v. De Longchamps - the "Marbois Affair" Notes [ edit ] ^ R.E. Bernstein, Thomas Jefferson , p. 50.

^ "Book of Members, 1780–2010: Chapter B" (PDF) . American Academy of Arts and Sciences . Retrieved 17 May 2011 .

^ J. G. Rosengarten (1907). "The Early French Members of the American Philosophical Society".

Transactions of the American Philosophical Society .

46 (185). Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: 87– 93.

JSTOR 983442 .

^ Chisholm 1911 , pp. 385–386.

^ a b c d e f Chisholm 1911 , p. 386.

References [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Barbé-Marbois, François, Marquis de ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 3 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

385– 386.

Wilson, J. G.

; Fiske, J.

, eds. (1900).

"Marbois, Francois de Barbe" .

Appletons' Cyclopædia of American Biography . New York: D. Appleton.

Works cited [ edit ] Tugdual de Langlais, L'armateur préféré de Beaumarchais, Jean Peltier Dudoyer, de Nantes à l'Isle de France , Éd. Coiffard, 2015, 340 p. ( ISBN 9782919339280 ) Tugdual de Langlais, Marie-Etienne Peltier, Capitaine corsaire de la République , Éd. Coiffard, 2017, 240 p. ( ISBN 9782919339471 ).

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to François Barbé-Marbois .

Works by or about François Barbé-Marbois at the Internet Archive https://web.archive.org/web/20040813061110/http://www.yale.edu/lawweb/avalon/diplomacy/france/louis2.htm Letter from George Washington Letter from Thomas Jefferson at the Wayback Machine (archived 23 March 2006) https://web.archive.org/web/20040816205311/http://www.antebellumcovers.com/catalog104.htm Exhibits v t e French Consulate (10 November 1799 – 18 May 1804) Provisional consuls Napoleon Bonaparte Emmanuel Joseph Sieyès Roger Ducos Bonaparte First Consul Consuls Napoleon Bonaparte Jean Jacques Régis de Cambacérès Charles-François Lebrun, duc de Plaisance Ministers Foreign Affairs Charles-Frédéric Reinhard Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord Justice Jean-Jacques-Régis de Cambacérès André Joseph Abrial Claude Ambroise Régnier War Louis-Alexandre Berthier Lazare Carnot Louis-Alexandre Berthier Finance Martin-Michel-Charles Gaudin Police Joseph Fouché Interior Pierre-Simon Laplace Lucien Bonaparte Jean-Antoine Chaptal Navy and Colonies Marc-Antoine Bourdon de Vatry Pierre-Alexandre-Laurent Forfait Denis Decrès Secretary of State Hugues-Bernard Maret, duc de Bassano Treasury François Barbé-Marbois War Administration Jean François Aimé Dejean Preceded by French Directory Followed by First Cabinet of Napoleon I v t e First cabinet of Napoleon (18 May 1804 to 1 April 1814) Head of state: Napoleon Secretary of State Hugues-Bernard Maret Pierre Daru Hugues-Bernard Maret Napoleon Foreign Affairs Charles Maurice de Talleyrand-Périgord Jean-Baptiste de Nompère de Champagny Hugues-Bernard Maret Armand Augustin Louis de Caulaincourt Interior Jean-Antoine Chaptal Jean-Baptiste de Nompère de Champagny Emmanuel Crétet Joseph Fouché Jean-Pierre de Montalivet Justice Claude Ambroise Régnier Louis-Mathieu Molé War Louis-Alexandre Berthier Henri Jacques Guillaume Clarke War Administration Jean François Aimé Dejean Jean-Girard Lacuée Pierre Daru Finance Martin-Michel-Charles Gaudin Treasury François Barbé-Marbois Nicolas François, Count Mollien Navy and Colonies Denis Decrès Police Joseph Fouché Anne Jean Marie René Savary Religious affairs Jean-Étienne-Marie Portalis Félix-Julien-Jean Bigot de Préameneu Manufacturing and Commerce Jean-Baptiste Collin de Sussy Preceded by French Consulate • Followed by French provisional government of 1814 v t e First ministry of Armand-Emmanuel du Plessis de Richelieu (26 September 1815 to 29 December 1818) Head of state: King Louis XVIII of France President of the council and Foreign Affairs Armand-Emmanuel du Plessis de Richelieu Richelieu Interior Vincent-Marie Viénot, Count of Vaublanc Joseph Lainé Justice François Barbé-Marbois Charles Dambray Étienne-Denis Pasquier War Henri Jacques Guillaume Clarke Laurent de Gouvion Saint-Cyr Finance Louis-Emmanuel Corvetto Antoine Roy Navy and Colonies François Joseph de Gratet, vicomte Dubouchage Laurent de Gouvion Saint-Cyr Louis-Mathieu Molé Police Élie, duc Decazes v t e Justice ministers of France since 1790 Until the Government of National Defense Duport-Dutertre de la Platière Duranton de Joly Danton Garat Gohier de Douai Génissieu de Douai Lambrechts de Cambacérès Abrial Régnier Molé de Pansey Dambray de Cambacérès de la Meurthe Pasquier Barbé-Marbois Dambray Pasquier de Serre de Peyronnet Portalis Bourdeau de Courvoisier de Chantelauze de l'Eure Mérilhou Barthe Persil Sauzet Persil Barthe de l'Ain Teste Vivien du Nord Hébert Crémieux Bethmont de Saint-Georges Rouher Corbin Daviel Rouher Abbatucci de Royer Delangle Baroche Duvergier Ollivier Grandperret Third Republic Crémieux Dufaure Ernoul Depeyre Tailhand Dufaure Martel de Broglie Le Pelletier Dufaure Le Royer Cazot Humbert Devès Martin-Feuillée Brisson Demôle Sarrien Mazeau Fallières Ferrouillat Dessaigne Thévenet Fallières Ricard Bourgeois Develle Bourgeois Guérin Dubost Guérin Trarieux Ricard Darlan Milliard Sarrien Lebret Monis Vallé Chaumié Sarrien Dessaigne Briand Barthou Girard Perrier Cruppi Briand Barthou Ratier Bienvenu-Martin Ribot Bienvenu-Martin Briand Viviani Péret Nail Lhopiteau Bonnevay Barthou Colrat du Prey Ratier Renoult Steeg de Monzie Chautemps Renoult Laval Colrat Barthou Hubert Steeg Péret Chéron Bérard Reynaud Renoult Gardey Penancier Dalimier Raynaldy Penancier Chéron Lémery Pernot Bérard Rucart Auriol Campinchi Rucart Reynaud Marchandeau Bonnet Sérol Frémicourt World War II Vichy France Alibert Barthélemy Gabolde Free France Cassin Abadie de Menthon Provisional Government of the French Republic de Menthon Teitgen Ramadier Fourth Republic Marie Lecourt Marie Lecourt Mayer Faure Martinaud-Déplat Ribeyre Hugues De Beaumont Temple Schuman Mitterrand Corniglion-Molinier Lecourt Fifth Republic Debré Michelet Chenot Foyer Joxe Capitant Jeanneney Pleven Taittinger Lecanuet Guichard Peyrefitte Faure Badinter Crépeau Chalandon Arpaillange Nallet Vauzelle Méhaignerie Toubon Guigou Lebranchu Perben Clément Dati Alliot-Marie Mercier Taubira Urvoas Bayrou Belloubet Dupond-Moretti Migaud Darmanin Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Sweden Poland Vatican Israel People Netherlands Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=François_Barbé-Marbois&oldid=1298443576 " Categories : 1745 births 1837 deaths Politicians from Metz Marquesses of Barbé-Marbois Counts of the First French Empire Government ministers of France Members of the Council of Ancients Members of the Sénat conservateur Members of the Chamber of Peers of the Bourbon Restoration Members of the Chamber of Peers of the July Monarchy 18th-century French diplomats 19th-century French historians Members of the Académie des Inscriptions et Belles-Lettres Writers from Metz Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences International members of the American Philosophical Society 18th-century French historians 18th-century French male writers French male non-fiction writers 19th-century French male writers Grand Officers of the Legion of Honour Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2020 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from Appleton's Cyclopedia Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 14:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents François Barbé-Marbois 8 languages Add topic

