Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Evaluation 2 Number of species 3 List of LC species 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Least-concern species 71 languages Afrikaans العربية অসমীয়া Asturianu বাংলা Беларуская भोजपुरी Български Català Čeština Dansk الدارجة Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Jawa Kurdî Latina Latviešu Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Occitan Polski Português Română Русский සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia IUCN conservation category Conservation status by IUCN Red List category Extinct Extinct (EX) ( list ) Extinct in the Wild (EW) ( list ) Threatened Critically Endangered (CR) ( list ) Endangered (EN) ( list ) Vulnerable (VU) ( list ) Lower Risk Near Threatened (NT) ( list ) Conservation Dependent (CD) ( list ) Least Concern (LC) ( lists ) Other categories Data Deficient (DD) ( list ) Not Evaluated (NE) Related topics International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) IUCN Red List NatureServe status Lists of organisms by population Comparison of Red List classes above and NatureServe status below v t e Taurotragus oryx , the common eland, is a species with a conservation status of least concern A least-concern species is a species that has been evaluated and categorized by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN) as not being a focus of wildlife conservation because the specific species is still plentiful in the wild. They do not qualify as threatened , near threatened , or (before 2001) conservation dependent .

Species cannot be assigned the "Least Concern" category unless they have had their population status evaluated. That is, adequate information is needed to make a direct, or indirect, assessment of its risk of extinction based on its distribution or population status.

Evaluation [ edit ] Since 2001 the category has had the abbreviation "LC", following the IUCN 2001 Categories & Criteria (version 3.1).

[ 1 ] Before 2001 "least concern" was a subcategory of the " Lower Risk " category and assigned the code "LR/lc" or lc. Around 20% of least concern taxa (3261 of 15,636) in the IUCN database still use the code "LR/lc", which indicates they have not been re-evaluated since 2000.

Number of species [ edit ] While "least concern" is not considered a red listed category by the IUCN, the 2006 IUCN Red List still assigns the category to 15,636 taxa. The number of animal species listed in this category totals 14,033 (which includes several undescribed species such as a frog from the genus Philautus [ 2 ] ). There are also 101 animal subspecies listed and 1500 plant taxa (1410 species, 55 subspecies, and 35 varieties). No fungi or protista have the classification, though only four species in those kingdoms have been evaluated by the IUCN.

Humans were formally assessed [ 3 ] as a species of least concern in 2008.

List of LC species [ edit ] Further information: Category:IUCN Red List least concern species See also [ edit ] Conservation status References [ edit ] ^ "2001 Categories & Criteria (version 3.1)" (PDF) .

The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species . Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 January 2016 . Retrieved 22 May 2015 .

^ "Philautus sp. nov. 'Kalpatta' " .

The IUCN Red List of Threatened Species . Retrieved 19 December 2006 .

^ Global Mammal Assessment Team (2008).

" Homo sapiens (human)" .

IUCN Red List of Threatened Species .

2008 .

doi : 10.2305/IUCN.UK.2008.RLTS.T136584A4313662.en .

External links [ edit ] List of Least Concern species as identified by the IUCN Red List of Threatened Species v t e Threatened species Template: Threatened species by region IUCN Red List Categories 1 Extinct Extinct (EX) Extinct in the Wild (EW) Threatened Critically Endangered (CR) Endangered (EN) Vulnerable (VU) Lower risk Near Threatened (NT) Least Concern (LC) Lower Risk (LR) Conservation Dependent (LR/cd) Not fully assessed Data Deficient (DD) Not Evaluated (NE) Species Lists Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient WP categories Extinct Extinct in the Wild Critically Endangered Endangered Vulnerable Near Threatened Least Concern Data Deficient CITES Appendix I Appendix II Appendix III By taxa Threatened arthropods / Endangered arthropods / spiders / Decline in insect populations Decline in amphibian populations Threatened Banksia / rays / sharks / Fungi / Chromista The World's 25 Most Endangered Primates The world's 100 most threatened species Conservation Biodiversity action plan Biodiversity threats Conservation biology CITES ARKive Bird conservation Conservation status Conservation-reliant species Ecoregion conservation status Habitat destruction Latent extinction risk Rare species Vulnerability and susceptibility 1 Pre-2001 categories and subcategories shown in italics .

Portals : Ecology Biology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Least-concern_species&oldid=1286726053 " Categories : IUCN Red List least concern species Least concern plants Biota by conservation status IUCN Red List Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from July 2022 Use dmy dates from July 2022 This page was last edited on 21 April 2025, at 16:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Least-concern species 71 languages Add topic

