Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ideology 2 Status 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Christian Patriot movement 2 languages Español Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American Christian political movement For the political organization briefly known as Christian Patriots in 1912, see United Christian Party (United States) .

This article is part of a series on Christian nationalism in the United States Principles Anti-abortion movement Anti-abortion violence Authoritarianism Christian fundamentalism Christian Identity Christian persecution complex Christian reconstructionism Conservatism National Social Ultra Dominionism Seven Mountain Mandate Familialism Great Replacement conspiracy theory Gun rights Heteronormativity Islamophobia Judeo-Christian ethics Natalism Nationalism Ethnic Religious Ultra White Nativism Patriarchy Supremacism Christian White Theonomy White backlash Xenophobia History Ruby Ridge standoff Waco siege Christian Patriot movement Tea Party movement American Redoubt January 6 United States Capitol attack ReAwaken America Tour Project 2025 Politicians Beckwith Boebert Click Deevers Flynn Gibbs Greene Hawley Hegseth Hoover Lewis O'Daniel Prichard Sexton Schriver Trump Utt Vought Activists Ainsworth Beale Barton Capell Capt Comparet Flynn Fuentes Haywood Kirk Laurie Moore Pelley Peters Sellner Sheets Smith Wallnau Wambsganss Wiles Witzke White-Cain Organizations America First Party Army of God Christian Liberty Party Christian Nationalist Crusade Constitution Party Georgia Republic Militia Hutaree Jericho March Liberty Lobby Moral Majority National States' Rights Party New Apostolic Reformation Project Blitz Silver Legion of America Society for American Civic Renewal Veterans on Patrol Related topics American civil religion Bible Belt The Case for Christian Nationalism Christianity in the United States God Bless America In God We Trust Ku Klux Klan Libertarianism in the United States American militia movement Christian Patriot movement Racism in the United States Arab Palestinian Hispanic Jewish Sovereign citizen movement Theocracy Trumpism Christian support Christianity portal Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Insignia of Hutaree , a Christian paramilitary group The Christian Patriot movement is a subset of the broader American Patriot movement that promotes Christian nationalism and emphasizes it as its core goal and philosophy. Like the larger Patriot movement, it promotes an interpretation of American history in which the federal government has turned against the ideas of liberty and natural rights expressed in the American Revolution .

Ideology [ edit ] The movement originally referred to the Posse Comitatus , a far-right militia organization .  The Posse Comitatus followed an ideology based on the teachings of William Potter Gale , who was also a Christian Identity minister. This ideology holds the view that state and federal governments are agents of an arcane conspiracy to deprive Americans of their rights as " sovereign citizens ." It also holds the view that this conspiracy can be undermined through various legal pleadings from English common law and other sources, such as a motion protesting the way a defendant's name is typeset in a legal complaint.

[ 1 ] The ideology persists despite numerous court rulings that have declared its theories frivolous .

[ 2 ] Status [ edit ] The movement grew during the 1990s after the Ruby Ridge and Waco Sieges appeared to confirm the suspicions of Christian Patriots.

[ 3 ] The movement maintained its ties with the American militia movement of the same period. A highly publicized federal confrontation with Christian Patriots occurred in 1996, when Federal marshals arrested the Montana Freemen .

[ 1 ] In 2009, the Southern Poverty Law Center said that militia groups may be experiencing a "Patriot revival." [ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Tea party movement Constitutional militia movement Miles Christianus Bo Gritz Gordon Kahl James Wesley Rawles Alex Jones American Redoubt Theoconservatism Jon Arthur References [ edit ] ^ a b Carey, Kevin (July 2008).

"Too Weird for The Wire " .

Washington Monthly . Archived from the original on 2016-03-04 . Retrieved 2008-07-19 .

^ Sussman, Bernard J.

Idiot Legal Arguments: A Casebook for Dealing with Extremist Legal Arguments . Anti-Defamation League. Archived from the original on 2007-09-10 . Retrieved 2007-09-13 .

{{ cite book }} : |work= ignored ( help ) ^ Anti-Defamation League, The Militia Movement Archived 2011-06-29 at the Wayback Machine ^ Keller, Larry (August 2009).

"The Second Wave: Return of the Militias" .

A Special Report from the Southern Poverty Law Center .

Montgomery, Alabama : 5– 10 . Retrieved September 12, 2013 .

Further reading [ edit ] Aho, James (1995).

The Politics of Righteousness: Idaho Christian Patriotism .

Aho, James (2016).

Far-Right Fantasy: A Sociology of American Religion and Politics . New York & London: Routledge, Imprint of Taylor & Francis Group.

ISBN 978-1138962422 .

Durham, Martin (2000).

The Christian Right, the Far Right and the Boundaries of American Conservatism .

Gallaher, Carolyn (2003).

On the Fault Line: Race, Class, and the American Patriot Movement . Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 0-7425-1974-0 .

OCLC 845530800 .

Kushner, Harvey W (1998).

The Future of Terrorism: Violence in the New Millennium .

Martin, Gus (2006).

Understanding Terrorism: Challenges, Perspectives, and Issues .

Niewert, David A (1999).

In God's Country: The Patriot Movement and the Pacific Northwest . Pullmam, Wash.: Washington State Univ. Press.

ISBN 978-0-87422-175-6 .

Schlatter, Evelyn A (2006).

Aryan Cowboys: White Supremacists and the Search for a New Frontier, 1970-2000 .

de Armond, Paul (1996). "Christian Patriots At War with the State".

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Christian_Patriot_movement&oldid=1304275669 " Categories : 1990s in the United States Christian nationalism in the United States Christian movements Far-right politics and Christianity Patriot movement Paleoconservatism Right-wing militia organizations in the United States Sovereign citizen movement White supremacist groups in the United States Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 02:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Christian Patriot movement 2 languages Add topic

