Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 United Nations system 2 International Bill of Human Rights Toggle International Bill of Human Rights subsection 2.1 Universal Declaration of Human Rights 3 International human rights treaties 4 Regional protection and institutions Toggle Regional protection and institutions subsection 4.1 Americas and Europe 4.2 Africa 4.3 Inter-American system 4.4 European system 5 Monitoring, implementation and enforcement Toggle Monitoring, implementation and enforcement subsection 5.1 Universal jurisdiction 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents International human rights law 28 languages العربية অসমীয়া Azərbaycanca বাংলা Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Кыргызча Latina Bahasa Melayu Монгол 日本語 پښتو Português Русский Simple English தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Not to be confused with International humanitarian law .

Body of international law designed to promote human rights International human rights law ( IHRL ) is the body of international law designed to promote human rights on social, regional, and domestic levels. As a form of international law, international human rights law is primarily made up of treaties , agreements between sovereign states intended to have binding legal effect between the parties that have agreed to them; and customary international law . Other international human rights instruments , while not legally binding, contribute to the implementation, understanding and development of international human rights law and have been recognized as a source of political obligation.

[ 1 ] International human rights law, which governs the conduct of a state towards its people in peacetime is traditionally seen as distinct from international humanitarian law which governs the conduct of states and non-state armed groups during conflict, [ 2 ] although the two branches of law are complementary and in some ways overlap.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] A more systemic perspective explains that international humanitarian law represents a function of international human rights law; it includes general norms that apply to everyone at all time as well as specialized norms which apply to certain situations such as armed conflict between both state and military occupation (i.e. IHL) or to certain groups of people including refugees (e.g. the 1951 Refugee Convention ), children (the Convention on the Rights of the Child ), and prisoners of war (the 1949 Third Geneva Convention ).

United Nations system [ edit ] The General Assembly of the United Nations adopted the Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action in 1993, in terms of which the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights was established.

International Human Rights Day 2018 (45346105045) In 2006, the United Nations Commission on Human Rights was replaced with the United Nations Human Rights Council for the enforcement of international human rights law. The changes prophesied a more structured organization along with a requirement to review human rights cases every four years. The United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 10 also targets the promotion of legislation and policies towards reducing inequality.

[ 7 ] International Bill of Human Rights [ edit ] Universal Declaration of Human Rights [ edit ] Main article: Universal Declaration of Human Rights Eleanor Roosevelt UDHR The Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) is a UN General Assembly declaration that does not in form create binding international human rights law.

[ 8 ] Many legal scholars cite the UDHR as evidence of customary international law .

More broadly, the UDHR has become an authoritative human rights reference. It has provided the basis for subsequent international human rights instruments that form non-binding, but ultimately authoritative international human rights law.

International human rights treaties [ edit ] Main article: International human rights instruments Besides the adoption in 1966 of the two wide-ranging Covenants that form part of the International Bill of Human Rights (namely the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights ), other treaties have been adopted at the international level. These are generally known as human rights instruments . Some of the most significant include the following: Processes for becoming a state party to a treaty the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide (CPCG) (adopted 1948 and entered into force in 1951); the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (CSR) (adopted in 1951 and entered into force in 1954); the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination (CERD) (adopted in 1965 and entered into force in 1969); [ 9 ] the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) (entered into force in 1981); [ 10 ] the United Nations Convention Against Torture (CAT) (adopted in 1984 and entered into force in 1987); [ 11 ] the Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) (adopted in 1989 and entered into force in 1990); [ 12 ] the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families (ICRMW) (adopted in 1990 and entered into force in 2003); the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities (CRPD) (entered into force on 3 May 2008); [ 13 ] and the International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance (ICPPED) (adopted in 2006 and entered into force in 2010).

Regional protection and institutions [ edit ] Regional systems of international human rights law supplement and complement national and international human rights law by protecting and promoting human rights in specific areas of the world. There are three key regional human rights instruments which have established human rights law on a regional basis: the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights for Africa of 1981, in force since 1986; the American Convention on Human Rights for the Americas of 1969, in force since 1978; and the European Convention on Human Rights for Europe of 1950, in force since 1953.

Americas and Europe [ edit ] Main article: Human rights in the United States The Organisation of American States and the Council of Europe , like the UN, have adopted treaties (albeit with weaker implementation mechanisms) containing catalogues of economic, social and cultural rights , in addition to the aforementioned conventions dealing mostly with civil and political rights : the European Social Charter for Europe of 1961, in force since 1965 (whose complaints mechanism, created in 1995 under an Additional Protocol, has been in force since 1998); and the Protocol of San Salvador to the ACHR for the Americas of 1988, in force since 1999.

Africa [ edit ] Main article: Human rights in Africa The African Union (AU) is a supranational union consisting of 55 African countries.

[ 14 ] Established in 2001, the AU's purpose is to help secure Africa's democracy, human rights, and a sustainable economy, in particular by bringing an end to intra-African conflict and creating an effective and productive common market.

[ 15 ] The Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights is the region's principal human rights instrument, which emerged under the aegis of the Organisation of African Unity (OAU) (since replaced by the African Union ). The intention to draw up the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights was announced in 1979. The Charter was unanimously approved at the OAU's 1981 Assembly.

Pursuant to Article 63 (whereby it was to "come into force three months after the reception by the Secretary General of the instruments of ratification or adherence of a simple majority" of the OAU's member states), the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights came into effect on 21 October 1986, in honour of which 21 October was declared African Human Rights Day.

[ 16 ] The African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights (ACHPR) is a quasi-judicial organ of the African Union , tasked with promoting and protecting human rights and collective (peoples') rights throughout the African continent, as well as with interpreting the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights, and considering individual complaints of violations of the Charter. The commission has three broad areas of responsibility: [ 17 ] promoting human and peoples' rights; protecting human and peoples' rights; and interpreting the African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights .

In pursuit of these goals, the commission is mandated to "collect documents, undertake studies and researches on African problems in the field of human and peoples' rights, organise seminars, symposia and conferences, disseminate information, encourage national and local institutions concerned with human and peoples' rights and, should the case arise, give its views or make recommendations to governments." [ 17 ] [ 18 ] With the creation of the African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights (under a protocol to the Charter which was adopted in 1998 and entered into force in January 2004), the commission will have the additional task of preparing cases for submission to the Court's jurisdiction.

[ 19 ] In a July 2004 decision, the AU Assembly resolved that the future Court on Human and Peoples' Rights would be integrated with the African Court of Justice.

The Court of Justice of the African Union is intended to be the "principal judicial organ of the Union".

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Although it has not yet been established, it is intended to take over the duties of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights, as well as to act as the supreme court of the African Union, interpreting all necessary laws and treaties. The Protocol establishing the African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights entered into force in January 2004, [ 22 ] but its merging with the Court of Justice has delayed its establishment. The Protocol establishing the Court of Justice will come into force when ratified by fifteen countries.

[ 23 ] There are many countries in Africa accused of human rights violations by the international community and NGOs.

[ 24 ] Inter-American system [ edit ] See also: Category:Human rights in North America and Category:Human rights in South America The Organization of American States (OAS) is an international organization headquartered in Washington, DC. Its members are the thirty-five independent nation-states of the Americas.

Over the course of the 1990s, with the end of the Cold War , the return to democracy in Latin America, [ citation needed ] and the thrust toward globalisation , the OAS made major efforts to reinvent itself to fit the new context. Its stated priorities now include the following: [ 25 ] strengthening democracy; working for peace; protecting human rights; combating corruption; the rights of indigenous peoples; and promoting sustainable development.

The Inter-American Commission on Human Rights (IACHR) is an autonomous organ of the Organization of American States , also based in Washington, D.C. Along with the Inter-American Court of Human Rights , based in San José , Costa Rica, it is one of the bodies that comprise the inter-American system for the promotion and protection of human rights.

[ 26 ] The IACHR is a permanent body which meets in regular and special sessions several times a year to examine allegations of human rights violations in the hemisphere. Its human rights duties stem from three documents: [ 27 ] the OAS Charter ; the American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man ; and the American Convention on Human Rights .

The Inter-American Court of Human Rights was established in 1979 with the purpose of enforcing and interpreting the provisions of the American Convention on Human Rights. Its two main functions are therefore adjudicatory and advisory: Under the former, it hears and rules on the specific cases of human rights violations referred to it.

Under the latter, it issues opinions on matters of legal interpretation brought to its attention by other OAS bodies or member states.

[ 28 ] Many countries in the Americas, including Colombia, Cuba, Mexico and Venezuela, [ 29 ] have been accused of human rights violations.

European system [ edit ] Main article: Human rights in Europe The Council of Europe , founded in 1949, is the oldest organisation working for European integration. It is an international organisation with legal personality recognised under public international law, and has observer status at the United Nations. The seat of the council is in Strasbourg in France.

The Council of Europe is responsible for both the European Convention on Human Rights and the European Court of Human Rights .

[ 30 ] These institutions bind the council's members to a code of human rights which, although strict, is more lenient than that of the UN Charter on human rights.

[ citation needed ] The council also promotes the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages and the European Social Charter .

[ 31 ] Membership is open to all European states which seek European integration , accept the principle of the rule of law , and are able and willing to guarantee democracy, fundamental human rights and freedoms .

[ 32 ] The Council of Europe is separate from the European Union , but the latter is expected to accede to the European Convention on Human Rights. The Council includes all the member states of European Union. The EU also has a separate human rights document, the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .

[ 33 ] The European Convention on Human Rights has since 1950 defined and guaranteed human rights and fundamental freedoms in Europe.

[ 34 ] All 47 member states of the Council of Europe have signed this convention, and are therefore under the jurisdiction of the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg.

[ 34 ] In order to prevent torture and inhuman or degrading treatment, [ 35 ] [ 36 ] the Committee for the Prevention of Torture was established.

[ 37 ] The Council of Europe also adopted the Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings in May 2005, for protection against human trafficking and sexual exploitation , the Council of Europe Convention on the Protection of Children against Sexual Exploitation and Sexual Abuse in October 2007, and the Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence in May 2011.

[ citation needed ] The European Court of Human Rights is the only international court with jurisdiction to deal with cases brought by individuals rather than states.

[ 34 ] In early 2010, the court had a backlog of over 120,000 cases and a multi-year waiting list.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] About one out of every twenty cases submitted to the court is considered admissible.

[ 41 ] In 2007, the court issued 1,503 verdicts. At the current rate of proceedings, it would take 46 years for the backlog to clear.

[ 42 ] Monitoring, implementation and enforcement [ edit ] There is currently no international court to administer international human rights law, but quasi-judicial bodies exist under some UN treaties (like the Human Rights Committee under the ICCPR). The International Criminal Court (ICC) has jurisdiction over the crime of genocide , war crimes and crimes against humanity .

[ 43 ] The European Court of Human Rights and the Inter-American Court of Human Rights enforce regional human rights law.

Although these same international bodies also hold jurisdiction over cases regarding international humanitarian law, it is crucial to recognise, as discussed above, that the two frameworks constitute different legal regimes.

[ 44 ] The United Nations human rights bodies do have some quasi-legal enforcement mechanisms. These include the treaty bodies attached to the seven currently active treaties, and the United Nations Human Rights Council complaints procedures, with Universal Periodic Review and United Nations Special Rapporteur (known as the 1235 and 1503 mechanisms respectively).

[ 45 ] The enforcement of international human rights law is the responsibility of the nation state ; it is the primary responsibility of the State to make the human rights of its citizens a reality.

In practice, many human rights are difficult to enforce legally, due to the absence of consensus on the application of certain rights, the lack of relevant national legislation or of bodies empowered to take legal action to enforce them.

[ 46 ] In over 110 countries, national human rights institutions (NHRIs) have been set up to protect, promote or monitor human rights with jurisdiction in a given country.

[ 47 ] Although not all NHRIs are compliant with the Paris Principles, [ 48 ] the number and effect of these institutions is increasing.

[ 49 ] The Paris Principles were defined at the first International Workshop on National Institutions for the Promotion and Protection of Human Rights in Paris from 7 to 9 October 1991, and adopted by UN Human Rights Commission Resolution 1992/54 of 1992 and General Assembly Resolution 48/134 of 1993. The Paris Principles list a number of responsibilities for NHRIs.

[ 50 ] Universal jurisdiction [ edit ] Main article: universal jurisdiction Universal jurisdiction is a controversial principle in international law, whereby states claim criminal jurisdiction over people whose alleged crimes were committed outside the boundaries of the prosecuting state, regardless of nationality, country of residence or any other relationship to the prosecuting country. The state backs its claim on the grounds that the crime committed is considered a crime against all, which any state is authorized to punish.

[ 51 ] The concept of universal jurisdiction is therefore closely linked to the idea that certain international norms are erga omnes , or owed to the entire world community, as well as the concept of jus cogens .

In 1993, Belgium passed a "law of universal jurisdiction" to give its courts jurisdiction over crimes against humanity in other countries. In 1998, Augusto Pinochet was arrested in London following an indictment by Spanish judge Baltasar Garzón under the universal-jurisdiction principle.

[ 52 ] Adolf Eichmann who was the former Nazi SS lieutenant colonel accused of overseeing the transfer of Jews to Holocaust death camps also persecuted in Israel in 1961. Adolf was living in Argentina after the war.

[ 53 ] The principle is supported by Amnesty International and other human rights organisations , which believe that certain crimes pose a threat to the international community as a whole, and that the community has a moral duty to act.

Others, like Henry Kissinger , [ 54 ] argue that "widespread agreement that human rights violations and crimes against humanity must be prosecuted has hindered active consideration of the proper role of international courts. Universal jurisdiction risks creating universal tyranny—that of judges".

[ 55 ] See also [ edit ] Portals : Politics Law Declaration of Principles on Equality Global Rights Human rights International law International humanitarian law International human rights instruments Jus gentium Legal certainty Natural law Natural and legal rights Refugee law Right of return Rule of law Rule of Law in Armed Conflicts Project Rule According to Higher Law Substantive equality United Kingdom constitutional law References [ edit ] ^ Human rights, A very short introduction replace this with a better reference later ^ "Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and Relating to the Protection of Victims of Non-International Armed Conflicts (Protocol II)" .

^ Ben-Naftali, Orna (2011).

International Humanitarian Law and International Human Rights Law . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-100160-4 .

^ "What is the difference between IHL and human rights law?" . ICRC. 22 January 2015.

Archived from the original on 21 November 2023.

^ "IHL and human rights law" . ICRC. 29 October 2010.

Archived from the original on 14 February 2024.

^ Koskenniemi, Martti (September 2002). "Fragmentation of International Law? Postmodern Anxieties".

Leiden Journal of International Law .

15 (3): 553– 579.

doi : 10.1017/S0922156502000262 .

S2CID 146783448 .

^ "Goal 10 targets" .

UNDP . Archived from the original on 27 November 2020 . Retrieved 23 September 2020 .

^ Verdross, Alfred; Simma, Bruno (2010) [1984]. "Der völkerrechltiche Schutz von Menschen" [The protection of humans in Public International Law].

Universelles Völkerrecht: Theorie und Praxis [ Universal Public International Law ] (in German) (3rd. ed.). Berlin: Duncker & Humblot. p. 822.

ISBN 978-3-428-13296-6 .

^ "OHCHR" . 30 May 2008. Archived from the original on 30 May 2008 . Retrieved 9 October 2011 .

^ "Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women" . United Nations . Retrieved 9 October 2011 .

^ "OHCHR" . 9 March 2008. Archived from the original on 9 March 2008 . Retrieved 9 October 2011 .

^ "Convention on the Rights of the Child" . UNICEF . Retrieved 9 October 2011 .

^ "Convention on the Rights of People with Disabilities" . United Nations. 30 March 2007 . Retrieved 9 October 2011 .

^ "AU Member States" . African Union. Archived from the original on 5 January 2008 . Retrieved 3 January 2008 .

^ "AU in a Nutshell" . Archived from the original on 30 December 2007 . Retrieved 3 January 2008 .

^ African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights .

^ a b "Mandate of the African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights" . Archived from the original on 20 January 2008 . Retrieved 3 January 2008 .

^ Art. 45.

^ "Protocol to the African Charter on human and peoples' rights on the establishment of an African court on human and peoples' rights" . Archived from the original on 2 March 2012 . Retrieved 3 January 2008 .

^ Protocol of the Court of Justice of the African Union, Article 2.2.

^ "Protocol of the Court of Justice of the African Union" (PDF) . African Union. Archived from the original (PDF) on 24 July 2011 . Retrieved 22 September 2010 .

^ "Open Letter to the Chairman of the African Union (AU) seeking clarifications and assurances that the Establishment of an effective African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights will not be delayed or undermined" (PDF) . Amnesty International. 5 August 2004. Archived from the original (PDF) on 18 February 2008 . Retrieved 4 December 2016 .

^ "African Court of Justice" . African International Courts and Tribunals. Archived from the original on 26 July 2013 . Retrieved 3 January 2008 .

^ "Human Rights Watch Africa" . Retrieved 3 January 2008 .

^ "OAS Key Issues" . Retrieved 3 January 2008 .

^ "Directory of OAS Authorities" . Organization of American States . Retrieved 3 January 2008 .

^ "What is the IACHR?" . Inter-American Commission on Human Rights . Retrieved 3 January 2008 .

^ "Inter-American Court on Human Rights homepage" . Inter-American Court on Human Rights . Retrieved 3 January 2008 .

^ "Human rights in Venezuela" .

Amnesty International . Retrieved 3 July 2023 .

^ "Gender and reproductive rights home page" . Who.int. Archived from the original on 21 December 2002 . Retrieved 29 August 2010 .

^ "Social Charter" . Council of Europe . Retrieved 4 January 2008 .

^ "The Council of Europe in Brief" . Archived from the original on 9 January 2008 . Retrieved 4 January 2008 .

^ Juncker, Jean-Claude (11 April 2006).

"Council of Europe – European Union: "A sole ambition for the European Continent" " (PDF) . Council of Europe. Archived from the original (PDF) on 1 May 2011 . Retrieved 4 January 2008 .

^ a b c "Historical Background to the European Court of Human Rights" . European Court of Human Rights. Archived from the original on 22 December 2007 . Retrieved 4 January 2008 .

^ Article 3 of the Convention.

^ European Convention for the Prevention of Torture and Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment .

^ "About the European Committee for the Prevention of Torture" . European Committee for the Prevention of Torture . Retrieved 4 January 2008 .

^ "Virginia Law" . Law.virginia.edu. 24 March 2008. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved 29 August 2010 .

^ BBC article [1] ^ "Swiss info article" . Swissinfo.ch. Archived from the original on 11 May 2011 . Retrieved 29 August 2010 .

^ "The Guardian" .

TheGuardian.com . UK. 16 July 2008 . Retrieved 29 August 2010 .

^ "Breaking news, Ireland" . Breakingnews.ie. 23 January 2008 . Retrieved 29 August 2010 .

^ "How the Court works" .

www.icc-cpi.int . Archived from the original on 15 October 2016 . Retrieved 17 September 2021 .

^ The Program for Humanitarian Policy and Conflict Research, "Brief Primer on IHL" ^ OHCHR.

"Human Rights Council Complaint Procedure" . Archived from the original on 8 March 2009 . Retrieved 6 February 2009 .

^ See, REDRESS, Enforcement of Awards for Victims of Torture and Other International Crimes May, 2006 ^ National Human Rights Institutions Forum [ usurped ] is the official portal for the National Human Rights Institutions and show a list of 119 institutions that can be found at [2] [ usurped ] ^ "Chart of the Status of National Institutions" (PDF) . National Human Rights Institutions Forum. November 2007. Archived from the original on 16 February 2008 . Retrieved 6 January 2008 .

ACCREDITED BY THE INTERNATIONAL COORDINATING COMMITTEE OF NATIONAL INSTITUTIONS FOR THE PROMOTION AND PROTECTION OF HUMAN RIGHTS In accordance with the Paris Principles and the ICC Sub-Committee Rules of Procedure, the following classifications for accreditation are used by the ICC: A: Compliance with the Paris Principles; A(R): Accreditation with reserve – granted where insufficient documentation is submitted to confer A status; B: Observer Status – Not fully in compliance with the Paris Principles or insufficient information provided to make a determination; C: Non-compliant with the Paris Principles.

^ HURIDOCS has developed extensive methodologies for monitoring and documenting human rights violations, and more resources can be found at Human Rights Tools Archived 19 April 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ "National Human Rights Institutions – Implementing Human Rights", Executive Director Morten Kjærum, The Danish Institute for Human Rights, 2003.

ISBN 87-90744-72-1 , page 6.

^ Weiss, Peter (2008). "Universal Jurisdiction: Past, Present and Future".

Proceedings of the Asil Annual Meeting .

102 : 406– 409.

doi : 10.1017/S0272503700028032 .

ISSN 0272-5037 .

JSTOR 25660324 .

S2CID 159412931 .

^ Ball, Gready (2007) p.70 ^ "Security Council resolution 138: Question relating to the case of Adolf Eichmann" . United Nations Security Council. 23 June 1960 . Retrieved 13 October 2022 .

^ Kissinger has himself been subject to calls for prosecution under universal jurisdiction. See Hitchens, Christopher, and David Rieff. " [3] ." Prospect , 28 June 2001 (accessed 11 June 2013); Hitchens, Christopher.

The Trial of Henry Kissinger . London: Verso, 2001.

^ Kissinger, Henry (July–August 2001).

"The Pitfall of Universal Jurisdiction" .

Foreign Affairs .

80 (4): 86– 96.

doi : 10.2307/20050228 .

JSTOR 20050228 . Archived from the original on 14 January 2009.

External links [ edit ] UNHCHR Official United Nations website Official UN website on International Law Official website of the International Court of Justice International Justice Resource Center – comprehensive online resources and news v t e International human rights instruments Declarations, manifestos, and resolutions Brazilian Resolution Declaration of the Basic Duties of ASEAN Peoples and Governments Declaration on the Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR) Cairo Declaration on Human Rights in Islam Declaration of Montreal Declaration of the Rights of the Child Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination Against Women (DEDAW) Declaration on the Elimination of Violence Against Women (DEVAW) Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP) Declaration on sexual orientation and gender identity American Declaration of the Rights and Duties of Man Paris Principles Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action (VDPA) Yogyakarta Principles Declaration on the Rights of Peasants (UNDROP) International law United Nations General Assembly Resolution 1514 (XV) Granting of Independence to Colonial Countries and Peoples Convention against Torture Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW) Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Racial Discrimination Convention on the Political Rights of Women Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Convention on the Rights of the Child Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families International Convention on the Suppression and Punishment of the Crime of Apartheid International Convention for the Protection of All Persons from Enforced Disappearance Indigenous and Tribal Peoples Convention, 1989 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights Regional law African Charter on Human and Peoples' Rights Protocol to the African Charter on Human and Peoples’ Rights on the Rights of Women in Africa (Maputo Protocol) European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) Convention for the Prevention of Torture Convention on Nationality Convention for the Protection of National Minorities Social Charter Convention on preventing and combating violence against women and domestic violence (Istanbul Convention) American Convention on Human Rights Inter-American Convention to Prevent and Punish Torture on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Persons with Disabilities on the Prevention, Punishment, and Eradication of Violence against Women (Belém do Pará Convention) International humanitarian law Genocide Convention Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees Convention on the Reduction of Statelessness Geneva Conventions Hague Conventions Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court v t e International human rights organisations and institutions Types Human rights group Human rights commission Human rights institutions Truth and reconciliation commission International institutions Committee on the Rights of the Child Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities International Criminal Court Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights UN Human Rights Committee UN Human Rights Council UN Security Council Regional bodies African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights African Court of Justice European Court of Human Rights European Committee for the Prevention of Torture Inter-American Commission on Human Rights Inter-American Court of Human Rights Multi-lateral bodies European Union Council of Europe Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) Organization of American States (OAS) UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA) International Labour Organization (ILO) World Health Organization (WHO) UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Joint UN Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA) Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) UN Population Fund (UNFPA) UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) UN Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) UN Development Programme (UNDP) Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO) UN Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT) Major NGOs Amnesty International FIDH Human Rights Watch Emergency NGO Human Rights First ICRC – organization with special status based on Geneva Conventions International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) v t e Human rights Humans Children Intersex people Women Fundamental concepts and philosophies Natural law Positive law Sovereignty Universal jurisdiction Distinctions Claim rights and liberty rights Individual and group rights Natural rights and legal rights Negative and positive rights Aspects Corporal punishment Organizations List of human rights organisations National human rights institutions By continent Africa Middle East Asia Europe North America South America Oceania Human rights abuses Atrocity crime Crime of apartheid Crimes against humanity Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Enforced disappearances Forced migration Genocide Human rights abuses against Palestinians by Israel at Guantánamo Bay detention camp during the Battle of Mosul (2016–2017) during the Gaddafi regime during the Libyan civil war (2011) in Afghanistan in Algeria in Angola in Argentina in Armenia in Australia in Austria in Azad Kashmir in Azerbaijan in Bahrain in Balochistan in Bangladesh in Belarus in Bolivia in Botswana in Brazil in Burkina Faso in Burundi in Cambodia in Canada in Chile in Chile under Augusto Pinochet in China in Cuba in Egypt in El Salvador in Ethiopia in France in Gabon in Ghana in Germany in Guatemala in Hong Kong in Egypt in Haiti in India in Indonesia in Iran in Iraq in Ireland in Israel in Italy in Jammu and Kashmir in Japan in Kashmir in Kazakhstan in Kenya in Kuwait in Kyrgyzstan‎ in Lebanon in Libya in Lithuania in Malawi in Malaysia in Manipur in Mexico in Morocco in Myanmar in Nepal in New Zealand in Nigeria in North Korea in Pakistan in Palestine in Panama in Papua New Guinea in Peru in Poland in Punjab, India in Romania in the Russia in Saudi Arabia in Sierra Leone in Sindh in South Africa in South Korea in Sri Lanka in Sudan in Switzerland in Syria in Taiwan in Thailand in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the Dominican Republic in the Philippines in the Soviet Union in the United Arab Emirates in the United States in Turkey in Uganda in Ukraine in Uzbekistan in Venezuela in Vietnam in Yemen in Zimbabwe of the Marcos dictatorship of the military dictatorship in Brazil (1964–1985) Incitement to genocide List of human rights abuses by country Murder Persecution Rape Slavery Torture Victims War crimes Related History of human rights List of global issues List of human rights awards Three generations Universal Declaration of Human Rights United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights v t e Law Core subjects Administrative law Civil law Constitutional law Contract Criminal law Crime Deed Doctrine Equity Evidence International law Law of obligations Private law Procedure Civil Criminal Property law Public law Punishment Corporal Restitution and unjust enrichment Statutory law Tort Disciplines Abortion law Agricultural law Animal law Aviation law Amnesty law Banking law Bankruptcy Commercial law Competition law Conflict of laws Construction law Consumer protection Corporate law Cyberlaw Drugs law Election law Energy law Entertainment law (Media law) Environmental law Family law Financial law Financial regulation Health law Immigration law Intellectual property International criminal law International labour law International human rights International slavery laws International trade law Jurimetrics Labour Landlord–tenant law Law of war Legal archaeology Legal fiction Maritime law Marriage law Military law Music law Nationality law Probate Estate Will and testament Product liability Public international law Refugee law Space law Sports law State of emergency Tax law Transport law Trust law Unenforced law Sources of law Charter Legal code / Statutory law Constitution Custom Divine law Divine right Human rights Legitimacy Letters patent Man-made law Natural law Natural and legal rights Case law Precedent Law reports Legal treatise Regulations Law making Ballot measure Codification Decree Edict Executive order Proclamation Legislation Delegated legislation Regulation Rulemaking Promulgation Ratification Repeal Treaty Concordat Statutory law Statute Act of parliament Act of Congress Basic structure doctrine Legal systems Civil law Common law Chinese law Legal pluralism Religious law Canon law Catholic canon law Hindu law Jain law Jewish law Parsi law Sharia Roman law Byzantine law Socialist law Statutory law Xeer Yassa Legal theory Anarchist Contract theory Comparative law Expressive function Feminist Law and economics Legal ethics Legal formalism History Libertarian International legal theory Principle of legality Principle of typicality Pseudolaw Rule of law Rule of man Sociology Jurisprudence Adjudication Administration of justice Admission to practice law Constitutionalism Criminal justice Court-martial Disbarment Dispute resolution Fiqh Lawsuit/Litigation Legal opinion Legal remedy Damages Deterrence (penology) Proportionality Reparations Legal status Judge Justice of the peace Magistrate Judgment Judicial activism Judicial interpretation Judicial misconduct Kangaroo court Judicial review Jurisdiction Jury Justice Practice of law Attorney Barrister Counsel Lawyer Legal representation Prosecutor Solicitor Question of fact Question of law Trial Trial advocacy Trier of fact Ultra vires Verdict Legal institutions Barristers' chambers Bureaucracy The bar The bench Civil society Court Ecclesiastical Court of equity Election commission Executive Judiciary Law enforcement Agency Legal education Law school Legal industry by country Legislature Military Police Political party Tribunal History History of the legal profession History of the American legal profession Women in law Law portal Category Index Outline v t e International human rights organisations and institutions Types Human rights group Human rights commission Human rights institutions Truth and reconciliation commission International institutions Committee on the Rights of the Child Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities International Criminal Court Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Human Rights UN Human Rights Committee UN Human Rights Council UN Security Council Regional bodies African Commission on Human and Peoples' Rights African Court on Human and Peoples' Rights African Court of Justice European Court of Human Rights European Committee for the Prevention of Torture Inter-American Commission on Human Rights Inter-American Court of Human Rights Multi-lateral bodies European Union Council of Europe Organization for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) Office for Democratic Institutions and Human Rights (ODIHR) Organization of American States (OAS) UN High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) UN Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (UNOCHA) International Labour Organization (ILO) World Health Organization (WHO) UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) Joint UN Programme on HIV/AIDS (UNAIDS) UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs (UNDESA) Commission on the Status of Women (CSW) UN Population Fund (UNFPA) UN Children's Fund (UNICEF) UN Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) UN Development Programme (UNDP) Food and Agriculture Organization of the UN (FAO) UN Human Settlements Programme (UN-HABITAT) Major NGOs Amnesty International FIDH Human Rights Watch Emergency NGO Human Rights First ICRC – organization with special status based on Geneva Conventions International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies (IFRC) Portals : Politics Switzerland NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐848f445bb8‐vdvzg
Cached time: 20250814163138
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.732 seconds
Real time usage: 0.895 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3957/1000000
Revision size: 35797/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 201594/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5879/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 22/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 200507/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.430/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7364240/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  718.215      1 -total
 47.90%  344.021      1 Template:Reflist
 31.75%  228.013     36 Template:Cite_web
 10.46%   75.144      1 Template:International_human_rights_legal_instruments
  9.86%   70.824      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  9.73%   69.907      5 Template:Fix
  9.15%   65.683      1 Template:Short_description
  6.90%   49.536      3 Template:Citation_needed
  6.40%   45.971      5 Template:Navbox
  4.80%   34.455      1 Template:Distinguish Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:219877:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814163138 and revision id 1292154816. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_human_rights_law&oldid=1292154816 " Categories : Human rights instruments Human rights International law Human rights legislation Cultural globalization Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1: unfit URL Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from April 2008 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2008 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2024 This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 13:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International human rights law 28 languages Add topic

