Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Collection 3 Film conservation 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard Film Archive 2 languages Español Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′25.15″N 71°06′53.06″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3736528°N 71.1147389°W ﻿ / 42.3736528; -71.1147389 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The Carpenter Center , home of the Harvard Film Archive The Harvard Film Archive (HFA) is a film archive and cinema located in the Carpenter Center for the Visual Arts at Harvard University in Cambridge, Massachusetts . Dedicated to the collection, preservation and exhibition of film, the HFA houses a collection of over 25,000 films in addition to videos, photos, posters and other film ephemera from around the world and from almost every period in film history. The HFA cinematheque screens films weekly in its 188-seat theater. It also maintains a film conservation center near Central Square, Cambridge . Harvard Film Archive won the 2020 Webby Award for Cultural Institution in the category Web.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] The archive was founded in 1979 by Robert Gardner , Vlada K. Petric and Stanley Cavell in Harvard's Department of Visual and Environmental Studies, with grants from the Henry Luce Foundation and the National Endowment for the Humanities .  It opened on March 16, 1979, with a screening of Ernst Lubitsch ’s silent film, Lady Windermere's Fan .

Film programmer Amos Vogel 's extensive Cinema 16 film collection, originally sold to Barney Rosset and Grove Press circa 1966–1967, served as the founding collection for the Harvard Film Archive.

[ 2 ] The archive's first curator was Vlada K. Petric , who expanded the collection and established the year-round regular screenings.  He retired in 1995 and in 1999 Bruce Jenkins assumed the post.

In January 2005, Harvard Faculty of Arts and Sciences dean William C. Kirby announced that the archive would be absorbed by the Harvard College Library and managed by the Library of Fine Arts.  This caused some concern within the Harvard community about the future of the archive and its programming.  Jenkins resigned soon after the announcement.

[ 3 ] In September 2006 film scholar Haden Guest became the new director of the archive. He addressed worries that the archives' absorption in the Library would affect its public film screenings.

[ 4 ] Collection [ edit ] The collection spans the history of film-making from the silent film era to today, and includes Hollywood films , documentaries , animation , short films , B-movies and feature films from all over the world .  It is the largest collection of 35mm film in New England.
The collection grows by an average of 15 to 20 films a year and contains some rarities, such as some of the only prints in the United States of several films by Serbian director Dusan Makavejev .
It also features a large collection of German cinema and the Bavarian Film Fund donates prints of any films that it finances.

[ 5 ] After the death of Karen Aqua , the archive was given more than 300 of her works, both completed and unfinished.

[ 6 ] Film conservation [ edit ] The Archive's mission includes to conserve, restore, and exhibit the collection's prints. It prioritizes film-to-film preservation for archival stability, authenticity, and aesthetics.

[ 7 ] It may also perform film-to-digital transfers.

[ citation needed ] References [ edit ] ^ Kastrenakes, Jacob (20 May 2020).

"Here are all the winners of the 2020 Webby Awards" .

The Verge . Retrieved 22 May 2020 .

^ Decherney, Peter (2005).

Hollywood and the culture elite : how the movies became American . New York. p. 177.

ISBN 978-0-231-50851-3 .

OCLC 213305995 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "The Harvard Film Archive" . Harvard Magazine. November–December 2005. pp.

37– 38. Archived from the original on 2006-11-14.

^ Brokaw, Leslie (November 12, 2006).

"New director Guest plans larger role for Harvard Film Archive" . The Boston Globe.

^ "Film Archive Goes Silver" . Harvard Magazine. January–February 2004. pp.

57– 58. Archived from the original on 2006-11-14.

^ Meek, Tom (2016-04-16).

"Local Animator Karen Aqua Remembered In Retrospective At Harvard Film Archive" .

WBUR . Retrieved 2020-10-30 .

^ Austerlitz, Saul (2007-12-19).

"Preserving history, frame by frame" .

Boston.com . Retrieved 2019-05-10 .

External links [ edit ] The Harvard Film Archive's website 42°22′25.15″N 71°06′53.06″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3736528°N 71.1147389°W ﻿ / 42.3736528; -71.1147389 v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_Film_Archive&oldid=1301070172 " Categories : Film archives in the United States Harvard University Cambridge, Massachusetts Cultural history of Boston 1979 establishments in Massachusetts FIAF-affiliated institutions Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2019 Coordinates on Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 23:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard Film Archive 2 languages Add topic

