Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Career 3 Works 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Michael A. Cohen Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This biography of a living person relies too much on references to primary sources .

Please help by adding secondary or tertiary sources . Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately , especially if potentially libelous or harmful.

Find sources: "Michael A. Cohen" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( April 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The topic of this article may not meet Wikipedia's notability guideline for biographies .

Please help to demonstrate the notability of the topic by citing reliable secondary sources that are independent of the topic and provide significant coverage of it beyond a mere trivial mention. If notability cannot be shown, the article is likely to be merged , redirected , or deleted .

Find sources: "Michael A. Cohen" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Michael A. Cohen is an American academic who is the director of the International Affairs Program at The New School . He also works as Advisor to the Dean of the Faculty of Architecture, Design, and Urban Planning of the University of Buenos Aires .

Education [ edit ] Cohen received his Ph.D. in 1971 in Political Economy from the University of Chicago .

Career [ edit ] From 1972 to 1999, Cohen worked at the World Bank . He was responsible for much of the urban policy development of the Bank over that period and, from 1994-1998, he served as the Senior Advisor to the Bank's Vice-President for Environmentally Sustainable Development. Cohen has worked in over fifty countries and was heavily involved in the Bank's work on infrastructure, environment, and sustainable development.

Before coming to the New School in 2001, Cohen was a Visiting Fellow of the International Center for Advanced Studies at New York University .

Cohen is a member of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences Panel on Urban Dynamics, and is currently [ when?

] completing a study of urban inequality in Buenos Aires. He has taught at the University of California at Berkeley , The Johns Hopkins University , and the School of Architecture, Design, and Urban Planning of the University of Buenos Aires.

Works [ edit ] Cohen is the author or editor of several books, including most recently Preparing the Urban Future: Global Pressures and Local Forces (ed. with A. Garland, B. Ruble, and J. Tulchin), The Human Face of the Urban Environment (ed. with I. Serageldin), and Urban Policy and Economic Development: An Agenda for the 1990s . Other recent publications include articles in 25 Years of Urban Development (Amersfoort, The Netherlands, 1998), Cities Fit for People (Kirdar, ed., 1996), The Brookings Review , Journal of the Society for the Study of Traditional Environments , International Social Science Review , Habitat International , and Finance and Development .

References [ edit ] External links [ edit ] New School profile Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Netherlands Poland Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Michael_A._Cohen&oldid=1219605355 " Categories : Johns Hopkins University faculty Living people The New School faculty Academic staff of the University of Buenos Aires University of California, Berkeley faculty University of Chicago alumni World Bank people American officials of the United Nations Hidden categories: Articles lacking reliable references from April 2018 All articles lacking reliable references BLP articles lacking sources from April 2018 Articles lacking in-text citations from April 2018 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with topics of unclear notability from April 2018 All articles with topics of unclear notability Biography articles with topics of unclear notability Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from May 2022 Place of birth missing (living people) Year of birth missing (living people) This page was last edited on 18 April 2024, at 19:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Michael A. Cohen Add languages Add topic

