Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Conservation development 3 Types Toggle Types subsection 3.1 Conservation buyer projects 3.2 Conservation and limited development projects 3.3 Conservation subdivisions 3.4 Conservation-oriented planned development projects 4 Conservation community Toggle Conservation community subsection 4.1 The economy 4.2 Community 4.3 Examples 5 Advantages 6 Disadvantages 7 Implications 8 See also 9 References 10 Sources 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Conservation development 2 languages العربية فارسی Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Conservation community ) Controlled-growth land use development Parismina , main street, Costa Rica Conservation development , also known as conservation design , is a controlled-growth land use development that adopts the principle for allowing limited sustainable development while protecting the area's natural environmental features in perpetuity, including preserving open space landscape and vista, protecting farmland or natural habitats for wildlife, and maintaining the character of rural communities.

[ 1 ] A conservation development is usually defined as a project that dedicates a minimum of 50 percent of the total development parcel as open space . The management and ownership of the land are often formed by the partnership between private land owners, land-use conservation organizations and local government . It is a growing trend in many parts of the country, particularly in the Western United States . In the Eastern United States , conservation design has been promoted by some state and local governments as a technique to help preserve water quality .

[ 2 ] This type of planning has become more relevant as " land conversion for housing development is a leading cause of habitat loss and fragmentation ".

[ 3 ] With a loss or fragmentation of a species' habitat, it results in the endangerment of a species and pushes them towards premature extinction .

[ 4 ] Land conversion also contributes to the reduction of agriculturally productive land, [ 5 ] already shrinking due to climate change .

Conservation development differs from other land protection approaches by aiming to protect land and environmental resources on parcels slated for immediate development—to protect land here and now. In contrast, a green belt approach typically aims to protect land from future development, and in a region beyond areas currently slated for development. It seeks to offer a gradient between urban regions and open countryside , beyond what a line on a map—typically a highway —currently provides. This approach seeks to avoid the dichotomy of economic urbanism on one side of such a street while on the other lies completely protected woodlands and farm fields, devoid of inclusion in that economy. Addressing the theoretical illusion that humanity walled off is better-off, conservation development recognizes that design of how we live is far more important than we allot credit; that instead of walling off a problem we need to face that problem and drastically lower our impact on the sites where we live, and indeed raise the performance of our communities toward a level where such walls are no longer considered first response requirements.

History [ edit ] Conservation development was formulated in the early 1980s by a British-trained planner Randall Arendt. He pulled together several concepts from the 1960s. He combined the idea of cluster and open space design with Ian McHarg's "design with nature" philosophy.

[ 6 ] Conservation development [ edit ] Conservation development seeks to protect a variety of ecological resources and services such as biodiversity , productive farmland, ecosystem services , scenic landscapes and historic and cultural resources.

[ 5 ] This is achieved by identifying the ecologically sensitive and valuable areas. The protected lands can be under an easement to prevent development on it. Housing is then built around the protected areas. Density, lots sizes, types of housing and amount of protected area is dependent on the type of conservation development.

While not a prevalent type of development, it's estimated that conservation development takes up between 2.5%-10% of the total US real estate development .

[ 5 ] Conservation development is usually applied to rural, exurban or suburban residential subdivisions, though it does have a few urban applications (Doyle 4).

While there are several types of conservation developments, they all have several features in common.

[ 5 ] All developments have conservation land set aside, either held by a conservation organization or protected by a conservation easement. These developments must have ongoing stewardship for the protected portion of the parcel.

[ 3 ] Secondly, the development finances the protected area. Third, each development begins by surveying the land's ecological features and resources. A decision can then be made about where to build and what areas need to be protected. Lastly, these developments also use a variety of design features to reduce some of the negative impacts inherent in development. Examples include low-impact stormwater management systems , and landscape design.

Types [ edit ] Milder cites four principal conservation development techniques found in the United States.

[ 5 ] The first two he groups together as having a "conservation with development" philosophy. Conservation is the main goal with development as a means to that end. The latter two types fall under the "development with conservation" ethos. These two types of projects are done through private developers whose goal is to turn a profit at the end of the day, but in a "conservation-friendly matter".

[ 5 ] Table 1 provides an excellent summary of the different conservation development techniques.

Conservation buyer projects [ edit ] In this situation, a land trust buys the property and places the ecologically important areas under a conservation easement. The land is then resold, including the easement, to a conservation buyer. The buyer cannot build on the easement but may do so on the remaining, unprotected portion. This technique usually results in a few houses being built on the piece of land, resulting in a low density development.

[ 5 ] According to a study undertaken by Milder & Clark, 98.4% of the total land receives protection, the highest amongst the four conservation development types.

[ 7 ] Conservation and limited development projects [ edit ] Conservation and limited development projects (CLDP) are a type of development often carried out by land trusts, and occasionally by conservation-minded developers or landowners. Real estate is developed for sale on an open market, and the profit is used to finance conservation of the nearby land. Milder & Clark found that 93.5% of the total land area is protected under this type of development.

[ 7 ] Recent studies done on the effectiveness of CLDPs in protecting, restoring and managing threatened resources reveal that it is significantly more effective at doing so, in comparison to conservation subdivisions and conventional development.

Conservation subdivisions [ edit ] Conservation subdivisions are a type of development that "sets aside a major portion of the site as conservation land" and clusters housing on the remaining portion.

[ 5 ] The houses are built on lots smaller than usual, meaning the density of the development nears the maximum allowed by zoning. Unlike conservation and limited development projects, a homeowners' association manages the protected land. These associations may lack knowledge and have different goals regarding the lands' management, which may result in a less than ideally managed conservation. As a result of this and other factors, a study found that on average only 57.1% of the total land area is protected from development.

[ 7 ] Conservation-oriented planned development projects [ edit ] Conservation-oriented planned development projects are large-scale development projects found in suburban and exurban areas. The scale of the projects means large tracts of land can be protected. They typically have densities nearing the zoned maximum and feature of a mix of housing types and land uses. The resulting percentage of protected land is 71.3.

[ 7 ] Conservation community [ edit ] This map of Santa Lucia Preserve , a conservation community in California, depicts which portions are protected by conservation covenants.

A conservation community (or conservation development ) is a real estate and conservation hybrid model of land development , consisting of both protected areas and human settlements , with the primary goal of saving large parcels of land from ecological degradation.

[ 8 ] This land can be forested land, agricultural land, ranch land, or any other type of land that needs protecting from high-impact development. This model is contrasted from other protected area models by integrating human communities within nature, rather than relocating them outside, and as such falls under the IUCN's Category V protected area designation.

The model represents an integral balance between people and nature and can sustain for-profit activity such as residential communities, private clubs, or small-scale industrial activity on conditions that ensure the continued protection or ecological restoration of an area.

[ 9 ] Conservation communities are models of sustainable community development, providing an alternative to conventional forms of development.

[ 10 ] They are adaptable to the needs of different regions and use small-scale residential development to fund conservation , eliminating the need to solely depend on funding from private donors or governments , though they are sometimes additionally subsidized by such investments. This land development model is important to goals of sustainable development , green infrastructure, local food security , and responsible management of natural resources.

Some of the tools used to create conservation communities are conservation covenants, ecoforestry covenants, and other forms of covenant registered to the title of the land. Covenants are a legal contract used to protect the integrity of the ecosystem, the ecological health of watersheds (which are damaged by increased development), [ 11 ] maintain long-term access to natural resources and associated value-added opportunities, protect native plant and animal species, and mitigate climate change impacts .

In an effort to avoid greenwashing and in order to increase accountability and public transparency, some conservation communities establish separate federally registered charities or 501(c)(3) non-profit land trusts , which own the land in fee and extend conservation easements to developers and private homeowners. This way, the incentive structure ensures real estate developers stay true to the mission of conservation, with the land trust vested with authority to investigate, report, and penalize infractions.

Conservation communities are developed not only to minimize their ecological footprint but to improve the existing ecological system's performance. The planning stage for the residential community focuses around maintaining and enhancing the ecological integrity of the land. Therefore, the community sits on the least sensitive part of the land from an ecological point of view and is often built using low-impact infrastructure such as Nature-based Solutions for the civil engineering and LEED -targeted housing. To further reduce broader environmental impact, many conservation communities (whether in whole or in part) generate their own power, pump their own water, and grow food on-site.

The economy [ edit ] In addition to residential use, conservation communities can supplement their funding through other eco-compatible uses such as sustainable resource extraction, value-added manufacturing opportunities, organic horticulture , live/work enterprises , ecotourism , recreational and ecological educational opportunities. Through these additional measures, long-term protection of the land is sustained by the economic value created through restrained, eco-conscious business.

Additionally, conservation communities can create sustainable employment opportunities for those living in the communities as well as the surrounding region. Ecotourism promotes environmental protection and support for the well-being of local community members by bringing visitors into the conservation community for educational and recreational purposes.

[ 12 ] Community [ edit ] As a novel and intentional approach to human settlement, conservation communities can be designed to strengthen interconnectedness between community members as well as with the broader local community. Doug Makaroff, founder of Elkington Forest (recently renamed to Malahat Forest Estates) noted that "by building sustainable and relational communities, our lives are richer." [ 13 ] Examples [ edit ] Community name Location Active?

Deer Path Farm [ 14 ] Illinois, US Yes Elkington Forest [ 15 ] British Columbia, Canada Yes Independence Denver [ 16 ] Colorado, US Yes Palmetto Bluff [ 17 ] South Carolina, US Yes Pendergrast Farm Community [ 18 ] Georgia, US Yes Prairie Crossing [ 19 ] Illinois, US Yes Santa Lucia Preserve [ 20 ] California, US Yes Serenbe [ 21 ] Georgia, US Yes The Boulders [ 22 ] North Carolina, US Yes Tryon Farm [ 23 ] Indiana, US Yes Young Ranch [ 24 ] California, US Proposed Advantages [ edit ] The biggest advantage of conservation development is that it can protect species and ecosystems, preventing further habitat fragmentation and loss. By surveying the land and identifying the primary conservation areas where ecosystems are most at risk, communities are created without huge disruption to the environment.

[ 3 ] [ 6 ] Conservation development also provides for secondary conservation areas, which provide corridors for animals to hunt, mate and travel through.

[ 1 ] However, any development will have some impact on the land. But by studying it, there are ways in which this can be mitigated. A developer can have native vegetation planted. Wildlife friendly native species could be introduced, [ 5 ] while invasive species are monitored and controlled.

[ 3 ] Stormwater management systems are also used to "promote natural flow patterns and infiltration", considered a very important factor in minimizing a development's impact.

[ 5 ] There are several benefits from an economic standpoint. Conservation development allows developers to make themselves distinct in a competitive housing market.

[ 3 ] A developer can use an environmentally oriented marketing strategy, highlighting the benefits of the development to possible buyer with a green thumb.

[ 1 ] A final advantage of conservation development is that homes in these developments tend appreciate faster than their conventional counterparts.

[ 1 ] [ 6 ] Pejchar et al. and Arendt cite a number of economic benefits that accrue to municipalities through conservation development. They include fewer public costs on maintenance and infrastructure, protecting open space without losing tax revenues, and avoiding the loss of ecological services like landscape stabilization, flood control and clean water.

[ 3 ] [ 1 ] A municipality also experiences a reduced demand for public green space since it has been provided free of charge by the development.

[ 1 ] Lastly, there are a few social and recreational advantages to conservation development.

[ 1 ] With the smaller lots that accompany these houses, homeowners are likely to move into public green space and engage with their neighbors. Community events such as picnics or parties are more common. The protected green space also provides excellent recreational activities, such as hiking, jogging, or simply observing nature. It's hopeful that with this experience, people can reconnect with nature and develop a land ethic.

[ 6 ] Disadvantages [ edit ] There are several drawbacks to conservation development. The first problem encountered is the perceived risk by both developers and homebuyers.

[ 3 ] In protecting sensitive areas, developers and homeowners see a risk in the possible elimination of desired sites to build homes. This might be a large enough risk to discourage developers. This could be a place for government intervention, which could provide tax breaks to developers building a development this way.

Conservation subdivisions and conservation-oriented planned development projects have been "criticized for protecting land at too small a scale to provide meaningful conservation benefits, while simultaneously promoting "leapfrog" development".

[ 5 ] This pushes sprawl further from the city and contributes to a more fragmented rural area.

Implications [ edit ] This type of planning has become more relevant as " land conversion for housing development is a leading cause of habitat loss and fragmentation ".

[ 3 ] With a loss or fragmentation of a species' habitat, it results in the endangerment of a species and pushes them towards premature extinction.

[ 4 ] Without biodiversity , we lose the many benefits we derive from it, including economic and ecological services , genetic information, and recreational pleasure, just to name a few.

[ 4 ] Land conversion also contributes to the reduction of agriculturally productive land , [ 5 ] already shrinking due to climate change .

See also [ edit ] Ecology portal Environment portal Community-based conservation – Conservation movement emerging in the 1980s Conservation community – Controlled-growth land use development Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Environmental planning – Considering environment in developing land Land trust – Conservation organization Low impact development – Developments with little or no environmental impact Preservation development – Model of real-estate development (farmland preservation) Private protected area Protected area – Areas protected for having ecological or cultural importance Residential cluster development Smart growth – Urban planning philosophy References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g Arendt, Randall G. (1996).

Conservation Design for Subdivisions: A Practical Guide To Creating Open Space Networks . Washington: Island Press.

ISBN 978-1-55963-489-2 .

^ Delaware Department of Natural Resources and Environmental Control, Dover, DE; and Brandywine Conservancy, Chadds Ford, PA.

Conservation Design for Stormwater Management.

Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine September 1997.

^ a b c d e f g h Pejchar, Liba; Margaret R. Caldwell; Carl Palmer; Gretchen C. Daily (2007). "Evaluating the Potential for Conservation Development: Biophysical, Economic and Institutional Perspectives".

Conservation Biology .

21 (1): 69– 78.

Bibcode : 2007ConBi..21...69P .

doi : 10.1111/j.1523-1739.2006.00572.x .

PMID 17298512 .

S2CID 7601586 .

^ a b c Miller Jr., Tyler G.; Dave Hackett (201).

Living in the Environment (2nd Canadian ed.). Nelson Education.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Milder, Jeffery C. (2007).

"A Framework for Understanding Conservation Development and its Ecological Implications" .

BioScience .

57 (9): 757– 768.

doi : 10.1641/b570908 .

^ a b c d Doyle, Donna L. (2005). "Planning for Greener Development: Conservation Development and Landon Bay East".

FES Outstanding Graduate Student Paper Series .

10 (2): 1– 20.

^ a b c d Milder, Jeffery C.; Story Clark (2001). "Conservation Development Practices, Extent and Land-Use Effects in the United States".

Conservation Biology .

25 (4): 697– 707.

doi : 10.1111/j.1523-1739.2011.01688.x .

PMID 21658127 .

S2CID 5828829 .

^ McMahon, Edward T. (July 1, 2010).

"Conservation Communities" .

UrbanLand.ULI.org . Urban Land Institute . Retrieved 7 March 2022 .

^ Milder, Jeffrey (October 1, 2007).

"A Framework for Understanding Conservation Development and Its Ecological Implications" .

BioScience .

57 (9): 757– 768.

doi : 10.1641/B570908 .

S2CID 14417328 .

^ Sustainable Development , Simon Fraser University.

^ " Watershed Protection ". Purdue University, College of Engineering.

^ Randall, A. (1987).

Resource economics . 2nd ed. New York, USA: John Wiley and Sons.

^ " Hard Times Can Increase Innovation and Collaboration ". Davis, Kim (December 13, 2008).

Vancouver Sun , Westcoast Homes.

^ "Deer Path Farm History" .

DeerPathFarm.com . Deer Path Farm . Retrieved 5 March 2022 .

^ "Elkington Forest" .

ElkingtonForest.com . renamed. Elkington Forest. Archived from the original on 2012-05-01 . Retrieved 5 March 2022 .

^ "Independence Denver" .

IndependenceDenver.com . Independence . Retrieved 5 March 2022 .

^ "Palmetto Bluff Conservation" .

PalmettoBluff.com . Palmetto Bluff . Retrieved 5 March 2022 .

^ "Pendergrast Farm" .

PendergrastFarm.com . Pendergrast Farm . Retrieved 5 March 2022 .

^ "Prairie Crossing" .

PCHOA.com . Prairie Crossing . Retrieved 5 March 2022 .

^ "Santa Lucia Preserve" .

SantaLuciaPreserve.com . Santa Lucia Preserve . Retrieved 5 March 2022 .

^ "Serenbe" .

Serbene.com . Serenbe . Retrieved 5 March 2022 .

^ "The Boulders" .

TheBouldersNC.com . The Boulders . Retrieved 5 March 2022 .

^ "Tryon Farm" .

TryonFarm.com . Tryon Farm . Retrieved 5 March 2022 .

^ "Young Ranch" .

YoungRanchSanJose.com . Young Ranch . Retrieved 5 March 2022 .

Sources [ edit ] McMahon, Edward (2010).

Conservation communities : creating value with nature, open space, and agriculture . Washington, DC: Urban Land Institute.

ISBN 9780874202175 .

Anderson, Jennifer (Summer 2014).

"Protecting Land Through Conservation Development: Lessons from Land Trust Experience" .

Saving Land Magazine . Land Trust Alliance . Retrieved 7 March 2022 .

Heid, FASLA, Jim (June 2014).

"Conservation Development" (PDF) .

JHeid.com/ideas . Retrieved 7 March 2022 .

A definitional framework of Conservation Development and four case studies.

Further reading [ edit ] Ellis, Ronald L. Jr. (2006).

"Residential Land Use Policy and Conservation Development in the Blanco River Basin." Applied Research Project. Texas State University-San Marcos. Paper 110.

Gillfillan, Abigail (2007).

"Using Geographic Information Systems to Develop and Analyze Land-Use Policies." Applied Research Project. Texas State University-San Marcos. Paper 273.

Sullivan, Michael and Warren, John-Paul (2002). "Conservation Development: Blending Ecology and Development" Ontario Planning Journal, Vol 17, No. 6, 2002 Daigle, Andre and Savard, Daniel (2005) "Designing for Conservation" Plan Canada, Winter 2005 Warren, John-Paul (2007) "Sustainable Development based on Conservation Design: A New Approach in New Brunswick Land Planning - Is It  Working?" York University MES Major Research Paper Warren, John-Paul and Mercer, Kevin (2008) "Water: Harvesting the Resource" Ground, Ontario Assn of Landscape Architects, Landscape Architecture Quarterly, Fall/Winter 2008 Warren, John-Paul (2001) "Blake-Duck-Siep In One Go: A CD Developer Survey" Conservation Development Alliance of Ontario, for The Natural Lands Trust, PA Yaro, Robert, Randall G. Arendt, Harry L. Dodson and Elizabeth A. Brabec (1988) Dealing with Change in the Connecticut River Valley: A Design Manual for Conservation and Development , Lincoln Institute of Land Policy Arendt, Randall G. (2015) Rural By Design: Planning for Town and Country 2nd Edition, APA Planners Press McHarg, Ian (1995) Design With Nature , Wiley Donohue, Brian (2001) Reclaiming the Commons: Community Farms and Forests in a New England Town , Yale University Press Warren, John-Paul (2001) "A Survey on Conservation Development: 13 U.S. Land Trusts respond", for The Natural Lands Trust, PA Warren, John-Paul (2005) "A Database of Canadian Urban Conservation Developments", Evergreen, Common Grounds, all the above available from the author at jpwarren-inter at uniserve.com External links [ edit ] "Green Neighborhoods: Open Space Residential Design in Massachusetts" [ usurped ] - Massachusetts Audubon Society "Growing Greener." Case Studies in Pennsylvania.

- Natural Lands Trust, Media, PA v t e Urban planning History Theories Index Outline General Urban area City Metropolitan area Suburb Land use Planning Planning and zoning commission Growth management World Urbanism Day Labor market area Major branches General Land-use planning Comprehensive planning (US) History of urban planning Spatial planning (Eur) Redevelopment Urban design Urban green space Urbanism Rural Conservation development Preservation development Rural housing Village design statement (UK) Regional planning Regional Planning Association of America Environmental planning Environmental design Environmental impact assessment Recreation resource planning Sustainable development Transportation planning Transportation forecasting Trip distribution Rational planning model Transit-oriented development Professional transportation planner Urban freight distribution Economic development Community economic development Concepts/ theories Movements Athens Charter Car-free movement City Beautiful movement Dark-sky movement Garden city movement Indigenous planning NIMBY New Urbanism Settlement movement Smart growth Structuralism Transition towns YIMBY Theories Collaborative planning Context theory Ekistics Intelligent urbanism Livable streets Market urbanism Radical planning Urban renewal Cities by type Company town / Monotown Commuter town Ghost town Global city Mining community Pit village Man camp Logging camp Model village Planned community (New town) Intentional community Arcology Urban village Boomtown Concepts Affordable housing Cityscape Cluster development Complete Communities Conservation community Creative city Eminent domain (US) Filtering (housing) Gentrification / Brusselization Infill Healthy cities / Healthy community design LEED-ND Leapfrog development Mixed-use development Permeability Placemaking Planning gain Planning Permission Rural flight Temporary use Third place Tract housing Transferable development rights Urban decay Urban growth boundary Urban sprawl / Peri-urbanisation Urban vitality Urbanization Verticalization / High-rise urbanism Zoning People Theorists/ practitioners Edward Bassett Andrés Duany Clarence Perry Clarence Stein Colin Buchanan Daniel Burnham Donald Appleyard Ebenezer Howard Edmund Bacon Guy Benveniste Ian McHarg James Rouse Konstantinos Doxiadis Kevin A. Lynch Le Corbusier Loretta Lees Peter Calthorpe Patrick Geddes Raymond Unwin Thomas Adams List of urban theorists List of urban planners Critics Elizabeth Farrelly Jane Jacobs James Howard Kunstler Lewis Mumford Randal O'Toole Training Planning education Planning Accreditation Board Real estate education Professional organizations Places Countries Australia China Czech Republic Russia Serbia Singapore United Kingdom Taiwan Cities Barcelona Shanghai Sydney Other Africa Communist countries Nazi Germany Ancient Egypt Related fields Architecture Civil engineering Development economics Environmental social science Geography Land development Landscape architecture Marine spatial planning Public health Public policy Real estate development Social sciences Urban ecology Urban economics Cities portal Category List of planned cities List of planning journals Commons v t e Conservation of species Index of conservation articles Conservation biology Biodiversity Captive breeding Compassionate conservation Conservation behavior Conservation-dependent species Conservation genetics Conservation-induced extinction Conservation status Endemism Ex-situ conservation Extinction threshold In-situ conservation Latent extinction risk Marine conservation Mutualisms and conservation Nature conservation Nuisance wildlife Pest Vermin Conservation biology of parasites Species translocation Conservation welfare Threatened species Vulnerability and susceptibility Approaches Conservation agriculture Conservation development Conservation finance Conservation grazing Conservation management system Conservation movement Conservation photography Conservation psychology Conspicuous conservation Community-based conservation Ecoregion conservation status Environmental protection Evidence-based conservation Flagship species Forest management Forest protection Tropical rainforest conservation Integrated Conservation and Development Project Other effective area-based conservation measures Riparian buffer Roadless area conservation Roadside conservation Site-based conservation Wetland conservation Protected areas Conservation designation Conservation district Conservation easement Conservation reserve Gap analysis Habitat conservation High conservation value area Landscape-scale conservation Marine protected area Marxan Open space reserve Wildlife corridor 30 by 30 target Key issues Conservation refugee Fortress conservation Habitat fragmentation Human–wildlife conflict Restoration Assisted natural regeneration Ecosystem restoration Island restoration Reforestation afforestation Rewilding marine Species reintroduction By taxon Arthropod Bird Hawaiian honeycreeper Raptor Golden eagle Fungi Land mammal American bison Arabian oryx Bear Polar bear Cheetah Elephant Indian elephant Slow loris Tiger Bengal Tiger Wolf Marine Dolphin Gray nurse shark Manatee Painted turtle Salmon Sea otter Plant Seed bank Cryopreservation By country Angola Australia Belize Brazil Canada Central African Republic Costa Rica Hong Kong Iceland India Indonesia Ireland Italy Malaysia Mauritius Namibia New Zealand Pakistan Papua New Guinea South Sudan Sweden Uganda United Kingdom Scotland United States forests Related Conservation officer De-extinction Planetary boundaries IUCN Red List NatureServe conservation status Special Area of Conservation Soil conservation List of conservation issues List of organisations List of people Category v t e Environmentalism Outline of environmentalism Key topics Climate justice Ecological crisis Environmental conflict Environmental movement History List of environmental conflicts Organizations Environmental studies Human impact on the environment Disciplines Communication Ecology Education Ethics Health History Humanities Law Philosophy Politics Psychology Religion Science Social science Sociology Views Philosophical Political ecology Environmental philosophy Biocentrism Deep ecology Earth jurisprudence Ecocentrism Resacralization of nature Social ecology Political Bioconservatism Bright green environmentalism Disinvestment Eco-capitalism Ecofascism Ecofeminism Eco-nationalism Eco-socialism Eco-terrorism Ecomodernism Free-market environmentalism Green anarchism Green conservatism Green left Green liberalism Green libertarianism Green politics Green syndicalism War on coal Religious Ecotheology Christianity Evangelical Islam Judaism Stewardship (theology) Opposition Anti-environmentalism Environmental skepticism List of environmental killings Biophilia hypothesis Environmentalism of the poor Environmental stewardship Hardline Nature conservation Radical environmentalism Offshoots Anti-fracking movement Anti-nuclear movement Car-free movement Climate movement Conservation movement Cultural environmentalism Degrowth Earth Optimism Eco-anxiety Ecological grief Environmental defender Environmental justice Ethical banking Ethical consumerism Flight shame Impact investing Product stewardship Slow movement Sustainability organization Goals Circular economy Climate action Climate change mitigation Conservation community Ecological civilization Environmental personhood Environmental protection Environmental policy Environmental, social, and corporate governance Environmentally friendly Greening Green economy Greenwashing Natural resource management Environmental resource management Rights of nature Short-haul flight ban Smoke abatement Sustainability Vegetarianism Protests Tree sitting By country Albania Australia Brazil Rio Grande do Sul China Anti-incinerator movement India Chipko movement Israel New Zealand Philippines South Africa Switzerland United Kingdom United States In culture Art Books Ecofiction Conspicuous conservation Film list festivals horror Journalism The Lord of the Rings Music Ecomusicology Motorsport Sculpture Surfing Tourism Eco hotel Publications Environmentalists Environmentalist Environmental defender Water protector Notable people Sunderlal Bahuguna Murray Bookchin David Brower Rachel Carson Jacques Cousteau Ng Cho-nam Tim Flannery Al Gore Aldo Leopold Wangari Maathai Seyyed Hossein Nasr Chico Mendes John Muir Theodore Roosevelt Shōzō Tanaka Greta Thunberg Related topics Barriers to pro-environmental behaviour Business ethics Land ethic Lifeboat ethics Tragedy of the commons Environment portal v t e Real estate developments Commercial Airport Business park Bus station Commercial area Mixed-use development Office building Port inland Power center Retail park Riverfront Shopping center ( Shopping mall ) Train station Shopping streets and districts Industrial Business cluster Industrial district Industrial park Technology centers Residential Agrihood Boarding house Bungalow court City block Closed community Company town Conservation community Executive home Golf course community Gated community Housing estate Intentional community Luxury apartment McMansion Mixed-use development Model dwellings for the poor Multifamily residential Penthouse apartment Private community Public housing Residential airpark Residential area Retirement community Revenue house Rooming house Single-room occupancy Subdivision Tract housing Disability Assisted living Behavior modification facility Residential treatment center Therapeutic boarding school Elderly care Age-restricted community Nursing home Retirement home Senior living Science/education Akademgorodok Atomgrad Campus Research park Satellite campus Science park Municipal Arcology Civic center Garden city movement Model village Planned cities Planned community Urban green space parks Buildings ( types ) Apartment House types Skyscraper Tower block Villa Miscellaneous Brownfield land Cemetery Residential cluster development Construction Context theory Eminent domain Greenfield land Greyfield land Groundscraper Land-use planning Nonbuilding NIMBY Park Parking ( Multistorey car park ) Planning permission Playground Redevelopment Regional planning Urban design Urban planning YIMBY Zoning Housing portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conservation_development&oldid=1288864378#Conservation_community " Categories : Environmental conservation Economy and the environment Urban design New Urbanism Sustainable urban planning Rural development Economic development Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 5 May 2025, at 03:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conservation development 2 languages Add topic

