Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Protest and aftermath 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Notes 4.2 Literature 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Göttingen Seven 17 languages Deutsch Español Esperanto Français 한국어 Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Русский Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Group of professors exiled for political protest The Göttingen Seven. Top row: Wilhelm Grimm, Jacob Grimm. Middle Row: Wilhelm Eduard Albrecht, Friedrich Christoph Dahlmann, Georg Gottfried Gervinus. Bottom Row: Wilhelm Eduard Weber, Heinrich Georg August Ewald.

[ 1 ] The Göttingen Seven ( German : Göttinger Sieben ) were a group of seven liberal professors at University of Göttingen .

[ 2 ] In 1837, they protested against the annulment of the constitution of the Kingdom of Hanover by its new ruler, King Ernest Augustus , and refused to swear an oath to the king.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The company of seven was led by historian Friedrich Christoph Dahlmann , [ 5 ] who himself was one of the key advocates of the previous constitution. The other six were the Germanist brothers Wilhelm and Jacob Grimm , famed collectors and publishers of folklore, known collectively as the Brothers Grimm ; [ 6 ] jurist Wilhelm Eduard Albrecht ; historian Georg Gottfried Gervinus ; physicist Wilhelm Eduard Weber ; and theologian and orientalist Heinrich Georg August Ewald .

[ 1 ] Background [ edit ] Ernest Augustus The constitution that Ernest Augustus opposed came into effect in 1833, while he was still heir presumptive to the Hanoverian throne. Historian and politician Friedrich Christoph Dahlmann contested Ernest's plans to change the constitution to his liking, as Dahlmann himself had contributed to the constitution's framing.  Additionally, Dahlmann served as the representative of the University of Göttingen , in the second chamber of the noble court.

[ 7 ] The death of King William IV on 20 June 1837 had a great impact on Hanover's political positioning, relations, and union with the group of constitutional states in the German Confederation . With William's death, the personal union ended between Hanover and the United Kingdom, and William's brother (Ernest Augustus) took over as ruler of the kingdom of Hanover. Their niece Victoria acceded to the throne of the United Kingdom, but could not inherit Hanover due to the provision of Salic Law in force in Hanover, which barred females from ruling.

[ 7 ] About one month after he succeeded to the throne, King Ernest addressed the matter of the Constitution. He stated that he was not bound by it, as his consent had not been asked to it.  He also indicated that it would have been different, or perhaps even non-existent, had he been in power at the time of its composition.  He declared that it was his aim and ambition to make the necessary changes to the constitution and rewrite it to reflect his values.

[ 8 ] Hearing this, Dahlmann made an attempt to persuade his colleagues at the University of Göttingen senate to disapprove of the king's intent to change the constitution, and take some form of action. None of his over 40 different colleagues were willing to support Dahlmann's view and possibly cause public conflict or unrest during ongoing festivities of the 100th anniversary of the University of Göttingen.

[ 9 ] Protest and aftermath [ edit ] The bronze statues of the Göttingen Seven seen near to the federal state parliament in Hanover On 1 November the same year, Ernest Augustus annulled the constitution.  This move was met with political criticism from some German states .

[ 10 ] The move also provoked Dahlmann to again appeal to the university and to compose a protestation opposing Ernest's decision. This time, he received a better response: six other professors were now willing to sign in opposition.  These six plus Dahlmann became known as the Göttingen Seven. Dahlmann's document was published on 18 November and it met with an explosive influence—the students at the university produced many hundreds or even thousands of copies and disseminated them across Germany.

The protest's impact forced the king to take action, and the seven defiant professors were questioned before the university court on 4 December. Ten days later, the seven were relieved of their posts at the university, and three of them (Dahlmann, Jacob Grimm, and Gervinus) were given three days to leave the country.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] The university viewed the dismissal as a great loss to the university, confirmed in writings about the event during the time.

The direct effects of the protest were limited, but public sensation and media interest was high in Germany and much of Europe, and the seven were popular among the general public.

[ 1 ] [ 13 ] Each of the seven had his own personal reasons for defying the king, but the fact that they had done so was the central catalyst for the media and public attention.  The efforts of the Göttingen Seven outlived each of them, and the creation of a liberal republic in Germany can in part be traced back to their protest.

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Germany portal History of Germany § German Confederation References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c Donald R. Hettinga The Brothers Grimm: Two Lives, One Legacy . Clarion Books, 2001.

ISBN 0-618-05599-1 ^ Crosby, Margaret Barber (2008).

The Making of a German Constitution: A Slow Revolution . A&C Black. pp.

140– 141.

^ Suzanne L Marchand Down from Olympus: Archaeology and Philhellenism in Germany, 1750–1970 . Princeton University
Press, 1996.

ISBN 0-691-11478-1 ^ Margaret B. W. Tent The Prince of Mathematics: Carl Friedrich Gauss . A K Peters, 2006.

ISBN 1-56881-261-2 ^ Fanny Lewald , Hanna Ballin Lewis A Year of Revolutions: Fanny Lewald's Recollections of 1848 . Berghahn Books, 1997.

ISBN 1-57181-099-4 ^ Christa Jungnickel , Russell McCormmach Intellectual Mastery of Nature: Theoretical Physics from Ohm to Einstein . University of Preston
Press, 1986.

ISBN 0-226-41582-1 ^ a b Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Hanover (province)" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 12 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 925.

^ Gregory A. Kimble, Michael Wertheimer, C. Alan Boneau, Charlotte White Portraits of pioneers in psychology . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

ISBN 0-8058-2198-8 ^ Constance Reid Hilbert . Springer, 1996.

ISBN 0-387-94674-8 .

^ Marshall Dill Germany: A Modern History . University of Michigan Press, 1970.

ISBN 0-472-07101-7 ^ Hajo Holborn A History of Modern Germany: 1840–1945 . Princeton University Press, 1982, p. 28.

ISBN 0-691-00797-7 ^ Hans-Christof Kraus "Die Gelehrten und der cholerische König" [The scholars and the cholerical king] (in German). In: Damals , vol. 45, No. 5, 2013, pp. 40–41.

^ John Derbyshire Prime Obsession: Bernhard Riemann and the Greatest Unsolved Problem in Mathematics . Joseph Henry Press, 2003.

ISBN 0-309-08549-7 ^ Klaus Hentschel Physics and National Socialism: An Anthology of Primary Sources . Birkhäuser, 1996.

ISBN 3-7643-5312-0 Literature [ edit ] See, Klaus von (October 2000).

Die Göttinger Sieben. Kritik einer Legende (The Göttingen Seven. Criticism of a legend) (in German). Universitätsverlag Winter.

ISBN 978-3-8253-1058-5 .

Hunger, Ulrich (2002). "Die Georgia Augusta als hannoversche Landesuniversität. Von der Gründung bis zum Ende des Königreichs (The Georgia Augusta as hanoverian national university. From its establishment to the end of the kingdom)". In Denecke, Dietrich; Böhme, Ernst (eds.).

Vom Dreißigjährigen Krieg bis zum Anschluss an Preußen - Der Wiederaufstieg als Universitätsstadt (1648 - 1866) mit 32 Tabellen (in German). Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.

ISBN 3-525-36197-1 .

Lampe, Jörg H. (2002). "Politische Entwicklungen in Göttingen vom Beginn des 19. Jahrhunderts bis zum Vormärz (Political developments in Göttingen of the beginning 19th Century up to the Vormärz)". In Denecke, Dietrich; Böhme, Ernst (eds.).

Göttingen: Geschichte einer Universitätsstadt (Goettingen: history of a university town) (in German). Göttingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.

ISBN 3-525-36197-1 .

Fulbrook, Mary (1997).

German History Since 1800 . Oxford University Press US.

ISBN 0-340-69200-6 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Göttingen Seven at Wikimedia Commons v t e The Göttingen Seven Friedrich Christoph Dahlmann Brothers Grimm Wilhelm Jacob Wilhelm Eduard Albrecht Georg Gottfried Gervinus Wilhelm Eduard Weber Heinrich Ewald v t e The Brothers Grimm Jacob Grimm · Wilhelm Grimm Works Grimms' Fairy Tales Deutsche Sagen Deutsche Mythologie Deutsches Wörterbuch Notable tales " Bearskin " " The Brave Little Tailor " " Brother and Sister " " Cat and Mouse in Partnership " " Cinderella " " Death's Messengers " " The Devil with the Three Golden Hairs " " Doctor Know-all " " The Dog and the Sparrow " " The Elves and the Shoemaker " " The Fisherman and His Wife " " The Four Skillful Brothers " " The Frog Prince " " The Gnome " " Godfather Death " " The Golden Bird " " The Golden Goose " " The Goose Girl " " The Goose-Girl at the Well " " The Grave Mound " " Hans My Hedgehog " " Hansel and Gretel " " The Hut in the Forest " " The Jew Among Thorns " " Jorinde and Joringel " " The Juniper Tree " " The King of the Golden Mountain " " King Thrushbeard " " Little Red Riding Hood " " Mary's Child " " Mother Holle " " Old Hildebrand " " Old Sultan " " Pied Piper of Hamelin " " The Queen Bee " " Rapunzel " " The Riddle " " The Robber Bridegroom " " Rumpelstiltskin " " The Seven Ravens " " The Singing, Springing Lark " " The Six Servants " " The Six Swans " " Sleeping Beauty " " Snow White " " Snow-White and Rose-Red " " The Story of the Youth Who Went Forth to Learn What Fear Was " " The Three Little Men in the Wood " " The Three Spinners " " Thumbling " " Town Musicians of Bremen " " Trusty John " " The Turnip " " The Twelve Brothers " " The Twelve Dancing Princesses " " The Water of Life " " The White Snake " " The Wolf and the Seven Young Goats " " The Wonderful Musician " Other Grimm's law Göttingen Seven Grim Tales The Wonderful World of the Brothers Grimm Once Upon a Brothers Grimm Grimm's Fairy Tale Classics Simsala Grimm The Brothers Grimm Grimm Tales The Sisters Grimm Fairy tale American McGee's Grimm German Fairy Tale Route Grimm Once Upon a Time The 10th Kingdom The Grimm Variations Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Göttingen_Seven&oldid=1301470957 " Categories : 1837 in the German Confederation University of Göttingen Kingdom of Hanover 1837 in the Kingdom of Hanover Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Good articles Articles containing German-language text CS1 German-language sources (de) Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 01:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Göttingen Seven 17 languages Add topic

