Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Philosophies 2 Movement 3 Leading figures 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Transmodernism 6 languages Español فارسی Português Română Русский Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Not to be confused with Transmodernity .

Philosophical and cultural movement Part of a series on the History of Christian theology Background Christian theology Diversity in early Christian theology Adoptionism Arianism Docetism Gnosticism Marcionism Montanism Early Christianity Proto-orthodox Christianity Timeline History of Christianity Template:History of Christianity Ecclesiastical polity Trinitarianism Nontrinitarianism Christology Paterology Pneumatology Mariology Biblical canon Deuterocanon Hermeneutics Theological hermeneutics African American Asian American Philosophical theology Christian philosophy Christian apologetics Persecution and tolerance Historical theology Ecumenical Creeds Apostles' Nicene Chalcedonian Athanasian Patristics and Councils Great church ante-Nicene period Church Fathers Apostolic Fathers Cappadocian Fathers Desert Fathers Desert Mothers Augustine Nicaea Ephesus Chalcedon Post-Nicene development Heresy Monophysitism Monothelitism Byzantine Iconoclasm Gregory I Alcuin Photios East–West Schism Scholasticism Aquinas Anselm Palamas Reformation Martin Luther Theology 95 Theses John Calvin Radical Evangelicalism theology Five solae Book of Concord Arminianism English Counter- Trent Jansenism From the Reformation to the World Wars Natural Onto- Practical Pietism John Wesley Great Awakenings Holiness movement Restoration Movement Dispensationalism Covenant theology Existentialism Dogmatics Fundamental/foundational Liberal Catholic Anglo-Catholic Critical realism Political Since the World Wars Vatican II of religions Situational ethics Nouvelle théologie ( Ressourcement ) Death of God Postliberal  •  Narrative Continental philosophy Radical orthodoxy Neo-orthodoxy Reconciliation Analytic in Thomism Theopoetics Ecumenism Digital Systematic Biblical Constructive Eco- Environmental Public Contextualisation and Inculturation Indigenous church mission theory Sino-Christian Feminism in Feminist theology Asian Womanist New Queer Liberation Black Dalit Latin American Minjung Palestinian Postcolonial Fourth Great Awakening Christian Zionism Paleo-orthodoxy Dominion theology extraterrestrials Moderate Christianity Conservative Christianity Emerging church Progressive Christianity Confessing Movement Biotheology Theophysics Christianity portal v t e Transmodernism is a philosophical and cultural movement founded by Argentinian - Mexican philosopher Enrique Dussel .

[ 1 ] He refers to himself as a transmodernist and wrote a series of essays criticising the postmodern theory and advocating a transmodern way of thinking. Transmodernism is a development in thought following the period of postmodernism . As a movement, it was also developed from modernism and critiques modernity and postmodernity, [ 1 ] viewing them as the end of modernism.

[ 2 ] Transmodernism is influenced by many philosophical movements. Its emphasis on spirituality was influenced by the esoteric movements during the Renaissance . Transmodernism is influenced by transcendentalism and idealises different figures from the mid-19th century United States , most notably Ralph Waldo Emerson . Transmodernism is related to different aspects of Marxist philosophy, having common ground with Roman Catholic liberation theology .

[ 3 ] Philosophies [ edit ] The philosophical views of the transmodernism movement contain elements of both modernism and postmodernism. Transmodernism has been described as "new modernism" and its proponents admire avant-garde styles .

[ 4 ] It bases much of its core beliefs on the integral theory of Ken Wilber, those of creating a synthesis of "pre-modern", "modern" and "postmodern" realities.

In transmodernism, there is a place for both tradition and modernity, and it seeks as a movement to re-vitalise and modernise tradition rather than destroy or replace it. Unlike modernism or postmodernism, the honouring and reverence of antiquity and traditional lifestyles is important in transmodernism. Transmodernism criticises pessimism , nihilism , relativism and the counter-Enlightenment . It embraces, to a limited extent, optimism , absolutism , foundationalism and universalism . It has an analogical way of thinking, [ 3 ] viewing things from the outside rather than the inside.

Movement [ edit ] As a movement, transmodernism puts an emphasis on spirituality , alternative religions, and transpersonal psychology . Unlike postmodernism, it disagrees with the secularisation of society, putting an emphasis on religion, and it criticises the rejection of worldviews as false or of no importance. Transmodernism places an emphasis on xenophily and globalism , promoting the importance of different cultures and cultural appreciation. It seeks a worldview on cultural affairs and is anti- Eurocentric and anti- imperialist .

[ 1 ] Environmentalism , sustainability and ecology are important aspects of the transmodern theory. Transmodernism embraces environmental protection and stresses the importance of neighbourhood life, building communities as well as order and cleanliness. It accepts technological change , yet only when its aim is that of improving life or human conditions.

[ 5 ] Other aspects of transmodernism include democracy and listening to the poor and suffering .

Transmodernism takes strong stances on feminism , health care, family life and relationships . It promotes the emancipation of women and female rights , alongside several traditional moral and ethical family values ; in particular, the importance of family is stressed.

Leading figures [ edit ] Transmodernism is a minor philosophical movement in comparison to postmodernism and is relatively new to the Northern Hemisphere, but it has a large set of leading figures and philosophers.

Enrique Dussel is its founder.

Ken Wilber , the inventor of Integral Theory, argues from a transpersonal point of view.

Paul Gilroy , a cultural theorist, has also "enthusiastically endorsed" transmodern thinking, [ 3 ] and Ziauddin Sardar , an Islamic scholar, is a critic of postmodernism and in many cases adopts a transmodernist way of thinking.

Essays and works arguing from a transmodernist point of view have been published throughout the years.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Alex Katz Criticism of postmodernism Neomodernism Remodernism Transmodernity References [ edit ] ^ a b c Cole, Mike.

[1] Psychology Press, 2008, p. 68 ^ Mura, Andrea (2012).

"The Symbolic Function of Transmodernity" .

Language and Psychoanalysis .

1 (1): 68– 87.

doi : 10.7565/landp.2012.0005 .

^ a b c Cole, Mike.

[2] Psychology Press, 2008, p. 69 ^ Weagel, D.F. (2010).

Words and Music: Camus, Beckett, Cage, Gould . Peter Lang. p. 9.

ISBN 9781433108365 . Retrieved 2015-04-13 .

^ Greer, J.M.; Moberg, D.O. (2001).

Research in the Social Scientific Study of Religion.v.10 . JAI Press. p. 68.

ISBN 9780762304837 . Retrieved 2015-04-13 .

^ Mura, Andrea (2012).

"The Symbolic Function of Transmodernity" .

Language and Psychoanalysis .

1 (1): 68– 87.

doi : 10.7565/landp.2012.0005 .

^ Mura, Andrea (2015).

The Symbolic Scenarios of Islamism: A Study in Islamic Political Thought . London: Routledge.

ISBN 9781317014508 .

External links [ edit ] "Islam and the West in a Transmodern World" — by Ziauddin Sardar .

"Critical Muslims, transmodern tradition" — an interview with Ziauddin Sardar .

"The Rise of Integral Culture" — by Paul H. Ray .

"Transmodernism, Marxism, and Social Change: Some Implications for Teacher Education" — by Mike Cole .

v t e Criticism of postmodernism Concepts Altermodern Anti-anti-art Hypermodernity Metamodernism Neomodern Neomodernism New sincerity Post-irony Post-postmodernism Remodernism Remodernist film Stuckism International Transmodernism Critics Anderson Benson Berman Bricmont Bunge Chomsky Crews Dawkins Dennett Dussel Eagleton Fukuyama Hicks Jameson Kramer Lindsay Paglia Peterson Pluckrose Scruton Sokal Windschuttle Works Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (1991) Higher Superstition (1994) Dead White Males (1995) Fashionable Nonsense (1997) Explaining Postmodernism (2004) The Dictionary of Fashionable Nonsense (2006) Cynical Theories (2020) Related Grievance studies affair Postmodernism Generator Science wars Sokal affair Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transmodernism&oldid=1268456520 " Categories : Remodernism Modernism Criticism of postmodernism Postmodern theory 21st century in the arts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 January 2025, at 21:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transmodernism 6 languages Add topic

