Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 Usage 3 History 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Reach extender 4 languages Dansk Deutsch Eesti עברית Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Long stick with a grabber on the end to pick up things easily "Trash picker" redirects here. For a person who collects items from trash bins, see Dumpster diving .

A 36 in (910 mm) reach extender with a secondary trigger and a pole that can be rotated 90 degrees A reach extender (or reacher , grabber arm , helping hand , trash picker , picker-upper , extended gripper , long arm gripper , extended reach grabber , grabber tool , litter picker , or caliper ) is a handheld mechanical tool used to increase the range of a person's reach and grasp when grabbing objects. It has applications in waste management , assistive technology , gardening and outdoor work, and in some cases as a children's toy. It is chiefly used to pick items up off the ground, but can also be used to retrieve items from high shelves. The tool is commonly sold in hardware stores .

Description [ edit ] A reach extender takes the form of a long metal or plastic pole, usually around 3 feet (0.91 m) in length, with a handle at one end and a pair of jaws at the other end. The tool is available in lengths ranging from 24 inches (610 mm) for wheelchair users, up to at least 16 feet (4.9 m).

[ 1 ] The handle is equipped with a trigger that, when pulled, closes the jaws via a lever-and-spring system or mechanical cable within the pole. The jaws are open by default and spring open when the trigger is released. Some reach extenders may possess a secondary trigger which locks the jaws in position around whatever object they are holding, so the user does not need to maintain a tight grip on the handle. Gripping force can range up to 17 pounds (7.7 kg) in some models.

[ 1 ] Other designs have jaws equipped with suction cups for holding round objects more easily, and still others have small magnets for collecting lightweight ferrous items. Some designs allow rotation of the plane in which the jaws operate relative to the trigger grip, allowing less-awkward manipulation of different objects. Variations on the basic form of a reach extender depend on what task needs to be accomplished, and significant variation is found in the length of the pole and the maximum weight the reach extender can bear.

[ 2 ] Usage [ edit ] Reach extenders are used by litter collection services to aid in picking up litter off the ground without having to bend over repeatedly, which is very fatiguing. People may construct specially adapted tools for this purpose.

[ 3 ] Reach extenders are also used to provide accessibility to people with disabilities or who are aging.

[ 4 ] A 2009 neuroplasticity study by Cardinali et al. used reach extenders to demonstrate that the human brain quickly learns to map tools as parts of the body.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Dutch tool used for picking up litter Israeli tool for accessibility Retrieving a cup from a high shelf Harrison Schmitt using reach extender in Apollo 17 mission History [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( April 2023 ) In 1768, United States polymath Benjamin Franklin invented the "Long Arm", a reach extender for extracting books from high shelves.

[ 7 ] In 1887, the Combined Hook and Hanger was patented by Charles Bierman of Brooklyn in 1887.

[ 8 ] Various other versions of the reach extender were patented throughout the 19th and 20th centuries.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Ultra Hand References [ edit ] ^ a b "The Best Trash Pickup & Reaching Tool in the USA" .

Grapplers Inc . Retrieved 2023-04-11 .

^ Miller, Jim T. (9 August 2014).

"How to Find the Best Reacher Grabber Tool" .

The Huffington Post .

^ Goldsberry, Clare.

"Inventor solves big litter problem; Can't grab it? Get a Grabbinator" .

plasticstoday.com . UBM Americas . Retrieved 2016-09-27 .

^ Dahl, Timothy (24 May 2016).

"How to Make a Grabber Arm for Picking up Anything" .

popularmechanics.com . Hearst Digital Media . Retrieved 27 September 2016 .

^ "Tools are 'temporary body parts' " .

BBC World News . BBC. 22 June 2009 . Retrieved 27 September 2016 .

^ Zehr, Paul E. (26 September 2012).

"Assembling an Avenger-Inside the Brain of Iron Man" .

Scientific American . Retrieved 27 September 2016 .

^ Brabner, Ian.

"The Long Arm of Benjamin Franklin" .

Rare Americana . Retrieved 11 April 2024 .

^ Commissioner of Patents (1888).

Annual Report of the Commissioner of Patents for the Year 1887 . Washington: Government Printing Office. p. 51.

^ "US Patent for Multi-purpose reacher-grabber tool Patent (Patent # 8,641,110 issued February 4, 2014) - Justia Patents Search" .

patents.justia.com . Retrieved 2024-04-10 .

v t e Cleaning tools ( List ) Broom Brush Bucket Carpet sweeper Dustpan Feather duster Floor buffer Floor scrubber Hataki Holystone Ladder Mop Mop bucket cart Needlegun scaler Peg wood Pipe cleaner Pith wood Pressure washer Reach extender Sandblaster Sponge Squeegee Steam mop Tawashi Vacuum cleaner Types of tools Cleaning Cutting and abrasive Forestry Garden Hand Kitchen Machine and metalworking Masonry Measuring and alignment Mining Power Textile Woodworking This tool article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reach_extender&oldid=1298383285 " Categories : Tools Tool stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles to be expanded from April 2023 All articles to be expanded All stub articles This page was last edited on 2 July 2025, at 04:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reach extender 4 languages Add topic

