Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Duties Toggle Duties subsection 1.1 Traffic control at emergency scenes 1.2 Scene safety 1.3 Crowd control and liaison 1.4 Scene security 1.5 Police assistance 1.6 Logistics 2 Fire police around the world Toggle Fire police around the world subsection 2.1 Brazil 2.2 China 2.3 New Zealand 2.3.1 Future prospects 2.3.2 Dissolution of Fire Police 2.4 India 2.5 Ancient Rome 2.6 United States 2.6.1 Connecticut 2.6.2 Maine 2.6.3 New York 2.6.4 North Carolina 2.6.5 Pennsylvania 2.7 Vietnam 2.8 Germany 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Fire police 2 languages العربية ไทย Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of police auxiliary with limited police powers For Nazi Germany era firefighter unit, see Feuerschutzpolizei .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Fire police" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2007 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Fire police are fire department members who, based upon their jurisdictional authority, receive sworn police powers, special training , and support firefighting efforts at emergency incidents. In addition to securing firefighting equipment, incident and fire scenes, and the station itself, fire police perform traffic and crowd control . In some jurisdictions, fire police are exterior firefighters and may be called upon at fire scenes to perform any of the duties of an interior firefighter except those that require a self-contained breathing apparatus. On occasion, fire police also assist regular police : they perform road closures, traffic control, crowd control at public events, missing persons searches, parade details, salvage, security, and other miscellaneous tasks as requested.

Duties [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( January 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Fire police are a fire department resource and answer to the officer in charge (OIC) of the fire brigade in attendance. However, special fire police officers in Pennsylvania , USA, are under the direction of the state or local police. Where no other fire brigade resources are present, fire police will usually assist police under the direction of the police's OIC or, depending on local regulations, act autonomously.

While the exact role of fire police may vary between brigades and between countries, the general themes are constant throughout: Traffic control at emergency scenes [ edit ] Traffic control consists of managing the flow of vehicles around or through the immediate vicinity of an emergency. This may entail road closures, diversions, full 'points' control at intersections, or '1-way-shunts', in which the road is reduced to one lane and its direction is alternated in a controlled fashion.

Scene safety [ edit ] Fire police assist in ensuring that the scene of an incident remains safe for firefighters, emergency service workers, and members of the public working in its vicinity.

Crowd control and liaison [ edit ] Residents, owners, occupants, relatives, transients, spectators, and the media are among those who may approach the scene of an incident, and fire police prevent them from being harmed or hampering the work of emergency services personnel working at the scene. Since fire police are often the public's first point of contact with the fire department, they must be skilled in public relations.

Scene security [ edit ] Fire police may be asked to provide a scene guard in order to prevent looting or theft and monitor unattended fire brigade equipment.

Police assistance [ edit ] Fire police are often called upon by police and other law enforcement agencies to provide additional manpower. Many of the tasks listed above also fall within the area of responsibility of the police, but fire police when on the scene may allow the police to concentrate on other more specific areas of expertise.

Logistics [ edit ] Fire police may provide a logistics resource - vehicle movements, communications or similar. This would particularly be the case at a scene controlled by the fire brigade but they may be called upon by other services.

Fire police around the world [ edit ] Brazil [ edit ] In Brazil , the Military Firefighters Corps ( Portuguese : Corpo de Bombeiros Militar ) are military public security forces, responsible for civil defense , firefighting and search and rescue inside the federative units . Since 1915, it has been a military reserve force and an auxiliary force of the Brazilian Army , also composing the Single System of Public Security ( Brazilian Portuguese : Sistema Único de Segurança Pública ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Members of the Military Firefighters Corps, such as the members of the Military Police , are designated as being part of the military of the Federative Units by the Federal Constitution .

[ 3 ] China [ edit ] Prior to the 2018 formation of China Fire and Rescue , the People's Armed Police was responsible for wildfire suppression .

New Zealand [ edit ] In New Zealand , fire police formerly existed by virtue of Section 33 of the Fire Service Act 1975.

[ 4 ] The Fire Service Act allowed for the formation of volunteer fire police units (based on the approval of the district chief of police) and bestowed upon them the legal powers of a police constable . Several fire police units existed around New Zealand, some attached to volunteer fire brigades, and others acting as individual units and/or brigades in their own right.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] Fire police in New Zealand engaged in all of the above listed roles.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In areas where fire police did not exist, operational support members of the fire service carried out the same tasks (using the powers of a firefighter gained through Section 28 of the Fire Service Act). Firefighters (including operational support members) gained all the powers required to conduct their operations through Section 28; fire police wielded both these and the powers of a constable gained through Section 33. Operationally, fire police units and operational support units were generally considered to be equivalent, and were well valued by both the operational firefighters and the New Zealand Police .

Future prospects [ edit ] A review of the Fire Service Act was announced in the late 2000s [ 10 ] but a change of government placed this on hold. However, in the aftermath of the review of the Policing Act 2008 the NZ Fire Service announced its intention to have Section 33 of the Fire Service Act (allowing for fire police) repealed.

[ 11 ] With this in mind, fire police units across New Zealand have become operational support units, with a largely unchanged role, but without the powers of police. The powers of a constable are considered unnecessary, as all the functions of fire police were able to be legally carried out under Section 28 of the Act (powers of a chief fire officer) under delegation, except for the power of arrest.

Dissolution of Fire Police [ edit ] In 2017, the Fire Services Act 1975 was repealed, and replaced with the Fire And Emergency New Zealand Act 2017. Under this new Act, Fire Police in New Zealand no longer exist in law.

India [ edit ] The Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) and Home Guard have fire wings.

Ancient Rome [ edit ] The Vigiles had dual firefighting and policing duties.

United States [ edit ] Fire police exist in thirteen states of the United States including Connecticut , Delaware , Florida , Maryland , Massachusetts , New Jersey , New York , North Carolina , Maine , Ohio , and Pennsylvania . They must take an oath of office and be sworn in by a municipal clerk or official, mayor, magistrate , judge, sheriff or justice of the peace - depending upon jurisdiction and local authorizing laws. At fire service incidents, fire police assume either the full or necessary powers of a police constable .

Some texts list Burlington County, New Jersey as forming one of the first fire police units. Laws in New Jersey State code as early as the 1850s supported fire police in their duties.

Connecticut [ edit ] Unlike many other fire police departments, those in Connecticut do not necessarily have police powers or acts as sworn agents of a body of government. Instead, their authority flows directly from the fire chief of their parent fire department; however, this authority relates only to fire drills, emergencies within the fire district, and mutual aid situations. Nevertheless, the mayor or first selectman of some towns may give fire police constable status despite this worldwide custom.

The state of Connecticut requires that fire police officers are officially appointed by the fire chief, and it provides them with, among other things, distinctive badges of office, headgear, reflective equipment.

All Connecticut fire police are certified by the Connecticut Fire Police Association under the standards of the Connecticut Fire Academy, and many fire departments have specialized or modified their apparatus for traffic control. For instance, the Hebron volunteer fire company ( Hebron , CT) has Service 310, a modified retired ambulance .

Colchester Hayward volunteer fire company has Service 328, a utility pick-up truck that it has modified specifically for traffic control by equipping it to hold many cones and signs.

This [ clarification needed ] is spelled out in Connecticut statute under Chapter 104, Section 7-313a.

Maine [ edit ] Although Maine fire police are not peace officers and do not have any police powers, they may be sworn in as special police in some towns, albeit rarely. Special police are police officers appointed for one-year terms and given very limited authority by their township to carry out specified duties. For example, under Maine law, only a police officer may actually shut down a roadway, while fire police cannot.

However, in 2005, emergency workers in Maine received the authority to "redirect traffic" at emergency scenes as public safety traffic flaggers (PSTF's). This new authority improved upon the previous custom of fire police doing so by citing the state law that allows them to use reasonable force to protect a fire scene. Moreover, the law requires anyone acting as a PSTF to be properly trained and wear appropriate safety gear. Furthermore, while PSTF duties are generally carried out by fire police, other department members with proper PSTF training may be pressed into duty at busy scenes.

See Maine Revised Statutes, Title 29-A, Chapter 2091 - "Control of vehicular traffic at emergency scenes".

New York [ edit ] Under New York State law, Fire Police must complete a Fire Police certification course outlined by the New York State Division of Criminal Justice (NYS DCJS). After which, each fire police member is required to take an oath of office by either the AHJ (Chief/Assistant Chief) of the supporting fire company or the town, county or city clerks office and a copy of which must be kept on file in the town, county, city clerk's office in the municipality in which they serve. The training coordinator must fill out and submit all paperwork concerning the course study and attendance to DCJS for each individual fire company. At that time, each individual person is now registered and certified as a Peace Officer by the State of New York. Fire police in New York State are peace officers as per Article 2.10 Subsection 41 of the states Criminal Procedure Law.

[ 12 ] When acting pursuant to their special duties and allowed by the fire agency, fire police have the powers of peace officers which are listed in Article 2.20 of the states Criminal Procedure Law. Peace officer status does grant fire police arrest powers however, they may not carry a firearm without additional licensing [ 13 ] These duties are granted under Section 209 (c) of the General Municipal Law. As New York State peace officers, they are required to take an oath, a copy of which must be kept on file in the town clerk's office in the municipality in which they serve. As mandated by Executive Law, Section 845 (Chapter 482, Laws of 1979 and Chapter 843 Laws of 1980), they are also listed with the Central Registry of Police and Peace Officers at the New York State, Division of Criminal Justice Services, Office of Public Safety in Albany , NY.

Their duties are as follows: To regulate traffic at emergency scenes.

- In order to protect firefighters from outside interference, each New York State fire police detachment regulates traffic at the scene of any emergency to which its respective department has been called until relieved by the arrival of a fire chief or the regular police agency.

To protect the general public at the scene of a fire.

- Residents, owners, occupants, relatives, transients, spectators, and even the news media may hamper firefighting operations; therefore, New York State fire police use tact and courtesy [ citation needed ] to prevent them from being harmed or obstructing firefighting operations.

To keep fire areas clear for fire fighting purpose.

- New York State fire police provide room for apparatus, emergency vehicles, service vehicles, and firefighters' vehicles to, among other things, park, operate, turn around, perform tanker operations, and lay hose lines for firefighters.

To protect the equipment of a fire company.

- New York State fire police keep all non-firefighters away from (and especially off) department vehicles and equipment in order to prevent damage and looting.

To enforce the laws of New York State relating to firematic activities and firefighting techniques.

- The reckless disregard for safe driving within an emergency area, driving over fire hoses, spectators' disrespect for fire lines, and non-emergency vehicles intrusions, comprise just some of the situations that New York fire police must prevent.

To cooperate with all regular police agencies.

- Owing to their common causes of protection, safety, and order, New York fire police cooperate with regular police agencies.

To protect the property at the scene of a fire until the chief releases the fire police from duty and turns the responsibility over to other police agencies or to the owner.

To preserve the crime scene until the proper authority arrives on the scene . - Although New York fire police prevent unauthorized entry into the scene, they remain alert to the fact that bystanders may possess critical information. In addition, they protect the scene's evidence and report unusual events or happenings.

To carry out the orders of the chief who is in supreme command at all fires and emergencies.

North Carolina [ edit ] Uniformed regular and volunteer firemen and uniformed regular and volunteer members of a rescue squad in North Carolina may direct traffic and enforce traffic laws and ordinances at the scene of or in connection with fires, accidents, or other hazards in connection with their duties as firemen or rescue squad members. These members are not, however, considered law enforcement officers.

[ 14 ] Pennsylvania [ edit ] Fire police in Pennsylvania are volunteer fire company members and are sworn in by the mayor, borough council president, township supervisor, or the local district justice of the peace. While they are usually under the direct control of the local police, they are under the Pennsylvania State Police if no local department is available. The first fire police officers in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania were appointed in Meadville , Crawford County in 1896 and until the passage of Title 35 in 1941, had no greater authority than that which could be provided by their respective fire company and municipality.

However, the passage of the aforementioned bill granted Pennsylvania's special fire police officers the police power to provide protection. In addition, fire police were legally created to assist their fire department during emergency situations. Moreover, Title 35 was amended in 1949, 1959, and again in 1980 (Act 74, 388, 209, 122) to broaden the scope of authority of the fire police. In 1949, the law was amended (Act 388) to give fire police the power to act without fire company involvement if requested to do so by their municipality. In 1959, (Act 209) the law was again amended to allow fire police to use their police powers in any non-emergency public function conducted by or under the auspices of any volunteer fire company and the requirement of the request of the municipality was later removed from the law.

Furthermore, the provision that allows fire police to use their police power in non-emergency events was later amended to authorize these officers to provide police services for organizations other than volunteer fire companies if requested to do so by their respective municipality. In 1980 (Act 122 - current law), the Fire Police Act was amended to, among other things, make it clear that the act does not (in and of itself) grant fire police officers the right or power to use firearms or other weapons.  Conversely, nothing in the law prohibits Pennsylvania Fire Police, with a permit to carry a weapon, from carrying such while performing their duties.

In conclusion, these amendments widened the scope of authority of fire police in Pennsylvania to have limited police powers, and although they have no authority to make arrests, they do have the right to detain someone within reason.

Fire police may control the flow of traffic to ensure emergency vehicles have a quick, safe entrance and egress to an incident. They may halt traffic or detour traffic because of the situation and the dangers involved. They take orders from the police authority in charge.

All fire police officers are sworn officers of the law and when on duty shall display a badge of authority and shall be subject to control of the chief of police of the city, borough, town or township in which they are serving, or if none, of a member of the Pennsylvania state police. Disobeying a fire police officer is the same as disobeying a police officer, sheriff's deputy, state constable or state trooper and assaulting one is a felony.

Current Pennsylvania fire police law is found in Title 35, Chapter 74, subchapters 7431 to 7437.

Vietnam [ edit ] In Vietnam, Vietnam Fire and Rescue Police Department (FRPD) is under command of Ministry of Public Security .

Germany [ edit ] During the Third Reich the Feuerschutzpolizei ( lit.

'Fire Protection Police') was a national firefighter unit formed by former municipal career fire departments and a part of the Ordnungspolizei . Every career firefighter was a police officer. In 1945 the fire departments came under municipal administration again, strictly separated from police jurisdictions.

See also [ edit ] Emergency Service Unit Fire marshal Women in firefighting References [ edit ] ^ Article 144 of Constitution of Brazil.

^ "L13675" .

www.planalto.gov.br . Retrieved 2022-08-17 .

^ Constitutional Amendment 18, of February 5, 1998. (In Portuguese) ^ NZ Legislation Online. Browse through 'Statutes' and look for Fire Service Act under 'F'.

^ "New Zealand Fire Service STAR Magazine, Issue 88 Mar/Apr 04 (Page 24)" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-10-25 . Retrieved 2007-05-09 .

^ "New Zealand Fire and Rescue Magazine, Issue 22 Aug/Sep 06 (Page 8)" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-10-25 . Retrieved 2007-05-09 .

^ "New Zealand Fire and Rescue Magazine, Issue 26 Mar/Apr 07 (Page 16)" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-10-25 . Retrieved 2007-05-09 .

^ "Hutt Valley Fire Police Website; Role of Fire Police article" . Archived from the original on 2007-07-19.

^ "Role of Fire Police and Operational Support; Extract from NZFS Official documentation" . Archived from the original on 2007-08-05 . Retrieved 2007-05-09 .

^ "NZ Department of Internal Affairs, Review of Fire Legislation" . Archived from the original on 2010-03-02 . Retrieved 2007-05-09 .

^ "United Fire Brigades Association of New Zealand "RIP Fire Police: 1867-2011" (with History of Fire Police in NZ)" .

^ New York State Criminal Procedure Law Article 2.20 Subsection (25) ^ New York State Criminal Procedure Law Article 2.10 Subsection (25) ^ North Carolina statute 20-114.1 v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline v t e Types of law enforcement agencies List Police Airport police Auxiliary police Border police Campus police Cantonal police Capitol police Cathedral constable Company police Conservation officer County police Fire police Highway patrol Military police Gendarmerie Provost Municipal police City guard Paramilitary police Police tactical units Park police Postal police Private police Protective security units Railroad police Regional police Regimental police Religious police Riot police Secret police Security police Special police State police Territorial police Transit police Water police Coast guard Related Anti-corruption agency Bailiff Bodyguard Bounty hunter Bail bondsman Constable Criminal investigation agency Customs service Intelligence officer Law enforcement Officer Neighborhood watch Parapolice Police officer Posse comitatus Prison officer Security guard Sheriff Thief-taker Vigilantism Watchman Templates: Border guard Coast guard Customs Law enforcement agency Types Intelligence agency NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐b499cfbc7‐g4c7k
Cached time: 20250815150807
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.409 seconds
Real time usage: 0.500 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1467/1000000
Revision size: 21921/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 74967/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1612/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 50845/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.273/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 16866053/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  417.071      1 -total
 25.58%  106.690      1 Template:Reflist
 22.49%   93.819      8 Template:Cite_web
 21.47%   89.563      3 Template:Navbox
 20.60%   85.930      1 Template:Fire_fighting
 18.24%   76.094      2 Template:Langx
 12.60%   52.551      1 Template:Short_description
 10.46%   43.646      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 10.19%   42.485      2 Template:Ambox
  7.70%   32.131      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:945160:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815150807 and revision id 1281312090. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fire_police&oldid=1281312090 " Categories : Firefighters Firefighting in the United States Law enforcement units Firefighter ranks Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2007 All articles needing additional references Articles with limited geographic scope from January 2013 Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles containing Brazilian Portuguese-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2012 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2013 This page was last edited on 19 March 2025, at 16:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fire police 2 languages Add topic

