Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Contents 3 Other works by the same author 4 Manuscripts 5 Later influence 6 References in popular culture 7 Editions 8 See also 9 Notes 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents The Cloud of Unknowing 12 languages Български Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français Italiano Polski Português Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Medieval work of Christian mysticism This article is about the medieval book. For other uses, see The Cloud of Unknowing (disambiguation) .

The Cloud of Unknowing The first page of Cloud of Unknowing in the 15th century manuscript Harley MS 2373 , beginning with the Decorated initial "I" [ note 1 ] [ 1 ] Author Anonymous Original title The Cloude of Unknowyng Language Middle English Subject Spiritual guide to contemplative prayer Genre Christian mysticism Publication date Late 14th century Publication place England Followed by The Book of Privy Counseling Part of a series on Christian mysticism Theology and philosophy Apophatic Ascetical Cataphatic Catholic spirituality Hellenistic Mystical theology Neoplatonic Henosis Practices Monasticism Monasticism New Silence Asceticism Mendicant Spiritual direction Meditation Meditation Lectio Divina Invoking of Mystic Saints Active asceticism Contemplation Hesychasm Jesus Prayer Quietism Stages of Christian perfection Hesychia Divinization Catharsis Theosis Kenosis Spiritual dryness Religious ecstasy Passive asceticism Abstinence Esoteric Charismatic Esoteric People (by era or century) Antiquity Ancient African Origen Thomasines Gregory of Nyssa Pseudo-Dionysius Desert Fathers Paul of Thebes Anthony the Great Arsenius the Great Poemen Macarius of Egypt Moses the Black Syncletica Athanasius John Chrysostom Hilarion John Cassian 11th · 12th Bernard of Clairvaux Guigo II Hildegard of Bingen Symeon the New Theologian Saint Sava of Serbia 13th · 14th Dominican Dominic de Guzmán Franciscan Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Bonaventure Jacopone da Todi Angela of Foligno English Richard Rolle Walter Hilton Julian of Norwich Margery Kempe Flemish Beatrice of Nazareth Lutgardis Hadewijch John van Ruysbroeck German Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Henry Suso Female Beatrice of Nazareth Bridget of Sweden Catherine of Siena Mechthild of Magdeburg Marguerite Porete 15th · 16th Spanish Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Teresa of Ávila John of the Cross Others Catherine of Genoa 17th · 18th French Margaret Mary Alacoque Pierre de Bérulle Jean-Jacques Olier Louis de Montfort Charles de Condren John Eudes John of St. Samson Others Mary of Jesus of Ágreda Anne Catherine Emmerich Veronica Giuliani Francis de Sales 19th Dina Bélanger Catherine Labouré Mélanie Calvat Maximin Giraud Bernadette Soubirous Conchita de Armida Luisa Piccarreta Mary of the Divine Heart Thérèse of Lisieux Gemma Galgani 20th Padre Pio Therese Neumann Marthe Robin Alexandrina of Balazar Faustina Kowalska Sister Lúcia of Fátima Edgar Cayce Simone Weil Alfred Delp Thomas Merton Charles de Foucauld Edvige Carboni Elena Aiello Contemporary papal views Aspects of meditation ( Orationis Formas , 1989) Reflection on the New Age (2003) Literature and media Lingua ignota Ordo Virtutum Scivias Ascent of Mount Carmel Dark Night of the Soul Spiritual Canticle Way of Perfection Book of the First Monks The Interior Castle Abbey of the Holy Ghost A Dialogue of Comfort against Tribulation From Willow Creek to Sacred Heart The Glories of Mary The Imitation of Christ The Ladder of Divine Ascent Philokalia Revelations of Divine Love The Story of a Soul Theologia Germanica Devotio Moderna Fatima in Lucia's Own Words Calls from the Message of Fatima The Miracle of Our Lady of Fatima Sol de Fátima The Cloud of Unknowing On the Consolation of Philosophy The Mirror of Simple Souls Sister Catherine Treatise Tractatus de Purgatorio Sancti Patricii The Vision of Adamnán Divine Comedy Inferno Purgatorio Paradiso Fatima v t e The Cloud of Unknowing ( Middle English : The Cloude of Unknowyng ) is an anonymous work of Christian mysticism written in Middle English in the latter half of the 14th century. The text is a spiritual guide on contemplative prayer . The underlying message of this work suggests that the way to know God is to abandon consideration of God's particular activities and attributes, and be courageous enough to surrender one's mind and ego to the realm of "unknowing", at which point one may begin to glimpse the nature of God.

History [ edit ] The Cloud of Unknowing draws on the mystical tradition of Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite and Christian Neoplatonism , [ 2 ] which focuses on the via negativa road to discovering God as a pure entity, beyond any capacity of mental conception and so without any definitive image or form. This tradition has reputedly inspired generations of mystics, from John Scotus Eriugena , Nicholas of Cusa , and John of the Cross . Prior to this, the theme of a passing cloud of ignorance (as opposed to the heavenly and eternal truth of God beyond the cloud) had appeared briefly in the Confessions of Saint Augustine (XIII, XV, 17–18) written around 398 AD.

[ 3 ] Concerning the placement of The Cloud of Unknowing in the trends of the Catholic Church at the approximate time of its writing, the work joins a broader medieval movement within Christianity toward a religious experience of a more individual and passionate view of relationship with God.

[ 4 ] The author is unknown. The English Augustinian mystic Walter Hilton has at times been suggested, but this is generally doubted.

[ 5 ] It is possible the author was a Carthusian priest, though this is not certain.

[ 6 ] A second major work by the same author, The Book of Privy Counseling (originally titled Prive Counselling ), continues the themes discussed in the Cloud . It is less than half the length of the Cloud , appears to be the author's final work, and clarifies and deepens some of its teachings.

[ 7 ] In this work, the author characterizes the practice of contemplative unknowing as worshiping God with one's "substance," coming to rest in a "naked blind feeling of being," and ultimately finding thereby that God is one's being. Experience, in keeping with the mystical tradition, is considered the ultimate means by which a Christian can and should relate to God, and the practice of contemplation in The Cloud is thus focused on the experience of God by the contemplative. This relationship between God and the contemplative takes place within continual conflict between the spirit and the physical. God is spirit in the purest sense; therefore, no matter how intense one's desire or how fervent one's love, the movement toward God by body-bound contemplatives will ever be halted by the cloud of unknowing that hides God from our understanding and prevents the fullest and truest experience of God's being. The object of the contemplative experience is to know God, as much as possible, from within this cloud of unknowing.

Contents [ edit ] The Cloud of Unknowing is written specifically to a student, and the author strongly commands the student in the Prologue, "do not willingly and deliberately read it, copy it, speak of it, or allow it to be read, copied, or spoken of, by anyone or to anyone, except by or to a person who, in your opinion, has undertaken truly and without reservation to be a perfect follower of Christ." [ 8 ] The book counsels the young student to seek God, not through knowledge and intellect (faculty of the human mind), but through intense contemplation, motivated by love, and stripped of all thought.

[ note 2 ] Experience of a "cloud of unknowing" is introduced Chapter 3: "For the first time you [lift your heart to God with stirrings of love], you will find only a darkness, and as it were a cloud of unknowing [...] Whatever you do, this darkness and the cloud are between you and your God, and hold you back from seeing him clearly by the light of understanding in your reason and from experiencing him in the sweetness of love in your feelings. [...] And so prepare to remain in this darkness as long as you can, always begging for him you love; for if you are ever to feel or see him...it must always be in this cloud and this darkness." — The Cloud of Unknowing and Other Works . Translated by A. C. Spearing . London: Penguin. 2001. pp. 22.

ISBN 0-14-044762-8 .

This is brought about by putting all thoughts and desires under a "cloud of forgetting," and thereby piercing God's cloud of unknowing with a "dart of longing love" from the heart. This form of contemplation is not directed by the intellect, but involves spiritual union with God through the heart: For He can well be loved, but he cannot be thought. By love he can be grasped and held, but by thought, neither grasped nor held. And therefore, though it may be good at times to think specifically of the kindness and excellence of God, and though this may be a light and a part of contemplation, all the same, in the work of contemplation itself, it must be cast down and covered with a cloud of forgetting. And you must step above it stoutly but deftly, with a devout and delightful stirring of love, and struggle to pierce that darkness above you; and beat on that thick cloud of unknowing with a sharp dart of longing love, and do not give up, whatever happens." [ 9 ] As one pursues the beating of the cloud of unknowing as compelled by spiritual stirrings of love in the heart, the intellect and sinful stirrings will often pull the contemplative's focus away from God and back to the things of physical world and of the self. The author thus enjoins the contemplative to "vigorously trample on [any new thoughts or sinful stirrings] with a fervent stirring of love, and tread them down beneath your feet. And try to cover them with a thick cloud of forgetting, as if they had never been done by you or anyone else on earth. [...] Push them down as often as they rise." [ 10 ] The author draws a strong distinction in Chapters 16-22 between the active and contemplative Christian life. He illustrates the distinction by drawing heavily from the account of Mary and Martha in the Gospel of Luke , writing that "[By] Mary all contemplatives are understood, so that they should model their way of life on hers; and similarly by Martha, all actives, with the same consequent resemblance." [ 8 ] While the author holds Mary as the superior example in the passage as a "model for all of us [who seek to be contemplatives]," he clarifies that Martha's activity in service to God was nonetheless "good and beneficial for her salvation" but not the best thing.

[ 11 ] Chapter 23 of The Book of Privy Counseling glorifies experience over knowledge: "And so I urge you, go after experience rather than knowledge. On account of pride, knowledge may often deceive you, but this gentle, loving affection will not deceive you. Knowledge tends to breed conceit, but love builds. Knowledge is full of labor, but love, full of rest." [ 12 ] Chapters 39 and 40 recommend the focus on a single word as the means to invoke the fullness of God: When we intend to pray for goodness, let all our thought and desire be contained in the one small word "God." Nothing else and no other words are needed, for God is the epitome of all goodness. Immerse yourself in the spiritual reality it speaks of yet without precise ideas of God's works whether small or great, spiritual or material. Do not consider any particular virtue which God may teach you through grace, whether it is humility, charity, patience, abstinence, hope, faith, moderation, chastity, or evangelical poverty. For to a contemplative they are, in a sense, all the same. Let this little word represent to you God in all his fullness and nothing less than the fullness of God.

[ 13 ] [ note 3 ] While the author presents many methods of his own for effective contemplation of God, he often leaves the teaching of method to God himself. In Chapter 40, for example, he advises a contemplative who is struggling with sin to "[...] feel sin as a lump, you do not know what, but nothing other than yourself. And then shout continuously in spirit, 'Sin, sin, sin! out, out, out!' This spiritual shout is better learned from God by experience than from any human being by word." [ 16 ] While the practice of contemplation in The Cloud is focused upon the experience of spiritual reality by the soul, the author also makes some provision for the needs of the body, going so far as to say that care for the body is an important element of spiritual contemplation if only to prevent hindrance of its practice. He writes in Chapter 41: And so, for the love of God, guard against sickness as much as you reasonably can, so that, as far as you may, you are not the cause of your own weakness. For I tell you that this work demands the greatest tranquility, and a state of health and purity in body as much as in soul. And so, for the love of God, regulate your conduct with moderation in body and in soul, and keep yourself as healthy as possible.

— The Cloud of Unknowing and Other Works . Translated by A. C. Spearing . London: Penguin Publishers. 2001. pp. 64–65.

ISBN 0-14-044762-8 .

Other works by the same author [ edit ] In addition to The Cloud of Unknowing and The Book of Privy Counseling , the Cloud author is believed to be responsible for a few other spiritual treatises and translations, including: Deonise Hid Divinity , a free translation of the Mystical Theology by Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite . A vernacular translation of the Mystical Theology was unprecedented; however, it was clearly not widely read, since only two manuscripts survive.

[ 17 ] A Letter of Prayer ( A Pistle of Prayer ), which survives in seven manuscripts. ( Online ); A Letter of Discretion of Stirrings ( A Pistle of Discrecioun of Stirings ). ( Online, part VI of "The Cell of Self Knowledge" ) It is possible, but doubtful, [ 17 ] that he wrote A Treatise of Discernment of Spirits (originally titled A Tretis of Discrecyon of Spirites ), a free translation of Sermones di Diversis nos 23–24, by Bernard of Clairvaux , ( Online ).

It is possible, but doubtful, [ 17 ] that he wrote A Treatise of the Study of Wisdom that Men Call Benjamin (also called Pursuit of Wisdom , and, in its original, A Tretyse of the Stodye of Wysdome that Men Clepen Beniamyn ), an abbreviated and free translation of the Benjamin Minor by Richard of Saint Victor ( Online ).

Manuscripts [ edit ] The Cloud of Unknowing has 17 known manuscripts.

[ 7 ] The two best known are British Library Harley MS 2373 and Cambridge University Library Kk.vi.26. These contain all seven of the works attributed to the Cloud author, the former extensively glossed in Latin.

[ 3 ] Another important manuscript is British Library Harleian 2373, which contains all but Deonise Hid Divinity .

[ 18 ] Later influence [ edit ] Given its survival in only seventeen manuscripts, The Cloud of Unknowing was not as popular in late medieval England as the works of Richard Rolle or Walter Hilton , perhaps because the Cloud is addressed to solitaries and concentrates on the advanced levels of the mystical path. Two Latin translations of the Cloud were made in the late fifteenth century. One was made by Richard Methley , a Carthusian of the Charterhouse of Mount Grace in Yorkshire , and finished in 1491.

[ 19 ] The other is anonymous. Neither, however, enjoyed wide dissemination.

[ 7 ] This work became known to English Catholics in the mid-17th century, when the Benedictine monk Augustine Baker (1575–1641) wrote an exposition on its doctrine based on a manuscript copy in the library of the monastery of Cambrai in Flanders . The original work itself, however, was not published until 1877. English mystic Evelyn Underhill edited an important version of the work in 1922.

[ 2 ] The work has become increasingly popular over the course of the twentieth century, with nine English translations or modernisations produced in this period. In particular, The Cloud has influenced recent contemplative prayer practices. The practical prayer advice contained in The Cloud of Unknowing forms a primary basis for the contemporary practice of Centering Prayer , a form of Christian meditation developed by Trappist monks William Meninger , Basil Pennington and Thomas Keating in the 1970s.

[ 20 ] It also informed the meditation techniques of the English Benedictine John Main .

[ 7 ] The contemplation method urged in The Cloud is similar to Buddhist meditation and modern transcendental meditation .

[ 21 ] For example, the last paragraph of chapter 7 says: If you want to gather all your desire into one simple word that the mind can easily retain, choose a short word rather than a long one. A one-syllable word such as "God" or "love" is best. But choose one that is meaningful to you. Then fix it in your mind so that it will remain there come what may. This word will be your defence in conflict and in peace. Use it to beat upon the cloud of darkness above you and to subdue all distractions, consigning them to the cloud of forgetting beneath you.

References in popular culture [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( May 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section may contain irrelevant references to popular culture .

Please help improve it by removing such content and adding citations to reliable , independent sources .

( February 2025 ) Leonard Cohen refers to The Cloud of Unknowing in the 1979 song "The Window" from Recent Songs [ 22 ] James Blackshaw released an album in 2007 by the same name John Luther Adams ' orchestral work Clouds of Forgetting, Clouds of Unknowing , completed in 1995, was inspired by The Cloud of Unknowing Steve Roach 's album The Magnificent Void (1996) includes a track named "Cloud of Unknowing" J. D. Salinger 's novel Franny and Zooey (1961) refers to The Cloud of Unknowing in a passage where the characters are discussing contemplative prayer.

W. Somerset Maugham referenced The Cloud of Unknowing in The Razor's Edge .

Todd Rundgren refers to The Cloud of Unknowing in the 1989 song "The Waiting Game" from Nearly Human Current 93 's 1994 album, Of Ruine or Some Blazing Starre , includes a song titled "The Cloud of Unknowing" In the album GHoSTYhead , Rickie Lee Jones ' track 9 is titled "Cloud of Unknowing" In Don DeLillo 's 1997 book, Underworld , Part 3 (of 6) is entitled "The Cloud of Unknowing: Spring 1978," and a character speaks about the book.

[ 23 ] Vasari Singers released an album in 2007 entitled "The Cloud of Unknowing" using texts from Biblical and poetic sources. This is an 89-minute eponymous oratorio [2005] by the British composer Francis Pott [b. 1957].

[ 24 ] The character Rev. Ames in Gilead (2004) by Marilynne Robinson refers to the book several times in an introspective journal/letter to his son.

Gorillaz ' 2010 album, Plastic Beach , includes a song titled "Cloud of Unknowing" Swans ' 2016 album, The Glowing Man , includes two songs titled "Cloud of Forgetting" and "Cloud of Unknowing".

Appears atop a stack of religious volumes on the desk of Rev. Ernst Toller in Paul Schrader's 2017 film First Reformed .

[ 25 ] Editions [ edit ] Billy, Dennis J., CSsR (2014).

The Cloud of the Unknowing , Liguori Publications, Liguori, Missouri. ISBN 9780764-822889.

Butcher, Carmen Acevedo (2018).

The Cloud of Unknowing . Boston: Shambhala Pocket Edition.

ISBN 978-1-61180-622-9 .

Butcher, Carmen Acevedo (2009).

The Cloud of Unknowing with the Book of Privy Counsel . Boston: Shambhala.

ISBN 978-1-59030-622-2 .

The Cloud of Unknowing: And The Book of Privy Counseling (1944). ed.

Phyllis Hodgson . Early English Text Society. Oxford University Press, hardback: ISBN 0-19-722218-8 .

The Cloud of Unknowing (1957). translator, Ira Progoff . Dell/Doubleday. 1983 paperback: ISBN 0-440-31994-3 , 1989 paperback: ISBN 0-385-28144-7 Johnston, William; preface: Huston Smith (1996) [1973].

The Cloud of Unknowing and the Book of Privy Counseling . New York: Image Books.

ISBN 0-385-03097-5 .

(first edition, 1973) John J. Kirvan (1996).

Where Only Love Can Go: A Journey of the Soul into the Cloud of Unknowing . Ave Maria Press.

ISBN 0877935912 .

The Cloud of Unknowing and other works . Penguin Classics. 2001.

ISBN 978-0-14-044762-0 .

Translated by A. C. Spearing The Cloud of Unknowing and Other Works . New York: Penguin Books. 1961.

ISBN 0-14-044-385-1 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Translated by Clifton Wolters . Includes The Cloud of Unknowing , The Epistle of Privy Counsel , Dionysius' Mystical Teaching , and The Epistle of Prayer .

Walsh, James, ed. (1981).

The Cloud of Unknowing . Preface by Simon Tugwell [ Wikidata ] , Introduction by James Walsh. New York: Paulist Press.

ISBN 978-08091-2332-2 .

Editions of related texts include Deonise Hid Divinite: And Other Treatises on Contemplative Prayer Related to The Cloud of Unknowing (1955). ed., Phyllis Hodgson . Early English Text Society. Oxford University Press, 2002 paperback: 0859916987 The Pursuit of Wisdom: And Other Works by the Author of The Cloud of Unknowing (1988). translator, James Walsh. Paulist Press Classics of Western Spirituality. paperback: ISBN 0-8091-2972-8 .

See also [ edit ] Christianity portal Apophatic theology (known also as the via negativa ) Lectio Divina Notes [ edit ] ^ "A later owner has glossed the Middle English word 'cleped' with its modern equivalent 'called', in the left margin." [ 1 ] ^ An important introductory section of Thomas Aquinas' Summa Theologica states a recurring premise of the work: that "we cannot know what God is, but rather what He is not, we have no means for considering how God is, but rather how He is not." As for how to proceed: "Now it can be shown how God is not, by denying of Him whatever is opposed to the idea of Him" (Intro to Treatise on Divine Simplicity, Prima Pars, Q. 3). It's possible either that the author of the Cloud was influenced by Aquinas, or correspondingly, both the author and Aquinas were influenced by Pseudo-Dionysius.

Orthodox Christian philosophy is also influenced by Pseudo-Dionysius.

^ Ch. 39-40, other translations: * Evelyn Underhill (1922/2003): "And if we will intentively pray for getting of good, let us cry, either with word or with thought or with desire, nought else nor no more words, but this word "God". For why, in God be all good..
Fill thy spirit with the ghostly bemeaning of it without any special beholding to any of His works—whether they be good, better, or best of all—bodily or ghostly, or to any virtue that may be wrought in man’s soul by any grace; not looking after whether it be meekness or charity, patience or abstinence, hope, faith, or soberness, chastity or wilful poverty. What recks this in contemplatives?.. they covet nothing with special beholding, but only good God. Do thou.. mean God all, and all God, so that nought work in thy wit and in thy will, but only God.

[ 14 ] * Middle English original: "And yif we wil ententifly preie for getyng of goodes, lat us crie, outher with worde or with thought or with desire, nought elles, ne no mo wordes, bot this worde God. For whi in God ben alle goodes.. Fille thi spirit with the goostly bemenyng of it withoutyn any specyal beholdyng to any of His werkes whether thei be good, betir, or alther best, bodily or goostly—or to any vertewe that may be wrought in mans soule by any grace, not lokyng after whether it be meeknes or charité, pacyence or abstynence, hope, feith, or sobirnes, chastité or wilful poverté. What thar reche in contemplatyves?.. thei coveyte nothing with specyal beholdyng, bot only good God. Do thou.. mene God al, and al God, so that nought worche in thi witte and in thi wile, bot only God.

[ 15 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Wight, C.

"Image of an item from the British Library Catalogue of Illuminated Manuscripts" .

www.bl.uk . Retrieved 19 February 2023 .

^ a b "Introduction", The Cloud of Unknowing , (Evelyn Underhill, ed.) 1922 .

^ a b "Introduction", The Cloud of Unknowing , (Patrick Gallacher, ed.)  (TEAMS Middle English Texts Series, 1997) ^ Spearing, A. C.

(2001). "Introduction".

The Cloud of Unknowing and Other Works . London: Penguin Books. pp. xii.

ISBN 978-0-14-044762-0 .

^ Walsh 1981 , p. 2.

^ Walsh 1981 , pp. 3–9.

^ a b c d McGinn, Bernard.

The Varieties of Vernacular Mysticism , (New York: Herder & Herder, 2012), pg. 396.

^ a b The Cloud of Unknowing and Other Works . Translated by A. C. Spearing. London: Penguin. 2001. pp.

44-45 .

ISBN 0-14-044762-8 .

^ The Cloud of Unknowing and other works . Penguin Classics. 2001.

ISBN 978-0-14-044762-0 .

Translated by A. C. Spearing ^ The Cloud of Unknowing and Other Works . Translated by A. C. Spearing . London: Penguin Books. 2001. pp.

54 .

ISBN 0-14-044762-8 .

OCLC 59513557 .

^ The Cloud of Unknowing and Other Works . Translated by A. C. Spearing. London: Penguin Books. 2001. pp.

44-45 .

ISBN 0-14-044762-8 .

^ Johnston (1996), p. 188 (paperback).

^ Johnston (1996), pp. 98-101.

^ Cloud (version), Underhill (2003), pp. 69-72 , Accessed 23 May 2010.

^ Cloud (original), Gallacher (1997), lines 1426 - 1471 Archived 19 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine , Accessed 23 May 2010.

^ The Cloud of Unknowing and Other Works . Translated by A. C. Spearing. London: Penguin Books. 2001. pp.

63 .

ISBN 0-14-044762-8 .

^ a b c Bernard McGinn, The Varieties of Vernacular Mysticism , (New York: Herder & Herder, 2012), p398.

^ The Cloud of Unknowing and Other Works , trans. by A. C. Spearing (London: Penguin, 2001), p. xl.

^ Walsh 1981 , p. 16.

^ Open Mind, Open Heart: The Contemplative Dimension of the Gospel (2006/1986). by Thomas Keating. Continuum International Publishing Group. paperback: ISBN 0-8264-0696-3 , hardback: ISBN 0-8264-1420-6 .

^ The Cloud of Unknowing and Other Works , trans. by A. C. Spearing (London: Penguin, 2001), p. xviii; Ninian Smart, 'What Would Buddhaghosa Have Made of The Cloud of Unknowing ?', in Mysticism and Language , ed. by Steven A, Katz (New York, 1992), pp. 103-22.

^ See verse four of the song.

^ Don DeLillo, Underworld (New York: Scribner, 1997), p. 273.

^ francispott.com website ^ "Official trailer for First Reformed" .

IMDB.com . Appears at :10 . Retrieved 8 June 2018 .

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: The Cloud of Unknowing Wikiquote has quotations related to The Cloud of Unknowing .

The Cloud of Unknowing read by Carmen Acevedo Butcher Introduction to Online text with analysis and bibliography Online text in Middle English , 2528 lines in 75 chapters on one HTML page 1922 London edition, edited by Evelyn Underhill : HTML , other formats The Cloud of Unknowing public domain audiobook at LibriVox v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Modern spirituality Spirituality Outline of spirituality Category:Spirituality Concepts Afterlife Akashic records Ātman Awakening Bodhi Chakra Consciousness Cosmogony Cosmology Creation myths Deity Dharma Ekam Emanationism Enlightenment Epigenesis Eschatology Eternal return Eternity Ethic of reciprocity Existence God Guru Inner peace Involution Jihad Karma Kevala jnana Lataif-e-Sitta Meaning of life Metaphysics Mind's eye Moksha Nature Nirvana Paranormal Parapsychology Planes of existence Prophecy Qi Reality Reincarnation Revelation Salvation Samadhi Satguru Satori Shabda Śūnyatā Soul Spirit Spiritual evolution Spiritual possession Supernatural Synchronicity Tao Tattvas Yana Yuga Practices Ahimsa Aikido Altruism Ancestor worship Asceticism Astrology Bearing testimony Being born again Bhajan Bhakti Blessing Celibacy Channelling Chanting Contemplation Dhikr Embodiment Entheogen Exorcism Faith healing Fasting Glossolalia Hymn Iconolatry Japa Kinomichi Koan practice Magick Mantra Meditation Martyrdom Ministering Miracles Monasticism Muraqabah Nonresistance Nonviolence Pacifism Pilgrimage Prayer Qawwali Qigong Religious ecstasy Religious music Repentance Revivalism Ritual Sacrament Sacrifice Sādhanā Sahaj Marg Sainthood Self-realization Shamanism Simple living Simran Supplication Sufi whirling Tai chi Theophany Theosis Tithing Vegetarianism Veneration Vipassanā Wabi-sabi Wearing vestments Worship Yoga Zazen Belief systems Advaita Anthroposophy Darshana Deism Eutheism, dystheism, and maltheism Gnosticism Henotheism Hermeticism Kabbalah Kathenotheism Martinism Modern paganism Monotheism Monolatry Mysticism Neoplatonism Nondualism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Religion Rosicrucianism Spiritualism Sufism Taoism Theism Thelema Theosophy Transcendentalism Vedanta Texts A Course in Miracles Akilathirattu Ammanai Bible Book of Mormon The Cloud of Unknowing Dhammapada Hindu scripture Guru Granth Sahib I Ching Liber AL vel Legis Quran Sufi texts Tao Te Ching Torah The Urantia Book Zhuangzi Virtues Awareness Charity Compassion Empathy Faith Forgiveness Gratitude Honesty Hope Intuition Kindness Love Mercy Mettā Moral courage Patience Seven virtues Wisdom Authority control databases International VIAF National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Cloud_of_Unknowing&oldid=1280403021 " Categories : 14th-century Christian texts Catholic spirituality Christian mystical texts Clouds in culture English non-fiction books Middle English literature Neoplatonic texts Visionary literature Works of unknown authorship Works published anonymously Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 Articles needing additional references from May 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles with trivia sections from February 2025 CS1 errors: ISBN date Wikisource templates with missing id Articles with LibriVox links This page was last edited on 14 March 2025, at 12:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Cloud of Unknowing 12 languages Add topic

