Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 De nuptiis Toggle De nuptiis subsection 2.1 Influence 3 Editions and translations 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Martianus Capella 33 languages العربية Asturianu Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Magyar Mirandés Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Latin prose writer of Late Antiquity Grammar teaching, from a 10th-century manuscript of De nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii Martianus Minneus Felix Capella ( fl.

c.

410–420 ) was a jurist , polymath and Latin prose writer of late antiquity , one of the earliest developers of the system of the seven liberal arts that structured early medieval education.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] He was a native of Madaura .

His single encyclopedic work, De nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii ("On the Marriage of Philology and Mercury"), also called De septem disciplinis ("On the seven disciplines"), is an elaborate didactic allegory written in a mixture of prose and elaborately allusive verse.

Martianus often presents philosophical views based on Neoplatonism , the Platonic school of philosophy pioneered by Plotinus and his followers.

[ 5 ] Like his near-contemporary Macrobius , who also produced a major work on classical Roman religion , Martianus never directly identifies his own religious affiliation. Much of his work occurs in the form of dialogue , and the views of the interlocutors may not represent the author's own.

[ 6 ] Life [ edit ] According to Cassiodorus , Martianus was a native of Madaura —which had been the native city of Apuleius —in the Roman province of Africa (now Souk Ahras , Algeria ). He appears to have practiced as a jurist at Roman Carthage .

Martianus was active during the 5th century, writing after the sack of Rome by Alaric I in 410, which he mentions, but apparently before the conquest of North Africa by the Vandals in 429.

[ 7 ] As early as the middle of the 6th century, Securus Memor Felix , a professor of rhetoric, received the text in Rome, for his personal subscription at the end of Book I (or Book II in many manuscripts) records that he was working "from most corrupt exemplars".

Gerardus Vossius erroneously took this to mean that Martianus was himself active in the 6th century, giving rise to a long-standing misconception about Martianus's dating.

[ 8 ] The lunar crater Capella is named after him.

De nuptiis [ edit ] Musica , illustration by Gherardo di Giovanni del Fora (15th century) Part of a series on Neoplatonism Reconstructed bust believed to represent Plotinus, the founder of Neoplatonism Concepts Emanationism Hypostasis Porphyrian tree Demiurge Anima mundi Henology Henosis Theurgy Okhema Kenoma Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Works Chaldean Oracles Enneads Isagoge On the Cave of the Nymphs On the Mysteries Elements of Theology De Coelesti Hierarchia Commentarii in Somnium Scipionis The Consolation of Philosophy Theology of Aristotle Book of Causes De divisione naturae People Plotinus ( students ) Porphyry Iamblichus Julian the Apostate Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius of Cilicia Olympiodorus the Younger Asclepius of Tralles Pseudo-Dionysius Martianus Capella Macrobius Boethius Maximus the Confessor Al-Kindi Johannes Scotus Eriugena Related topics Platonic Academy Platonism Middle Platonism Neopythagoreanism Commentaries on Plato Commentaries on Aristotle Neoplatonism and Christianity / Gnosticism Platonism in Islamic philosophy Isma'ilism Druze Kabbalah School of Chartres Platonism in the Renaissance Cambridge Platonists Philosophy portal v t e This single encyclopedic work, De nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii ("On the Marriage of Philology and Mercury"), sometimes called De septem disciplinis ("On the seven disciplines") or the Satyricon , [ 9 ] is an elaborate didactic allegory written in a mixture of prose and elaborately allusive verse, a prosimetrum in the manner of the Menippean satires of Varro . The style is wordy and involved, loaded with metaphor and bizarre expressions. The book was of great importance in defining the standard formula of academic learning from the Christianized Roman Empire of the fifth century until the Renaissance of the 12th century . This formula included a medieval love for allegory (in particular personifications) as a means of presenting knowledge, and a structuring of that learning around the seven liberal arts.

The book, embracing in résumé form the narrowed classical culture of his time, was dedicated to his son. Its frame story in the first two books relates the courtship and wedding of Mercury (intelligent or profitable pursuit), who has been refused by Wisdom, Divination and the Soul, with the maiden Philologia (learning, or more literally the love of letters and study), who is made immortal under the protection of the gods, the Muses , the Cardinal Virtues and the Graces . The title refers to the allegorical union of the intellectually profitable pursuit (Mercury) of learning by way of the art of letters (Philology).

Among the wedding gifts are seven maids who will be Philology's servants. They are the seven liberal arts: Grammar (an old woman with a knife for excising children's grammatical errors), Dialectic , Rhetoric (a tall woman with a dress decorated with figures of speech and armed in a fashion to harm adversaries), Geometry , Arithmetic , Astronomy and (musical) Harmony . As each art is introduced, she gives an exposition of the principles of the science she represents, thereby providing a summary of the seven liberal arts. Two other arts, Architecture and Medicine , were present at the feast, but since they care for earthly things, they were to keep silent in the company of the celestial deities.

Each book is an abstract or a compilation from earlier authors. The treatment of the subjects belongs to a tradition which goes back to Varro's Disciplinae , even to Varro's passing allusion to architecture and medicine, which in Martianus Capella's day were mechanics' arts, material for clever slaves but not for senators . The classical Roman curriculum, which was to pass—largely through Martianus Capella's book—into the early medieval period, was modified but scarcely revolutionized by Christianity . The verse portions, on the whole correct and classically constructed, are in imitation of Varro.

Naboth 's representation of Martianus Capella's geo-heliocentric astronomical model (1573) Retorica , illustration by Gherardo di Giovanni del Fora (15th century) The eighth book describes a modified geocentric astronomical model, in which the Earth is at rest in the center of the universe and circled by the Moon, the Sun, three planets and the stars, while Mercury and Venus circle the Sun.

[ 10 ] The view that Mercury and Venus circle the Sun was singled out as one not to "disregard" by Copernicus in Book I of his De revolutionibus orbium coelestium .

Influence [ edit ] Martianus Capella can best be understood in connection with the reputation of his book.

[ 11 ] The work was read, taught, and commented upon throughout the early Middle Ages and shaped European education during the early medieval period and the Carolingian Renaissance .

As early as the end of the fifth century, another African, Fulgentius , composed a work modeled on it. A note found in numerous manuscripts—written by one Securus Memor Felix, who was intending to produce an edition—indicates that by about 534 the dense and convoluted text of De nuptiis had already become hopelessly corrupted by scribal errors [ 12 ] (Michael Winterbottom suggests that Securus Memor's work may be the basis of the text found in "an impressive number of extant books" written in the ninth century).

[ 13 ] Another sixth-century writer, Gregory of Tours , attests that it had become virtually a school manual.

[ 14 ] In his 1959 study, C. Leonardi catalogued 241 existing manuscripts of De nuptiis , attesting to its popularity during the Middle Ages.

[ 13 ] It was commented upon copiously: by John Scotus Erigena , Hadoard , Alexander Neckham , and Remigius of Auxerre .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] In the eleventh century the German monk Notker Labeo translated the first two books into Old High German . Martianus continued to play a major role as transmitter of ancient learning until the rise of a new system of learning founded on scholastic Aristotelianism . As late as the thirteenth century, Martianus was still credited as having been the efficient cause of the study of astronomy.

[ 17 ] Modern interpreters have less interest in Martianus's ideas, "except for the light his work throws on what men in other times and places knew or thought it was important to know about the artes liberales ".

[ 18 ] C. S. Lewis , in The Allegory of Love , states that "the universe, which has produced the bee-orchid and the giraffe , has produced nothing stranger than Martianus Capella".

The editio princeps of De nuptiis , edited by Franciscus Vitalis Bodianus, was printed in Vicenza in 1499. The work's comparatively late date in print, as well as the modest number of later editions, [ 19 ] is a marker of the slide in its popularity, save as an elementary educational primer in the liberal arts.

[ 20 ] For many years the standard edition of the work was that of A. Dick (Teubner, 1925), but J. Willis produced a new edition for Teubner in 1983.

[ 13 ] A modern introduction, focusing on the mathematical arts, is Martianus Capella and the Seven Liberal Arts , vol. 1: The Quadrivium of Martianus Capella: Latin Traditions in the Mathematical Sciences, 50 B.C. – A.D. 1250 .

[ 21 ] Volume 2 of this work is an English translation of De nuptiis .

Editions and translations [ edit ] Martianus Capella and the Seven Liberal Arts . New York: Columbia University Press 1971.

Vol. 1: The quadrivium of Martianus Capella. Latin traditions in the mathematical sciences, 50 B.C.–A.D. 1250 , by William Harris Stahl , 1971.

Vol. 2: The marriage of Philology and Mercury , translated by William Harris Stahl and R. Johnson, with E. L. Burge, 1977.

M. Ferré, Martianus Capella. Les noces de Philologie et de Mercure. Livre IV: la dialectique , Paris, Les Belles Lettres, 2007.

Cavarzere, Alberto (2024).

Martiani Capellae De nvptiis Philologiae. Vol. IV.1: Liber V / introduzione, testo critico, traduzione e commento a cura di Alberto Cavarzere Introduzione, testo critico, traduzione . Hildesheim: Weidmann.

ISBN 9783615004700 .

B. Ferré, Martianus Capella. Les noces de Philologie et de Mercure. Livre VI: la géométrie , Paris: Les Belles Lettres, 2007.

J.-Y. Guillaumin, Martianus Capella. Les noces de Philologie et de Mercure. Livre VII: l'arithmétique , Paris, Les Belles Lettres, 2003.

De nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii (books 1-9, Latin text only).

Notes [ edit ] ^ Margaret Deanesly , A History of Early Medieval Europe: From 476–911 (New York: Routledge, 2020).

^ Jack Lindsay, " Introduction: Apuleius and His Work ", in The Golden Ass , trans. Jack Lindsay (Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1960), p. 25.

^ Andy Merrills and Richard Miles, The Vandals (Chichester: John Wiley & Sons, 2010), p. 213.

^ Ian Wood, " Latin ", in A Companion to Late Antique Literature , ed. Scott McGill and Edward J. Watts (Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons, 2018), p. 27 ^ Danuta Shanzer, A Philosophical and Literary Commentary on Martianus Capella's De Nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii Book One (University of California Press, 1986), pp. 14, 136 et passim ; Stahl, et al., vol. 1, p. 10.

^ Stahl and Johnson with Burge, The Quadrivium of Martianus Capella , p. 5ff.; Alan Cameron , The Last Pagans of Rome (Oxford University Press, 2011), p. 265ff. Cameron finds it highly unlikely that a non-Christian could participate prominently in public life at this late date.

^ William H. Stahl, "To a Better Understanding of Martianus Capella" Speculum 40 .1 (January 1965), pp. 102-115.

^ Parker, H. - "The Seven Liberal Arts" (The English Historical Review, vol. 5, no. 19, pp. 417-461) ^ On the title see William Stahl, Martianus Capella and the Seven Liberal Arts , vol. 1, pp. 21-22.

^ Bruce S. Eastwood, Ordering the Heavens: Roman Astronomy and Cosmology in the Carolingian Renaissance (Leiden: Brill, 2007), pp. 238-9.

^ "The most elucidating approach to Martianus is through his fortuna (Stahl 1965, p. 105).

^ Stahl 1965, p. 104.

^ a b c Winterbottom, "Martianus Capella" in Texts and Transmission: A Survey of the Latin Classics , edited by L. D. Reynolds (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983), p. 245.

^ "Our Martianus has instructed us in the seven disciplines" ( History of the Franks X, 449, 14.) ^ For a digital edition of the glosses in Carolingian manuscripts of Martianus Capella, see Teeuwen ( 2008 ) and Isépy & Posselt ( 2010 ).

^ "Victorius of Aquitaine. Martianus Capella. Remigius of Auxerre. Gregory the Great" .

World Digital Library . Retrieved 2014-06-03 .

^ Stephen C. McCluskey, Astronomies and Cultures in Early Medieval Europe (Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1999), p. 159.

^ M. P. Cunningham, review of Stahl, Johnson and Burge, Martianus Capella and the Seven Liberal Arts , vol. 1: The Quadrivium of Martianus Capella: Latin Traditions in the Mathematical Sciences 50 B.C. - A.D. 1250 , in: Classical Philology vol. 72 no. 1 (January 1977, pp. 79-80) p. 80.

^ One, edited and emended by the sixteen-year-old Hugo Grotius , is a tour de force , "one of the more prodigious feats of Latin scholarship", as was noted by Stahl 1965, p. 104.

^ Stahl 1965, p. 102.

^ Stahl, William Harris; Johnson, Richard; Burge, E. L. (1971).

Martianus Capella and the Seven Liberal Arts, Vol. 1: The Quadrivium of Martianus Capella: Latin Traditions in the Mathematical Sciences, 50 B.C.–A.D. 1250 (Records of Civilization: Sources and Studies, 84) . New York: Columbia University Press.

OCLC 888835999 .

References [ edit ] Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Capella, Martianus Minneus Felix" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

An early version of this article was based on it.

"Martianus Capella" in Encyclopædia Britannica Online .

P. Wessner in Pauly-Wissowa, Real-Encyclopädie der classischen Altertumswissenschaften 1930.

M. Cappuyns, in Dictionnaire d'histoire et de géographie ecclésiastique , Paris, 1949.

Konrad Vössing, "Augustinus und Martianus Capella - ein Diskurs im Spätantiken Karthago?", in Therese Fuhrer (hg), Die christlich-philosophischen Diskurse der Spätantike: Texte, Personen, Institutionen: Akten der Tagung vom 22.-25. Februar 2006 am Zentrum für Antike und Moderne der Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg (Stuttgart, Franz Steiner Verlag, 2008) (Philosophie der Antike, 28), O’Sullivan, Sinéad, "Martianus Capella and the Carolingians: Some Observations Based on the Glosses on Books I–II from the Oldest Gloss Tradition on De nuptiis," in Elizabeth Mullins and Diarmuid Scully (eds), Listen, O Isles, unto me: Studies in Medieval Word and Image in honour of Jennifer O’Reilly (Cork, 2011), 28–38.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Martianus Capella .

Herbermann, Charles, ed. (1913).

"Martianus Capella" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

.

Martianus Capella (2008). Thomas Brouwer; Mariken Teeuwen (eds.).

Carolingian Scholarship and Martianus Capella: The Oldest Commentary Tradition . Leiden: Huygens Instituut . Retrieved 22 November 2013 .

Martianus Capella; Remigius of Auxerre; John Scotus Eriugena (2010). Monika Isépy; Bernd Posselt (eds.).

Die Glossen zu Martianus Capella im Codex 193 der Kölner Dombibliothek . Cologne: Münchner Zentrum für Editionswissenschaft . Retrieved 22 November 2013 .

Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries Archived 2020-11-13 at the Wayback Machine High resolution images of works by Martianus Capella in .jpg and .tiff format.

De nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii in PDF and other formats Rhetores latini minores , Carl Halm (ed.), Lipsiae in aedibus B. G. Teubneri, 1863, pp. 449-492 .

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain 2 Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii zbMATH People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Martianus_Capella&oldid=1305601890 " Categories : 5th-century deaths 5th-century writers in Latin 5th-century Romans Ancient Roman rhetoricians Algerian writers Ancient Roman encyclopedists People from Souk Ahras Province Music theorists Neoplatonists Encyclopedias in classical antiquity 5th-century mathematicians Medieval geometers 5th-century philosophers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Webarchive template wayback links Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 01:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Martianus Capella 33 languages Add topic

