Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work Toggle Work subsection 2.1 Speed of sound 3 Tribute 4 Works 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents William Derham 12 languages العربية تۆرکجه Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano 日本語 Polski Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English clergyman, natural philosopher and scientist William Derham 18th-century tableau of William Derham Born ( 1657-11-26 ) 26 November 1657 Stoulton , Worcestershire , England Died 5 April 1735 (1735-04-05) (aged 77) Upminster , Essex , England Nationality English Alma mater Trinity College, Oxford Known for Natural theology ; Measurement of the speed of sound Awards Fellow of the Royal Society Scientific career Fields Physico-Theology William Derham FRS (26 November 1657 – 5 April 1735) [ 1 ] was an English clergyman, natural theologian , natural philosopher and scientist . He produced the earliest reasonably accurate measurement of the speed of sound .

Life [ edit ] William Derham was the son of Thomas Derham. He was born at Stoulton , in Worcestershire , England. He was educated at Blockley , Gloucestershire , and at Trinity College, Oxford , from 1675 to 1679.

[ 1 ] He was ordained on 29 May 1681. In 1682, he became vicar of Wargrave , Berkshire , and from 1689 to 1735 he was Rector at Upminster , Essex . While at Upminster, in 1716 he became a Canon of Windsor and the vestry minutes show that thereafter he divided his time between those two places.  The parish registers of Upminster record his burial at St. Laurence's in 1735.  However, the precise site of his grave is unknown and, in accordance with his wishes, there is no memorial to him in the church.

[ 2 ] Work [ edit ] Title page of 1723 edition of Derham's Physico-Theology In 1696, he published his Artificial Clockmaker , which went through several editions. The best known of his subsequent works are Physico-Theology , published in 1713; Astro-Theology , 1714; and Christo-Theology , 1730. All three of these books are teleological arguments for the being and attributes of God , and were used by William Paley nearly a century later.

[ 3 ] However, these books also include quantities of original scientific observations.  For example, Physico-Theology contains his recognition of natural variation within species and that he knew that Didelphis virginialis (the Virginia opossum ) was the only marsupial in North America . It also includes one of the earliest theoretical descriptions of a marine chronometer , accompanied by a discussion of the use of vacuum seals to reduce inaccuracies in the operation of timepieces. He is the first person known to have used the word chronometer .

[ 4 ] Similarly, Astro-Theology includes several newly identified nebulae (this was the name used at the time for all extended astronomical objects: some of his nebulae are what we would now call star clusters ).  His 16-foot-long (4.9 m) telescope (also used when measuring the velocity of sound) was at the top of the tower of St Laurence's Church, where the necessary doors are still in place.

[ 2 ] On 3 February 1703, Derham was elected Fellow of the Royal Society . He was Boyle lecturer in 1711–1712. His last known work, entitled A Defence of the Church's Right in Leasehold Estates , appeared as early as 1731.

[ 3 ] But besides the works published in his own name, Derham contributed a variety of papers to the Transactions of the Royal Society . He revised the Miscellanea Curiosa .

[ 3 ] He edited the correspondence and wrote a biography of John Ray , whose 'physico-theology' ( natural theology ) tradition he continued, making him an early parson-naturalist .

[ 5 ] He edited Eleazar Albin 's Natural History , and published some of the manuscripts of the scientist Robert Hooke .

[ 3 ] His meteorological observations at Upminster (in the Transactions of the Royal Society ) are amongst the earliest series in England.

Speed of sound [ edit ] In 1709 Derham published a more accurate measure of the speed of sound, at 1,072 Parisian feet per second.

[ 6 ] Derham used a telescope from the tower of the church of St Laurence, Upminster , to observe the flash of a distant shotgun being fired, and then measured the time until he heard the gunshot with a half second pendulum. Measurements were made of gunshots from local landmarks including the Church of St Mary Magdalene, North Ockendon . The distance was known by triangulation , and thus the speed that the sound had travelled could be calculated.

[ 2 ] Tribute [ edit ] Dr Derham was of small stature and distorted frame. He was not only the moral and religious benefactor of his parishioners, and of all those who came in his way, but he was likewise the physician of their bodies, and their pecuniary friend in all their difficulties. He lived beloved, and died lamented, at his rectory, in 1735 … [ 7 ] Works [ edit ] The Artificial Clockmaker (1696) --- (1734 edition) Physico-theology, or a Demonstration of the Being and Attributes of God (1723 edition) Christo-Theology: Or, a Demonstration of the Divine Authority of the Christian Religion (1730 edition) A defence of the churches right in leasehold estate , London: W. Innys 1731.

Astro-theology: or, A demonstration of the being and attributes of God, from a Survey of the Heavens (1731 edition) See also [ edit ] Astrotheology References [ edit ] ^ a b Smolenaars, Marja. ' Derham, William (1657–1735) ', Oxford Dictionary of National Biography , Oxford University Press , 2004. Accessed 26 May 2007.

^ a b c Fox, Tony (2003).

Essex Journal . Essex Arch & Hist Soc. pp.

12– 16.

^ a b c d One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Derham, William ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 8 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

73– 74.

^ Koberer, Wolfgang (May 2016). "Notes: On the First Use of the Term "Chronometer"=".

The Mariner's Mirror .

102 (2). United Kingdom: Society for Nautical Research: 203– 205.

doi : 10.1080/00253359.2016.1167400 .

S2CID 164165009 .

^ Mabey, Richard (1986).

Gilbert White. A biography of the author of The Natural History of Selborne . Century Hutchinson. p. 11.

^ Murdin, Paul (25 December 2008).

Full Meridian of Glory: Perilous Adventures in the Competition to Measure the Earth . Springer Science & Business Media. pp.

35– 36.

ISBN 9780387755342 .

^ The National Cyclopaedia of Useful Knowledge . Vol. V (First ed.). London: Charles Knight. 1848. p. 357.

External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Author:William Derham William Derham (1696) The artificial clock-maker - digital facsimile from the Linda Hall Library Works by William Derham at Project Gutenberg v t e Natural history Pioneering naturalists Classical antiquity Aristotle ( History of Animals ) Theophrastus ( Historia Plantarum ) Aelian ( De Natura Animalium ) Pliny the Elder ( Natural History ) Dioscorides ( De Materia Medica ) Renaissance Ulisse Aldrovandi Gaspard Bauhin ( Pinax theatri botanici ) Otto Brunfels Hieronymus Bock Andrea Cesalpino Valerius Cordus Leonhart Fuchs Conrad Gessner ( Historia animalium ) Frederik Ruysch William Turner ( Avium Praecipuarum , New Herball ) John Gerard ( Herball, or Generall Historie of Plantes ) Enlightenment Robert Hooke ( Micrographia ) Marcello Malpighi Antonie van Leeuwenhoek William Derham Hans Sloane Jan Swammerdam Regnier de Graaf Carl Linnaeus ( Systema Naturae ) Georg Steller Joseph Banks Johan Christian Fabricius James Hutton John Ray ( Historia Plantarum ) Comte de Buffon ( Histoire Naturelle ) Bernard Germain de Lacépède Gilbert White ( The Natural History of Selborne ) Thomas Bewick ( A History of British Birds ) Jean-Baptiste Lamarck ( Philosophie zoologique ) 19th century George Montagu ( Ornithological Dictionary ) Georges Cuvier ( Le Règne Animal ) William Smith Charles Darwin ( On the Origin of Species ) Alfred Russel Wallace ( The Malay Archipelago ) Henry Walter Bates ( The Naturalist on the River Amazons ) Alexander von Humboldt John James Audubon ( The Birds of America ) William Buckland Charles Lyell Mary Anning Jean-Henri Fabre Louis Agassiz Philip Henry Gosse Asa Gray William Jackson Hooker Joseph Dalton Hooker William Jardine ( The Naturalist's Library ) Ernst Haeckel ( Kunstformen der Natur ) Richard Lydekker ( The Royal Natural History ) 20th century Martinus Beijerinck Abbott Thayer ( Concealing-Coloration in the Animal Kingdom ) Hugh B. Cott ( Adaptive Coloration in Animals ) Niko Tinbergen ( The Study of Instinct ) Konrad Lorenz ( On Aggression ) Karl von Frisch ( The Dancing Bees ) Ronald Lockley ( Shearwaters ) Topics Natural history museums ( List ) Parson-naturalists ( List ) Natural History Societies List of natural history dealers Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=William_Derham&oldid=1303485899 " Categories : 1657 births 1735 deaths Alumni of Trinity College, Oxford Natural philosophers English naturalists 17th-century English Anglican priests 18th-century English Anglican priests Fellows of the Royal Society Canons of Windsor Parson-naturalists People from Wychavon (district) 17th-century English writers 17th-century English male writers 18th-century English writers 18th-century English male writers Presidents of St John's College, Oxford Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2019 Articles with hCards Articles with Project Gutenberg links This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 08:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents William Derham 12 languages Add topic

