Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Books 2.2 Columns 2.3 Television, film, and radio 3 Political views Toggle Political views subsection 3.1 Abortion 3.2 Christianity 3.3 Confederate Flag and India 3.4 Evolution 3.5 Federalism 3.6 Civil liberties 3.7 Civil rights 3.8 Women's rights 3.9 Immigration 3.10 LGBT rights 3.11 War on Drugs 3.12 Bernie Sanders 4 Political activities and commentary Toggle Political activities and commentary subsection 4.1 Paula Jones – Bill Clinton case 4.2 Comments on Islam, Arabs, and terrorism 4.3 2013 CPAC Conference 4.4 VDARE 5 Candidate endorsements 6 Controversies Toggle Controversies subsection 6.1 Antisemitism accusations 6.2 Plagiarism accusations 6.3 Cyberbullying 6.4 Native Americans 7 Personal life 8 Bibliography 9 References 10 External links Toggle External links subsection 10.1 Column archives Toggle the table of contents Ann Coulter 40 languages العربية تۆرکجه 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latviešu مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Sardu Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American conservative political commentator (born 1961) Ann Coulter Coulter in 2019 Born Ann Hart Coulter ( 1961-12-08 ) December 8, 1961 (age 63) New York City , U.S.

Alma mater Cornell University ( BA ) University of Michigan ( JD ) Occupations Pundit author columnist lawyer Political party Republican [ 1 ] Website anncoulter .com Signature Ann Hart Coulter ( / ˈ k oʊ l t ər / ⓘ ; born December 8, 1961) is an American conservative political commentator , author , syndicated columnist and media pundit . A graduate of Cornell University (B.A., 1984) and the University of Michigan Law School (J.D., 1988), she launched her career as a corporate lawyer and law clerk before serving on the U.S. Senate Judiciary Committee in the mid‑1990s. Coulter gained national prominence in the late 1990s as a television legal analyst and has since authored more than a dozen best‑selling political books, including Slander (2002), Godless (2006), and In Trump We Trust (2016).

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Known for her provocative rhetoric and polemical style, she frequently critiques liberal politics and media institutions and regularly appears across cable and radio platforms.

Early life Coulter as a senior in high school, 1980 Ann Hart Coulter was born on December 8, 1961, [ 4 ] in New York City, to John Vincent Coulter (1926–2008), an FBI agent from a working class Catholic Irish American and German American family [ 5 ] in Albany, New York , and Nell Husbands Coulter (née Martin; 1928–2009), a homemaker who was born in Paducah, Kentucky .

Coulter's mother's ancestry has been traced back on both sides of her family to a group of Puritan settlers in Plymouth Colony , British America arriving on the Griffin with Thomas Hooker in 1633, [ 6 ] and her father's family were Catholic Irish and German immigrants who arrived in America in the 19th century. Her father's Irish ancestors emigrated during the famine [ 5 ] —and became ship laborers, tilemakers, brickmakers, carpenters and flagmen . Coulter's father attended college on the GI Bill and later became an FBI agent.

[ 7 ] She has two older brothers: James, an accountant, [ 8 ] and John, an attorney.

[ 9 ] Her family later moved to New Canaan, Connecticut , where Coulter and her two brothers were raised.

[ 10 ] Coulter graduated from New Canaan High School in 1980.

[ 11 ] While attending Cornell University , Coulter helped found The Cornell Review , [ 12 ] and was a member of the Delta Gamma national sorority.

[ 13 ] She graduated cum laude from Cornell in 1984 with a Bachelor of Arts degree in history and received her Juris Doctor from the University of Michigan Law School in 1988, where she was an editor of the Michigan Law Review .

[ 14 ] At Michigan, Coulter was president of the local chapter of the Federalist Society and was trained at the National Journalism Center .

[ 15 ] Coulter's age was disputed in 2002. While she argued that she was not yet 40, The Washington Post columnist Lloyd Grove cited a birthdate of December 8, 1961, which Coulter provided when registering to vote in New Canaan, Connecticut , prior to the 1980 Presidential election , for which she had to be 18 years old to register. A driver's license issued several years later purportedly listed her birthdate as December 8, 1963. Coulter has not confirmed either date, citing privacy concerns.

[ 16 ] Career After law school, Coulter served as a law clerk in Kansas City for Judge Pasco Bowman II of the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit .

[ 17 ] After a short time working in New York City in private practice, where she specialized in corporate law , Coulter left to work for the United States Senate Judiciary Committee after the Republican Party took control of Congress in 1994. She handled crime and immigration issues for Senator Spencer Abraham of Michigan and helped craft legislation designed to expedite the deportation of aliens convicted of felonies .

[ 18 ] She later became a litigator with the Center for Individual Rights .

[ 19 ] Coulter has written 13 books, and also publishes a syndicated newspaper column. She is particularly known for her polemical style, [ 20 ] and describes herself as someone who likes to "stir up the pot. I don't pretend to be impartial or balanced, as broadcasters do".

[ 21 ] She idolized Clare Boothe Luce for her satirical style.

[ 22 ] She also makes numerous public appearances, speaking on television and radio talk shows , as well as on college campuses , receiving both praise and protest. Coulter typically spends 6 to 12 weeks of the year on speaking engagement tours, and more when she has a book coming out.

[ 23 ] In 2010, she made an estimated $500,000 on the speaking circuit, giving speeches on topics of modern conservatism , gay marriage , and what she describes as the hypocrisy of modern American liberalism .

[ 24 ] During one appearance at the University of Arizona , a pie was thrown at her .

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] In defense of her ideas, Coulter has on occasion responded with inflammatory remarks toward hecklers and protestors who attend her speeches.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] Books Ann Coulter at the 2004 Republican National Convention Coulter has authored twelve books, including many that have appeared on The New York Times Best Seller list , with a combined 3 million copies sold as of May 2009 [update] .

[ 30 ] Coulter's first book, High Crimes and Misdemeanors: The Case Against Bill Clinton , was published by Regnery Publishing in 1998 and made The New York Times Bestseller list.

[ 31 ] It details Coulter's case for the impeachment of President Bill Clinton .

Her second book, Slander: Liberal Lies About the American Right , published by Crown Forum in 2002, reached the number one spot on The New York Times non-fiction best seller list.

[ 32 ] In Slander , Coulter argues that President George W. Bush was given unfair negative media coverage. The factual accuracy of Slander was called into question by then- comedian and author, later Democratic U.S. Senator from Minnesota , Al Franken ; he also accused her of citing passages out of context.

[ 33 ] Others investigated these charges, and also raised questions about the book's accuracy and presentation of facts.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Coulter responded to criticisms in a column called "Answering My Critics".

[ 36 ] In her third book, Treason: Liberal Treachery from the Cold War to the War on Terrorism , also published by Crown Forum, she reexamines the 60-year history of the Cold War —including the career of Senator Joseph McCarthy , the Whittaker Chambers - Alger Hiss affair, and Ronald Reagan 's challenge to Mikhail Gorbachev to " tear down this wall "—and argues that liberals were wrong in their Cold War political analyses and policy decisions, and that McCarthy was correct about Soviet agents working for the U.S. government.

[ 37 ] She also argues that the correct identification of Annie Lee Moss , among others, as communists was misreported by the liberal media.

[ 38 ] Treason was published in 2003, and spent 13 weeks on the Best Seller list.

[ 39 ] Crown Forum published a collection of Coulter's columns in 2004 as her fourth book, How to Talk to a Liberal (If You Must): The World According to Ann Coulter .

[ 40 ] Coulter's fifth book, published by Crown Forum in 2006, is Godless: The Church of Liberalism .

[ 41 ] In it, she argues, first, that American liberalism rejects the idea of God and reviles people of faith, and second, that it bears all the attributes of a religion itself.

[ 42 ] Godless debuted at number one on the New York Times Best Seller list.

[ 43 ] Coulter's If Democrats Had Any Brains, They'd Be Republicans (Crown Forum), published in October 2007, and Guilty: Liberal "Victims" and Their Assault on America (Crown Forum), published on January 6, 2009, both also achieved best-seller status.

[ 44 ] On June 7, 2011, Crown Forum published her eighth book Demonic: How the Liberal Mob Is Endangering America .

[ 45 ] Her ninth book, published September 25, 2012, was Mugged: Racial Demagoguery from the Seventies to Obama . It argues that liberals, and Democrats in particular, have taken undue credit for racial civil rights in America.

[ 46 ] Coulter's tenth book, Never Trust a Liberal Over 3 – Especially a Republican , was released on October 14, 2013. It is her second collection of columns and her first published by Regnery since her first book, High Crimes and Misdemeanors .

[ 47 ] Coulter published her eleventh book, Adios, America: The Left's Plan to Turn Our Country Into a Third World Hellhole , on June 1, 2015. The book addresses illegal immigration, amnesty programs, and border security in the United States.

[ 48 ] Columns In the late 1990s, Coulter's weekly (biweekly from 1999 to 2000) syndicated column for Universal Press Syndicate began appearing. Her column is featured on six conservative websites: Human Events Online , WorldNetDaily , Townhall.com , VDARE , FrontPage Magazine , Jewish World Review and her own website. Her syndicator says, "Ann's client newspapers stick with her because she has a loyal fan base of conservative readers who look forward to reading her columns in their local newspapers".

[ 49 ] In 1999, Coulter worked as a columnist for George magazine.

[ 50 ] [ 51 ] Coulter also wrote weekly columns for the conservative magazine Human Events between 1998 and 2003, with occasional columns thereafter. In her columns, she discussed judicial rulings, constitutional issues, and legal matters affecting Congress and the executive branch .

[ 52 ] In 2001, as a contributing editor and syndicated columnist for National Review Online (NRO), Coulter was asked by editors to make changes to a piece written after the September 11 attacks . On the show Politically Incorrect , Coulter accused NRO of censorship and said she was paid $5 per article.

NRO dropped her column and terminated her editorship.

Jonah Goldberg , the editor-at-large of NRO , said: "We did not 'fire' Ann for what she wrote... we ended the relationship because she behaved with a total lack of professionalism, friendship, and loyalty [concerning the editing disagreement]." [ 53 ] In August 2005, the Arizona Daily Star dropped Coulter's syndicated column, citing reader complaints: "Many readers find her shrill, bombastic, and mean-spirited. And those are the words used by readers who identified themselves as conservatives".

[ 54 ] In July 2006, some newspapers replaced Coulter's column with those of other conservative columnists following the publication of her fourth book, Godless: The Church of Liberalism .

[ 55 ] After The Augusta Chronicle dropped her column, newspaper editor Michael Ryan said: "it came to the point where she was the issue rather than what she was writing about." [ 56 ] Ryan added that he continued himself "to be an Ann Coulter fan" as "her logic is devastating and her viewpoint is right most of the time." [ 56 ] Television, film, and radio Ann Coulter at the 2012 Time 100 Coulter made her first national media appearance in 1996 after she was hired by the then-fledgling network MSNBC as a legal correspondent. She later appeared on CNN and Fox News , [ 57 ] and went on to make frequent guest appearances on many television and radio talk shows . Additionally, she stars in the 2015 film Sharknado 3: Oh Hell No!

, in which she portrays the vice-president of the United States.

[ 58 ] Political views This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Ann Coulter is a conservative columnist and, as a member of the Federalist Society , is a staunch advocate federalism , originalism , states' rights and textualism . In 2003, described herself as a "typical, immodest-dressing, swarthy male-loving, friend-to-homosexuals, ultra-conservative." [ 59 ] She is a registered Republican and former member of the advisory council of GOProud since August 9, 2011.

[ 60 ] When Milo Yiannopoulos initially defended pederasty , [ 61 ] Coulter commented, "Well, Milo learned HIS lesson. Pederasty acceptable only for refugees and illegals. Then libs will support you." [ 62 ] According to NBC News , Coulter has been known for her "racist and anti-immigrant stances" and has made several xenophobic comments about Nikki Haley in a racist tirade.

[ 63 ] Abortion Coulter supported the Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization ruling, which overturned the Roe v. Wade and Planned Parenthood v. Casey precedent, because she does not believe in a right to privacy . She believes abortion is a states' rights issue and opposes federal government regulating both for and against abortion. She describes herself as an " anti-abortion zealot ". She described banning most abortions after the first 15 weeks of pregnancy as "shockingly reasonable".

[ 64 ] She believes abortion, excluding abortion exceptions in cases of fetal impairment, rape and danger to a woman's life or health, should be illegal in most other cases.

[ 65 ] [ 66 ] Christianity Coulter is a Presbyterian .

[ 67 ] Coulter was raised by a Catholic father and Protestant mother.

[ 68 ] At one public lecture she said: "I don't care about anything else; Christ died for my sins, and nothing else matters." [ 69 ] Confronting some critics' views that her content and style of writing is unchristian, [ 70 ] Coulter said that she is "a Christian first and a mean-spirited, bigoted conservative second, and don't you ever forget it." [ 71 ] Six years later, in 2011, she also said "Christianity fuels everything I write." [ 72 ] Confederate Flag and India She supports the display of the Confederate flag [ 73 ] and asked former South Carolina Gov. Nikki Haley to go back to India for removing the Confederate flag during her term as Governor. Coulter also called Haley a "bimbo" and a "preposterous creature" and accused and attacked India for worshipping cows and a "rat temple". She also remarked "This is my country, lady, I'm not an American Indian, and I don't like them taking down all the monuments." [ 63 ] [ 74 ] Evolution Coulter advocates teaching intelligent design , a pseudoscientific anti-evolution ideology, alongside evolution.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] [ 77 ] [ 78 ] In Godless: The Church of Liberalism , Coulter characterized the theory of evolution as bogus science, and contrasted her beliefs to what she called the left's "obsession with Darwinism and the Darwinian view of the world, which replaces sanctification of life with sanctification of sex and death".

[ 79 ] Federalism Ann Coulter supports, regardless of her own personal position on the issue, a federalist states' rights position on abortion , [ 80 ] affirmative action , [ 81 ] cannabis legalization , [ 82 ] capital punishment , [ 83 ] contraception , [ 84 ] criminal justice reform , [ 85 ] education , [ 86 ] environmental regulations , [ 87 ] gun control , [ 88 ] hate crime laws , [ 89 ] healthcare , [ 90 ] labor laws , [ 91 ] minimum wage , [ 92 ] religious displays on public buildings , [ 93 ] prostitution , [ 94 ] right-to-work laws , [ 95 ] same-sex marriage , [ 96 ] sodomy laws , [ 97 ] state preemption laws , [ 98 ] state religion , [ 99 ] voting rights , [ 100 ] and welfare .

[ 101 ] Civil liberties Coulter endorsed the NSA's Terrorist Surveillance Program directed at Al-Qaeda.

[ 102 ] During a 2011 appearance on Stossel , she said " PATRIOT Act , fantastic, Gitmo , fantastic, waterboarding , not bad, though torture would've been better." [ 103 ] She criticized Rand Paul for "this anti- drone stuff".

[ 104 ] Coulter opposes hate crime laws , calling them "unconstitutional". She also stated that "Hate-crime provisions seem vaguely directed at capturing a sense of cold-bloodedness, but the law can do that without elevating some victims over others." [ 105 ] Civil rights Although Coulter supported the Brown v. Board of Education ruling, she is critical of desegregation busing , which she calls "forced busing" and desegregation court rulings since Brown v. Board of Education .

[ 106 ] [ 107 ] She supports literacy tests for voting, which she claims are not unconstitutional or prohibited in the Civil Rights Act of 1964 .

[ 108 ] She supports the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

[ 109 ] Women's rights Coulter rejects "the academic convention of euphemism and circumlocution ", [ 110 ] and is claimed to play to misogyny in order to further her goals; she "dominates without threatening (at least not straight men)".

[ 75 ] Feminist critics also reject Coulter's opinion that the gains made by women have gone so far as to create an anti-male society [ 111 ] and her call for women to be rejected from the military because they are more vicious than men.

[ 112 ] Like the late anti-feminist Phyllis Schlafly , Coulter uses traditionally masculine rhetoric as reasoning for the need for traditional gender roles, and she carries this idea of feminized dependency into her governmental policies, according to feminist critics.

[ 113 ] Coulter said in 2021 that women should not be allowed to vote.

[ 114 ] Immigration Coulter has criticized former president George W. Bush 's immigration proposals. In a 2007 column, she claimed that the current immigration system was set up to deliberately reduce the percentage of whites in the population.

[ 115 ] Coulter opposes the Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 .

[ 116 ] She strongly opposed amnesty for undocumented immigrants , and at the 2013 CPAC said she had become "a single-issue voter against amnesty".

[ 117 ] In June 2018, during the controversy caused by the Trump administration family separation policy , Coulter dismissed immigrant children as "child actors weeping and crying" and urged Trump not to "fall for it".

[ 118 ] Coulter is an advocate of the white genocide conspiracy theory .

[ 119 ] [ 120 ] [ 121 ] She has compared non-white immigration into the United States with genocide, [ 122 ] and claiming that "a genocide" is occurring against South African farmers, [ 123 ] she has said that the Boers are the "only real refugees" in South Africa.

[ 124 ] [ 125 ] Regarding domestic politics, Vox labelled Coulter as one of many providing a voice for "the 'white genocide' myth", [ 126 ] and the SPLC covered Coulter's remarks that if the demographic changes occurring in the U.S. were being "legally imposed on any group other than white Americans , it would be called genocide".

[ 127 ] [ 115 ] LGBT rights Since the 1990s, Coulter has had many acquaintances in the LGBT community. She describes herself as "the Judy Garland of the Right", reflecting Garland's large fan base from the gay community . In the last few years before 2015 she attracted LGBT fans, namely gay men and drag queens .

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] Coulter opposes same-sex marriage, opposes Obergefell v. Hodges , and supports, after previously saying she did not, a federal U.S. constitutional amendment defining marriage as a union of one man and one woman .

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] She claims her opposition to same-sex marriage "wasn't an anti-gay thing" and that "It's genuinely a pro-marriage position to oppose gay marriage".

[ 132 ] Coulter claims that same-sex marriage would "ruin gay culture", because "gays value promiscuous sex over monogamy".

[ 128 ] In an October 2003 C-SPAN debate, Coulter said there was nothing in the US Constitution about same-sex marriage and that she did not think she had taken a position yet on the issue of same-sex marriage. When asked, hypothetically, as Supreme Court of the United States (SCOTUS) judge, if she would overturn a state statutorily legalizing same-sex marriage, she said she would not. When asked if she would support a federal U.S. constitutional amendment defining marriage as a union of one man and one woman, she said  she did not because she thought it was pointless as SCOTUS wasn't correctly interpreting the constitution as it is according to her.

[ 133 ] On November 18, 2003, the day Goodridge v. Department of Public Health was decided, she began helping to launch a national effort to amend the U.S. Constitution to prevent same-marriage.

[ 134 ] Coulter also opposes civil unions [ 135 ] and privatizing marriage .

[ 136 ] When addressed with the issue of rights granted by marriage , she said, "Gays already can visit loved ones in hospitals. They can also visit neighbors, random acquaintances, and total strangers in hospitals—just like everyone else. Gays can also pass on property to whomever they would like." [ 137 ] She also stated that same-sex sexual intercourse was already protected under the Fourth Amendment , which prevents police from going into your home without a search warrant or court order.

[ 138 ] Coulter disagreed with repealing Don't Ask Don't Tell , stating that it is not an "anti-gay position; it is a pro-military position" because "sexual bonds are disruptive to the military bond".

[ 139 ] She also stated that there is "no proof that all the discharges for homosexuality involve actual homosexuals." [ 140 ] Coulter has expressed her opposition to treatment of LGBT people in the countries of Cuba, China, and Saudi Arabia.

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] At the 2007 CPAC , Coulter said, "I do want to point out one thing that has been driving me crazy with the media—how they keep describing Mitt Romney 's position as being pro-gays, and that's going to upset the right wingers", and "Well, you know, screw you! I'm not anti-gay. We're against gay marriage. I don't want gays to be discriminated against." She added, "I don't know why all gays aren't Republican. I think we have the pro-gay positions, which is anti-crime and for tax cuts. Gays make a lot of money and they're victims of crime. No, they are! They should be with us." [ 143 ] In Coulter's 2007 book If Democrats Had Any Brains, They'd Be Republicans , in the chapter "Gays: No Gay Left Behind!", she argued that Republican policies were more pro-gay than Democratic policies. Coulter attended the 2010 HomoCon of GOProud , where she gave a speech about why gays should oppose same-sex marriage.

[ 144 ] At the 2011 CPAC , during her question-and-answer segment, Coulter was asked about GOProud and the controversy over their inclusion at the 2011 CPAC. She boasted how she talked GOProud into dropping its support for same-sex marriage in the party's platform, saying, "The left is trying to co-opt gays, and I don't think we should let them. I think they should be on our side", and "Gays are natural conservatives".

[ 145 ] Later that year, she joined advisory board for GOProud. On Logo's The A-List: Dallas she told gay Republican Taylor Garrett that "The gays have got to be pro-life", and "As soon as they find the gay gene , guess who the liberal yuppies are gonna start aborting?" [ 146 ] War on Drugs Coulter strongly supports continuing the War on Drugs .

[ 147 ] However, she has said that, if there were not a welfare state , she "wouldn't care" if drugs were legal.

[ 148 ] She spoke about drugs as a guest on Piers Morgan Live , where she said that marijuana users "can't perform daily functions".

[ 149 ] Bernie Sanders In April 2019, Coulter said of Senator Bernie Sanders she would vote and perhaps even work for him in the 2020 U.S. presidential election if he stuck to his "original position" on U.S. border policy. "If he went back to his original position, which is the pro blue-collar position—I mean, it totally makes sense with him", and "If he went back to that position, I'd vote for him, I might work for him. I don't care about the rest of the socialist stuff. Just, can we do something for ordinary Americans?" [ 150 ] [ 151 ] Political activities and commentary This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( March 2018 ) Ann Coulter has described herself as a " polemicist " who likes to "stir up the pot" and does not "pretend to be impartial or balanced, as broadcasters do".

[ 152 ] While her political activities in the past have included advising a plaintiff suing President Bill Clinton as well as considering a run for Congress, she mostly serves as a political pundit , sometimes creating controversy ranging from rowdy uprisings at some of the colleges where she speaks to protracted discussions in the media.

Time magazine's John Cloud once observed that Coulter "likes to shock reporters by wondering aloud whether America might be better off if women lost the right to vote".

[ 57 ] This was in reference to her statement that "it would be a much better country if women did not vote. That is simply a fact. In fact, in every presidential election since 1950—except Goldwater in '64—the Republican would have won, if only the men had voted." [ 59 ] Similarly, in an October 2007 interview with The New York Observer , Coulter said: [ 153 ] If we took away women's right to vote, we'd never have to worry about another Democrat president. It's kind of a pipe dream, it's a personal fantasy of mine, but I don't think it's going to happen. And it is a good way of making the point that women are voting so stupidly, at least single women.
It also makes the point, it is kind of embarrassing, the Democratic Party ought to be hanging its head in shame, that it has so much difficulty getting men to vote for it. I mean, you do see it's the party of women and 'We'll pay for health care and tuition and day care—and here, what else can we give you, soccer moms?' Coulter has also appeared on Fox News and advocated for a poll tax and a literacy test for voters (this was in 1999, and she reiterated her support of a literacy test in 2015).

[ 154 ] Paula Jones – Bill Clinton case Coulter first became a public figure shortly before becoming an unpaid legal adviser for the attorneys representing Paula Jones in her sexual harassment suit against President Bill Clinton. Coulter's friend George Conway had been asked to assist Jones' attorneys, and shortly afterward Coulter, who wrote a column about the Paula Jones case for Human Events , was also asked to help, and she began writing legal briefs for the case.

Coulter later stated that she would come to mistrust the motives of Jones' head lawyer, Joseph Cammaratta, who by August or September 1997 was advising Jones that her case was weak and to settle , if a favorable settlement could be negotiated.

[ 18 ] [ 155 ] From the outset, Jones had sought an apology from Clinton at least as eagerly as she sought a settlement.

[ 156 ] However, in a later interview Coulter recounted that she herself had believed that the case was strong, that Jones was telling the truth, that Clinton should be held publicly accountable for his misconduct, and that a settlement would give the impression that Jones was merely interested in extorting money from the President.

[ 18 ] David Daley, who wrote the interview piece for The Hartford Courant recounted what followed: Coulter played one particularly key role in keeping the Jones case alive. In Newsweek reporter Michael Isikoff's new book Uncovering Clinton: A Reporter's Story , Coulter is unmasked as the one who leaked word of Clinton's "distinguishing characteristic"—his reportedly bent penis that Jones said she could recognize and describe—to the news media. Her hope was to foster mistrust between the Clinton and Jones camps and forestall a settlement ... I thought if I leaked the distinguishing characteristic it would show bad faith in negotiations. [Clinton lawyer] Bob Bennett would think Jones had leaked it. Cammaratta would know he himself hadn't leaked it and would get mad at Bennett. It might stall negotiations enough for me to get through to [Jones adviser] Susan Carpenter-McMillan to tell her that I thought settling would hurt Paula, that this would ruin her reputation, and that there were other lawyers working for her. Then 36 hours later, she returned my phone call. I just wanted to help Paula. I really think Paula Jones is a hero. I don't think I could have taken the abuse she came under. She's this poor little country girl and she has the most powerful man she's ever met hitting on her sexually, then denying it and smearing her as president. And she never did anything tacky. It's not like she was going on TV or trying to make a buck out of it." [ 18 ] In his book, Isikoff also reported Coulter as saying: "We were terrified that Jones would settle. It was contrary to our purpose of bringing down the President." [ 155 ] After the book came out, Coulter clarified her stated motives, saying: The only motive for leaking the distinguishing characteristic item that [Isikoff] gives in his book is my self-parodying remark that "it would humiliate the president" and that a settlement would foil our efforts to bring down the president ... I suppose you could take the position, as [Isikoff] does, that we were working for Jones because we thought Clinton was a lecherous, lying scumbag, but this argument gets a bit circular. You could also say that Juanita Broaddrick's secret motive in accusing Clinton of rape is that she hates Clinton because he raped her. The whole reason we didn't much like Clinton was that we could see he was the sort of man who would haul a low-level government employee like Paula to his hotel room, drop his pants, and say, "Kiss it." You know: Everything his defense said about him at the impeachment trial. It's not like we secretly disliked Clinton because of his administration's position on California's citrus cartels or something, and then set to work on some crazy scheme to destroy him using a pathological intern as our Mata Hari.

[ 157 ] The case went to court after Jones broke with Coulter and her original legal team, and it was dismissed via summary judgment . The judge ruled that even if her allegations proved true, Jones did not show that she had suffered any damages, stating, "... plaintiff has not demonstrated any tangible job detriment or adverse employment action for her refusal to submit to the governor's alleged advances. The president is therefore entitled to summary judgment on plaintiff's claim of quid pro quo sexual harassment." The ruling was appealed by Jones' lawyers. During the pendency of the appeal, Clinton settled with Jones for $850,000 ($151,000 after legal fees) in November 1998, in exchange for Jones' dismissal of the appeal. By then, the Jones lawsuit had given way to the Monica Lewinsky sex scandal .

In October 2000, Jones revealed that she would pose for nude pictures in an adult magazine, saying she wanted to use the money to pay taxes and support her grade-school-aged children, in particular saying, "I'm wanting to put them through college and maybe set up a college fund." [ 158 ] Coulter publicly denounced Jones, calling her "the trailer-park trash they said she was" (Coulter had earlier chastened Clinton supporters for calling Jones this name), [ 159 ] after Clinton's former campaign strategist James Carville had made the widely reported remark, "Drag a $100 bill through a trailer park, and you'll never know what you'll find", and called Jones a "fraud, at least to the extent of pretending to be an honorable and moral person".

[ 158 ] Coulter wrote: Paula surely was given more than a million dollars in free legal assistance from an array of legal talent she will never again encounter in her life, much less have busily working on her behalf. Some of those lawyers never asked for or received a dime for hundreds of thousands of dollars in legal work performed at great professional, financial and personal cost to themselves. Others got partial payments out of the settlement. But at least they got her reputation back. And now she's thrown it away.

[ 160 ] Jones claimed not to have been offered any help with a book deal of her own or any other additional financial help after the lawsuit.

[ 158 ] Comments on Islam, Arabs, and terrorism Coulter's September 14, 2001, column eulogized her friend Barbara Olson , killed three days earlier in the September 11 attacks , and ended with a call for war: Airports scrupulously apply the same laughably ineffective airport harassment to Suzy Chapstick as to Muslim hijackers. It is preposterous to assume every passenger is a potential crazed homicidal maniac. We know who the homicidal maniacs are. They are the ones cheering and dancing right now. We should invade their countries, kill their leaders and convert them to Christianity. We weren't punctilious about locating and punishing only Hitler and his top officers. We carpet-bombed German cities; we killed civilians. That's war. And this is war.

[ 161 ] These comments resulted in Coulter being fired as a columnist by National Review , which she subsequently referred to as "squeamish girly-boys".

[ 162 ] Responding to this comment, Ibrahim Hooper of the Council on American–Islamic Relations remarked in the Chicago Sun-Times that before September 11, Coulter "would have faced swift repudiation from her colleagues", but "now it's accepted as legitimate commentary".

[ 163 ] One day after the attacks (when death toll estimates were higher than later), Coulter asserted that only Muslims could have been behind them: "Not all Muslims may be terrorists, but all terrorists are Muslims—at least all terrorists capable of assembling a murderous plot against America that leaves 7,000 people dead in under two hours." [ 164 ] Coulter was highly critical in 2002 of the U.S. Department of Transportation and especially its then-secretary Norman Mineta . Her many criticisms include their refusal to use racial profiling as a component of passenger security screening .

[ 165 ] After a group of Muslims was expelled from a US Airways flight when other passengers expressed concern, sparking a call for Muslims to boycott the airline because of the ejection from a flight of six imams , Coulter wrote, "If only we could get Muslims to boycott all airlines, we could dispense with airport security altogether." [ 166 ] Coulter also cited the 2002 Senate testimony of FBI whistleblower Coleen Rowley , who was acclaimed for condemning her superiors for refusing to authorize a search warrant for 9-11 conspirator Zacarias Moussaoui when he refused to consent to a search of his computer. They knew that he was a Muslim in flight school who had overstayed his visa, and the French Intelligence Service had confirmed his affiliations with radical fundamentalist Islamic groups. Coulter said she agreed that probable cause existed in the case, but that refusing consent, being in flight school and overstaying a visa should not constitute grounds for a search. Citing a poll which found that 98 percent of Muslims between the ages of 20 and 45 said they would not fight for Britain in the war in Afghanistan, and that 48 percent said they would fight for Osama bin Laden she asserted "any Muslim who has attended a mosque in Europe—certainly in England, where Moussaoui lived—has had 'affiliations with radical fundamentalist Islamic groups,'" so that she parsed Rowley's position as meaning that " 'probable cause' existed to search Moussaoui's computer because he was a Muslim who had lived in England". Coulter says the poll was "by The Daily Telegraph ", actually it was by Sunrise, an " Asian " (therefore an Indian subcontinent-oriented) radio station, canvassing the opinions of 500 Muslims in Greater London (not Britain as a whole), mainly of Pakistani origin and aged between 20 and 45. Because "FBI headquarters ... refused to engage in racial profiling", they failed to uncover the 9-11 plot, Coulter asserted. "The FBI allowed thousands of Americans to be slaughtered on the altar of political correctness . What more do liberals want?" [ 167 ] Coulter wrote in another column that she had reviewed the civil rights lawsuits against certain airlines to determine which of them had subjected Arabs to the most "egregious discrimination" so that she could fly only that airline. She also said that the airline should be bragging instead of denying any of the charges of discrimination brought against them.

[ 168 ] In an interview with The Guardian she said, "I think airlines ought to start advertising: 'We have the most civil rights lawsuits brought against us by Arabs.'" When the interviewer, Jonathan Freedland , replied by asking what Muslims would do for travel, she responded, "They could use flying carpets ." [ 59 ] In the wake of the Boston Marathon bombing , Coulter told Hannity host Sean Hannity that the wife of bombing suspect Tamerlan Tsarnaev should be jailed for wearing a hijab . Coulter continued by saying "Assimilating immigrants into our culture isn't really working. They're assimilating us into their culture." [ 169 ] 2013 CPAC Conference In March 2013, Coulter was one of the keynote speakers at the Conservative Political Action Conference , where she made references to New Jersey Governor Chris Christie 's weight ("CPAC had to cut back on its speakers this year about 300 pounds") and progressive activist Sandra Fluke 's hairdo. (Coulter quipped that Fluke didn't need birth control pills because "that haircut is birth control enough".) Coulter advocated against a path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants because such new citizens would never vote for Republican candidates: "If amnesty goes through, America becomes California and no Republican will ever win another election." [ 170 ] [ 171 ] VDARE Since 2013, Coulter has been a contributor to VDARE , a far-right website and blog founded by anti-immigration activist and paleo-conservative Peter Brimelow .

[ 172 ] Michael Malice has said that "Coulter and VDARE can be considered the furthest edge of the Overton Window " as any political position further to the right would be too heretical to find mainstream success.

[ 173 ] VDARE is controversial because of its alleged white supremacist rhetoric and support of scientific racism and white nationalism .

[ 174 ] Candidate endorsements Coulter initially supported George W. Bush's presidency , but later criticized its approach to immigration. She endorsed Duncan Hunter [ 175 ] and later Mitt Romney in the 2008 Republican presidential primaries [ 176 ] and the 2012 Republican presidential primary and presidential run .

[ 177 ] In the 2016 Republican Party presidential primaries , she endorsed Donald Trump .

[ 178 ] Coulter later distanced herself from Trump following arguments over immigration policies; she called for his impeachment in September 2017, saying "Put a fork in Trump, he's dead".

[ 179 ] She described herself in 2018 as a "former Trumper"; [ 180 ] in a 2020 speech to a Turning Point USA event, she said, "The Trump agenda without Trump would be a lot easier. Our new motto should be 'Going on with Trumpism without Trump.' That's a winning strategy." [ 181 ] Coulter blamed Trump's son-in-law and advisor Jared Kushner for Trump's 2020 election loss, and said that Trump had failed to deliver for the white working class.

[ 182 ] In August 2024, Coulter spoke out against Donald Trump saying he was an "awful, awful person.” However, she said she would vote for him in the 2024 election because she liked his running mate JD Vance and how we needed "a wall on the border". "Can’t trust Trump as far as I can throw him, but I do trust JD Vance to care about the left behind people”, Coulter said.

[ 183 ] Other candidates Coulter has endorsed include Greg Brannon ( 2014 Republican primary candidate for North Carolina Senator ), [ 184 ] Paul Nehlen ( 2016 Republican primary candidate for Wisconsin's 1st congressional district in the United States House of Representatives ), [ 185 ] Mo Brooks ( 2017 Republican primary candidate for Alabama Senator ), and Roy Moore ( 2017 Republican candidate for Alabama Senator ).

[ 186 ] Controversies This "criticism" or "controversy" section may compromise the article's neutrality .

Please help integrate negative information into other sections or remove undue focus on minor aspects through discussion on the talk page .

( May 2025 ) Antisemitism accusations Coulter was accused of antisemitism in an October 8, 2007, interview with Donny Deutsch on The Big Idea . During the interview, Coulter stated that the United States is a Christian nation, and said that she wants "Jews to be perfected, as they say" (referring to them being converted to Christianity).

[ 187 ] Deutsch, a practicing Jew, implied that this was an anti-semitic remark, but Coulter said she did not consider it to be a hateful comment.

[ 188 ] [ 189 ] Coulter's comments on the show were condemned by the Anti-Defamation League , American Jewish Committee and Bradley Burston , [ 190 ] and the National Jewish Democratic Council asked media outlets to cease inviting Coulter as a guest commentator.

[ 191 ] Talk show host Dennis Prager , while disagreeing with her comments, said that they were not "anti-semitic", noting, "There is nothing in what Ann Coulter said to a Jewish interviewer on CNBC that indicates she hates Jews or wishes them ill, or does damage to the Jewish people or the Jewish state . And if none of those criteria is present, how can someone be labeled anti-Semitic?" [ 192 ] [ 193 ] [ 194 ] Conservative activist David Horowitz also defended Coulter against the allegation.

[ 195 ] Coulter in September 2015 tweeted in response to multiple candidates' references to Israel during a Republican presidential primary debate, "How many f—ing Jews do these people think there are in the United States?" [ 196 ] The Anti-Defamation League referred to the tweets as "ugly, spiteful and anti-Semitic".

[ 197 ] In response to accusations of anti-Semitism, she tweeted "I like the Jews, I like fetuses, I like Reagan. Didn't need to hear applause lines about them all night." [ 196 ] Plagiarism accusations In October 2001, Coulter was accused of plagiarism for her 1998 book High Crimes and Misdemeanors: The Case Against Bill Clinton by Michael Chapman, a columnist for the journal Human Events who claims that passages were taken from a supplement he wrote for the journal in 1997 titled "A Case for Impeachment".

[ 162 ] On the July 5, 2006, episode of Countdown with Keith Olbermann on MSNBC , guest John Barrie, the CEO of iParadigms , offered his professional opinion that Coulter plagiarized in her book Godless as well as in her columns over the previous year.

[ 198 ] Barrie ran "Godless" through iThenticate, his company's machine, which is able to scan works and compare them to existing texts. He found a 25-word section of the text that was "virtually word-for-word" matched with a Planned Parenthood pamphlet and a 33-word section almost duplicating a 1999 article from the Portland Press as some examples of evidence.

[ 198 ] Barrie also said that it was "very, very difficult to try to determine whether Ann Coulter was citing that material or whether she was just trying to pass it off".

[ 198 ] Left-wing activist group [ 199 ] Media Matters for America has appealed to Random House publishing to further investigate Coulter's work.

[ 200 ] The syndicator of her columns cleared her of the plagiarism charges.

[ 201 ] Universal Press Syndicate and Crown Books also defended Coulter against the charges.

[ 202 ] Columnist Bill Nemitz from the Portland Press Herald accused Coulter of plagiarizing a very specific sentence from his newspaper in her book Godless , but he also acknowledged that one sentence is insufficient grounds for filing suit.

[ 203 ] Cyberbullying In August 2024, Coulter received widespread criticism for a tweet with the comment "Talk about weird ...", referring to Democratic vice presidential nominee Tim Walz 's 17-year-old son, who has nonverbal learning disorder , [ 204 ] crying during his father's acceptance speech at the 2024 Democratic National Convention .

[ 205 ] Elizabeth Booker Houston launched a scathing viral rebuke.

[ 206 ] The tweet was deleted shortly after it was posted.

[ 207 ] Native Americans In a 2025 response on X to social commentary from Navajo professor Melanie Yazzie speaking at the Socialism 2025 conference, Coulter tweeted, "We didn't kill enough Indians". Her comments were labeled hate speech by Cherokee Nation Principal Chief Chuck Hoskin Jr.

[ 208 ] Personal life Coulter has been engaged several times, but she has never married and has no children.

[ 28 ] After the September 11 attacks , she dated a Muslim boyfriend.

[ 209 ] She has dated Spin founder and publisher Bob Guccione Jr.

[ 50 ] and conservative writer Dinesh D'Souza .

[ 210 ] [ 211 ] In October 2007, she began dating Andrew Stein , the former president of the New York City Council , a liberal Democrat. On January 7, 2008, however, Stein told the New York Post that the relationship was over, citing irreconcilable differences.

[ 212 ] In 2013 it was reported that Coulter was dating actor Jimmie Walker . Coulter responded to the rumors by saying "He’s the one spreading that [dating] rumor! No, we’re great friends. We do a lot of stuff together. … He is so hilarious, so I see him a lot when I’m in L.A., but we are not technically dating.” In 2017, Norman Lear , who created the television sitcom Good Times in which Walker starred, said of Walker "I love him; he’s a wonderful guy. But I’ll tell you something about him that’ll astound you: He dates Ann Coulter.” Coulter responded to Lear's comments by saying "This rumor spreads every now and then, but it’s never been true. We’re great friends. He’s hilarious and a Republican. Now, that’s news!” [ 213 ] Kellyanne Conway , who refers to Coulter as a friend, told New York magazine in 2017 that Coulter "started dating her security guard probably ten years ago because she couldn't see anybody else".

[ 214 ] Coulter owns a house, bought in 2005, in Palm Beach , Florida, a condominium in Manhattan , and an apartment in Los Angeles. She was a voter in Connecticut in 2004 before moving to Palm Beach.

[ 215 ] [ 216 ] [ 217 ] Bibliography Coulter, Ann H. (1998).

High Crimes and Misdemeanors: The Case Against Bill Clinton . Washington, D.C.; Lanham, MD: Regnery Pub.

ISBN 978-0-89526-360-5 .

—— (2002).

Slander: Liberal Lies About the American Right . New York: Crown.

ISBN 978-1-4000-4661-4 .

—— (2003).

Treason: Liberal Treachery from the Cold War to the War on Terrorism . New York: Crown Forum.

ISBN 978-1-4000-5030-7 .

—— (2004).

How to Talk to a Liberal (If You Must): The World According to Ann Coulter . New York: Crown Forum.

ISBN 978-1-4000-5418-3 .

—— (2006).

Godless: The Church of Liberalism . New York: Crown Forum.

ISBN 978-1-4000-5420-6 .

—— (2007).

If Democrats Had Any Brains, They'd Be Republicans . New York: Crown Forum.

ISBN 978-0-307-35345-0 .

—— (2009).

Guilty: Liberal "Victims" and Their Assault on America . New York: Crown Forum.

ISBN 978-0-307-35346-7 .

—— (2011).

Demonic: How the Liberal Mob Is Endangering America . New York: Crown Forum.

ISBN 978-0-307-35348-1 .

—— (2012).

Mugged: Racial Demagoguery from the Seventies to Obama . New York: Sentinel.

ISBN 978-1-59523-099-7 .

—— (2013).

Never Trust a Liberal Over 3 – Especially a Republican . Washington, D.C.: Regnery Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-62157-191-9 .

—— (2015).

Adios, America: The Left's Plan to Turn Our Country into a Third World Hellhole . Washington, D.C.: Regnery Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-62157-267-1 .

—— (2016).

In Trump We Trust: E Pluribus Awesome!

. New York: Sentinel.

ISBN 978-0-7352-1446-0 .

—— (2018).

Resistance Is Futile! How the Trump-Hating Left Lost Its Collective Mind . New York: Sentinel.

ISBN 978-0-525-54007-6 .

References ^ "Ann Coulter's Florida Voter Registration Application Form" . bradblog.com. April 11, 2006.

Archived from the original on April 1, 2013 . Retrieved May 3, 2013 .

^ "Bio" .

Ann Coulter . Retrieved August 5, 2025 .

^ "Books" .

Ann Coulter . Retrieved August 5, 2025 .

^ Coulter, however disputes this birth date.

Conroy, J Oliver (October 17, 2018).

"Ann Coulter believes the left has 'lost its mind'. Should we listen?" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on October 17, 2018 . Retrieved October 17, 2018 .

^ a b Smolenyak, Megan.

"Ann Coulter's Immigrant Ancestors" .

The Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on October 20, 2015 . Retrieved October 21, 2015 .

^ Coulter, Ann (April 22, 2009).

"Nell Husbands Martin Coulter" .

AnnCoulter.com .

Archived from the original on January 23, 2018 . Retrieved January 27, 2018 .

^ "Ann Coulter – January 9, 2008 – John Vincent Coulter" . anncoulter.com. January 9, 2008.

Archived from the original on September 23, 2015 . Retrieved April 3, 2015 .

"Nell Husbands Nartin CoulterLL" Archived July 14, 2014, at the Wayback Machine . humanevents.com. April 2009.

^ "James Coulter" .

LinkedIn . Retrieved January 27, 2018 .

^ "Coulter & Walsh: About (John V. Coulter)" . coulterwalsh.com.

Archived from the original on January 27, 2018 . Retrieved January 27, 2018 .

^ Holson, Laura M. (October 8, 2010).

"Outflanked on Right, Coulter Seeks New Image" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on November 8, 2017 . Retrieved January 27, 2018 .

^ "With Ann Coulter, how far is 'too far'?" . June 15, 2006.

^ "Cornell Review XXXI #6 Coulter '84 Denied Invitation by Fordham" .

Issuu . December 4, 2012.

Archived from the original on April 15, 2016 . Retrieved April 4, 2016 .

The Nation : A Once-Bright Star Dims.

Archived February 17, 2015, at the Wayback Machine January 30, 2003.

^ "From the pens of Delta Gammas" (PDF) . Anchora of Delta Gamma. Summer 2005. p. 29 (16 in PDF). Archived from the original (PDF) on May 28, 2006 . Retrieved July 11, 2006 .

^ " Ann Coulter: bestselling author and political commentator Archived November 14, 2006, at the Wayback Machine (Profile)".

premierespeakers.com Archived July 5, 2006, at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved July 10, 2006. See also Michigan Law Review vol. 86 No. 5 (April 1988), where Ann Coulter "of Connecticut" is listed on the masthead as an articles editor.

^ Hallow, Ralph. " A lifelong voice for conservatives ".

The Washington Times . February 21, 2006. Retrieved July 10, 2006.

^ Grove, Lloyd (September 6, 2002).

"Mystery of the Ages" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on October 17, 2015 . Retrieved September 26, 2011 .

^ See Lythgoe, Dennis (October 5, 2003).

"Liberals, conservatives duke it out on paper" .

Deseret Morning News . p. E1. Archived from the original on August 20, 2013.

; Hentoff, Nat (December 5, 1998). "Op-Ed: Congress Goes Fishing".

The Washington Post . p. A23.

; Coulter herself says it was Bowman. See her online bio Archived August 10, 2015, at the Wayback Machine ; see also Coulter, Ann (May 3, 2001). "ABA's ratings no more".

The Washington Times . p. A15.

^ a b c d Daley, David.

"Ann Coulter: light's all shining on her" Archived July 23, 2006, at the Wayback Machine .

Hartford Courant . June 25, 1999.

^ Moore, Frazier (October 5, 2003). "Conservative Coulter sounds off in her latest book; Treason aims to change views on McCarthy".

Telegraph Herald . p. e2.

^ Schmidt, Tracy Samantha (June 12, 2006).

"What Would Ann Coulter Do?" .

Time . Archived from the original on September 22, 2009 . Retrieved June 28, 2009 .

^ Bryan Keefer (July 13, 2002).

"Throwing the book at her" .

Salon .

Archived from the original on March 9, 2014 . Retrieved March 8, 2014 .

^ David T. Courtwright, No Right Turn: Conservative Politics in a Liberal America , Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 2010, p. 230 ^ Laura M. Holson (October 8, 2010).

"Outflanked on Right, Coulter Seeks New Image" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 20, 2014 . Retrieved March 8, 2014 .

^ "Newsweek's Power 50: Profiles" .

Newsweek . November 1, 2010.

Archived from the original on January 20, 2011 . Retrieved June 9, 2011 .

^ "Al Pieda Targets Ann Coulter" .

The Smoking Gun . October 22, 2004.

Archived from the original on July 30, 2010 . Retrieved June 28, 2009 .

^ Wells, Holly (January 12, 2006).

"Former student enters plea in 2004 Coulter pie assault" .

Arizona Daily Wildcat . Archived from the original on July 21, 2006 . Retrieved June 28, 2009 .

^ "The Pie-Proof Ann Coulter on Hecklers" .

Fox News . May 4, 2005.

Archived from the original on November 2, 2008 . Retrieved June 28, 2009 .

^ a b Harnden, Toby (July 19, 2002).

"I love to pick fights with liberals" .

The Daily Telegraph . London.

Archived from the original on July 2, 2009 . Retrieved June 28, 2009 .

^ Guidi, David (October 20, 2006).

"Controversial Conservative Pundit Elicits Praise and Protest Thursday" . The Oracle (University of South Florida). Archived from the original on June 13, 2011 . Retrieved June 28, 2009 .

^ De Pasquale, Lisa (May 6, 2009).

"Being Ann" .

Townhall.com .

Archived from the original on May 9, 2009 . Retrieved June 28, 2009 .

^ Kurtz, Howard (October 16, 1998).

"The Blonde Flinging Bombshells at Bill Clinton" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on April 11, 2013 . Retrieved March 8, 2014 .

Cloud, John (April 17, 2005).

"Ms. Right: Ann Coulter" .

Time .

Archived from the original on March 9, 2014 . Retrieved March 8, 2014 .

^ Austen, Ian (March 10, 2009).

"Ann Coulter" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 13, 2009 . Retrieved July 21, 2009 .

^ Franken, Al (2003).

Lies and the Lying Liars Who Tell Them: A Fair and Balanced Look at the Right . Dutton Books.

ISBN 0-525-94764-7 .

^ "Throwing the book at her" Archived May 17, 2011, at the Wayback Machine , Spinsanity . July 13, 2002. Retrieved September 30, 2007.

"Screed: With Treason, Ann Coulter once again defines a new low in America's political debate" Archived June 13, 2011, at the Wayback Machine , Spinsanity . June 30, 2003. Retrieved September 30, 2007.

^ Scherer, Michael; Secules, Sarah (November 1, 2002). "Books: how slippery is Slander?".

Columbia Journalism Review .

41 (4): 14– 15.

Gale A94600403 .

^ Coulter, Ann (October 9, 2003).

"Answering my critics" .

Jewish World Review .

Archived from the original on February 26, 2009 . Retrieved June 28, 2009 .

^ William F. Buckley Jr. (December 1, 2003).

"Tailgunner Ann" . The Claremont Institute. Archived from the original on March 9, 2014 . Retrieved March 8, 2014 .

^ Jacob Heilbrunn (July 13, 2003).

"McCarthy in a mini" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on March 9, 2014 . Retrieved March 8, 2014 .

^ Guthmann, Edward (December 2, 2003).

"An outbreak of partisan warfare on the best-seller list is encouraging authors to stoke the fires of readers hungry for political squabbles—and the Bay Area is fertile ground for Bush-whackers" .

San Francisco Chronicle .

Archived from the original on December 10, 2007 . Retrieved June 28, 2009 .

^ Liesl Schillinger (October 31, 2004).

" 'How to Talk to a Liberal (If You Must)': All Their Fault" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 18, 2014 . Retrieved March 8, 2014 .

^ David Carr (June 12, 2006).

"Deadly Intent: Ann Coulter, Word Warrior" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on March 18, 2014 . Retrieved March 8, 2014 .

^ Ann Coulter (June 25, 2007).

"Read an Excerpt of "Godless: The Church of Liberalism" " .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on March 9, 2014 . Retrieved March 8, 2014 .

^ "Best Sellers: Hardcover Nonfiction" .

The New York Times . June 25, 2006.

Archived from the original on April 11, 2009 . Retrieved June 28, 2009 .

^ Emily Friedman (October 17, 2007).

"Ann Coulter: Marketing Genius?" .

ABC News .

Archived from the original on February 17, 2015 . Retrieved March 8, 2014 .

Jennifer Schuessler (June 17, 2011).

"Inside the List" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on February 17, 2015 . Retrieved March 8, 2014 .

Julie Bosman (April 19, 2011).

"Ann Coulter Follows Up 'Guilty' with 'Demonic' " .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 5, 2013 . Retrieved March 8, 2014 .

^ Coulter, Ann H. (2012).

Mugged: racial demagoguery from the seventies to Obama . New York : Sentinel.

ISBN 978-1-59523-099-7 . Retrieved September 5, 2021 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Mugged: Racial Demagoguery from the Seventies to Obama . Sentinel. 2012.

ISBN 978-1-59523-099-7 .

^ Hartwell, Ray V. III (November 4, 2013).

"Book Review: 'Never Trust a Liberal Over Three' " .

The Washington Times .

Archived from the original on February 27, 2014 . Retrieved March 8, 2014 .

^ Vernon, Wes (June 21, 2015).

"Book Review: 'Adios America: The Left's Plan to Turn Our Country into a Third World Hellhole' " .

The Washington Times .

Archived from the original on November 17, 2015 . Retrieved November 14, 2015 .

^ Astor, Dave; Mitchell, Greg (June 16, 2006).

"Newspaper Clients, and Syndicate, Stick With Coulter" .

Editor & Publisher . Archived from the original on July 14, 2011 . Retrieved June 28, 2009 .

^ a b Lehman, Susan.

Conservative pinup battles "arm candy" canard .

Salon . March 4, 1999. Retrieved July 10, 2006.

^ Coulter, Ann (July 28, 1999).

"A Republican Tribute to John" . uexpress.com.

Archived from the original on January 5, 2009 . Retrieved June 28, 2009 .

^ "Ann Coulter's Articles" .

Human Events .

Archived from the original on March 18, 2014 . Retrieved March 8, 2014 .

^ Goldberg, Jonah (October 2, 2001).

"L'Affaire Coulter" .

National Review . Archived from the original on September 1, 2014 . Retrieved November 5, 2014 .

^ Stoeffler, David (August 28, 2005).

"Opinion pages get a makeover" .

Arizona Daily Star . Archived from the original on September 25, 2005 . Retrieved July 10, 2006 .

^ "Another Newspaper Decides to Drop Ann Coulter's Column" .

editorandpublisher.com .

Archived from the original on April 21, 2016 . Retrieved April 4, 2016 .

^ a b Astor, Dave; Mitchell, Greg (July 24, 2006).

"Augusta Editor Explains Why He Dropped Coulter Column" .

Editor & Publisher . Archived from the original on August 22, 2006.

^ a b Cloud, John (April 17, 2005).

"Ms. Right" .

Time . Archived from the original on May 24, 2009 . Retrieved June 28, 2009 .

^ Schulz, Bill (July 22, 2015).

"Ann Coulter on Her Role in Sharknado 3" .

Vulture . Retrieved July 7, 2025 .

^ a b c Freedland, Jonathan (May 17, 2003).

"An appalling magic" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on June 2, 2003 . Retrieved April 15, 2020 .

^ "Ann Coulter Joins Advisory Council of GOP Homosexual Group" .

Christian Post Politics . August 10, 2011.

Archived from the original on September 11, 2013 . Retrieved May 3, 2013 .

^ "Ann Coulter on Milo Meltdown: 'Pederasty Acceptable Only for Refugees and Illegals' " . February 21, 2017. Archived from the original on June 12, 2018 . Retrieved September 9, 2018 .

^ Verhoeven, Beatrice (February 21, 2017).

"Ann Coulter on Milo Meltdown: 'Pederasty Acceptable Only for Refugees and Illegals' " .

TheWrap . Retrieved September 5, 2021 .

^ a b "Ann Coulter tells Nikki Haley to 'go back to your own country' in racist rant against new GOP presidential candidate" .

NBC News . February 16, 2023 . Retrieved March 16, 2025 .

^ "ALITO WILL SAVE LIVES, NOT BIDEN" . May 4, 2022.

^ "Don't Blame Romney" . anncoulter.com. November 7, 2012.

Archived from the original on January 21, 2013 . Retrieved January 31, 2013 .

^ Boboltz, Sara (December 12, 2023).

"Ann Coulter Joins Critics Of Texas' Brutal Anti-Abortion Decision" .

HuffPost . Retrieved December 30, 2023 – via Yahoo News.

^ "YouTube" .

YouTube .  Event occurs at 2:55. Archived from the original on April 7, 2015 . Retrieved April 19, 2015 .

^ "John V. Coulter Obituary (2008) - Albany Times Union" .

Legacy.com . Retrieved December 19, 2021 .

^ Olasky, Marvin (August 13, 2005).

"South Park vs. Ann Coulter" .

World .

Archived from the original on September 27, 2011 . Retrieved September 27, 2011 .

^ Inside Higher Ed : Calling Off Ann Coulter Archived 2018-08-20 at the Wayback Machine December 1, 2005.

^ "Coulter: Press Either 'Incompetent' or Full of 'Left-Wing Bias" .

Editor & Publisher . July 21, 2006.

Archived from the original on March 15, 2012 . Retrieved September 27, 2011 .

^ De Pasquale, Lisa (June 6, 2006).

"Exclusive Interview: Coulter Says Book Examines 'Mental Disorder' of Liberalism" .

Human Events . Archived from the original on May 24, 2011 . Retrieved September 27, 2011 .

^ "Here's who is still defending the Confederate flag (and the many reasons they give)" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on September 24, 2018 . Retrieved September 9, 2018 .

^ Hensch, Mark (June 24, 2015).

"Ann Coulter: Nikki Haley 'an immigrant' who doesn't understand Confederate flag" .

The Hill . Archived from the original on November 30, 2023 . Retrieved March 16, 2025 .

^ a b Chambers, Samuel A.; Finlayson, Alan (May 2008). "Ann Coulter and the problem of pluralism: from values to politics".

Borderlands .

7 (1).

Gale A193247304 .

^ Zimmer, Carl (August 25, 2011).

"Ann Coulter Nostalgia: Behold, For *I* Am The Giant Flatulent Raccoon" .

National Geographic . Archived from the original on September 16, 2021 . Retrieved September 16, 2021 .

^ Ann Coulter (May 11, 2022).

"Dems Speak Out on Roe: Release the COVID Variants!" . Ann Coulter Official Website . Retrieved August 29, 2024 .

^ Coulter, Ann (2006).

Godless: The Church of Liberalism . Crown Forum. p. 199. ISBN 978-1400054206.

^ Coulter, Ann (2007).

Godless: The Church of Liberalism . New York: Crown Publishing Group . pp.

199– 282.

ISBN 978-1-4000-5421-3 .

^ Time Magazine. "Ann Coulter on Overturning Roe v. Wade." Time, 2022. "I am thrilled that this is going to be turned back to the states." ^ Coulter, Ann. *Guilty: Liberal "Victims" and Their Assault on America.* Crown Forum, 2009. Discusses her opposition to federal affirmative action policies, supporting state decision-making.

^ Coulter, Ann. "Speech at CPAC 2013." Conservative Political Action Conference, 2013. Advocated for states' rights to legalize marijuana without federal interference.

^ Coulter, Ann. *Demonic: How the Liberal Mob Is Endangering America.* Crown Forum, 2011. Supports states' rights in determining their own policies on the death penalty.

^ Coulter, Ann. "Who Was the Second Choice?" AnnCoulter.com, October 19, 2005.

[1] ( https://anncoulter.com/2005/10/19/who-was-the-second-choice/ ).

^ Coulter, Ann. *Treason: Liberal Treachery from the Cold War to the War on Terrorism.* Crown Forum, 2003. Supports state autonomy in criminal justice matters, particularly in sentencing laws.

^ Coulter, Ann. "Column: Why Liberals Are Afraid of School Choice." Townhall, 2014. Criticizes federal control over education and supports state/local control.

^ Coulter, Ann. "Column: EPA's New Mandates Are Killing Jobs." Townhall, 2011. Criticizes federal environmental regulations and advocates for state control over environmental policies.

^ Coulter, Ann. *High Crimes and Misdemeanors: The Case Against Bill Clinton.* Regnery Publishing, 1998. Expresses opposition to federal gun control measures, supporting state decision-making.

^ Coulter, Ann. "Column: The Left's Crazy Hate Crime Laws." AnnCoulter.com, 2009. Criticizes hate crime laws and supports state jurisdiction over criminal justice.

^ Coulter, Ann. *Demonic: How the Liberal Mob Is Endangering America.* Crown Forum, 2011. Discusses state control over healthcare and Medicaid expansion.

^ Coulter, Ann. *Mugged: Racial Demagoguery from the Seventies to Obama.* Penguin Books, 2012. Discusses her support for state-level decisions on labor laws.

^ Coulter, Ann. "Column: States Know Best on Minimum Wage." Townhall, 2014. Argues that decisions regarding the minimum wage should be left to the states rather than being set by federal mandates.

^ Coulter, Ann. "Column: The Ten Commandments Controversy." Townhall, 2005. Discusses her support for states' rights in religious matters.

^ Coulter, Ann. *If Democrats Had Any Brains, They'd Be Republicans*. Crown Forum, 2007.

^ Coulter, Ann (May 11, 2011).

"MORE GUTSY CALLS FROM OBAMA!" . Retrieved August 29, 2024 .

Two weeks ago, Obama's National Labor Relations Board made the gutsy call to file a complaint against Boeing for attempting to build a new airplane production plant in South Carolina -- a right-to-work state -- and demanding that the plant be opened in Washington state -- a dying Democratic pro-union state.

^ Coulter, Ann. "Speech at Homocon 2011." GOProud, 2011. "I think it's a state's rights issue, and I think it's crazy for the Supreme Court to take that away from the states." ^ Time Magazine. "10 Questions for Ann Coulter." July 16, 2003. Coulter commented on the Supreme Court's ruling on sodomy laws: "Gay sex may well be a mystery of life, but I'll be damned if I can find it in the Constitution." ^ "O'Reilly and Ann Coulter on Westboro Baptist Church vs. Snyder Family." Fox News, 2011.

[2] ( https://www.foxnews.com/story/oreilly-and-ann-coulter-on-westboro-baptist-church-vs-snyder-family ).

^ Coulter, Ann (February 29, 2012).

"The Problem With Santorum" . Retrieved August 29, 2024 .

... Santorum supports a federal ban on partial-birth abortion -- a position I find to be an unholy abomination and a blatant violation of states' rights.

^ Coulter, Ann. *If Democrats Had Any Brains, They’d Be Republicans.* Crown Forum, 2007. Criticizes federal oversight of state voting laws, supports states' rights in voting.

^ Coulter, Ann. "Column: The Great Republican Welfare Crack-Up." Townhall, 2012. Supports the idea that states should have more control over welfare programs rather than a uniform federal approach.

^ "What Part of the War on Terrorism Do They Support?" .

www.anncoulter.com . August 23, 2006.

Archived from the original on April 12, 2018 . Retrieved September 9, 2018 .

^ Suebsaeng, Asawin (April 19, 2017).

"Ann Coulter Said Anti-War Dems Were 'Traitors.' Now She Says 'War Is Like Crack for' Trump" .

The Daily Beast .

Archived from the original on April 28, 2017 . Retrieved September 9, 2018 .

^ Wing, Nick (March 26, 2013).

"Ann Coulter: Rand Paul Favors 'Legalizing Pot And Amnesty,' Can't Be GOP Presidential Candidate" (Video) .

HuffPost .

Archived from the original on July 2, 2015 . Retrieved September 9, 2018 .

^ "Ann Coulter" .

www.jewishworldreview.com .

Archived from the original on August 26, 2018 . Retrieved September 9, 2018 .

^ "Where's That Religious Fanatic We Elected?" .

Ann Coulter . January 27, 2005.

^ Coulter, Ann.

"Ann Coulter - Ashcroft and the blowhard discuss" .

^ Kaufman, Scott Eric (April 15, 2015).

"Ann Coulter's xenophobic defense of voter suppression: "I'm pretty sure Senate debates will not be taking place in Urdu" " .

Salon .

^ "White Liberals Tell Black Lies About Civil Rights" .

Ann Coulter . February 13, 2013.

^ Murphey, Dwight D. (December 22, 2015). "!Adios, America!: The Left's Plan to Turn Our Country into a Third World Hellhole".

The Journal of Social, Political and Economic Studies .

40 (4): 472– 487.

Gale A438688854 ProQuest 1774914874 .

] ^ Stambach, Amy; David, Miriam (January 2005). "Feminist Theory and Educational Policy: How Gender Has Been 'Involved' in Family School Choice Debates".

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

30 (2): 1633– 1658.

doi : 10.1086/382633 .

ISSN 0097-9740 .

S2CID 144182384 .

^ Steans, Jill (January 2008). "Telling Stories about Women and Gender in the War on Terror".

Global Society .

22 (1): 159– 176.

doi : 10.1080/13600820701740795 .

S2CID 145586431 .

^ Hoberek, Andrew (2005). "Liberal Antiliberalism: Mailer, O'Connor, and The Gender Politics of Middle-Class Ressentiment".

Women's Studies Quarterly .

33 (3/4): 24– 47.

JSTOR 40004417 .

^ Sullender, Andrew (October 22, 2021).

"Conservative pundit Ann Coulter speaks at Missouri State, says women shouldn't have the right to vote" .

Springfield News-Leader . Retrieved May 18, 2024 .

^ a b Coulter, Ann (June 6, 2007).

"Bush's America: Roach Motel" . anncoulter.com. Archived from the original on January 2, 2010 . Retrieved April 7, 2010 .

^ "Bush's America: Roach Hotel" .

www.anncoulter.com . June 6, 2007.

Archived from the original on December 28, 2017 . Retrieved September 9, 2018 .

^ "Ann Coulter Becomes a Single Issue Voter" . barelyablog.com. July 12, 2010.

Archived from the original on March 20, 2013 . Retrieved January 31, 2013 .

^ Thomsen, Jacqueline.

"Ann Coulter calls immigrant children 'child actors' " .

The Hill .

Archived from the original on June 20, 2018 . Retrieved June 20, 2018 .

^ "Trump Wants Pompeo to Study 'Killing of Farmers' in South Africa" .

The New York Times . August 23, 2018.

Archived from the original on August 27, 2018 . Retrieved January 29, 2019 .

^ "The creeping spectre of "white genocide" " .

The Outline . May 9, 2017.

Archived from the original on October 11, 2018 . Retrieved January 29, 2019 .

^ "Why Ann Coulter is dead wrong about immigration in America" .

The Daily Dot . May 28, 2015.

Archived from the original on January 15, 2019 . Retrieved January 29, 2019 .

^ "The far right's "Free Speech Week" at UC Berkeley, explained" .

Vox Media . September 21, 2017.

Archived from the original on August 20, 2018 . Retrieved January 29, 2019 .

^ "The high price of 'white genocide' politics for Australia" .

The Sydney Morning Herald . August 12, 2018.

Archived from the original on August 30, 2018 . Retrieved January 29, 2019 .

^ "Peter Dutton's offer to white South African farmers started on the far right" .

The Guardian . May 16, 2018.

Archived from the original on October 1, 2018 . Retrieved January 29, 2019 .

^ "Trump's tweet echoing white nationalist propaganda about South African farmers, explained" .

Salon . August 23, 2018.

Archived from the original on August 23, 2018 . Retrieved January 29, 2019 .

^ "The scary ideology behind Trump's immigration instincts" .

Vox Media . June 18, 2018.

Archived from the original on December 31, 2018 . Retrieved January 29, 2019 .

^ "Ann Coulter – A White Nationalist in the Mainstream?" .

Southern Poverty Law Center . May 27, 2015.

Archived from the original on December 31, 2018 . Retrieved January 29, 2019 .

^ a b "Ann Coulter Is a Human Being" .

Broadly . August 13, 2015.

Archived from the original on March 10, 2016 . Retrieved April 4, 2016 .

^ "Queen of the Hill: The World's Best Hillary Impersonator Is Ready for 2016" .

Broadly . September 8, 2015.

Archived from the original on March 10, 2016 . Retrieved April 4, 2016 .

"Shooting Guns With Ann Coulter" .

Broadly . August 11, 2015.

Archived from the original on March 10, 2016 . Retrieved April 4, 2016 .

^ "Supreme Court and Constitutional Authority | C-SPAN.org" .

www.c-span.org .

^ Ann Coulter (February 6, 2008).

"From Goldwater Girl to Hillary Girl" . anncoulter.com.

Archived from the original on November 4, 2016 . Retrieved January 29, 2019 .

^ "Ann Coulter: Chick-Fil-A Anti-Gay Stance 'Not An Anti-Gay Thing' " .

The Huffington Post . August 5, 2012.

Archived from the original on March 2, 2013 . Retrieved January 31, 2013 .

^ "Supreme Court and Constitutional Authority." *C-SPAN*, October 2003. Available at: https://www.c-span.org/video/?178812-1/supreme-court-constitutional-authority ^ "Conservatives Visit to Oppose Gay Marriages." *East Valley Tribune*, November 18, 2003. Available at: https://www.eastvalleytribune.com/news/conservatives-visit-to-oppose-gay-marriages/article_73a67a75-38bd-5f8f-abbd-f814c5297353.html ^ "Ann Coulter speech at DePaul divides students" .

RedEye . June 2, 2011. Archived from the original on July 11, 2013 . Retrieved January 31, 2013 .

^ Ann Coulter (June 15, 2011).

"Get Rid of Government – But First Make Me President!" .

anncoulter.com .

Archived from the original on September 23, 2015 . Retrieved April 4, 2016 .

^ "Massachusetts Supreme Court abolishes capitalism!" .

The Huffington Post . December 4, 2003.

Archived from the original on October 10, 2012 . Retrieved January 31, 2013 .

^ Bowman, David (July 25, 2003).

"Ann Coulter, woman" .

Archived from the original on September 24, 2018 . Retrieved January 29, 2019 .

^ "Ann Coulter Defends Don't Ask, Don't Tell, Booing Gay Soldier" .

The Huffington Post . September 29, 2011.

Archived from the original on December 20, 2013 . Retrieved January 31, 2013 .

^ Suebsaeng, Asawin.

"Ann Coulter Named GOProud's "Gay Icon," Will Serve as Council Chair" .

Mother Jones .

Archived from the original on September 24, 2018 . Retrieved September 9, 2018 .

^ "Lassie, Come Home" .

www.anncoulter.com . April 12, 2017.

Archived from the original on September 19, 2018 . Retrieved September 9, 2018 .

^ Ann Coulter.

"Commentary –Kwanzaa: A Holiday From the FBI" .

www.realclearpolitics.com .

Archived from the original on April 12, 2018 . Retrieved September 9, 2018 .

^ "Coulter under fire for anti-gay slur" .

CNN . March 4, 2007.

Archived from the original on January 27, 2014 . Retrieved May 3, 2013 .

^ "Ann Coulter Loves the Gays? Inside a Surprising Culture War" .

Esquire . September 27, 2010.

Archived from the original on January 11, 2012 . Retrieved January 31, 2013 .

^ "Coulter Says 'Gays Are Natural Conservatives' – To Cheers From CPAC Crowd" .

Metro Weekly . February 12, 2011. Archived from the original on September 22, 2011 . Retrieved January 31, 2013 .

^ "Ann Coulter On 'A List: Dallas': Liberals Would Abort Gay Babies (video)" .

The Huffington Post . December 8, 2011.

Archived from the original on April 19, 2012 . Retrieved January 31, 2013 .

^ "War on Drugs; Or, Conservative Inconsistency" .

Ricochet . March 12, 2013.

Archived from the original on March 15, 2013 . Retrieved May 3, 2013 .

^ "Ann Coulter Battles Libertarians" Archived March 30, 2014, at the Wayback Machine . Fox News Channel. February 21, 2013. Retrieved March 31, 2014.

^ Fung, Katherine (January 23, 2014).

"Ann Coulter Is Against Weed Because A Pool Guy Didn't Clean Her Pool, Or Something" .

Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on August 3, 2016 . Retrieved April 24, 2016 .

^ Croucher, Shane (April 18, 2019).

"Ann Coulter Would Vote for Bernie Sanders' Original Border Policy Despite 'The Rest of the Socialist Stuff' " .

Newsweek .

Archived from the original on May 4, 2019 . Retrieved May 4, 2019 .

^ "Real Clear Politics" .

Archived from the original on April 30, 2019 . Retrieved May 4, 2019 .

^ Aloi, Daniel (April 17, 2006).

"Conservative pundit Ann Coulter '84 to speak May 7" .

Cornell University . Archived from the original on April 30, 2006 . Retrieved September 27, 2011 .

^ Gurley, George (October 2, 2007).

"Coulter Culture" .

The New York Observer . Archived from the original on November 12, 2011 . Retrieved September 27, 2011 .

^ Hasen, Richard L. (2016).

Plutocrats United: Campaign Money, the Supreme Court, and the Distortion of American Elections . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. p. 66.

ISBN 978-0-300-21245-7 .

^ a b Conason, Joe; Lyons, Gene. " Impeachment's little elves ".

Salon . March 4, 2000. Retrieved July 10, 2006.

Archived February 12, 2006, at the Wayback Machine ^ Barak, Daphne. " Jones would have been happy with an apology ".

Irish Examiner . September 23, 1998. Retrieved July 10, 2006.

Archived August 12, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ Coulter, Ann (May 1999). "Spikey and me".

George .

^ a b c Jones, Paula. " Paula Jones describes why she's posing for Penthouse Archived February 25, 2007, at the Wayback Machine ".

Larry King Live . CNN. October 24, 2000. Retrieved October 24, 2000 ^ Ann Coulter " "'Trailer park trash' strikes back ".

Human Events . January 30, 1998. Retrieved November 18, 2006 ^ Coulter, Ann. " Clinton sure can pick 'em Archived March 8, 2005, at the Wayback Machine ".

Jewish World Review . October 30, 2000. Retrieved July 11, 2006.

^ "This Is War" .

National Review . September 14, 2001. Archived from the original on September 14, 2001 . Retrieved December 10, 2011 .

^ a b "Rough Sailing for the New Darling on the Racial Right".

The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education (34): 44. 2001.

JSTOR 3134110 .

ProQuest 195525219 .

^ Jim Ritter, "Muslims see a growing media bias", Chicago Sun-Times , September 4, 2006 ^ Coulter, Ann (September 28, 2001).

"Future widows of America: Write your congressman" .

Jewish World Review .

Archived from the original on April 16, 2007 . Retrieved April 16, 2007 .

^ Coulter, Ann. " Mineta's Bataan death march Archived August 26, 2005, at the Wayback Machine ", Jewish World Review . February 28, 2002. Retrieved July 11, 2006.

^ Coulter, Ann (November 22, 2006).

"What can I do to make your flight more uncomfortable?" . AnnCoulter.com. Archived from the original on March 26, 2007 . Retrieved April 17, 2007 .

^ Coulter, Ann. " This whistle-blower they like Archived October 24, 2006, at the Wayback Machine ", Jewish World Review June 13, 2002. Retrieved October 1, 2006.

Smith, Michael; Roy, Amit (October 30, 2001).

"Britons who join Taliban to face trial" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on December 10, 2007 . Retrieved November 30, 2007 .

^ Coulter, Ann. " Arab hijackers now eligible for pre-boarding Archived August 11, 2006, at the Wayback Machine " Jewish World Review April 29, 2004. Retrieved July 11, 2006.

^ Webster, Stephen C (April 23, 2013).

"Coulter: Boston suspect's widow 'ought to be in prison for wearing a hijab' " .

Raw Story .

Archived from the original on May 2, 2013 . Retrieved April 30, 2013 .

^ Garrett Quinn (March 16, 2013).

"Ann Coulter Blasts Chris Christie, Says He's 'Off My List' For 2016 In Fiery CPAC Speech" .

Mediaite .

Archived from the original on April 25, 2013 . Retrieved May 15, 2013 .

^ "Ann Coulter CPAC: Pundit Tells Chris Christie Weight Joke, Calls Bill Clinton 'Forcible Rapist' " .

The Huffington Post . March 16, 2013. Archived from the original on April 18, 2013 . Retrieved May 15, 2013 .

^ Edison Hayden, Michael; Gais, Hannah (December 20, 2020).

"White Nationalists Sought Resumes for Trump White House, Emails Show" .

HateWatch . Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved August 15, 2021 .

^ Malice, Michael (May 14, 2019).

The New Right: A Journey to the Fringe of American Politics . New York, N.Y.: St. Martin's Publishing Group.

ISBN 978-1-250-15467-5 . Retrieved August 15, 2021 .

^ Klein, Adam (2017).

Fanaticism, racism, and rage online: corrupting the digital sphere . Cham, Switzerland: Springer. p. 76.

ISBN 978-3-319-51424-6 .

VDARE's web contributors have included noted conservative pundits lke Pat Buchanan, Ann Coulter, and Michelle Malkin, as well as noted white supremacists such as Jared Taylor and John Philippe Rushton ... While the friends it has acquired in politics and journalism have long protected VDARE from greater scrutiny, its digital record has gradually exposed its character as a racially consumed, xenophobic community "Michelle Malkin's White Supremacist Ties" .

The Huffington Post . May 12, 2006.

Archived from the original on March 24, 2015 . Retrieved March 24, 2015 .

"VDARE" .

Southern Poverty Law Center . Retrieved August 15, 2021 .

Dewey, Caitlin (March 17, 2015).

"Amazon, PayPal and Spotify inadvertently fund white supremacists. Here's how" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on August 11, 2017 . Retrieved August 24, 2017 .

^ "Ann Coulter endorses the "magnificent" Duncan Hunter for President - John Hawkins' Right Wing News" . July 3, 2007.

Archived from the original on June 14, 2018 . Retrieved September 9, 2018 .

^ "Coulter endorses Romney" .

The Daily Beast . January 16, 2008.

Archived from the original on January 16, 2014 . Retrieved May 3, 2013 .

^ "Coulter Gives Up, Endorses Mitt Romney: 'You've Got To Go With What You Have' " .

Mediaite . October 15, 2011.

Archived from the original on April 7, 2013 . Retrieved May 3, 2013 .

^ "Ann Coulter Endorses Donald Trump – The Bull Elephant" .

The Bull Elephant . August 3, 2015.

Archived from the original on March 19, 2016 . Retrieved April 4, 2016 .

^ "Right wing commentator Ann Coulter lashes out at Trump over 'dreamers' " .

The Daily Telegraph . September 15, 2017.

Archived from the original on February 21, 2018 . Retrieved February 20, 2018 .

^ "Ann Coulter says she's now a 'Former Trumper' - Opinion" . April 2, 2018.

Archived from the original on July 14, 2018 . Retrieved September 9, 2018 .

^ Jonathan Kyncl, 'Going on with Trumpism without Trump,' Ann Coulter speaks at OU Turning Point USA student event , OU Daily (November 6, 2020).

^ Devika Desai, Ann Coulter blames 'wonderboy' Jared Kushner for Trump's 2020 election defeat , Postmedia News (November 23, 2020).

^ Jones, Kipp (August 11, 2024).

"Ann Coulter Bashes Trump as an 'Awful, Awful Person' — But Says She's Voting for Him Anyway Because of JD Vance" .

MSN . Retrieved August 11, 2024 .

^ "Coulter endorses Brannon, bashes Tillis" .

Archived from the original on March 10, 2014 . Retrieved September 9, 2018 .

^ "Ann Coulter rallies Paul Nehlen supporters" .

Jsonline.com . August 6, 2016.

Archived from the original on August 23, 2016 . Retrieved January 8, 2017 .

^ "December 13, 2017 - WHY I SECRETLY WANTED MOORE TO LOSE: BROOKS 2020!" .

www.anncoulter.com . December 13, 2017.

Archived from the original on December 23, 2017 . Retrieved September 9, 2018 .

^ "Coulter: We Want Jews To Be "Perfected" " .

CBS News . February 11, 2009.

Archived from the original on June 29, 2011 . Retrieved September 27, 2011 .

^ "Columnist Ann Coulter Shocks Cable TV Show, Declaring 'Jews Need to be Perfected by Becoming Christians' " .

Fox News . October 11, 2007.

Archived from the original on October 7, 2011 . Retrieved September 27, 2011 .

^ "Coulter draws fire over remarks about Jews" .

NBC News . October 11, 2007.

Archived from the original on November 2, 2013 . Retrieved September 27, 2011 .

^ Burston, B. (October 14, 2007). Ann Coulter's dream of a Jew-free America.

Haaretz.com archive Archived 2017-08-09 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved May 19, 2015.

^ Meyer, Dick (February 11, 2009).

"Jewish Groups Condemn, Boycott Ann Coulter" .

CBS News .

Archived from the original on May 24, 2011 . Retrieved September 27, 2011 .

^ "Ann Coulter's Expletive Might Be her Way of 'Perfecting' Jews and the GOP" .

JewishPress.com . JNi.Media. September 20, 2015.

Archived from the original on January 26, 2019 . Retrieved November 5, 2018 .

^ Prager, Dennis (October 16, 2007).

"Ann Coulter Wants Jews to Become Christian-So What?" . Townhall.com.

Archived from the original on November 12, 2011 . Retrieved September 27, 2011 .

^ Prager, Dennis (September 27, 2015).

"No, Ann Coulter Is Not an Anti-Semite" . The Forward Association.

Archived from the original on November 8, 2018 . Retrieved November 7, 2018 .

^ Nelson, Chris (November 2007).

"Horowitz Defends Coulter's Jewish Remark: It's All Donnie Deutsch's Fault" .

Huffington Post .

Archived from the original on August 22, 2015 . Retrieved January 29, 2019 .

^ a b Chan, Melissa (September 17, 2015).

"Ann Coulter sparks outrage over 'anti-Semitic' tweet, rant about 'Jews' during GOP debate" .

Daily News . New York.

Archived from the original on September 19, 2015 . Retrieved September 17, 2015 .

^ "ADL Calls Ann Coulter's Tweets "Ugly, Spiteful and Anti-Semitic" " (Press release). September 17, 2015.

Archived from the original on September 20, 2015 . Retrieved September 17, 2015 .

^ a b c Dietz, Rob (July 6, 2006).

"Olbermann hosted plagiarism expert to spell out allegations against Coulter" .

Media Matters for America . Archived from the original on August 31, 2018 . Retrieved August 30, 2018 .

^ Fearnow, Benjamin (May 13, 2019).

"Liberal activist group targets Fox News advertisers with "Drop Fox" ad, encourages them to stop funding lies" .

Newsweek .

^ "Media Matters asks Random House to investigate Coulter plagiarism allegations" .

Media Matters for America . October 10, 2007.

Archived from the original on November 30, 2016 . Retrieved October 12, 2016 .

^ Bowles, Cheryl (July 11, 2006).

"Sorry, harpies--syndicator sees no Coulter plagiarism" .

Chicago Tribune .

Archived from the original on November 16, 2018 . Retrieved November 7, 2018 .

^ "Syndicate supports Ann Coulter" .

United Press International . July 11, 2006.

Archived from the original on November 8, 2018 . Retrieved November 7, 2018 .

^ Nemitz, Bill (July 23, 2006). "Wonder how Ann Coulter fills her books?".

Portland Press Herald .

^ Sullivan, Kaitlin (August 22, 2024).

"What is a nonverbal learning disorder? Tim Walz's son Gus' condition, explained" .

NBC News . Retrieved August 23, 2024 .

^ TOI World Desk (August 22, 2024).

"Ann Coulter called 'bully', 'soulless' after her 'weird' attack on Gus Walz" .

The Times of India . Retrieved August 22, 2024 .

^ Adolphus, Emell Derra (August 25, 2024).

"Comedian Whose Gus Walz Defense Went Viral Has 'Always Hated' Ann Coulter" .

The Daily Beast . Retrieved July 21, 2025 .

^ Lavine, Owen (August 22, 2024).

"Ann Coulter Deletes Heartless Gus Walz Tweet After Backlash" .

The Daily Beast . Retrieved August 22, 2024 .

^ Sharfman, Alexandra (July 7, 2025).

"Cherokee Nation chief condemns Ann Coulter's post as dangerous hate speech against Natives" .

KTUL . Retrieved July 7, 2025 .

^ Ann Coulter (August 18, 2024).

Ann Coulter Speaks on Liberals, Islam, and More . YouTube: Conservative News . Retrieved August 29, 2024 .

^ Gurley, George (August 25, 2002).

"Coultergeist" .

The New York Observer .

Archived from the original on August 9, 2011 . Retrieved June 28, 2009 .

^ Peretz, Evgenia (April 9, 2015).

"Get a Rare Glimpse of Dinesh D'Souza's Life After Conviction" .

Vanity Fair . Retrieved August 12, 2021 .

^ "SPLIT!!!!! Ann Coulter and Andrew Stein" .

New York . January 7, 2008.

Archived from the original on October 11, 2014 . Retrieved May 11, 2014 .

^ Clarendon, Dan (December 8, 2020).

"Ann Coulter Has Good Times, Not Romance, With 'Good Times' Star Jimmie Walker" .

distractify.com . Retrieved August 11, 2024 .

^ Nuzzi, Olivia (March 18, 2017).

"Kellyanne Conway Is the Real First Lady of Trump's America" .

Archived from the original on March 20, 2017 . Retrieved March 20, 2017 .

^ "Ann Coulter is cleared in probe of election" .

Gainesville Sun .

^ Holson, Laura M. (October 8, 2010).

"Outflanked on Right, Coulter Seeks New Image" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 30, 2012 . Retrieved May 3, 2013 .

^ Lisberg, Adam. " Her disputed elex ballot sparks probe in Florida ".

Daily News . June 8, 2006. Retrieved August 21, 2007.

External links Ann Coulter at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Official website Ann Coulter at IMDb Appearances on C-SPAN In Depth interview with Coulter, August 7, 2011 Ann Coulter at the Muck Rack journalist directory Column archives Ann Coulter column archive for Human Events articles at BNet Find Articles with advanced search (1998–2007) Ann Coulter column archive at Human Events (2002–present) (use search feature) Ann Coulter column archive at National Review (2000–2001) Ann Coulter column archive Archived September 29, 2013, at the Wayback Machine at uExpress.com (1999–present) [select headline archive] v t e Works by Ann Coulter High Crimes and Misdemeanors: The Case Against Bill Clinton Slander: Liberal Lies About the American Right Treason: Liberal Treachery from the Cold War to the War on Terrorism How to Talk to a Liberal (If You Must) Godless: The Church of Liberalism If Democrats Had Any Brains, They'd Be Republicans Guilty: Liberal "Victims" and Their Assault on America Demonic: How the Liberal Mob Is Endangering America Mugged: Racial Demagoguery from the Seventies to Obama Never Trust a Liberal Over 3—Especially a Republican ¡Adios, America!

In Trump We Trust Resistance Is Futile!

v t e Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Libertarian Moderate Movement Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Progressive Social Traditionalist Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian nationalism Classical liberalism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Gender essentialism Complementarianism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Militarism Moral absolutism Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Protectionism Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Tradition People Presidents Adams (John) Adams (John Quincy) G. H. W. Bush G. W. Bush Cleveland Coolidge Harding Hoover McKinley Nixon Reagan W. H. Taft Trump Washington Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan II Kavanaugh Kennedy O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft Thomas Vermeule Yoo Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Buckley Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eastman Eliot Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hazony Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kendall Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lasch Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet O'Connor Ong Ransom Rieff Santayana Sowell Strauss Viereck Voegelin Washington Weaver Yarvin Other figures Ailes Atwater Beck Breitbart Carlson Cheney Coulter Cruz DeSantis Dilling Elder Falwell Gingrich Giuliani Goldwater Hannity Ingraham Levin Limbaugh Lindbergh Lodge Lovecraft McCain McCarthy McConnell Novak O'Reilly Palin Rand Paul Ron Paul Pence Perot Quayle Romney Rove Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Schlafly Shapiro Stone Robert A. Taft Booker T. Washington Parties American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party of New York State Constitution Party Republican Party Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Movements Alt-right Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Dark Enlightenment Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBT Libertarian Republicans Militia movement Patriot movement Christian Radical Right Reactionary feminism Tea Party movement Trumpism Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Historical factions Bourbon Democrats Dixiecrats Loyalists Old Right Redeemers Southern Agrarians Other organizations 1789 Capital ATR FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Rockbridge Network Tea Party Patriots USCC Literature Democracy in America (1835–1840) Democracy and Leadership (1924) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) Losing Ground (1984) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Bell Curve (1994) A Republic, Not an Empire (1999) Hillbilly Elegy (2017) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) See also American nationalism Bibliography of conservatism in the United States List of American conservatives National conservatism Southern strategy Conservatism portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Netherlands Norway Korea Poland Israel Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐kbbtm
Cached time: 20250817043648
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.285 seconds
Real time usage: 2.611 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14718/1000000
Revision size: 139687/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 535969/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14046/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 759055/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.455/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 11671525/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2173.086      1 -total
 53.09% 1153.606      1 Template:Reflist
 21.43%  465.762     89 Template:Cite_news
 18.65%  405.248     76 Template:Cite_web
  9.56%  207.755     20 Template:Cite_book
  8.90%  193.322      1 Template:Infobox_person
  5.52%  119.896      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  4.91%  106.743      3 Template:Navbox
  3.82%   83.004      7 Template:Cite_journal
  3.71%   80.586      1 Template:Conservatism_US_footer Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:205522:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043648 and revision id 1306278318. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ann_Coulter&oldid=1306278318 " Categories : 1961 births Living people 20th-century American women writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century Presbyterians 21st-century American women writers 21st-century American non-fiction writers 21st-century Presbyterians Right-wing politics in the United States American Christians American women columnists American conspiracy theorists American critics of Islam American people of German descent American people of Irish descent American political commentators American critics of atheism American political writers American Presbyterians American women non-fiction writers American white nationalists California Republicans Clinton–Lewinsky scandal Connecticut Republicans Conservatism in the United States Cornell University alumni Christian critics of Islam Critics of multiculturalism Female critics of feminism Florida Republicans Former atheists and agnostics FrontPage Magazine people Human Events people Intelligent design advocates Lawyers from New York City National Review people New York (state) Republicans People from New Canaan, Connecticut Mass media people from New York City University of Michigan Law School alumni WorldNetDaily people Writers from California Writers from Connecticut Writers from Florida Writers from New York City Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: publisher location Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected biographies of living people Use mdy dates from August 2020 Biography with signature Articles with hCards Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing potentially dated statements from May 2009 All articles containing potentially dated statements Wikipedia articles in need of updating from March 2018 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Articles with criticism or controversy sections from May 2025 All articles with criticism or controversy sections People appearing on C-SPAN Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 22:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ann Coulter 40 languages Add topic

