Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Usage 2 Oligarchs versus commoners in Ancient Greece Toggle Oligarchs versus commoners in Ancient Greece subsection 2.1 Thucydides 2.2 Aristotle 2.3 Socrates 2.4 Plutarch 3 Patricians versus plebeians in Ancient Rome Toggle Patricians versus plebeians in Ancient Rome subsection 3.1 Camillus 3.2 Marius 3.3 Tiberius Gracchus 3.4 Julius Caesar 3.5 Coriolanus 3.6 Landlessness and debt 4 Enlightenment era Toggle Enlightenment era subsection 4.1 Jean-Jacques Rousseau 4.2 Thomas Jefferson 4.3 James Madison 4.4 Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel 5 Capitalist societies Toggle Capitalist societies subsection 5.1 Adam Smith 5.1.1 Inequality in the distribution of wealth 5.1.2 Violence against commoners by feudal lords 5.1.3 Distribution of incomes into wages, profit and rent 5.1.4 Wage negotiations and trade unions 5.1.5 Conflict between classes 5.2 Karl Marx 5.3 John Stuart Mill 5.4 Max Weber 5.5 Charles Comte and Charles Dunoyer 5.6 Other perspectives 6 Twentieth and twenty-first centuries Toggle Twentieth and twenty-first centuries subsection 6.1 Soviet Union and similar societies 6.2 United States 6.3 Post-2008 financial crisis 6.4 Arab Spring 7 Relationship to race 8 Chronology 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Class struggle 69 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский سرائیکی Shqip Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Class conflict ) Concept in political and social science Several terms  redirect here. For other uses, see Class war (disambiguation) and Class Struggle (disambiguation) .

This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article possibly contains original research .

Please improve it by verifying the claims made and adding inline citations . Statements consisting only of original research should be removed.

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article contains too many or overly lengthy quotations .

Please help summarise the quotations . Consider transferring direct quotations to Wikiquote or excerpts to Wikisource .

( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Class struggle" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Pyramid of Capitalist System visualizes and explains class conflict.

Part of a series on Revolution Characteristics Bourgeois Colour Communist Counter-revolutionary Democratic Nonviolent Passive Permanent Proletarian From above Wave Social Methods Boycott Civil disorder Civil war Class struggle Contentious politics Coup d'état Demonstration Human chain Direct action Guerrilla warfare Insurgency Mass mobilization Mutiny Protest Rebellion Resistance Nonviolent Civil Disobedience Riot Samizdat Strike action Tax resistance Terror Examples English Atlantic American Brabant Liège French Haitian Spanish American Serbian Greek 1820s 1830 July Belgian Texas 1848 Italian states February German Hungarian Eureka Bulgarian unification Philippine Iranian First Second Young Turk Mexican Chinese Xinhai Communist Cultural 1917–1923 Russian German Siamese Spanish August Guatemalan Hungarian (1956) Cuban Rwandan Nicaraguan Argentine Carnation Saur People Power 1989 Yogurt Velvet Romanian Singing Bolivarian Bulldozer Rose Orange Tulip Kyrgyz Arab Spring Tunisian Egyptian Yemeni Euromaidan Second Arab Spring Sudanese Politics portal v t e In political science , the term class struggle , class conflict , or class war refers to the economic antagonism and political tension that exist among social classes because of clashing interests, competition for limited resources, and inequalities of power in the socioeconomic hierarchy.

[ 1 ] In its simplest manifestation, class struggle refers to the ongoing battle between the rich and poor .

[ 2 ] In the writings of several leftist , socialist , and communist theorists, notably those of Karl Marx , class struggle is a core tenet and a practical means for effecting radical sociopolitical transformations for the majority working class .

[ 3 ] It is also a central concept within conflict theories of sociology and political philosophy .

Class struggle can reveal itself through: Direct violence, such as assassinations, coups , revolutions , counterrevolutions , and civil wars for control of government, natural resources, and labor; Indirect violence, such as deaths from poverty, malnutrition, illness, and unsafe workplaces; Economic coercion, such as boycotts and strikes , the threat of unemployment and capital flight , the withdrawal of investment capital ; Political machinations through lobbying (legal and illegal), bribery of legislators, voter suppression and disenfranchisement ; Ideological struggle by way of propaganda and political literature .

[ 1 ] In the economic sphere, class struggle is sometimes expressed overtly, such as owner lockouts of their employees in an effort to weaken the bargaining power of the employees' union ; or covertly, such as a worker slowdown of production or the widespread, simultaneous use of sick leave (e.g., " blue flu ") to protest unfair labor practices , low wages, poor work conditions , or a perceived injustice to a fellow worker.

[ 4 ] Usage [ edit ] Truck drivers fight the police in the course of the Minneapolis Teamsters Strike of 1934 Heads of aristocrats on pikes at the storming of the Bastille Farmer confronting landlord during China's Land Reform Movement When Marxists speak of class struggle, they define a class primarily in economic terms, i.e., by its relationship to the means of production . When anarchists like Bakunin speak of class struggle, they have a broader definition of "social class" which encompasses "notions of domination and privilege" in the political and cultural spheres as well as the economic.

[ 5 ] Bakunin believed the successful struggle of the dominated classes would achieve a revolution to depose the ruling elites and create a stateless or libertarian socialism , and that a prerequisite for successful revolution is class solidarity .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Marx's theory of history asserts that in the history of economic systems such as capitalism and feudalism , class struggle is "the central fact of social evolution." [ 8 ] Indeed, the first sentence of Chapter 1 of the Communist Manifesto reads: "The history of all hitherto existing society is the history of class struggles." [ 9 ] Marxists view the struggle's resolution in favor of the working class to be inevitable under plutocratic capitalism.

Oligarchs versus commoners in Ancient Greece [ edit ] Where societies are socially divided based on status, wealth, or control of social production and distribution, class structures arise and are thus coeval with civilization itself. The rise of class structures eventually leads to class conflict. It is a pattern that has repeated since at least European classical antiquity as illustrated in the Conflict of the Orders and the slave revolt led by Spartacus .

[ 10 ] Thucydides [ edit ] In his History , Thucydides describes a civil war in the city of Corcyra between the pro- Athens party of the common people and their pro- Corinth oligarchic opposition. Near the climax of the struggle, "the oligarchs in full rout, fearing that the victorious commons might assault and carry the arsenal and put them to the sword, fired the houses round the market-place and the lodging-houses, in order to bar their advance." [ 11 ] The historian Tacitus would later recount a similar class conflict in the city of Seleucia , in which disharmony between the oligarchs and the commoners would typically lead to each side calling on outside help to defeat the other.

[ 12 ] Thucydides believed that "as long as poverty gives men the courage of necessity, [...] so long will the impulse never be wanting to drive men into danger." [ 13 ] Aristotle [ edit ] In the Politics , Aristotle describes the basic dimensions of class conflict: "Again, because the rich are generally few in number, while the poor are many, they appear to be antagonistic, and as the one or the other prevails they form the government.".

[ 14 ] Aristotle also commented that "poverty is the parent of revolution", [ 15 ] but did not consider poverty to be the only cause of revolution. In a society where property is distributed equally throughout the community, "the nobles will be dissatisfied, because they think themselves worthy of more than an equal share of honors; and this is often found to be a cause of sedition and revolution." [ 16 ] Moreover, Aristotle said that it was wrong for the poor to seize the wealth of the rich and divide it among themselves, but he said that it is wrong for the rich to impoverish the multitude.

[ 17 ] Moreover, Aristotle further discussed a middle way, between laxity and cruelty, in the treatment of slaves by their masters, averring that "if not kept in hand, [slaves] are insolent, and think that they are as good as their masters, and, if harshly treated, they hate and conspire against them." [ 18 ] Socrates [ edit ] Socrates was the first Greek philosopher to describe class conflict. In the Republic , by Plato , Socrates said that "any city, however small, is in fact divided into two, one the city of the poor, the other [the city] of the rich; these [cities] are at war with one another." [ 19 ] Socrates disapproved of oligarchies , in which members of a small class of wealthy property owners take positions of political power in order to dominate the large social class of impoverished commoners; and used the analogy of a maritime pilot , who, like the power-holder in a polis , ought to be chosen for political office for his skill, not for the amount of property he owns.

[ 20 ] Plutarch [ edit ] This 6th century Athenian black-figure urn, in the British Museum , depicts the olive harvest. Many farmers, enslaved for debt, would have worked on large estates for their creditors.

The historian Plutarch recounts how the Greek people participated in the class conflict between the aristocrats and the common folk. Financially oppressed by their indebtedness to the aristocrats, the mass of Athenians chose Solon to be the lawgiver to lead them to freedom from their creditors.

[ 21 ] The philosopher Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel said that Solon's constitution of the Athenian popular assembly created a political sphere that balanced the competing socio-economic interests of the social classes of Athens: The wealthy aristocratic party of the plain The poor common party of the mountains The moderate party of the coast [ 22 ] Participating in a war among the social classes of Ancient Greece was a dangerous political endeavour. In his book Parallel Lives , Plutarch wrote of two Spartan kings, Agis and Cleomenes , who  "being desirous to raise the people, and to restore the noble and just form of government, now long fallen into disuse, [they] incurred the hatred of the rich and powerful, who could not endure to be deprived of the selfish enjoyment to which they were accustomed." [ 23 ] Patricians versus plebeians in Ancient Rome [ edit ] It was similarly difficult for the Romans to maintain peace between the upper class, the patricians , and the lower class, the plebs . French Enlightenment philosopher Montesquieu notes that this conflict intensified after the overthrow of the Roman monarchy .

[ 24 ] In The Spirit of Laws he lists the four main grievances of the plebs, which were rectified in the years following the deposition of King Tarquin : The patricians had much too easy access to positions of public service.

The constitution granted the consuls far too much power.

The plebs were constantly verbally slighted.

The plebs had too little power in their assemblies.

[ 25 ] Camillus [ edit ] The Senate had the ability to give a magistrate the power of dictatorship , meaning he could bypass public law in the pursuit of a prescribed mandate. Montesquieu explains that the purpose of this institution was to tilt the balance of power in favour of the patricians.

[ 26 ] However, in an attempt to resolve a conflict between the patricians and the plebs, the dictator Camillus used his power of dictatorship to coerce the Senate into giving the plebs the right to choose one of the two consuls.

[ 27 ] Marius [ edit ] Tacitus believed that the increase in Roman power spurred the patricians to expand their power over more and more cities. This process, he felt, exacerbated pre-existing class tensions with the plebs, and eventually culminated in a civil war between the patrician Sulla and the populist reformer Marius .

[ 28 ] Marius had taken the step of enlisting capite censi , the very lowest class of citizens, into the army, for the first time allowing non-land owners into the legions .

Tiberius Gracchus [ edit ] Tiberius Gracchus Of all the notable figures discussed by Plutarch and Tacitus, agrarian reformer Tiberius Gracchus may have most challenged the upper classes and most championed the cause of the lower classes. In a speech to the common soldiery, he decried their lowly conditions: "The savage beasts," said he, "in Italy, have their particular dens, they have their places of repose and refuge; but the men who bear arms, and expose their lives for the safety of their country, enjoy in the meantime nothing more in it but the air and light; and having no houses or settlements of their own, are constrained to wander from place to place with their wives and children." Following this observation, he remarked that these men "fought indeed and were slain, but it was to maintain the luxury and the wealth of other men." [ 29 ] Cicero believed that Tiberius Gracchus's reforming efforts saved Rome from tyranny, arguing: Tiberius Gracchus (says Cicero) caused the free-men to be admitted into the tribes , not by the force of his eloquence, but by a word, by a gesture; which had he not effected, the republic, whose drooping head we are at present scarce able to uphold, would not even exist.

[ 30 ] Tiberius Gracchus weakened the power of the Senate by changing the law so that judges were chosen from the ranks of the knights , instead of their social superiors in the senatorial class.

[ 31 ] Julius Caesar [ edit ] This article may lend undue weight to certain ideas, incidents, or controversies .

Please help improve it by rewriting it in a balanced fashion that contextualises different points of view.

( August 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Contrary to Shakespeare's depiction of Julius Caesar in the tragedy Julius Caesar , historian Michael Parenti has argued that Caesar was a populist, not a tyrant. In 2003 The New Press published Parenti's The Assassination of Julius Caesar: A People's History of Ancient Rome.

[ 32 ] Publishers Weekly said "Parenti [...] narrates a provocative history of the late republic in Rome (100–33 BC) to demonstrate that Caesar's death was the culmination of growing class conflict, economic disparity and political corruption." [ 33 ] Kirkus Reviews wrote: "Populist historian Parenti... views ancient Rome's most famous assassination not as a tyrannicide but as a sanguinary scene in the never-ending drama of class warfare." [ 32 ] Coriolanus [ edit ] Coriolanus , Act V, Scene III. Engraved by James Caldwell from a painting by Gavin Hamilton The patrician Coriolanus , whose life William Shakespeare would later depict in the tragic play Coriolanus , fought on the other side of the class war, for the patricians and against the plebs. When grain arrived to relieve a serious shortage in the city of Rome, the plebs made it known that they felt it ought to be divided amongst them as a gift, but Coriolanus stood up in the Senate against this idea on the grounds that it would empower the plebs at the expense of the patricians.

[ 34 ] This decision would eventually contribute to Coriolanus's undoing when he was impeached following a trial by the tribunes of the plebs . Montesquieu recounts how Coriolanus castigated the tribunes for trying a patrician, when in his mind no one but a consul had that right, although a law had been passed stipulating that all appeals affecting the life of a citizen had to be brought before the plebs.

[ 35 ] In the first scene of Shakespeare's Coriolanus , a crowd of angry plebs gathers in Rome to denounce Coriolanus as the "chief enemy to the people" and "a very dog to the commonalty" while the leader of the mob speaks out against the patricians thusly: They ne'er cared for us yet: suffer us to famish, and their store-houses crammed with grain; make edicts for usury, to support usurers; repeal daily any wholesome act established against the rich, and provide more piercing statutes daily, to chain up and restrain the poor. If the wars eat us not up, they will; and there's all the love they bear us.

[ 36 ] Landlessness and debt [ edit ] The Secession of the People to the Mons Sacer , engraving by B. Barloccini, 1849 Enlightenment -era historian Edward Gibbon might have agreed with this narrative of Roman class conflict. In the third volume of The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire , he relates the origins of the struggle: [T]he plebeians of Rome [...] had been oppressed from the earliest times by the weight of debt and usury; and the husbandman, during the term of his military service, was obliged to abandon the cultivation of his farm. The lands of Italy which had been originally divided among the families of free and indigent proprietors, were insensibly purchased or usurped by the avarice of the nobles; and in the age which preceded the fall of the republic, it was computed that only two thousand citizens were possessed of an independent substance.

Hegel similarly states that the 'severity of the patricians their creditors, the debts due to whom they had to discharge by slave-work, drove the plebs to revolts.' [ 37 ] Gibbon also explains how Augustus facilitated this class conflict by pacifying the plebs with actual bread and circuses .

[ 38 ] The economist Adam Smith noted that the poor freeman's lack of land provided a major impetus for Roman colonisation , as a way to relieve class tensions at home between the rich and the landless poor.

[ 39 ] Hegel described the same phenomenon happening in the impetus to Greek colonisation .

[ 40 ] Enlightenment era [ edit ] Writing in pre-capitalist Europe, the Swiss philosophe Jean-Jacques Rousseau and the Federalist statesman James Madison across the Atlantic Ocean made significant remarks on the dynamics of class struggle. Later, German idealist Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel would also contribute his perspective to the discussion around class conflict between employers and employees.

Jean-Jacques Rousseau [ edit ] Rousseau by Maurice Quentin de La Tour , 1753 It was with bitter sarcasm that Rousseau outlined the class conflict prevailing in his day between masters and their workmen: You have need of me, because I am rich and you are poor. We will therefore come to an agreement. I will permit you to have the honour of serving me, on condition that you bestow on me the little you have left, in return for the pains I shall take to command you.

[ 41 ] Rousseau argued that the most important task of any government is to fight in class warfare on the side of workmen against their masters, who he said engage in exploitation under the pretence of serving society.

[ 42 ] Specifically, he believed that governments should actively intervene in the economy to abolish poverty and prevent the accrual of too much wealth in the hands of too few men.

[ 43 ] Thomas Jefferson [ edit ] Thomas Jefferson (1743–1826) led the U.S. as president from 1801 to 1809 and is considered one of America's Founding Fathers . Regarding the interaction between social classes, he wrote: I am convinced that those societies (as the Indians ) which live without government enjoy in their general mass an infinitely greater degree of happiness than those who live under the European governments. Among the former, public opinion is in the place of law, & restrains morals as powerfully as laws ever did anywhere. Among the latter, under pretence of governing they have divided their nations into two classes, wolves & sheep. I do not exaggerate. This is a true picture of Europe. Cherish therefore the spirit of our people, and keep alive their attention. Do not be too severe upon their errors, but reclaim them by enlightening them. If once they become inattentive to the public affairs, you & I, & Congress & Assemblies, judges & governors shall all become wolves. It seems to be the law of our general nature, in spite of individual exceptions; and experience declares that man is the only animal which devours his own kind, for I can apply no milder term to the governments of Europe, and to the general prey of the rich on the poor.

[ 44 ] — Thomas Jefferson , Letter to Edward Carrington – 16 January 1787 James Madison [ edit ] In his Federalist No. 10 , James Madison revealed an emphatic concern with the conflict between rich and poor, commenting that "the most common and durable source of factions has been the various and unequal distribution of property. Those who hold and those who are without property have ever formed distinct interests in society. Those who are creditors, and those who are debtors, fall under a like discrimination." [ 45 ] He welcomed class-based factions into political life as a necessary result of political liberty, stating that the most important task of government was to manage and adjust for 'the spirit of party'.

[ 46 ] Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel [ edit ] In his Philosophy of Right , Hegel expressed concern that the standard of living of the poor might drop so far as to make it even easier for the rich to amass even more wealth.

[ 47 ] Hegel believed that, especially in a liberal country such as contemporary England, the poorest will politicise their situation, channelling their frustrations against the rich: Against nature man can claim no right, but once society is established, poverty immediately takes the form of a wrong done to one class by another.

[ 48 ] Capitalist societies [ edit ] Class conflict is most commonly described as occurring within capitalist societies. The conflict manifests itself as clashes between the capitalist class and working class, and takes the form of disputes over hours of work, amount paid in wages, division of profits, culture in the workplace, cost of consumer goods, cost of rent, control over parliament or government bureaucracy , and economic inequality . Even a seemingly benign humanitarian program such as government-provided disaster relief can exacerbate class conflict if the relief is seen as being unequally distributed depending on the recipient's class.

[ 49 ] Adam Smith [ edit ] Inequality in the distribution of wealth [ edit ] Like Rousseau, the classical liberal Adam Smith believed that the amassing of property in the hands of a minority naturally resulted in a disharmonious state of affairs. He said that "avarice and ambition in the rich, in the poor the hatred of labour and the love of present ease and enjoyment, are the passions which prompt to invade property", requiring a government to protect property rights: Wherever there is a great property, there is great inequality. For one very rich man, there must be at least five hundred poor, and the affluence of the few supposes the indigence of the many. The affluence of the rich excites the indignation of the poor, who are often both driven by want, and prompted by envy to invade his possessions. It is only under the shelter of the civil magistrate, that the owner of that valuable property, which is acquired by the labour of many years, or perhaps of many successive generations, can sleep a single night in security. He is at all times surrounded by unknown enemies, whom, though he never provoked, he can never appease, and from whose injustice he can be protected only by the powerful arm of the civil magistrate, continually held up to chastise it.

[ 50 ] Writing The Wealth of Nations , Smith's concern was the welfare of the ordinary workers who make up society and provide for it: No society can surely be flourishing and happy, of which the far greater part of the members are poor and miserable. It is but equity, besides, that they who feed, clothe, and lodge the whole body of the people, should have such a share of the produce of their own labour as to be themselves tolerably well fed, clothed, and lodged.

[ 51 ] Regarding the extravagant consumption of the aristocracy, he remarked that: All for ourselves, and nothing for other people, seems, in every age of the world, to have been the vile maxim of the masters of mankind.

[ 52 ] Violence against commoners by feudal lords [ edit ] In the third book of The Wealth of Nations , Smith explains that in the medieval period , after the fall of the Roman Empire, governments were unable to protect commoners, and their property, from the "violence of the great lords" [ 52 ] : In order to understand this, it must be remembered, that, in those days, the sovereign of perhaps no country in Europe was able to protect, through the whole extent of his dominions, the weaker part of his subjects from the oppression of the great lords. Those whom the law could not protect, and who were not strong enough to defend themselves, were obliged either to have recourse to the protection of some great lord, and in order to obtain it, to become either his slaves or vassals; or to enter into a league of mutual defence for the common protection of one another. The inhabitants of cities and burghs, considered as single individuals, had no power to defend themselves; but by entering into a league of mutual defence with their neighbours, they were capable of making no contemptible resistance.

[ 53 ] Residents of the cities were able to establish their freedom and security of property long before those of the country, which enabled a gradual increase in their prosperity: Order and good government, and along with them the liberty and security of individuals, were in this manner established in cities, at a time when the occupiers of land in the country, were exposed to every sort of violence. But men in this defenceless state naturally content themselves with their necessary subsistence; because, to acquire more, might only tempt the injustice of their oppressors. On the contrary, when they are secure of enjoying the fruits of their industry, they naturally exert it to better their condition, and to acquire not only the necessaries, but the conveniencies and elegancies of life.

[ 53 ] Distribution of incomes into wages, profit and rent [ edit ] In Book I Chapter 6, Smith explained how income is distributed between workers and their employers: The value which the workmen add to the materials, therefore, resolves itself in this case into two parts, of which the one pays their wages, the other the profits of their employer upon the whole stock of materials and wages which he advanced. He could have no interest to employ them, unless he expected from the sale of their work something more than what was sufficient to replace his stock to him; and he could have no interest to employ a great stock rather than a small one, unless his profits were to bear some proportion to the extent of his stock.

[ 54 ] Smith said that while a worker is paid wages in proportion to their "dexterity and ingenuity", as well as for "superior hardship and superior skill", this is not the case for the profit of their employers: The profits of stock [capital] , it may perhaps be thought, are only a different name for the wages of a particular sort of labour, the labour of inspection and direction. They are, however, altogether different, are regulated by quite different principles, and bear no proportion to the quantity, the hardship, or the ingenuity of this supposed labour of inspection and direction.

[ 54 ] He added that the work of management is often performed by other employees, rather than the business owner themselves: In many great works, almost the whole labour of this kind is committed to some principal clerk . His wages properly express the value of this labour of inspection and direction. Though in settling them some regard is had commonly, not only to his labour and skill, but to the trust which is reposed in him, yet they never bear any regular proportion to the capital of which he oversees the management; and the owner of this capital, though he is thus discharged of almost all labour, still expects that his profit should bear a regular proportion to his capital.

[ 54 ] In Chapter 9, Smith notes that: "The increase of stock , which raises wages, tends to lower profit. When the stocks of many rich merchants are turned into the same trade, their mutual competition naturally tends to lower its profit ". He says that "high profits tend much more to raise the price of work than high wages", because "the rise of wages operates in the same manner as simple interest", while "the rise of profit operates like compound interest ". He concludes the chapter: Our merchants and master manufacturers complain much of the bad effects of high wages in raising the price [of commodities] , and thereby lessening the sale of their goods, both at home and abroad. They say nothing concerning the bad effects of high profits; they are silent with regard to the pernicious effects of their own gains; they complain only of those of other people.

[ 55 ] Wage negotiations and trade unions [ edit ] Concerning wages, he explained the conflicting class interests between the owners of capital and workers, who he said were often compelled to form trade unions for fear of suffering starvation wages, as follows: What are the common wages of labour, depends everywhere upon the contract usually made between those two parties, whose interests are by no means the same. The workmen desire to get as much, the masters to give as little, as possible. The former are disposed to combine in order to raise, the latter in order to lower, the wages of labour.

It is not, however, difficult to foresee which of the two parties must, upon all ordinary occasions, have the advantage in the dispute, and force the other into a compliance with their terms. The masters, being fewer in number, can combine much more easily: and the law, besides, authorises, or at least does not prohibit, their combinations, while it prohibits those of the workmen. We have no acts of parliament against combining to lower the price of work, but many against combining to raise it.

[ 51 ] Smith was aware of the main advantage of employers over workers, in addition to state protection: In all such disputes, the masters can hold out much longer. A landlord, a farmer, a master manufacturer, or merchant, though they did not employ a single workman, could generally live a year or two upon the stocks, which they have already acquired. Many workmen could not subsist a week, few could subsist a month, and scarce any a year, without employment. In the long run, the workman may be as necessary to his master as his master is to him; but the necessity is not so immediate.

[ 51 ] Conflict between classes [ edit ] Smith observed that, outside of colonies where land is cheap and labour expensive, both the masters who subsist by profit and the masters who subsist by rents will work in tandem to subjugate the class of workmen, who subsist by wages.

[ 56 ] Moreover, he warned against blindly legislating in favour of the class of merchants and manufacturers who subsist by profit, since, as he said, their intention is to gain as large a share of their respective markets as possible, which naturally results in monopoly prices or close to them, a situation harmful to the other social classes.

[ 57 ] In the conclusion of the first book of The Wealth of Nations , Smith assessed the knowledge and interests of capitalists in comparison to that of the landed aristocracy: Merchants and master manufacturers are, in this order [those who live by profit] , the two classes of people who commonly employ the largest capitals, and who by their wealth draw to themselves the greatest share of the public consideration. As during their whole lives they are engaged in plans and projects, they have frequently more acuteness of understanding than the greater part of country gentlemen. As their thoughts, however, are commonly exercised rather about the interest of their own particular branch of business than about that of the society, their judgment, even when given with the greatest candour (which it has not been upon every occasion), is much more to be depended upon with regard to the former of those two objects, than with regard to the latter. Their superiority over the country gentleman is, not so much in their knowledge of the public interest, as in their having a better knowledge of their own interest than he has of his. It is by this superior knowledge of their own interest that they have frequently imposed upon his generosity, and persuaded him to give up both his own interest and that of the public, from a very simple but honest conviction, that their interest, and not his, was the interest of the public.

In the final words of the first book, he suggested how the public should consider the political agenda of this class: The proposal of any new law or regulation of commerce which comes from this order, ought always to be listened to with great precaution, and ought never to be adopted till after having been long and carefully examined, not only with the most scrupulous, but with the most suspicious attention. It comes from an order of men, whose interest is never exactly the same with that of the public, who have generally an interest to deceive and even to oppress the public, and who accordingly have, upon many occasions, both deceived and oppressed it.

[ 57 ] Karl Marx [ edit ] Karl Marx, 1875 Karl Marx (1818–1883) was a German born philosopher who lived the majority of his adult life in London, England. In The Communist Manifesto , Karl Marx argued that a class is formed due to changes in the mode of production . Members of a class may become aware of their position within it, achieving what is known as class consciousness .

[ 58 ] For the working classes this happens when their members become aware of their exploitation at the hands of the ruling class. According to Marx, the working class then takes action against the ruling class, and vice versa.

What Marx points out is that members of each of the two main classes have interests in common. These class or collective interests are in conflict with those of the other class as a whole. This in turn leads to conflict between individual members of different classes.

Marxist analysis of society identifies two main social groups: Labour (the proletariat or workers) includes anyone who earns their livelihood by selling their labor power and being paid a wage or salary for their labor time. They have little choice but to work for capital, since they typically have no independent way to survive.

Capital (the bourgeoisie or capitalists) includes anyone who gets their income not from labor as much as from the surplus value they appropriate from the workers who create wealth. The income of the capitalists, therefore, is based on their exploitation of the workers (proletariat).

Not all class struggle is radical, violent or aggressive, as in the case of strikes, lockouts and workplace sabotage. Class antagonism can also surface in minor acts of pilferage, low worker morale, and individual worker resistance to petty authority and hoarding of information. On the employers' side, lobbying for anti-union laws and against minimum wage increases, and hiring union-busting legal firms are expressions of class antagonism.

[ 4 ] On a larger scale, workers engage in class struggle when they agitate for systemic change via socialist or populist parties.

But not every instance of class struggle from below constitutes a grave threat to capitalism, or even to the authority of an individual capitalist. A narrow struggle for higher wages by a small sector of the working class, what is often called "economism", hardly threatens the status quo. In fact, by applying the craft-union tactics of excluding other workers from skilled trades, an economistic struggle may even weaken the working class as a whole by dividing it. Class struggle becomes more important in the historical process as it becomes more general, as industries are organized rather than crafts, as workers' class consciousness rises, and as they self-organize away from political parties. Marx referred to this as the progress of the proletariat from being a class "in itself", a position in the social structure, to being one "for itself", an active and conscious force that could change the world.

Marx focuses on the capital industrialist society as the source of social stratification , which ultimately results in class conflict.

[ 58 ] He states that capitalism creates a division between classes which can most clearly be seen in factories. The proletariat is separated from the bourgeoisie because production becomes a social enterprise. Contributing to their separation is the technology that is in factories. Technological advances de-skill and alienate workers as they are no longer viewed as having a specialized skill.

[ 58 ] Another effect of technology is a homogenous workforce that can be easily replaceable. Marx believed that this class conflict would result in the overthrow of the bourgeoisie and that the private property would be communally owned.

[ 58 ] The mode of production would remain, but communal ownership would eliminate class conflict.

[ 58 ] Even after a revolution, the two classes would struggle, but eventually the struggle would recede and the classes dissolve. As class boundaries broke down, the state apparatus would wither away. According to Marx, the main task of any state apparatus is to uphold the power of the ruling class; but without any classes there would be no need for a state. That would lead to the classless , stateless communist society .

John Stuart Mill [ edit ] Adam Smith was not the only classical liberal political economist concerned with class conflict. In his Considerations on Representative Government , John Stuart Mill observed the complete marginalisation of workmen's voices in Parliament , rhetorically asking whether its members ever empathise with the position of workmen, instead of siding entirely with their masters, on issues such as the right to go on strike .

[ 59 ] Later in the book, he argues that an important function of truly representative government is to provide a relatively equal balance of power between workmen and masters, in order to prevent threats to the good of the whole of society.

[ 60 ] During Mill's discussion of the merits of progressive taxation in his essay Utilitarianism , he notes as an aside the power of the rich as independent of state support: People feel obliged to argue that the State does more for the rich than for the poor, as a justification for its taking more [in taxation] from them: though this is in reality not true, for the rich would be far better able to protect themselves, in the absence of law or government, than the poor, and indeed would probably be successful in converting the poor into their slaves.

[ 61 ] Max Weber [ edit ] Max Weber (1864–1920) agreed with the fundamental ideas of Karl Marx about the economy causing class conflict, but claimed that class conflict can also stem from prestige and power.

[ 58 ] Weber argued that classes come from the different property locations. Different locations can largely affect one's class by their education and the people they associate with.

[ 58 ] He also stated that prestige results in different status groupings. This prestige is based upon the social status of one's parents. Prestige is an attributed value and many times cannot be changed. Weber stated that power differences led to the formation of political parties .

[ 58 ] Weber disagreed with Marx about the formation of classes. While Marx believed that groups are similar due to their economic status, Weber argued that classes are largely formed by social status .

[ 58 ] Weber did not believe that communities are formed by economic standing, but by similar social prestige.

[ 58 ] Weber did recognize that there is a relationship between social status, social prestige and classes.

[ 58 ] Charles Comte and Charles Dunoyer [ edit ] Charles Comte and Charles Dunoyer argued that class struggle came from factions that managed to gain control of the state power. The ruling class are the groups that seize the power of the state to carry out their political agenda, the ruled are then taxed and regulated by the state for the benefit of the ruling classes. Through taxation , state power, subsidies , tax codes , laws, and privileges the state creates class conflict by giving preferential treatment to some at the expense of others by force. In the free market , by contrast, exchanges are not carried out by force but by the non-aggression principle of cooperation in a win-win scenario .

[ 62 ] Other perspectives [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( November 2010 ) One of the first writers to comment on class struggle in the modern sense of the term was the French revolutionary François Boissel.

[ fr ] [ 63 ] Other class struggle commentators include Henri de Saint-Simon , [ 64 ] Augustin Thierry , [ 65 ] François Guizot , [ 64 ] François-Auguste Mignet and Adolphe Thiers . The Physiocrats , David Ricardo , and after Marx, Henry George noted the inelastic supply of land and argued that this created certain privileges ( economic rent ) for landowners. According to the historian Arnold J. Toynbee , stratification along lines of class appears only within civilizations, and furthermore only appears during the process of a civilization's decline while not characterizing the growth phase of a civilization.

[ 66 ] Pierre-Joseph Proudhon , in What is Property?

(1840) states that "certain classes do not relish investigation into the pretended titles to property, and its fabulous and perhaps scandalous history." [ 67 ] While Proudhon saw the solution as the lower classes forming an alternative, solidarity economy centered on cooperatives and self-managed workplaces, which would slowly undermine and replace capitalist class society, the anarchist Mikhail Bakunin , while influenced by Proudhon, insisted that a massive class struggle by the working class, peasantry and poor was essential to the creation of libertarian socialism. This would require a final showdown in the form of a social revolution.

One of the earliest analyses of the development of class as the development of conflicts between emergent classes is available in Peter Kropotkin 's Mutual Aid . In this work, Kropotkin analyzes the disposal of goods after death in pre-class or hunter-gatherer societies, and how inheritance produces early class divisions and conflict.

Fascists have often opposed 'horizontal' class struggle in favour of vertical national struggle and instead have attempted to appeal to the working class while promising to preserve the existing social classes and have proposed an alternative concept known as class collaboration .

[ dubious – discuss ] Twentieth and twenty-first centuries [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( September 2024 ) Soviet Union and similar societies [ edit ] A variety of thinkers, mostly Trotskyist and anarchist , argue that class conflict existed in Soviet-style societies . Their arguments describe as a class the bureaucratic stratum formed by the ruling political party (known as the nomenklatura in the Soviet Union ), sometimes termed a " new class ", [ 68 ] that controls and guides the means of production . This ruling class is viewed to be in opposition to the remainder of society, generally considered the proletariat. This type of system is referred by them as state socialism , state capitalism , bureaucratic collectivism or new class societies. Marxism was already a powerful ideological power in Russia before the Soviet Union was created in 1917, since a Marxist group known as the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party existed. This party soon divided into two main factions; the Bolsheviks , who were led by Vladimir Lenin , and the Mensheviks , who were led by Julius Martov .

However, many Marxists argue that unlike in capitalism, the Soviet elites did not own the means of production , or generate surplus value for their personal wealth as the generated profit from the economy was equally distributed into Soviet society.

[ 69 ] Even some Trotskyists like Ernest Mandel criticized the concept of a new ruling class as an oxymoron , saying: "The hypothesis of the bureaucracy's being a new ruling class leads to the conclusion that, for the first time in history, we are confronted with a 'ruling class' which does not exist as a class before it actually rules." [ 70 ] United States [ edit ] Class conflict was present in the earliest days of the U.S. with the struggles between slaveowners and slaves. Since the abolition of slavery, class conflict is more often noted in labor-management disputes. As far back as 1933, representative Edward Hamilton of the Airline Pilot's Association used the term "class warfare" to describe airline management's opposition at the National Labor Board hearings in October of that year.

[ 71 ] Apart from day-to-day forms of class conflict, there are also periods of crisis or revolution when class conflict takes on a violent nature and involves repression, assault, restriction of civil liberties, and assassinations or death squads.

[ 72 ] The investor, billionaire , and philanthropist Warren Buffett , one of the wealthiest people in the world, [ 73 ] voiced in 2005 and once more in 2006 his view that his class, the "rich class", is waging class warfare on the rest of society. In 2005 Buffet said to CNN: "It's class warfare, my class is winning, but they shouldn't be." [ 74 ] In a November 2006 interview in The New York Times , Buffett stated that "[t]here’s class warfare all right, but it’s my class, the rich class, that’s making war, and we’re winning." [ 75 ] Noam Chomsky , 2004 Noam Chomsky , American linguist , philosopher , and political activist , has spoken out on the topic of class conflict in the United States: [ 76 ] Well, there’s always a class war going on. The United States, to an unusual extent, is a business-run society, more so than others. The business classes are very class-conscious – they’re constantly fighting a bitter class war to improve their power and diminish opposition. Occasionally this is recognized... The enormous benefits given to the very wealthy, the privileges for the very wealthy here, are way beyond those of other comparable societies and are part of the ongoing class war. Take a look at CEO salaries....

— Noam Chomsky, Occupy: Class War, Rebellion and Solidarity , Second Edition (November 5, 2013) The 2024 killing of United Healthcare CEO Brian Thompson was seen by some as a class struggle event.

Luigi Mangione was charged with the killing, and a manifesto attributed to Mangione criticized the health insurance industry. According to NBC, highly engaged posts on social media appeared celebrating the shooter, and mentioning other powerful figures as potential targets. In particular, some called it the opening blow of a class war.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] Post-2008 financial crisis [ edit ] Main articles: 2008 financial crisis , We are the 99% , and Occupy movement Protester at the People's March in Columbus, Ohio with sign reading, "It's a class war, not a culture war." Class conflict intensified in the period after the 2008 financial crisis , which led to a global wave of anti-austerity protests , including the Greek and Spanish Indignados movements and later the Occupy movement , whose slogan was " We are the 99% ", signalling a more expansive class antagonist against the financial elite than that of the classical Marxist proletariat.

In the speech "The Great American Class War" (2013), the journalist Bill Moyers asserted the existence of social-class conflict between democracy and plutocracy in the U.S.

[ 79 ] Chris Hedges wrote a column for Truthdig called "Let's Get This Class War Started", which was a play on Pink's song " Let's Get This Party Started ." [ 80 ] [ 81 ] In a 2022 piece "America's New Class War", Hedges argues that increased class struggle and strikes by organized workers, often in defiance of union leadership, is the "one last hope for the United States." [ 82 ] Historian Steve Fraser, author of The Age of Acquiescence: The Life and Death of American Resistance to Organized Wealth and Power , asserted in 2014 that class conflict is an inevitability if current political and economic conditions continue, noting that "people are increasingly fed up [...] their voices are not being heard. And I think that can only go on for so long without there being more and more outbreaks of what used to be called class struggle, class warfare." [ 83 ] Arab Spring [ edit ] Often seen as part of the same "movement of squares" as the Indignado and Occupy movements, the Arab Spring was a wave of social protests starting in 2011. Numerous factors have culminated in the Arab Spring, including rejection of dictatorship or absolute monarchy , human rights violations, government corruption (demonstrated by Wikileaks diplomatic cables [ 84 ] ), economic decline, unemployment, extreme poverty, and a number of demographic structural factors, [ 85 ] [ 86 ] such as a large percentage of educated but dissatisfied youth within the population.

[ 87 ] but class conflict is also a key factor. The catalysts for the revolts in all Northern African and Persian Gulf countries have been the concentration of wealth in the hands of autocrats in power for decades, insufficient transparency of its redistribution, corruption, and especially the refusal of the youth to accept the status quo.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] Relationship to race [ edit ] Main article: Intersectionality Jobless black workers in the heat of the Philadelphia summer, 1973 Some historical tendencies of orthodox Marxism reject racism , sexism , etc. as struggles that essentially distract from class struggle, the real conflict.

[ citation needed ] These divisions within the class prevent the purported antagonists from acting in their common class interest. However, many Marxist internationalists and anti-colonial revolutionaries believe that sex, race and class are bound up together. Within Marxist scholarship there is an ongoing debate about these topics.

According to Michel Foucault , in the 19th century, the essentialist notion of the " race " was incorporated by racists , biologists , and eugenicists , who gave it the modern sense of "biological race" which was then integrated into " state racism ". On the other hand, Foucault claims that when Marxists developed their concept of "class struggle", they were partly inspired by the older, non-biological notions of the "race" and the "race struggle". Quoting a non-existent 1882 letter from Marx to Friedrich Engels during a lecture, Foucault erroneously claimed Marx wrote: "You know very well where we found our idea of class struggle; we found it in the work of the French historians who talked about the race struggle." [ 90 ] [ citation needed ] For Foucault, the theme of social war provides the overriding principle that connects class and race struggle.

[ 91 ] Moses Hess , an important theoretician and labor Zionist of the early socialist movement, in his "Epilogue" to " Rome and Jerusalem " argued that "the race struggle is primary, the class struggle secondary. [...] With the cessation of race antagonism, the class struggle will also come to a standstill. The equalization of all classes of society will necessarily follow the emancipation of all the races, for it will ultimately become a scientific question of social economics." [ 92 ] W. E. B. Du Bois theorized that the intersectional paradigms of race, class, and nation might explain certain aspects of black political economy.

Patricia Hill Collins writes: "Du Bois saw race, class, and nation not primarily as personal identity categories but as social hierarchies that shaped African-American access to status, poverty, and power." [ 93 ] : 44 In modern times, emerging schools of thought in the U.S. and other countries hold the opposite to be true.

[ 94 ] They argue that the race struggle is less important, because the primary struggle is that of class since labor of all races face the same problems and injustices.

Chronology [ edit ] Nationalist movements are not included.

Classical antiquity: Gracchi Tribuneship Social War , 91–88 BC Gallic Wars and the assassination of Julius Caesar Conflict of the Orders Roman Servile Wars Yellow Turban Rebellion , 184–205 AD Middle Ages: Popular revolt in late medieval Europe Ciompi in Florence, 1378 Peasants' Revolt in England, 1381 Jacquerie in 14th-century France Saint George's Night Uprising Modern era: German Peasants' War since 1524 Shimabara Rebellion , 1637–1638 English Civil War , 1642–1651 French Revolution since 1789 [ 95 ] Old Price Riots , 1809 July Revolution , 1830 Canut revolts in Lyon since 1831, often considered as the beginning of the modern labor movement June Rebellion , 1832 Galician slaughter , 1846 Revolutions of 1848 in France and around Europe Newport Rising , political revolt in 1839 led by Chartists American Civil War , 1861–1865 Paris Commune , 1871 Johnson County War , 1889–1893 Coal Wars , 1890–1930 Donghak Peasant Revolution in Korea, 1893–94 1905 Russian Revolution 1907 Romanian Peasants' Revolt Mexican Revolution , 1910-1920 Revolutions of 1917–1923 , including the 1917 Russian Revolution and the German Revolution of 1918–1919 Limerick Soviet in Ireland, 1919 Seattle General Strike of 1919 in Seattle General Strike of 1919 in Spain Winnipeg General Strike , 1919 Ruhr Uprising in Germany, 1920 Kronstadt rebellion , 1921 Battle of Blair Mountain , 1921 Hamburg Uprising , 1923 1926 United Kingdom general strike 1934 West Coast waterfront strike Spanish Civil War , 1936–1939 Land Reform Movement (China) , 1947–1950 Communist insurgency in Myanmar , 1948–1988 Uprising of 1953 in East Germany Telangana Rebellion Cuban Revolution , 1953–1959 Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Poznań 1956 protests Naxalite-Maoist insurgency , 1967–present Protests of 1968 , including May 68 in France and the Prague Spring Hot Autumn in Italy, 1969–70 Communist rebellion in the Philippines , 1969–present Several strikes by coal miners in the United Kingdom 1969 1972 1974 1984–85 Winter of Discontent 1978–79 Nicaraguan Revolution 1993 Russian constitutional crisis 1999 Seattle WTO protests 2006 Oaxaca protests in Mexico Bolivarian Revolution 2008 Greek riots Kyrgyz Revolution of 2010 Egyptian Revolution of 2011 World Social Forum World Economic Forum Occupy Wall Street , 2011, and the Occupy movement Jasic Incident Rojava Revolution Protests against Rodrigo Duterte in the Philippines, 2016-2022 Protests against Bongbong Marcos in the Philippines, 2021-present Yellow vests movement in France, 2018–2020 2019–2020 Chilean protests See also [ edit ] Class collaboration Class consciousness Classicide Classism Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Economic stratification Master-slave dialectic References [ edit ] ^ a b Isaac, Larry W.; Harrison, Daniel M.; Lipold, Paul F. (2022). "Class Conflict in Capitalist Society".

Encyclopedia of Violence, Peace, & Conflict . pp.

118– 136.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-820195-4.00248-X .

ISBN 978-0-12-820312-5 .

^ Tavernise, Sabrina (11 January 2012).

"Survey Finds Rising Perception of Class Tension" .

The New York Times .

^ Bullock, Allan; Trombley, Stephen, eds. (1999). "class conflict".

The New Fontana Dictionary of Modern Thought . HarperCollins. p. 127.

ISBN 978-0-00-255871-6 .

^ a b Parenti, Michael (1993).

Land of Idols: Political Mythology in America . St. Martin's Press. pp.

66– 67.

ISBN 978-0-312-09841-4 .

^ Corrêa, Felipe (2024).

Freedom or Death: The Theory and Practice of Mikhail Bakunin . Black Rose Books.

ISBN 978-1-55164-812-5 .

[ page needed ] ^ Bakunin, Mikhail (1873).

"Stateless Socialism: Anarchism" – via Mikhail Bakunin Reference Archive.

^ Bakunin, Mikhail (1867).

"Solidarity in Liberty: The Workers' Path to Freedom" – via Mikhail Bakunin Reference Archive.

^ McLellan, David T.; Chambre, Henri (30 July 2024).

"Class struggle" . Britannica.

^ Marx, Karl; Engels, Friedrich (1848).

"Manifesto of the Communist Party" . Chapter I. Bourgeois and Proletarians – via Marx-Engels Archive.

^ de Ste. Croix, Geoffrey Ernest Maurice (1989).

The Class Struggle in the Ancient Greek World: From the Archaic Age to the Arab Conquests . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8014-9597-7 .

[ page needed ] ^ Thucydides.

The History of the Peloponnesian War . Book Three, Chapter X, Translated by Richard Crawley.

The Internet Classics Archive .

^ Cornelius Tacitus.

Annals , Book VI, Section 42, Translated by John Jackson.

LacusCurtius .

^ Thucydides.

The History of the Peloponnesian War . Book Three, Chapter IX.

^ Aristotle.

Politics , Book Four, Part IV.

^ Aristotle.

Politics , Book Two, Part VI. Translated by Benjamin Jowett.

Internet Classics Archive .

^ Aristotle.

Politics , Book Two, Part VII.

^ Aristotle.

Politics , Book Three, Part X.

^ Aristotle.

Politics , Book Two, Part IX.

^ Plato.

The Republic , Book IV. Translated by Benjamin Jowett.

Project Gutenberg .

^ Plato.

The Republic , Book VIII.

^ Plutarch.

Lives , Solon . Translated by John Dryden.

Project Gutenberg .

^ Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, The Philosophy of History , Part II: 'An antagonism had early arisen between ancient and wealthy families and such as were poorer. Three parties, whose distinction had been grounded on their local position and the mode of life which that position suggested, were then fully recognized. These were, the Pediaeans — inhabitants of the plain, the rich and aristocratic; the Diacrians — mountaineers, cultivators of the vine and olive, and herdsmen, who were the most numerous class; and between the two [in political status and sentiment] the Paralians — inhabitants of the coast, the moderate party. The polity of the state was wavering between Aristocracy and Democracy. Solon effected, by his division into four property-classes, a medium between these opposites.' McMaster University.

^ Plutarch.

Lives , Agis .

^ Charles Louis de Secondat, Baron de Montesquieu .

The Spirit of Laws , Volume 1 , Book XI, Chapter 13.

Liberty Fund .

^ Montesquieu.

The Spirit of Laws , Volume 1 , Book XI, Chapter 14.

^ Montesqueiu.

The Spirit of Laws , Volume 1 , Book XI, Chapter 16.

^ Plutarch.

Lives , Camillus .

^ Cornelius Tacitus.

The Histories , Book II, Section 38. Translated by C. H. Moore.

LacusCurtius .

^ Plutarch.

Lives , Tiberius Gracchus .

^ In Montesquieu.

The Spirit of Laws , Volume 1 , Book XI, Chapter 15.

^ In Montesquieu.

The Spirit of Laws , Volume 1 , Book XI, Chapter 18.

^ a b "The Assassination of Julius Caesar: A People's History of Ancient Rome" .

Kirkus Reviews . 1 June 2003 . Retrieved 12 November 2014 .

^ "The Assassination of Julius Caesar: A People's History of Ancient Rome" .

Publishers Weekly . 26 May 2003 . Retrieved 12 November 2011 .

^ Plutarch.

Lives , Coriolanus .

^ Montesquieu.

The Spirit of Laws , Volume 1 , Book XI, Chapter 18.

^ William Shakespeare.

Coriolanus , Act I, Scene I.

The Complete Works of William Shakespeare ^ Hegel .

The Philosophy of History , Part III.

McMaster University .

^ Edward Gibbon.

History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire , Volume III, Chapter XXXI, Part 1.

Project Gutenberg .

^ Adam Smith .

The Wealth of Nations , Book IV, Chapter 7, Part 1. 'The citizens, therefore, who had no land, had scarce any other means of subsistence but the bounties of the candidates at the annual elections. The tribunes, when they had a mind to animate the people against the rich and the great, put them in mind of the ancient divisions of lands, and represented that law which restricted this sort of private property as the fundamental law of the republic. The people became clamorous to get land, and the rich and the great, we may believe, were perfectly determined not to give them any part of theirs. To satisfy them in some measure, therefore, they frequently proposed to send out a new colony.' Project Gutenberg .

^ Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel .

The Philosophy of History , Part II. 'Nevertheless a part of the poorer classes would not submit to the degradations of poverty, for everyone felt himself a free citizen. The only expedient, therefore, that remained, was colonization. In another country, those who suffered distress in their own, might seek a free soil, and gain a living as free citizens by its cultivation.' McMaster University .

^ Rousseau .

The Social Contract and Discourses , On Political Economy .

^ Jean-Jacques Rousseau .

The Social Contract and Discourses , On Political Economy . 'The law, which they thus abuse, serves the powerful at once as a weapon of offence, and as a shield against the weak; and the pretext of the public good is always the most dangerous scourge of the people. What is most necessary, and perhaps most difficult, in government, is rigid integrity in doing strict justice to all, and above all in protecting the poor against the tyranny of the rich.' Liberty Fund .

^ Rousseau .

The Social Contract and Discourses , On Political Economy . 'It is therefore one of the most important functions of government to prevent extreme inequality of fortunes; not by taking away wealth from its possessors, but by depriving all men of means to accumulate it; not by building hospitals for the poor, but by securing the citizens from becoming poor.' ^ Jefferson, Thomas (16 January 1787).

"Letter to Edward Carrington" .

Archived from the original on 16 January 2013.

^ James Madison .

The Federalist Papers , Federalist No. 10 .

Library of Congress .

^ Madison.

The Federalist Papers , Federalist No. 10 . 'The regulation of these various and interfering interests forms the principal task of modern legislation, and involves the spirit of party and faction in the necessary and ordinary operations of the government.' ^ Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel .

Elements of the Philosophy of Right , Part III, Paragraph 244. 'When a large number of people sink below the standard of living regarded as essential for the members of society, and lose that sense of right, rectitude, and honour which is derived from self-support, a pauper class arises, and wealth accumulates disproportionately in the hands of a few.' Marxists Internet Archive .

^ Hegel.

The Philosophy of Right , Addition 149.

^ Palast, Greg (26 October 2007).

"Burn Baby Burn - The California Celebrity Fires" . Retrieved 1 August 2024 .

^ Adam Smith .

The Wealth of Nations , Book V, Chapter 1, Part 2.

Project Gutenberg .

^ a b c Adam Smith .

An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations , Book I, Chapter 8.

Project Gutenberg .

^ a b Smith, Adam.

"An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations" .

Project Gutenberg . Book III, Chapter IV . Retrieved 1 March 2024 .

^ a b Smith, Adam.

"An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations" .

Project Gutenberg . Book III, Chapter III . Retrieved 3 March 2024 .

^ a b c Smith, Adam.

"An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations" .

Project Gutenberg . Book I, Chapter VI . Retrieved 1 March 2024 .

^ Smith, Adam.

"An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations" .

Project Gutenberg . Book I, Chapter IX . Retrieved 1 March 2024 .

^ Smith.

The Wealth of Nations , Book IV, Chapter 7, Part 2. 'In other countries, rent and profit eat up wages, and the two superior orders of people oppress the inferior one; but in new colonies, the interest of the two superior orders obliges them to treat the inferior one with more generosity and humanity, at least where that inferior one is not in a state of slavery. Waste lands, of the greatest natural fertility, are to be had for a trifle. The increase of revenue which the proprietor, who is always the undertaker, expects from their improvement, constitutes his profit, which, in these circumstances, is commonly very great; but this great profit cannot be made, without employing the labour of other people in clearing and cultivating the land; and the disproportion between the great extent of the land and the small number of the people, which commonly takes place in new colonies, makes it difficult for him to get this labour. He does not, therefore, dispute about wages, but is willing to employ labour at any price.' ^ a b Smith.

The Wealth of Nations , Book I, Chapter 11, Part 2. 'The interest of the dealers, however, in any particular branch of trade or manufactures, is always in some respects different from, and even opposite to, that of the public. To widen the market, and to narrow the competition, is always the interest of the dealers. To widen the market may frequently be agreeable enough to the interest of the public; but to narrow the competition must always be against it, and can only serve to enable the dealers, by raising their profits above what they naturally would be, to levy, for their own benefit, an absurd tax upon the rest of their fellow-citizens. The proposal of any new law or regulation of commerce which comes from this order, ought always to be listened to with great precaution, and ought never to be adopted till after having been long and carefully examined, not only with the most scrupulous, but with the most suspicious attention. It comes from an order of men, whose interest is never exactly the same with that of the public, who have generally an interest to deceive and even to oppress the public, and who accordingly have, upon many occasions, both deceived and oppressed it.' ^ a b c d e f g h i j k Blackwell Reference Online.

[1] [ permanent dead link ] . Retrieved 24 November 2008.

^ John Stuart Mill .

Representative Government , Chapter 3. ' Yet does Parliament, or almost any of the members composing it, ever for an instant look at any question with the eyes of a working man? When a subject arises in which the laborers as such have an interest, is it regarded from any point of view but that of the employers of labor? I do not say that the working men's view of these questions is in general nearer to the truth than the other, but it is sometimes quite as near; and in any case it ought to be respectfully listened to, instead of being, as it is, not merely turned away from, but ignored. On the question of strikes, for instance, it is doubtful if there is so much as one among the leading members of either House who is not firmly convinced that the reason of the matter is unqualifiedly on the side of the masters, and that the men's view of it is simply absurd. Those who have studied the question know well how far this is from being the case, and in how different, and how infinitely less superficial a manner the point would have to be argued, if the classes who strike were able to make themselves heard in Parliament.' Project Gutenberg .

^ Mill.

Representative Government , Chapter 6. 'In a state of society thus composed, if the representative system could be made ideally perfect, and if it were possible to maintain it in that state, its organization must be such that these two classes, manual laborers and their affinities on one side, employers of labor and their affinities on the other, should be, in the arrangement of the representative system, equally balanced, each influencing about an equal number of votes in Parliament; since, assuming that the majority of each class, in any difference between them, would be mainly governed by their class interests, there would be a minority of each in whom that consideration would be subordinate to reason, justice, and the good of the whole; and this minority of either, joining with the whole of the other, would turn the scale against any demands of their own majority which were not such as ought to prevail.' ^ Mill.

Utilitarianism , Chapter 5.

Project Gutenberg .

^ "James Mill and Libertarian Class Analysis" . 28 March 2012.

^ William Buck Guthrie (1907).

Socialism Before the French Revolution: A History . Macmillan. p. 283.

^ a b William James Blake (1939).

An American Looks at Karl Marx . Cordon Company. p. 622.

^ Augustin Thierry: Recueil des monuments inédits de l'histoire du Tiers état ^ Toynbee, Arnold (1947). "The Nature of Disintegration". In Dorothea Grace Somervell (ed.).

A Study of History : Abridgment of Volumes I–VI . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 365.

OCLC 891822269 .

^ Pierre Proudhon, What is Property?

, chapter 2, remark 2.

^ Đilas, Milovan (1983) [1957].

The New Class: An Analysis of the Communist System (paperback ed.). San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.

ISBN 978-0-15-665489-0 .

[ page needed ] ^ Harpal, Brar (1993).

Trotskyism or Leninism?

. London: H. Brar. p. 647.

ISBN 978-1-874613-03-9 .

^ Ernest, Mandel.

"Why The Soviet Bureaucracy is not a New Ruling Class (1979)" .

Archived from the original on 22 May 2017 . Retrieved 26 April 2017 .

^ Kaps, Robert W. (1997).

Air Transport Labor Relations (Southern Illinois University Press Series in Aviation Management) . Carbondale: Southern Illinois Press. p. 51.

ISBN 978-0-8093-1776-9 .

^ Zinn, Howard (2003).

A People's History of the United States: 1492–2001 . New York: HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0-06-052842-3 .

OCLC 50622172 .

[ page needed ] ^ "The World's Billionaires" .

Forbes .

Archived from the original on 3 April 2013 . Retrieved 1 May 2018 .

^ Dobbs, Lou (19 June 2005).

"Buffett: 'There are lots of loose nukes around the world' " .

CNN .

^ Buffett, Warren (26 November 2006).

"In Class Warfare, Guess Which Class is Winning" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 3 January 2017.

^ Chomsky, Noam (5 November 2013), Occupy: Class War, Rebellion and Solidarity (Second ed.), Zuccotti Park Press, archived from the original on 16 October 2014 , retrieved 14 October 2014 ^ "Insurance executive's killing sparks online praise and hate" .

NBC News . 5 December 2024 . Retrieved 12 December 2024 .

^ "12/5/24 - Praise for United Healthcare CEO Assassination Goes Viral" .

Network Contagion Research Institute . Retrieved 12 December 2024 .

^ Moyers, Bill (12 December 2013).

The Great American Class War Archived 22 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine .

Brennan Center for Justice . Retrieved 25 January 2014.

^ The Pathology of the Rich – Chris Hedges on Reality Asserts Itself pt 1 Archived 9 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine The Real News .

5 December 2013. Retrieved 25 January 2014.

^ Hedges, Chris (20 October 2013).

Let's Get This Class War Started Archived 21 October 2013 at the Wayback Machine .

Truthdig .

Retrieved 25 January 2014.

^ Hedges, Chris (18 January 2022).

"America's New Class War" .

Scheerpost . Retrieved 21 January 2022 .

^ Full Show: The New Robber Barons Archived 23 December 2014 at Wikiwix.

Moyers & Company .

19 December 2014.

^ Walker, Peter (12 May 2011).

"Amnesty International hails WikiLeaks and Guardian as Arab spring 'catalysts' " .

The Guardian . Retrieved 11 October 2021 .

^ Korotayev A, Zinkina J (2011).

"Egyptian Revolution: A Demographic Structural Analysis" .

Entelequia. Revista Interdisciplinar .

13 : 139– 165.

Archived from the original on 20 October 2016.

^ Mason, Paul (5 February 2013).

"From Arab Spring to global revolution" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 11 October 2021 .

^ "Demographics of the Arab League, computed by Wolfram Alpha" .

Archived from the original on 2 March 2011.

^ Breisinger, Clemens; Ecker, Olivier; Al-Riffai, Perrihan.

"Economics of the Arab Awakening" . International Food Policy Research Institute. Archived from the original on 15 April 2012 . Retrieved 25 May 2012 .

^ Friedman, Thomas L. (7 April 2012).

"Opinion | The Other Arab Spring" . Archived from the original on 29 November 2016 – via NYTimes.com.

^ Quoted in Society Must be Defended by Michel Foucault (trans.

David Macey ), London: Allen Lane, Penguin Press (1976, 2003), p. 79 ^ Ann Laura Stoler, Race and the Education of Desire: Foucault's "History of Sexuality" and the Colonial Order of Things , Duke University Press (1995), p.71-72 ^ quoted in Prophecy and Politics: Socialism, Nationalism, and the Russian Jews by Jonathan Frankel , Cambridge University Press (1981), p. 22.

^ Collins, Patricia Hill (March 2000). "Gender, black feminism, and black political economy".

Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science .

568 (1): 41– 53.

doi : 10.1177/000271620056800105 .

S2CID 146255922 .

^ Eastwood, John H.

(1995). "Ye Are the Salt of the Earth".

The Wonder of Grace . Shippensburg, PA: Companion Press. p. 18.

ISBN 978-1-56043-572-3 .

The system that was supposed to treat all men equally actually created a class society.

^ see Daniel Guérin, Class Struggle in the First French Republic , Pluto Press, 1977 Further reading [ edit ] Abidor, Mitchell, ed. (2016).

Death to Bourgeois Society: The Propagandists of the Deed .

PM Press .

ISBN 978-1629631127 .

Adamic, Louis (1934).

Dynamite: The Story of Class Violence in America (Revised ed.).

Antell, Gerson; Harris, Walter (2007).

Economics For Everybody . Amsco School Publications.

ISBN 978-1-56765-640-4 .

Dahrendorf, Ralf (1959).

Class and Class Conflict in Industrial Society . Stanford University Press.

OCLC 263443 .

(reprinted in 2013 in paperback as ISBN 1314811819 , 978-1314811810 ).

Faux, Jeff (2006).

The Global Class War: How America's Bipartisan Elite Lost Our Future and What It Will Take to Win It Back . John Wiley and Sons.

ISBN 978-0471697619 .

Klein, Matthew C.; Pettis, Michael (2020).

Trade Wars Are Class Wars: How Rising Inequality Distorts the Global Economy and Threatens International Peace .

Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0300244175 .

Li Yi (2005).

The Structure and Evolution of Chinese Social Stratification . University Press of America.

ISBN 978-0-7618-3331-4 .

Maavak, Mathew (December 2012).

"Class Warfare, Anarchy and the Future Society" (PDF) .

Journal of Futures Studies .

17 (2): 15– 36.

SSRN 2226762 .

Ness, Immanuel, ed. (2009).

The International Encyclopedia of Revolution and Protest: 1500 to the Present . Malden, MA: Wiley & Sons.

Ness, Immanuel (2014).

New Forms of Worker Organization: The Syndicalist and Autonomist Restoration of Class-Struggle Unionism . PM Press.

ISBN 978-1604869569 . Archived from the original on 29 March 2019 . Retrieved 2 August 2018 .

Tranjan, Ricardo (2023).

The Tenant Class . Between the Lines.

ISBN 978-1771136228 .

Vasudevan, Ramaa (2019).

"The Global Class War" .

Catalyst .

3 (1): 110– 139.

Zeilig, Leo, ed. (2002).

Class Struggle and Resistance in Africa . New Clarion Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Class struggle .

2008-2010 Study: CEOs Who Fired Most Workers Earned Highest Pay – video report by Democracy Now!

How a Real Class War, Like with Guns, Could Actually Happen .

Vice , 26 November 2018.

v t e Anarchism Concepts Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence Schools of thought Classical Individualist Egoist Illegalist Naturist Philosophical Mutualist Social Collectivist Communist Magonist Post-classical Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Independence Insurrectionary Pacifist Religious Christian Buddhist Jewish Without adjectives Contemporary Black Free-market Postcolonial Post-anarchist Post-left Queer Types of federation Affinity group Anarcho-syndicalism Platformism Anarchist synthesis Union of egoists Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Category Outline v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal v t e Social class Status Stratum Economic classes Theories Elite theory Gilbert model Marxian Mudsill theory New class Spoon class theory Weberian (three-component) Related topics Caste Chattering classes Class conflict Class discrimination Class society Class traitor Classicide Classless society Euthenics High society Nouveau riche / Parvenu Poverty Ranked society Snobbery Social cleansing Social exclusion Social mobility Social orphan Social position Social stigma Subaltern Status Anxiety By demographic By status Administrative detainee Alien illegal immigrant refugee Citizen dual or multiple native-born naturalized second-class Clique adolescent Convicted Migrant worker Political prisoner Socioeconomic Stateless By " collar " Blue Green Grey New Pink White By type Ruling Aristocracy Aristoi Hanseaten Magnate Oligarchy Russian Patrician Ancient Rome Post-Roman Political Family List Hereditary Royal family Intellectual Clergy Priest Knowledge worker Professor Scholar Warrior Chhetri Cossacks Cuāuh Harii Hashashin Knight Kshatriya Nair Ocēlōtl Pendekar Samurai Spartiate Vanniyar / Vanniar (Chieftain) Upper Business magnate Elite Gabellotto Gentry Lord Nobility Landed Petty Old money Overclass Robber baron Seigneur Superclass Creative Bohemians Middle Bourgeoisie Petite Burgher Lower middle class Upper middle class Working Commoner Lazzaroni Lumpenproletariat Pea-pickers Peasant Precariat Proletariat Working poor Under Ant tribe Outcast Outlaw / Prisoner Serf Plebeian Rat tribe Slave / Freedman Untouchable By country or region United States Affluence American Dream History Mobility Classes Upper Black Donor Gentry Middle Black Mexican-American Upper Middle Underprivileged Lower Under Income Household Inequality Personal Poverty Standard of living Education Homelessness Home-ownership Other regions or countries Africa Belize Cambodia China Colombia France Haiti India Iran Italy Luxembourg Nepal New Zealand Nigeria Romania Sri Lanka Tibet United Kingdom United States Historic 18th-century Spain Ancient Greece Ancient Rome Aztec Ottoman Empire Pre-industrial East Asia Pre-industrial Europe Soviet Union Category Authority control databases National Germany France BnF data Japan Spain Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐int.eqiad.main‐6bcc747f5‐wr45r
Cached time: 20250816094009
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.676 seconds
Real time usage: 2.048 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8328/1000000
Revision size: 89738/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 467863/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 30936/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 25/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 291170/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.049/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20764460/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1574.212      1 -total
 35.80%  563.596     12 Template:Navbox
 25.41%  399.941      1 Template:Reflist
 18.52%  291.537      1 Template:Anarchism
 15.86%  249.614      9 Template:Excerpt
 12.31%  193.825     23 Template:Cite_book
 10.09%  158.762      6 Template:Ambox
  8.84%  139.176      1 Template:Multiple_issues
  7.72%  121.532      1 Template:Social_class
  7.58%  119.313      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:42437083:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816094009 and revision id 1305934644. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Class_struggle&oldid=1305934644 " Categories : Anti-capitalism Anti-fascism Conflict theory Political science Social classes Social conflict Socialism Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from August 2024 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2019 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Webarchive template other archives Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2021 Articles that may contain original research from November 2024 All articles that may contain original research Wikipedia articles with style issues from June 2025 All articles with style issues Articles lacking reliable references from June 2025 All articles lacking reliable references Articles with multiple maintenance issues Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from August 2025 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes Articles to be expanded from November 2010 All articles to be expanded All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from June 2025 Articles to be expanded from September 2024 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2016 Articles with excerpts Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 23:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Class struggle 69 languages Add topic

