Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Present 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Winter garden 8 languages Eesti فارسی Français 한국어 עברית Norsk bokmål Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Kind of garden maintained in wintertime This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Winter garden" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is about the kind of garden maintained in wintertime. For other uses, see Winter garden (disambiguation) .

Winter garden at Myddelton House, London Borough of Enfield , England A winter garden is a kind of garden maintained in wintertime .

History [ edit ] The origin of the winter garden dates back to the 17th to 19th centuries where European nobility constructed large conservatories that housed tropical and subtropical plants and acted as an extension of their living space. Many of these were attached to their main palaces. Earlier versions were constructed of masonry with large windows and a glass roof, usually in the Classical or Gothic styles.

[ 1 ] While in the 19th century many of these conservatories were made out of iron and curvilinear glass.

Winter gardens were not just restricted to private residence; many were built for the greater public. The first large public winter garden was built in 1842–46 in Regent's Park , and was used for evening occasions, large flower shows and social gatherings.

[ 2 ] Other winter gardens, such as the Crystal Palace by Sir Joseph Paxton in 1851, were soon built and used for a variety of purposes.

Present [ edit ] The modern winter garden is usually a garden planted either to produce food, or at least to remain visibly planted and slowly develop, throughout the winter, or else a garden whose plants will serve as living decoration all winter. One basic premise to the winter garden in temperate or colder regions is that the plants may become dormant when snow covers the ground, but will grow each time the sun heats at least part of the plant to above freezing temperature , even if there is snow. This is especially the case in regions where snow cover and below-freezing temperatures are not constant for months at a time.

Common winter garden vegetables include: Several breeds of winter-hardy cabbage Specific winter-hardy breeds of broccoli Winter rye is grown where a summer garden will be, in order to protect the ground from weeds, and provide soil amendment when tilled directly into the soil the following spring Beets Carrots Alliums —onions, chives, and their relatives are evergreen, though some may die back during the winter and recover in the spring.

Oregano (including marjoram ) -- known to hardily survive the winter up to Zone 5 See also [ edit ] Greenhouse Hardiness zone Winter sowing References [ edit ] ^ Hix, John. The Glasshouse. Phaidon Press Limited. London. 1996.

^ Kohlmaier, Georg. Houses of Glass: A Nineteenth-Century Building Type. MIT Press. Cambridge, Massachusetts. 1991.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Winter garden .

Underneath the arches The Guardian on Sheffield 's public winter garden Up From the Ashes Collection Archived 2016-03-05 at the Wayback Machine v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Winter_garden&oldid=1245413409 " Categories : Types of garden Winter Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2008 All articles needing additional references Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 12 September 2024, at 21:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Winter garden 8 languages Add topic

