Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Research 3 Affiliations 4 Books 5 Selected articles 6 Interview with Binmore 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Kenneth Binmore 8 languages Español Français مصرى 日本語 Русский Suomi Svenska 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Ken Binmore ) English mathematician and game theorist born 1940 This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( July 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Kenneth George Binmore Born ( 1940-09-27 ) 27 September 1940 (age 84) Education Alma mater Imperial College London Philosophical work Era 20th / 21st-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy Institutions University of Bristol London School of Economics University College London Main interests Game theory political philosophy ethics social contract theory mathematical analysis Kenneth George "Ken" Binmore , CBE , FBA (born 27 September 1940) is an English mathematician, economist, and game theorist , a Professor Emeritus of Economics at University College London (UCL) [ 1 ] and a Visiting Emeritus Professor of Economics at the University of Bristol .

[ 2 ] As a founder of modern economic theory of bargaining (with Nash and Rubinstein ), he made important contributions to the foundations of game theory , experimental economics , evolutionary game theory and analytical philosophy . He took up economics after holding the Chair of Mathematics at the London School of Economics . The switch has put him at the forefront of developments in game theory. His other interests include political and moral philosophy , decision theory , and statistics. He has written over 100 scholarly papers and 14 books.

Education [ edit ] Binmore studied mathematics at Imperial College London , where he was awarded a 1st class-honours BSc with a Governor's Prize, and later a PhD in mathematical analysis .

Research [ edit ] Binmore's major research contributions are to the theory of bargaining and its testing in the laboratory. He is a pioneer of experimental economics . He began his experimental work in the 1980s when most economists thought that game theory would not work in the laboratory. Binmore and his collaborators established that game theory can often predict the behaviour of experienced players very well in laboratory settings, even in the case of human bargaining behaviour, a particularly challenging case for game theory. This has brought him into conflict with some proponents of behavioural economics who emphasise the importance of other-regarding or social preferences, and argue that their findings threaten traditional game theory.

Binmore's work in political and moral philosophy began in the 1980s when he first applied bargaining theory to John Rawls ' original position. His search for the philosophical foundations of the original position took him first to Kant 's works, and then to Hume . Hume inspired Binmore to contribute to a naturalistic science of morals that seeks foundations for Rawlsian ideas about fairness norms in biological and social evolution. The result was his two-volume Game Theory and the Social Contract , an ambitious attempt to lay the foundations for a genuine science of morals using the theory of games. In Game Theory and the Social Contract Binmore proposes a naturalistic reinterpretation of John Rawls ' original position that reconciles his egalitarian theory of justice with John Harsanyi 's utilitarian theory. His recent Natural Justice provides a nontechnical synthesis of this work.

Affiliations [ edit ] In 1995 Binmore became one of the founding directors of the Centre for Economic Learning and Social Evolution (ELSE), an interdisciplinary research centre involving economists, psychologists , anthropologists and mathematicians based at University College London . Funded by the Economic and Social Research Council, ELSE pursues basic research on evolutionary and learning approaches to games and society and applies its theoretical findings to practical problems in government and business.

While Director of ELSE, Binmore became widely known as the "poker-playing economic theorist", who netted the British government £22 billion when he led the team that designed the third-generation (3G) telecommunications auction in 2000. He went on to design and implement 3G spectrum auctions in Belgium, Denmark, Greece, Israel and Hong Kong.

Binmore is Emeritus Professor of Economics at University College London , Visiting Emeritus Professor of Economics at the University of Bristol and visiting professor in the Department of Philosophy, Logic and Scientific Method at the London School of Economics . He has held similar positions at the London School of Economics , Caltech , the University of Pennsylvania and the University of Michigan . He is a Fellow of the Econometric Society and the British Academy . He was appointed a CBE in the New Year's Honours List 2001 for contributions to game theory and to designing the UK 3G telecommunications auctions. He was elected a Foreign Honorary Member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2002.

[ 3 ] In 2007 he became an Honorary Research Fellow in the Department of Philosophy at the University of Bristol and an Honorary Fellow of the Centre for Philosophy at the London School of Economics .

Books [ edit ] 1977: Mathematical Analysis: A Straightforward Approach . New York: Cambridge University Press 1980: Foundations of Analysis: Book 1: Logic, Sets and Numbers . Cambridge University Press 1980: Foundations of Analysis: Book 2: Topological Ideas . Cambridge University Press 1986: Economic Organizations As Games (co-ed. Partha Dasgupta). Basil Blackwell 1987: The Economics of Bargaining (co-ed. Partha Dasgupta). Basil Blackwell. Includes many of his early papers on Nash bargaining theory 1990: Essays on the Foundations of Game Theory . Basil Blackwell. Includes "Modelling Rational Players I and II" from Economics and Philosophy 1991: Fun and Games: A Text on Game Theory . D. C. Heath and Company 1994: Game Theory and the Social Contract , Volume 1: Playing Fair . Cambridge: MIT Press 1998: Game Theory and the Social Contract , Volume 2: Just Playing . Cambridge: MIT Press 2002: Calculus: Concepts and Methods (with Joan Davies). Cambridge University Press 2005: Natural Justice . New York: Oxford University Press 2007: Playing for Real – A Text on Game Theory . New York: Oxford University Press 2007: Does Game Theory Work? The Bargaining Challenge . MIT Press. Papers on bargaining experiments with comments on challenges to game theory posed by behavioural school of economics 2008: Game Theory: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford University Press. Mini-biographies of many founders of subject, including John Nash; overview of a cutting-edge field with successes in evolutionary biology, economics and other disciplines 2009: Rational Decisions . Princeton University Press. Explains foundations of Bayesian decision theory and why Leonard Savage restricted it to small worlds. Argues that Bayesian approach inadequate in a large world 2021: Imaginary philosophical dialogues : between sages down the ages . Cham: Springer.

Selected articles [ edit ] With A. Rubinstein and A. Wolinsky, "The Nash Bargaining Solution in Economic Modeling", RAND Journal of Economics , 1986 "Perfect Equilibria in Bargaining Models," in K. Binmore and P. Dasgupta, editors, The Economics of Bargaining , Basil Blackwell, Oxford, 1987 "Modeling Rational Players I and II", Economics and Philosophy , 1987 With A. Shaked and J. Sutton, "An Outside Option Experiment", Quarterly Journal of Economics , 1989 "Debayesing Game Theory," in: B. Skyrms, editor, Studies in Logic and the Foundations of Game Theory: Proceedings of the Ninth International Congress of Logic, Methodology and the Philosophy of Science , Kluwer, Dordrecht, 1992 With L. Samuelson, "Evolutionary Stability in Repeated Games Played by Finite Automata," Journal of Economic Theory , 57, 1992 With J. Gale and L. Samuelson, "Learning to be Imperfect: The Ultimatum Game," Games and Economic Behavior , 8, 1995 With L. Samuelson, "Muddling Through: Noisy Equilibrium Selection," Journal of Economic Theory , 74, 1997 "Rationality and Backward Induction", Journal of Economic Methodology , 4, 1997 With J. McCarthy, G. Ponti, A. Shaked and L. Samuelson, "A Backward Induction Experiment," Journal of Economic Theory , 104, 2002 With P. Klemperer, "The Biggest Auction Ever: The Sale of the British 3G Telecom Licences," Economic Journal , 112, 2002 With L. Samuelson, "The Evolution of Focal Points," Games and Economic Behavior , 55, 2006 With A. Shaked, "Experimental Economics: Where Next?" Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization , 2009 Interview with Binmore [ edit ] "The Origin of Fairness" in Alex Voorhoeve Conversations on Ethics.

Oxford University Press, 2009.

ISBN 978-0-19-921537-9 Binmore's approach to moral philosophy References [ edit ] ^ "CV" (PDF) .

ELSE . Archived from the original (PDF) on 10 February 2012 . Retrieved 12 November 2011 .

^ "Bristol University | Department of Economics | Ken Binmore" . Archived from the original on 24 October 2007.

^ "Book of Members, 1780–2010: Chapter B" (PDF) . American Academy of Arts and Sciences . Retrieved 20 July 2011 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Kenneth Binmore .

Professor Binmore's ELSE page at UCL Professor Binmore's University of Bristol page Binmore's review of Robert Axelrod's Complexity of Cooperation: Agent-Based Models of Competition and Collaboration , 1997 One-armed economists show big business how to play the game . Binmore article on British 3G telecoms auction for The Independent , 29 May 2000 Another 5 Numbers: Game Theory .

Simon Singh interviews Binmore for BBC Radio 4 on bluffing in poker and British 3G telecoms auction, 31 October 2003 The dividend . Review of Binmore's Natural Justice by Brian Skyrms in Times Literary Supplement , 8 July 2005 Symposium on Binmore's Natural Justice in Politics, Philosophy & Economics , 1 February 2006, Volume 5, No. 1 Binmore's "Making Decisions in Large Worlds" . Recent paper arguing for a need to look beyond Bayesian decision theory to answer the general problem of making rational decisions under uncertainty Binmore and Shaked's "Experimental Economics: Science or What?" . Revised version of Shaked's critique of literature on "inequity aversion", warning that economists may lose respect of other disciplines in accepting claims about human behaviour without critical examination of data from which claims supposedly derive, or methodology employed in analysing the data "Rules of the Game" . A recent article in Prospect magazine in which Binmore argues that governments should take note of the theory of "mechanism design" — work on which recently won three economists the Nobel Prize.

v t e Game theory Glossary Game theorists Games Traditional game theory Definitions Asynchrony Bayesian regret Best response Bounded rationality Cheap talk Coalition Complete contract Complete information Complete mixing Confrontation analysis Conjectural variation Contingent cooperator Coopetition Cooperative game theory Dynamic inconsistency Escalation of commitment Farsightedness Game semantics Hierarchy of beliefs Imperfect information Incomplete information Information set Move by nature Mutual knowledge Non-cooperative game theory Non-credible threat Outcome Perfect information Perfect recall Ply Preference Rationality Sequential game Simultaneous action selection Spite Strategic complements Strategic dominance Strategic form Strategic interaction Strategic move Strategy Subgame Succinct game Topological game Tragedy of the commons Uncorrelated asymmetry Equilibrium concepts Backward induction Bayes correlated equilibrium Bayesian efficiency Bayesian game Bayesian Nash equilibrium Berge equilibrium Bertrand–Edgeworth model Coalition-proof Nash equilibrium Core Correlated equilibrium Cursed equilibrium Edgeworth price cycle Epsilon-equilibrium Gibbs equilibrium Incomplete contracts Inequity aversion Individual rationality Iterated elimination of dominated strategies Markov perfect equilibrium Mertens-stable equilibrium Nash equilibrium Open-loop model Pareto efficiency Payoff dominance Perfect Bayesian equilibrium Price of anarchy Program equilibrium Proper equilibrium Quantal response equilibrium Quasi-perfect equilibrium Rational agent Rationalizability Rationalizable strategy Satisfaction equilibrium Self-confirming equilibrium Sequential equilibrium Shapley value Strong Nash equilibrium Subgame perfect equilibrium Trembling hand equilibrium Strategies Appeasement Bid shading Cheap talk Collusion Commitment device De-escalation Deterrence Escalation Fictitious play Focal point Grim trigger Hobbesian trap Markov strategy Max-dominated strategy Mixed strategy Pure strategy Tit for tat Win–stay, lose–switch Games All-pay auction Battle of the sexes Nash bargaining game Bertrand competition Blotto game Centipede game Coordination game Cournot competition Deadlock Dictator game Trust game Diner's dilemma Dollar auction El Farol Bar problem Electronic mail game Gift-exchange game Guess 2/3 of the average Keynesian beauty contest Kuhn poker Lewis signaling game Matching pennies Obligationes Optional prisoner's dilemma Pirate game Prisoner's dilemma Public goods game Rendezvous problem Rock paper scissors Stackelberg competition Stag hunt Traveler's dilemma Ultimatum game Volunteer's dilemma War of attrition Theorems Arrow's impossibility theorem Aumann's agreement theorem Brouwer fixed-point theorem Competitive altruism Folk theorem Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem Gibbs lemma Glicksberg's theorem Kakutani fixed-point theorem Kuhn's theorem One-shot deviation principle Prim–Read theory Rational ignorance Rational irrationality Sperner's lemma Zermelo's theorem Subfields Algorithmic game theory Behavioral game theory Behavioral strategy Compositional game theory Contract theory Drama theory Graphical game theory Heresthetic Mean-field game theory Negotiation theory Quantum game theory Social software Key people Albert W. Tucker Alvin E. Roth Amos Tversky Antoine Augustin Cournot Ariel Rubinstein David Gale David K. Levine David M. Kreps Donald B. Gillies Drew Fudenberg Eric Maskin Harold W. Kuhn Herbert Simon Herbert Scarf Hervé Moulin Jean Tirole Jean-François Mertens Jennifer Tour Chayes Ken Binmore Kenneth Arrow Leonid Hurwicz Lloyd Shapley Martin Shubik Melvin Dresher Merrill M. Flood Olga Bondareva Oskar Morgenstern Paul Milgrom Peyton Young Reinhard Selten Robert Aumann Robert Axelrod Robert B. Wilson Roger Myerson Samuel Bowles Suzanne Scotchmer Thomas Schelling William Vickrey Combinatorial game theory Core concepts Combinatorial explosion Determinacy Disjunctive sum First-player and second-player win Game complexity Game tree Impartial game Misère Partisan game Solved game Sprague–Grundy theorem Strategy-stealing argument Zugzwang Games Chess Chomp Clobber Cram Domineering Hackenbush Nim Notakto Subtract a square Sylver coinage Toads and Frogs Mathematical tools Mex Nimber On Numbers and Games Star Surreal number Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays Search algorithms Alpha–beta pruning Expectiminimax Minimax Monte Carlo tree search Negamax Paranoid algorithm Principal variation search Key people Claude Shannon John Conway John von Neumann Evolutionary game theory Core concepts Bishop–Cannings theorem Evolution and the Theory of Games Evolutionarily stable set Evolutionarily stable state Evolutionarily stable strategy Replicator equation Risk dominance Stochastically stable equilibrium Weak evolutionarily stable strategy Games Chicken Stag hunt Applications Cultural group selection Fisher's principle Mobbing Terminal investment hypothesis Key people John Maynard Smith Robert Axelrod Mechanism design Core concepts Algorithmic mechanism design Bayesian-optimal mechanism Incentive compatibility Market design Monotonicity Participation constraint Revelation principle Strategyproofness Vickrey–Clarke–Groves mechanism Theorems Myerson–Satterthwaite theorem Revenue equivalence Applications Digital goods auction Knapsack auction Truthful cake-cutting Other topics Bertrand paradox Chainstore paradox Computational complexity of games Helly metric Multi-agent system PPAD-complete Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Category Authority control databases International VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Czech Republic Netherlands Latvia Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH DBLP MathSciNet People DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kenneth_Binmore&oldid=1294793243 " Categories : 1940 births Academics of University College London Alumni of Imperial College London English economists Fellows of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences Fellows of the Econometric Society Game theorists Living people University of Pennsylvania faculty University of Michigan faculty Welsh philosophers Academics of the London School of Economics Honorary Fellows of the London School of Economics 20th-century English philosophers 21st-century English philosophers Commanders of the Order of the British Empire Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from May 2012 Use dmy dates from May 2021 Articles lacking in-text citations from July 2011 All articles lacking in-text citations Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 20:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kenneth Binmore 8 languages Add topic

