Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Childhood Toggle Childhood subsection 1.1 Personal background 1.2 Familial ties to medicine 2 Historical aspects of female nursing in Arabia Toggle Historical aspects of female nursing in Arabia subsection 2.1 Pre-Islamic and Islamic Era (570–632 AD) 2.2 Post-Prophetic to Middle Ages Era (632–1500 AD) 3 Revolutions in nursing development Toggle Revolutions in nursing development subsection 3.1 Rufaida Al-Aslamia's emergence as nursing leader 3.2 Acute care origins 4 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 4.1 Rufaidah Al-Aslamia Prize In Nursing 5 References Toggle the table of contents Rufaida Al-Aslamia 15 languages العربية বাংলা Deutsch Español Euskara Français Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano کٲشُر മലയാളം Português Русский کوردی اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Arab medical and social worker (born c. 620) Rufayda Al-Aslamia Personal life Born c.

620 AD (approx. 2 BH) Hejaz , Arabia Home town Medina Religious life Religion Islam Rufayda Al-Aslamia (also transliterated Rufaida Al-Aslamiya or Rufaydah bint Sa`ad) ( Arabic : رفيدة الأسلمية ) (born approx. 620 AD; 2 BH ) was an Arab medical and social worker recognized as the first female Muslim nurse in Islam .

[ 1 ] Childhood [ edit ] Personal background [ edit ] Among the first people in Medina to accept Islam, Rufaida Al-Aslamia was born into the Bani Aslem tribe of the Kazraj tribal confederation in Madina, and gained fame for her contribution with other Ansar women who welcomed the Islamic prophet, Muhammad , on arrival in Medina.

[ 2 ] Familial ties to medicine [ edit ] Born into a family with strong ties to the medical community, Rufaida's father, Sa`ad Al Aslamy, was a physician and mentor under whom Rufaida initially obtained clinical experience. Devoting herself to nursing and taking care of sick people and , Rufaida Al-Aslamia became an expert nurse.

Although not given responsibilities held solely by men such as surgeries and amputations, Rufaida Al-Aslamia practiced her skills in field hospitals in her tent during many battles as Muhammad used to order all casualties to be carried to her tent so that she might treat them with medical expertise.

[ 3 ] It has also been documented that Rufaida provided care to injured soldiers during the jihad, as well as providing shelter from the wind and heat of the harsh desert for the dying.

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] Historical aspects of female nursing in Arabia [ edit ] Pre-Islamic and Islamic Era (570–632 AD) [ edit ] Typically presented within the context of Muhammad, the historical development of female nursing and surgery in Arabia from the Islamic Period to the modern times boasts a tumultuous history laden with cultural barriers and public pressures.

[ 1 ] Though very sparse documentation exists about the history of nursing in the Pre-Islamic period, a proper understanding of societal and religious paradigms during the reign of Muhammad lends significant insight into the roles and expectation of nurses in antiquity. In marked contrast to the pervading Christian interpretation of disease as a divine punishment for man, Muslims place an extremely high value on the ritual cleansing of the body, daily prayer schedules, and strict dietary regiments.

[ 5 ] An era in history defined by several holy wars, medicinal treatment during the times of Muhammad was largely performed solely by doctors, who would personally visit the patient to diagnose abnormalities and provide medications to those who were in need. Placing the bulk of the biological and physiological responsibilities of a patient on the doctor alone, nurses were limited in their duties to providing physical comfort and emotional support.

[ 1 ] Front door of ancient hospital of Salé in Morocco designed by Islamic architects and managed by ancient Islamic physicians Post-Prophetic to Middle Ages Era (632–1500 AD) [ edit ] With the diminishing intensity of holy wars and mass civil unrest that defined the climate of Islamic culture during the reign of Muhammad (SAW), advancements in technology and architecture resulted in the construction of many new hospitals and methods for treating the sick. Though nurses in this period were still relegated to rudimentary and noninvasive duties like serving food to patients and administering medicinal liquids, [ 1 ] religious and social norms of the times necessitated the segregation of hospital wards based on gender, with males treating males and females treating females.

[ 6 ] While there has been some relaxation of segregation in contemporary times, the values of many traditional Islamic people are for hospitals and their policies to reflect these past segregational practices.

[ 1 ] Revolutions in nursing development [ edit ] Rufaida Al-Aslamia's emergence as nursing leader [ edit ] A charismatic and capable leader, published records testify that Rufaida Al-Aslamia, who practiced at the time of Muhammad , was the first Muslim nurse.

[ 7 ] While there is slight controversy in who is "technically" the first surgeon and nurse in history, Middle Eastern countries attribute the status of the first-ever nurse to Rufaida, a Muslim surgeon and nurse.

[ 8 ] Acute care origins [ edit ] Rufaida Al-Aslamia implemented her clinical skills and medical experience into developing the first-ever documented mobile care units that were able to meet the medical needs of the community.

[ 9 ] The scope of the majority of her work in her organized medical command units consisted primarily in hygiene and stabilizing patients before further and more invasive medical procedures. During military expeditions, Rufaida Al-Aslamia led groups of volunteer nurses who went to the battlefield and treated the casualties. She participated in the battles of Khandaq, Khaibar, and others.

[ 2 ] The Mosque at Salaman, location of the Battle of The Trench where Al-Aslamia treated the injured During times of peace, Rufaida Al-Aslamia continued her involvement with humanitarian efforts by providing assistance to Muslims who were in need.

[ 2 ] Legacy [ edit ] Rufaidah had trained a group of women companions as nurses. When Muhammad's army was getting ready to go to the battle of Khaibar, Rufaidah and the group of volunteer nurses went to Muhammad. They asked him for permission "O Messenger of Allah, we want to go out with you to the battle and treat the injured and help Muslims as much as we can". Muhammad permitted them to go. The nurse volunteers did such a good job that Muhammad assigned a share of the bounty to Rufaidah. Her share was equivalent to that of soldiers who had fought. This was in recognition of her medical and nursing work.

[ 2 ] Rufaidah Al-Aslamia Prize In Nursing [ edit ] Each year the Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland at the University of Bahrain awards one student the coveted and prestigious Rufaida Al-Aslamia Prize in Nursing. The award winner determined by a panel of senior clinical medical staff members, the Rufaida Al-Aslamia Prize in Nursing is given to the student who consistently excels in delivering superb nursing care to patients.

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f Miller-Rosser, K.; Chapman, Y.; Francis, K. (2006). "Historical, Cultural, and Contemporary Influences on the Status of Women in Nursing in Saudi Arabia".

Online Journal of Issues in Nursing .

11 (3).

doi : 10.3912/OJIN.VOL11NO03PPT02 .

PMID 17279862 .

S2CID 26991626 .

^ a b c d Paderborner, SJ (27 May 2012).

"Who was Rufaida Al-Aslamia?" .

^ Al-Hassani, Salin TS.

"Women's Contribution to Classical Islamic Civilisation: Science, Medicine, and Politics" . Muslim Heritage . Retrieved 24 November 2013 .

^ see Stars in the Prophet's Orbit by Asmaa Tabaa, translated by Sawsan Tarabishy for a short biography ^ Lyons, Jonathan.

"Early Islamic Medicine" . Medicine . Retrieved 24 November 2013 .

^ Donahue, M.P. (1985) Nursing: the finest art. An illustrated history. St Louis: Mosby.

^ Kasule, O. H. (2003).

Historical roots of the nursing profession in Islam Archived 2003-12-04 at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved June 2004.

^ Jan, R. (1996). "Rufaida Al-Asalmiya, the first Muslim nurse".

Image: The Journal of Nursing Scholarship .

28 (3): 267– 268.

doi : 10.1111/j.1547-5069.1996.tb00362.x .

PMID 8854550 .

S2CID 21364079 .

^ El-Sanabary, N. (2003). "Women and the nursing profession in Saudi Arabia". In N. H. Bryant (Ed.), Women in nursing in Islamic societies . Pakistan: Oxford University Press.

^ "RCSI Bahrain announces four new awards during conferring ceremony" . Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland . Retrieved 25 November 2013 .

v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Authority control databases İslâm Ansiklopedisi Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rufaida_Al-Aslamia&oldid=1299288678 " Categories : 620s births Women companions of the Prophet Female wartime nurses Physicians of the medieval Islamic world Medieval women physicians 7th-century physicians Women in medieval warfare Arab women 7th-century Arab people Women in war in West Asia Arab women in war Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata No local image but image on Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 14:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rufaida Al-Aslamia 15 languages Add topic

