Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Origins and early years: 1918–1923 2.1.1 Adoption of Italian fascism: The Beer Hall Putsch 2.2 Rise to power: 1925–1933 2.2.1 Ascension and consolidation 2.3 After taking power: intertwining of party and state 2.4 Defeat and abolition 3 Political programme 4 Party composition Toggle Party composition subsection 4.1 Command structure 4.1.1 Top leadership 4.1.2 Reichsleiter 4.2 Nazi Party offices 4.3 Paramilitary groups 4.4 Affiliated organisations 5 Regional administration Toggle Regional administration subsection 5.1 Nazi Party Gaue 5.2 Gaue dissolved before 1945 5.3 Associated organisations abroad 5.3.1 Gaue in Switzerland 6 Membership Toggle Membership subsection 6.1 General membership 6.2 Military membership 6.3 Student membership 6.4 Women membership 6.5 Membership outside Germany 6.5.1 Deutsche Gemeinschaft 7 Party symbols 8 Ranks and rank insignia 9 Slogans and songs 10 Election results Toggle Election results subsection 10.1 German Reichstag 10.2 Presidential election 10.3 Volkstag of Danzig 11 See also 12 Notes 13 Citations 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Nazi Party 107 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ગુજરાતી 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Қазақша Kiswahili Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский संस्कृतम् Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Volapük 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zeêuws 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fascist German political party (1920–1945) This article is about the political party that existed in Germany from 1920 to 1945. For other uses, see Nazi Party (disambiguation) .

National Socialist German Workers' Party Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei Abbreviation NSDAP Chairman Anton Drexler (24 February 1920 – 29 July 1921) [ 1 ] Führer Adolf Hitler (29 July 1921 – 30 April 1945) Party Minister Martin Bormann (30 April 1945 – 2 May 1945) Founded 24 February 1920 ; 105 years ago ( 1920-02-24 ) Banned 10 October 1945 ; 79 years ago ( 1945-10-10 ) Preceded by German Workers' Party Headquarters Brown House , Munich, Germany [ 2 ] Newspaper Völkischer Beobachter Student wing National Socialist German Students' Union Youth wing Hitler Youth Women's wing National Socialist Women's League Paramilitary wings SA , SS , Motor Corps , Flyers Corps Sports body National Socialist League of the Reich for Physical Exercise Overseas wing NSDAP/AO Labour wing NSBO (1928–35), DAF (1933–45) [ 3 ] Membership Fewer than 60 (1920) 8.5 million (1945) [ 4 ] Ideology Nazism Political position Far-right [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Political alliance National Socialist Freedom Movement ( 1924 ) Anti- Young Plan campaign ( 1929 ) [ a ] Harzburg Front ( 1931 ) [ 8 ] Colours Black White Red (official, German Imperial colours ) Brown (customary) Slogan Deutschland erwache!

('Germany, awake!') (unofficial) Anthem " Horst-Wessel-Lied " Party flag Politics of Germany Political parties Elections Part of a series on Nazism Organizations Ahnenerbe Artaman League Geheime Staatspolizei Deutscher Fichte-Bund Deutsches Jungvolk Franz Eher Nachfolger Hitler Youth League of German Girls Organisation Todt NSDÄB NSDStB NSRL NSFK NSKK NSF Nazi media organizations Nationalsozialistische Monatshefte Neues Volk NS-Frauen-Warte Das Reich Das Schwarze Korps Nazi Party Sicherheitsdienst (SD) Sturmabteilung (SA) Schutzstaffel (SS) SS Gefolge Waffen-SS History Early timeline National Socialist Program Hitler's rise to power Machtergreifung Gleichschaltung German rearmament Nazi Germany Kirchenkampf Hitler's personality cult Enabling Act of 1933 Night of the Long Knives Nuremberg rallies Nuremberg Laws Anti-Comintern Pact Kristallnacht Anschluss World War II The Holocaust 1938–1939 German expedition to Tibet Tripartite Pact Denazification Nuremberg trials Final solution Concentration camps Deportations Doctors' Trial Extermination camps Genocide Ghettos Human experimentation Labour camps Pogroms Racial segregation Ideology Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-liberalism Anti-pacifism Blood and soil Chauvinism Class collaboration Conspiracism Dolchstoßlegende International Jewry Judeo-Bolshevism Corporatism Counter-Enlightenment Cult of personality Dictatorship Führerprinzip Direct action Economic interventionism Eugenics Geopolitik Heimat Imperialism Greater Germanic Reich Heim ins Reich Lebensraum Pan-Germanism Militarism Morality Nationalism Ethno Racial Palingenetic Revolutionary Ultra New Man New Order One-party state Populism Propaganda Prussianism Racism Antisemitism Anti-Slavic sentiment Aryan race Aryanism Master race Nordicism Nordic Indo-Germanic people Renordification Rassenschande Untermenschen Völkisch equality Völkisch movement Reactionary modernism Romanticism Social Darwinism Social interventionism Social order State capitalism Syncretism Totalitarianism Volksgemeinschaft Volk ohne Raum Volkskörper Politicians Bloem Bormann Daluege Dönitz Drexler Eichmann Esser Fischer Frank Frick Hess Heydrich Himmler Hitler Goebbels Göring Keller Lammers Lutze Mitford von Neurath Quisling von Ribbentrop Röhm Schacht von Schirach Scholtz-Klink Seldte Seyss-Inquart Speer Strasser (Gregor) Strasser (Otto) Streicher Thierack Ideologues Pre- Machtergreifung Arndt Burnouf Chamberlain Drumont Eckart Fritsch de Gobineau Grant von Liebenfels von List Löns Lueger Marr Nietzsche (contentious) Ratzel Riehl Ruskin Wagner Post- Machtergreifung Anacker Baeumler Bergmann Berndt Darré Eggers Eichrodt Feder Ford Grimm Günther Hauer Haushofer Heidegger (contentious) Hentschel Hoche al-Husseini Jung Krannhals Kriek Lindbergh Müller Plenge Rahn Rosenberg Saadeh Schäfer Schmalenbach Schmitt (contentious) von Sebottendorf Schwarz Stapel Wirsing Zimmermann Literature The Foundations of the Nineteenth Century (1899) The Protocols of the Elders of Zion (1903) The Passing of the Great Race (1916) Prussianism and Socialism (1919) " 25-point Program " (1920) The International Jew (1920s) Rassenkunde des deutschen Volkes (1922) Das Dritte Reich (1923) Mein Kampf (1925) Hitlers Zweites Buch (1928) Michael (1929) The Myth of the Twentieth Century (1930) Gelöbnis treuester Gefolgschaft (1933) I Fight (1942) Religion Ariosophy Thule Society Aspects Catholic Church persecution Germany Poland Christmas Esotericism German Evangelical Church Deutsche Christen German Faith Movement Germanic paganism Heathenry Gottgläubig Kirchenkampf Occultism Positive Christianity Religion under Nazism Hitler's views Symbolism Outside Germany Americas Brazil Chile Mexico Europe Greece Sweden Parties Arrow Cross Party Frontist movement German American Bund German National Movement in Liechtenstein Nasjonal Samling National Socialist Movement (Netherlands) National Socialist Movement of Chile National Socialist Workers' Party of Denmark Ossewabrandwag Lists Doctors Last surviving war crime suspects Nazi Party members Nicknames and pseudonyms NSDAP leaders and officials Publishers SS personnel Related topics Analogies Art Architecture Cinema Atsızism " Beefsteak Nazi " Economy Denordification Renordification Glossary Drang nach Osten Generalplan Ost German American Bund Horst-Wessel-Lied Hitler's political views Propaganda and the UK Racial theories Strasserism Women Germany portal Politics portal v t e The Nazi Party , [ b ] officially the National Socialist German Workers' Party ( German : Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei [ c ] or NSDAP ), was a far-right [ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] political party in Germany active between 1920 and 1945 that created and supported the ideology of Nazism . Its precursor, the German Workers' Party ( Deutsche Arbeiterpartei ; DAP), existed from 1919 to 1920. The Nazi Party emerged from the extremist German nationalist (" Völkisch nationalist "), racist , and populist Freikorps paramilitary culture, which fought against communist uprisings in post– World War I Germany.

[ 13 ] The party was created to draw workers away from communism and into völkisch nationalism.

[ 14 ] Initially, Nazi political strategy focused on anti- big business , anti- bourgeoisie , and anti-capitalism , disingenuously using socialist rhetoric to gain the support of the lower middle class ; [ 15 ] it was later downplayed to gain the support of business leaders. By the 1930s, the party's main focus shifted to antisemitic and anti-Marxist themes.

[ 16 ] The party had little popular support until the Great Depression , when worsening living standards and widespread unemployment drove Germans into political extremism.

[ 12 ] Central to Nazism were themes of racial segregation expressed in the idea of a "people's community" ( Volksgemeinschaft ).

[ 17 ] The party aimed to unite "racially desirable" Germans as national comrades while excluding those deemed to be either political dissidents, physically or intellectually inferior, or of a foreign race ( Fremdvölkische ).

[ 18 ] The Nazis sought to strengthen the Germanic people, the " Aryan master race ", through racial purity and eugenics , broad social welfare programs, and a collective subordination of individual rights, which could be sacrificed for the good of the state on behalf of the people. To protect the supposed purity and strength of the Aryan race, the Nazis sought to disenfranchise, segregate, and eventually exterminate Jews , Romani , Slavs , the physically and mentally disabled , homosexuals , Jehovah's Witnesses , and political opponents.

[ 19 ] The persecution reached its climax when the party-controlled German state set in motion the Final Solution – an industrial system of genocide that carried out mass murders of around 6 million Jews and millions of other targeted victims in what has become known as the Holocaust .

[ 20 ] Adolf Hitler , the party's leader since 1921, was appointed Chancellor of Germany by President Paul von Hindenburg on 30 January 1933, and quickly seized power afterwards. Hitler established a totalitarian regime known as the Third Reich and became dictator with absolute power .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] Following the military defeat of Germany in World War II , the party was declared illegal.

[ 25 ] The Allies attempted to purge German society of Nazi elements in a process known as denazification .

Several top leaders were tried and found guilty of crimes against humanity in the Nuremberg trials , and executed. The use of symbols associated with the party is still outlawed in many European countries, including Germany and Austria.

Name The renaming of the German Workers' Party (DAP) to the National Socialist German Workers' Party (NSDAP) was partially driven by a desire to draw upon both left-wing and right-wing ideals, with " Socialist " and "Workers'" appealing to the left, and " National " and "German" appealing to the right.

[ 26 ] Nazi , the informal and originally derogatory term for a party member, abbreviates the party's name ( Nationalsozialist [natsi̯oˈnaːlzotsi̯aˌlɪst] ), and was coined in analogy with Sozi (pronounced [ˈzoːtsiː] ), an abbreviation of Sozialdemokrat (member of the rival Social Democratic Party of Germany ).

[ d ] [ 27 ] Members of the party referred to themselves as Nationalsozialisten (National Socialists), but some did occasionally embrace the colloquial Nazi (so Leopold von Mildenstein in his article series Ein Nazi fährt nach Palästina published in Der Angriff in 1934). The term Parteigenosse (party member) was commonly used among Nazis, with its corresponding feminine form Parteigenossin .

[ 28 ] Before the rise of the party, these terms had been used as colloquial and derogatory words for a backward peasant , or an awkward and clumsy person. It derived from Ignaz, a shortened version of Ignatius , [ 29 ] [ 30 ] which was a common name in the Nazis' home region of Bavaria . Opponents seized on this, and the long-existing Sozi , to attach a dismissive nickname to the National Socialists.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] In 1933, when Adolf Hitler assumed power in the German government, the usage of "Nazi" diminished in Germany, although Austrian anti-Nazis continued to use the term.

[ 27 ] The use of " Nazi Germany " and "Nazi regime" was popularised by anti-Nazis and German exiles abroad. Thereafter, the term spread into other languages and eventually was brought back to Germany after World War II.

[ 31 ] In English, the term is not considered slang and has such derivatives as Nazism and denazification .

History Origins and early years: 1918–1923 The Nazi Party grew out of smaller political groups with a nationalist orientation that formed in the last years of World War I . In 1918, a league called the Freier Arbeiterausschuss für einen guten Frieden (Free Workers' Committee for a good Peace) [ 32 ] was created in Bremen , Germany. On 7 March 1918, Anton Drexler , an avid German nationalist, formed a branch of this league in Munich .

[ 32 ] Drexler was a local locksmith who had been a member of the militarist Fatherland Party [ 33 ] during World War I and was bitterly opposed to the armistice of November 1918 and the revolutionary upheavals that followed. Drexler followed the views of militant nationalists of the day, such as opposing the Treaty of Versailles , having antisemitic , anti-monarchist and anti-Marxist views, as well as believing in the superiority of Germans whom they claimed to be part of the Aryan " master race " ( Herrenvolk ). However, he also accused international capitalism of being a Jewish-dominated movement and denounced capitalists for war profiteering in World War I.

[ 34 ] Drexler saw the political violence and instability in Germany as the result of the Weimar Republic being out-of-touch with the masses, especially the lower classes.

[ 34 ] Drexler emphasised the need for a synthesis of völkisch nationalism with a form of economic socialism , in order to create a popular nationalist-oriented workers' movement that could challenge the rise of communism and internationalist politics .

[ 35 ] These were all well-known themes popular with various Weimar paramilitary groups such as the Freikorps .

Nazi Party badge emblem Drexler's movement received attention and support from some influential figures. Supporter Dietrich Eckart , a well-to-do journalist, brought military figure Felix Graf von Bothmer , a prominent supporter of the concept of "national socialism", to address the movement.

[ 36 ] Later in 1918, Karl Harrer (a journalist and member of the Thule Society ) convinced Drexler and several others to form the Politischer Arbeiter-Zirkel (Political Workers' Circle).

[ 32 ] The members met periodically for discussions with themes of nationalism and racism directed against Jewish people.

[ 32 ] In December 1918, Drexler decided that a new political party should be formed, based on the political principles that he endorsed, by combining his branch of the Workers' Committee for a good Peace with the Political Workers' Circle.

[ 32 ] [ 37 ] On 5 January 1919, Drexler created a new political party and proposed it should be named the "German Socialist Workers' Party", but Harrer objected to the term "socialist"; so the term was removed and the party was named the German Workers' Party ( Deutsche Arbeiterpartei , DAP).

[ 37 ] To ease concerns among potential middle-class supporters, Drexler made clear that unlike Marxists the party supported the middle-class and that its socialist policy was meant to give social welfare to German citizens deemed part of the Aryan race.

[ 34 ] They became one of many völkisch movements that existed in Germany. Like other völkisch groups, the DAP advocated the belief that through profit-sharing instead of socialisation Germany should become a unified "people's community" ( Volksgemeinschaft ) rather than a society divided along class and party lines.

[ 38 ] This ideology was explicitly antisemitic. As early as 1920, the party was raising money by selling a tobacco called Anti-Semit .

[ 39 ] From the outset, the DAP was opposed to non-nationalist political movements, especially on the left, including the Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) and the Communist Party of Germany (KPD). Members of the DAP saw themselves as fighting against " Bolshevism " and anyone considered a part of or aiding so-called " international Jewry ". The DAP was also deeply opposed to the Treaty of Versailles .

[ 40 ] The DAP did not attempt to make itself public and meetings were kept in relative secrecy, with public speakers discussing what they thought of Germany's present state of affairs , or writing to like-minded societies in Northern Germany .

[ 38 ] NSDAP membership book The DAP was a comparatively small group with fewer than 60 members.

[ 38 ] Nevertheless, it attracted the attention of the German authorities, who were suspicious of any organisation that appeared to have subversive tendencies. In July 1919, while stationed in Munich , army Gefreiter Adolf Hitler was appointed a Verbindungsmann (intelligence agent) of an Aufklärungskommando (reconnaissance unit) of the Reichswehr (army) by Captain Mayr , the head of the Education and Propaganda Department (Dept Ib/P) in Bavaria . Hitler was assigned to influence other soldiers and to infiltrate the DAP.

[ 41 ] While Hitler was initially unimpressed by the meetings and found them disorganised, he enjoyed the discussion that took place.

[ 42 ] While attending a party meeting on 12 September 1919 at Munich's Sterneckerbräu , Hitler became involved in a heated argument with a visitor, Professor Baumann, who questioned the soundness of Gottfried Feder 's arguments against capitalism; Baumann proposed that Bavaria should break away from Prussia and found a new South German nation with Austria . In vehemently attacking the man's arguments, Hitler made an impression on the other party members with his oratorical skills; according to Hitler, the "professor" left the hall acknowledging unequivocal defeat.

[ 43 ] Drexler encouraged him to join the DAP.

[ 43 ] On the orders of his army superiors, Hitler applied to join the party [ 44 ] and within a week was accepted as party member 555 (the party began counting membership at 500 to give the impression they were a much larger party).

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Among the party's earlier members were Ernst Röhm of the Army's District Command VII; Dietrich Eckart, who has been called the spiritual father of National Socialism; [ 47 ] then- University of Munich student Rudolf Hess ; [ 48 ] Freikorps soldier Hans Frank ; and Alfred Rosenberg , often credited as the philosopher of the movement. All were later prominent in the Nazi regime.

[ 49 ] Hitler later claimed to be the seventh party member. He was, in fact, the seventh executive member of the party's central committee [ 50 ] and he would later wear the Golden Party Badge number one. Anton Drexler drafted a letter to Hitler in 1940—which was never sent—that contradicts Hitler's later claim: No one knows better than you yourself, my Führer, that you were never the seventh member of the party, but at best the seventh member of the committee... And a few years ago I had to complain to a party office that your first proper membership card of the DAP, bearing the signatures of Schüssler and myself, was falsified, with the number 555 being erased and number 7 entered.

[ 51 ] Although Hitler initially wanted to form his own party, he claimed to have been convinced to join the DAP because it was small and he could eventually become its leader.

[ 52 ] He consequently encouraged the organisation to become less of a debating society, which it had been previously, and more of an active political party.

[ 53 ] Normally, enlisted army personnel were not allowed to join political parties. In this case, Hitler had Captain Karl Mayr 's permission to join the DAP. Further, Hitler was allowed to stay in the army and receive his weekly pay of 20 gold marks a week.

[ 54 ] Unlike many other members of the organisation, this continued employment provided him with enough money to dedicate himself more fully to the DAP.

[ 55 ] Hitler's first DAP speech was held in the Hofbräukeller on 16 October 1919. He was the second speaker of the evening, and spoke to 111 people.

[ 56 ] Hitler later declared that this was when he realised he could really "make a good speech".

[ 38 ] At first, Hitler spoke only to relatively small groups, but his considerable oratory and propaganda skills were appreciated by the party leadership. With the support of Anton Drexler, Hitler became chief of propaganda for the party in early 1920.

[ 57 ] Hitler began to make the party more public, and organised its biggest meeting yet of 2,000 people on 24 February 1920 in the Staatliches Hofbräuhaus in München . Such was the significance of this particular move in publicity that Karl Harrer resigned from the party in disagreement.

[ 58 ] It was in this speech that Hitler enunciated the twenty-five points of the German Workers' Party manifesto that had been drawn up by Drexler, Feder and himself.

[ 59 ] Through these points he gave the organisation a much bolder stratagem [ 57 ] with a clear foreign policy (abrogation of the Treaty of Versailles, a Greater Germany , Eastern expansion and exclusion of Jews from citizenship) and among his specific points were: confiscation of war profits , abolition of unearned incomes, the State to share profits of land and land for national needs to be taken away without compensation.

[ 60 ] In general, the manifesto was antisemitic , anti-capitalist , anti-democratic , anti-Marxist and anti-liberal .

[ 61 ] To increase its appeal to larger segments of the population, on the same day as Hitler's Hofbräuhaus speech on 24 February 1920, the DAP changed its name to the Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei ("National Socialist German Workers' Party", or Nazi Party).

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] [ e ] The name was intended to draw upon both left-wing and right-wing ideals, with "Socialist" and "Workers'" appealing to the left, and "National" and "German" appealing to the right.

[ 66 ] The word "Socialist" was added by the party's executive committee (at the suggestion of Rudolf Jung ), over Hitler's initial objections, [ f ] in order to help appeal to left-wing workers.

[ 68 ] In 1920, the Nazi Party officially announced that only persons of "pure Aryan descent [ rein arischer Abkunft ]" could become party members and if the person had a spouse, the spouse also had to be a "racially pure" Aryan. Party members could not be related either directly or indirectly to a so-called "non-Aryan".

[ 69 ] Even before it had become legally forbidden by the Nuremberg Laws in 1935, the Nazis banned sexual relations and marriages between party members and Jews.

[ 70 ] Party members found guilty of Rassenschande ("racial defilement") were persecuted heavily. Some members were even sentenced to death.

[ 71 ] Hitler quickly became the party's most active orator, appearing in public as a speaker 31 times within the first year after his self-discovery.

[ 72 ] Crowds began to flock to hear his speeches.

[ 73 ] Hitler always spoke about the same subjects: the Treaty of Versailles and the Jewish question .

[ 61 ] This deliberate technique and effective publicising of the party contributed significantly to his early success, [ 61 ] about which a contemporary poster wrote: "Since Herr Hitler is a brilliant speaker, we can hold out the prospect of an extremely exciting evening".

[ 74 ] [ page needed ] Over the following months, the party continued to attract new members, [ 50 ] while remaining too small to have any real significance in German politics.

[ 75 ] By the end of the year, party membership was recorded at 2,000, [ 73 ] many of whom Hitler and Röhm had brought into the party personally, or for whom Hitler's oratory had been their reason for joining.

[ 76 ] Hitler's membership card in the DAP (later NSDAP). The membership number (7) was altered from the original.

Hitler's talent as an orator and his ability to draw new members, combined with his characteristic ruthlessness, soon made him the dominant figure. However, while Hitler and Eckart were on a fundraising trip to Berlin in June 1921, a mutiny broke out within the party in Munich. Members of its executive committee wanted to merge with the rival German Socialist Party (DSP).

[ 77 ] Upon returning to Munich on 11 July, Hitler angrily tendered his resignation. The committee members realised that his resignation would mean the end of the party.

[ 78 ] Hitler announced he would rejoin on condition that he would replace Drexler as party chairman, and that the party headquarters would remain in Munich.

[ 79 ] The committee agreed, and he rejoined the party on 26 July as member 3,680. Hitler continued to face some opposition within the NSDAP, as his opponents had Hermann Esser expelled from the party and they printed 3,000 copies of a pamphlet attacking Hitler as a traitor to the party.

[ 79 ] In the following days, Hitler spoke to several packed houses and defended himself and Esser to thunderous applause.

[ 80 ] Hitler's strategy proved successful; at a special party congress on 29 July 1921, he replaced Drexler as party chairman by a vote of 533 to 1.

[ 80 ] The committee was dissolved, and Hitler was granted nearly absolute powers in the party as its sole leader.

[ 80 ] He would hold the post for the remainder of his life. Hitler soon acquired the title Führer ("leader") and after a series of sharp internal conflicts it was accepted that the party would be governed by the Führerprinzip ("leader principle"). Under this principle, the party was a highly centralised entity that functioned strictly from the top down, with Hitler at the apex. Hitler saw the party as a revolutionary organisation, whose aim was the overthrow of the Weimar Republic , which he saw as controlled by the socialists, Jews and the " November criminals ", a term invented to describe alleged elements of society who had 'betrayed the German soldiers' in 1918. The SA ("storm troopers", also known as "Brownshirts") were founded as a party militia in 1921 and began violent attacks on other parties.

Mein Kampf in its first edition cover For Hitler, the twin goals of the party were always German nationalist expansionism and antisemitism . These two goals were fused in his mind by his belief that Germany's external enemies—Britain, France and the Soviet Union—were controlled by the Jews and that Germany's future wars of national expansion would necessarily entail a war of annihilation against them.

[ 81 ] [ page needed ] For Hitler and his principal lieutenants, national and racial issues were always dominant. This was symbolised by the adoption as the party emblem of the swastika . In German nationalist circles, the swastika was considered a symbol of an " Aryan race " and it symbolised the replacement of the Christian Cross with allegiance to a National Socialist State.

The Nazi Party grew significantly during 1921 and 1922, partly through Hitler's oratorical skills, partly through the SA's appeal to unemployed young men, and partly because there was a backlash against socialist and liberal politics in Bavaria as Germany's economic problems deepened and the weakness of the Weimar regime became apparent. The party recruited former World War I soldiers, to whom Hitler as a decorated frontline veteran could particularly appeal, as well as small businessmen and disaffected former members of rival parties. Nazi rallies were often held in beer halls, where downtrodden men could get free beer. The Hitler Youth was formed for the children of party members. The party also formed groups in other parts of Germany.

Julius Streicher in Nuremberg was an early recruit and became editor of the racist magazine Der Stürmer . In December 1920, the Nazi Party had acquired a newspaper, the Völkischer Beobachter , of which its leading ideologist Alfred Rosenberg became editor. Others to join the party around this time were Heinrich Himmler and World War I flying ace Hermann Göring .

Adoption of Italian fascism: The Beer Hall Putsch On 31 October 1922, a fascist party with similar policies and objectives came into power in Italy, the National Fascist Party , under the leadership of the charismatic Benito Mussolini . The Fascists, like the Nazis, promoted a national rebirth of their country, as they opposed communism and liberalism; appealed to the working-class; opposed the Treaty of Versailles ; and advocated the territorial expansion of their country. Hitler was inspired by Mussolini and the Fascists, beginning to adopt elements of their program for the Nazi Party and himself.

[ 82 ] The Italian Fascists also used a straight-armed Roman salute and wore black-shirted uniforms; Hitler would later borrow their use of the straight-armed salute as a Nazi salute .

When the Fascists took control of Italy through their coup d'état called the " March on Rome ", Hitler began planning his own coup less than a month later.

[ 82 ] In January 1923, France occupied the Ruhr industrial region as a result of Germany's failure to meet its reparations payments. This led to economic chaos, the resignation of Wilhelm Cuno 's government and an attempt by the German Communist Party (KPD) to stage a revolution. The reaction to these events was an upsurge of nationalist sentiment. Nazi Party membership grew sharply to about 20,000, [ 83 ] compared to the approximate 6,000 at the beginning of 1923.

[ 84 ] By November 1923, Hitler had decided that the time was right for an attempt to seize power in Munich, in the hope that the Reichswehr (the post-war German military) would mutiny against the Berlin government and join his revolt. In this, he was influenced by former General Erich Ludendorff , who had become a supporter—though not a member—of the Nazis.

[ 85 ] Nazis during the Beer Hall Putsch in Munich On the night of 8 November, the Nazis used a patriotic rally in a Munich beer hall to launch an attempted putsch ("coup d'état"). This so-called Beer Hall Putsch attempt failed almost at once when the local Reichswehr commanders refused to support it. On the morning of 9 November, the Nazis staged a march of about 2,000 supporters through Munich in an attempt to rally support. The two groups exchanged fire, after which 15 putschists, four police officers, and a bystander lay dead.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] Hitler, Ludendorff and a number of others were arrested and were tried for treason in March 1924. Hitler and his associates were given very lenient prison sentences. While Hitler was in prison, he wrote his semi-autobiographical political manifesto Mein Kampf ("My Struggle").

The Nazi Party was banned on 9 November 1923; however, with the support of the nationalist Völkisch-Social Bloc ( Völkisch-Sozialer Block ), it continued to operate under the name "German Party" ( Deutsche Partei or DP) from 1924 to 1925.

[ 89 ] The Nazis failed to remain unified in the DP, as in the north, the right-wing Volkish nationalist supporters of the Nazis moved to the new German Völkisch Freedom Party , leaving the north's left-wing Nazi members, such as Joseph Goebbels retaining support for the party.

[ 89 ] Rise to power: 1925–1933 Further information: Adolf Hitler's rise to power "Rise of Nazism" redirects here. For the culmination of the rise, see Nazi seizure of power .

This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( February 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Adolf Hitler (standing) delivers a speech on the occasion of the refoundation of the NSDAP in February of 1925. Next to him from the perspective of the onlooker: On the right: Gregor Strasser and Heinrich Himmler. On the left: Franz Xaver Schwarz, Walter Buch and Alfred Rosenberg. Behind Hitler the Blutfahne (blood-flag), a central relique within the propaganda of the National-Socialists, can be seen attached to the wall.

Hitler with Nazi Party members in 1930 Pardoned by the Bavarian Supreme Court, Hitler was released from prison on 20 December 1924, against the state prosecutor's objections.

[ 90 ] On 16 February 1925, Hitler convinced the Bavarian authorities to lift the ban on the NSDAP and the party was formally refounded on 26 February 1925, with Hitler as its undisputed leader. It was at this time Hitler began referring to himself as " der Führer ".

[ 91 ] The new Nazi Party was no longer a paramilitary organisation and disavowed any intention of taking power by force. In any case, the economic and political situation had stabilised and the extremist upsurge of 1923 had faded, so there was no prospect of further revolutionary adventures. Instead, Hitler intended to alter the party's strategy to achieving power through what he called the "path of legality".

[ 92 ] The Nazi Party of 1925 was divided into the "Leadership Corps" ( Korps der politischen Leiter ) appointed by Hitler and the general membership ( Parteimitglieder ). The party and the SA were kept separate and the legal aspect of the party's work was emphasised. In a sign of this, the party began to admit women. The SA and the SS members (the latter founded in 1925 as Hitler's bodyguard, and known originally as the Schutzkommando ) had to all be regular party members.

[ 93 ] [ 94 ] In the 1920s the Nazi Party expanded beyond its Bavarian base. At this time, it began surveying voters in order to determine what they were dissatisfied with in Germany, allowing Nazi propaganda to be altered accordingly.

[ 95 ] Catholic Bavaria maintained its right-wing nostalgia for a Catholic monarch; [ citation needed ] and Westphalia , along with working-class "Red Berlin", were always the Nazis' weakest areas electorally, even during the Third Reich itself. The areas of strongest Nazi support were in rural Protestant areas such as Schleswig-Holstein , Mecklenburg , Pomerania and East Prussia . Depressed working-class areas such as Thuringia also produced a strong Nazi vote, while the workers of the Ruhr and Hamburg largely remained loyal to the Social Democrats , the Communist Party of Germany or the Catholic Centre Party . Nuremberg remained a Nazi Party stronghold, and the first Nuremberg Rally was held there in 1927. These rallies soon became massive displays of Nazi paramilitary power and attracted many recruits. The Nazis' strongest appeal was to the lower middle-classes—farmers, public servants, teachers and small businessmen—who had suffered most from the inflation of the 1920s, so who feared Bolshevism more than anything else. The small business class was receptive to Hitler's antisemitism, since it blamed Jewish big business for its economic problems. University students, disappointed at being too young to have served in the War of 1914–1918 and attracted by the Nazis' radical rhetoric, also became a strong Nazi constituency. By 1929, the party had 130,000 members.

[ 96 ] The party's nominal Deputy Leader was Rudolf Hess , but he had no real power in the party. By the early 1930s, the senior leaders of the party after Hitler were Heinrich Himmler , Joseph Goebbels and Hermann Göring . Beneath the Leadership Corps were the party's regional leaders, the Gauleiters , each of whom commanded the party in his Gau ("region"). Goebbels began his ascent through the party hierarchy as Gauleiter of Berlin-Brandenburg in 1926. Streicher was Gauleiter of Franconia , where he published his antisemitic newspaper Der Stürmer . Beneath the Gauleiter were lower-level officials, the Kreisleiter ("county leaders"), Zellenleiter ("cell leaders") and Blockleiter ("block leaders"). This was a strictly hierarchical structure in which orders flowed from the top and unquestioning loyalty was given to superiors. Only the SA retained some autonomy. Being composed largely of unemployed workers, many SA men took the Nazis' socialist rhetoric seriously. At this time, the Hitler salute (borrowed from the Italian fascists ) and the greeting "Heil Hitler!" were adopted throughout the party.

Nazi Party election poster used in Vienna in 1930 (translation: "We demand freedom and bread") The Nazis contested elections to the national parliament (the Reichstag ) and to the state legislature (the Landtage ) from 1924, although at first with little success. The " National Socialist Freedom Movement " polled 3% of the vote in the December 1924 Reichstag elections and this fell to 2.6% in 1928 . State elections produced similar results. Despite these poor results and despite Germany's relative political stability and prosperity during the later 1920s, the Nazi Party continued to grow. This was partly because Hitler, who had no administrative ability, left the party organisation to the head of the secretariat, Philipp Bouhler , the party treasurer Franz Xaver Schwarz and business manager Max Amann . The party had a capable propaganda head in Gregor Strasser , who was promoted to national organizational leader in January 1928. These men gave the party efficient recruitment and organizational structures. The party also owed its growth to the gradual fading away of competitor nationalist groups, such as the German National People's Party (DNVP). As Hitler became the recognised head of the German nationalists, other groups declined or were absorbed. In the late 1920s, seeing the party's lack of breakthrough into the mainstream, Goebbels proposed that instead of focusing all of their propaganda in major cities where there was competition from other political movements, they should instead begin holding rallies in rural areas where they would be more effective.

[ 97 ] Despite these strengths, the Nazi Party might never have come to power had it not been for the Great Depression and its effects on Germany. By 1930, the German economy was beset with mass unemployment and widespread business failures. The Social Democrats and Communists were bitterly divided and unable to formulate an effective solution: this gave the Nazis their opportunity and Hitler's message, blaming the crisis on the Jewish financiers and the Bolsheviks , resonated with wide sections of the electorate. At the September 1930 Reichstag elections , the Nazis won 18% of the votes and became the second-largest party in the Reichstag after the Social Democrats. Hitler proved to be a highly effective campaigner, pioneering the use of radio and aircraft for this purpose. His dismissal of Strasser and his appointment of Goebbels as the party's propaganda chief were major factors. While Strasser had used his position to promote his own leftish version of national socialism, Goebbels was completely loyal to Hitler, and worked only to improve Hitler's image.

The 1930 elections changed the German political landscape by weakening the traditional nationalist parties, the DNVP and the DVP, leaving the Nazis as the chief alternative to the discredited Social Democrats and the Zentrum, whose leader, Heinrich Brüning , headed a weak minority government. The inability of the democratic parties to form a united front, the self-imposed isolation of the Communists and the continued decline of the economy, all played into Hitler's hands. He now came to be seen as de facto leader of the opposition and donations poured into the Nazi Party's coffers. Some major business figures, such as Fritz Thyssen , were Nazi supporters and gave generously [ 98 ] and some Wall Street figures were allegedly involved, [ citation needed ] but many other businessmen were suspicious of the extreme nationalist tendencies of the Nazis and preferred to support the traditional conservative parties instead.

[ 99 ] In 1930, as the price for joining a coalition government of the Land (state) of Thuringia , the Nazi Party received the state ministries of the Interior and Education. On 23 January 1930, Wilhelm Frick was appointed to these ministries, becoming the first Nazi to hold a ministerial-level post at any level in Germany.

German NSDAP Donation Token 1932, Free State of Prussia elections In 1931 the Nazi Party altered its strategy to engage in perpetual campaigning across the country, even outside of election time.

[ 100 ] During 1931 and into 1932, Germany's political crisis deepened. Hitler ran for president against the incumbent Paul von Hindenburg in March 1932, polling 30% in the first round and 37% in the second against Hindenburg's 49% and 53%. By now the SA had 400,000 members and its running street battles with the SPD and Communist paramilitaries (who also fought each other) reduced some German cities to combat zones. Paradoxically, although the Nazis were among the main instigators of this disorder, part of Hitler's appeal to a frightened and demoralised middle class was his promise to restore law and order. Overt antisemitism was played down in official Nazi rhetoric, but was never far from the surface. Germans voted for Hitler primarily because of his promises to revive the economy (by unspecified means), to restore German greatness and overturn the Treaty of Versailles and to save Germany from communism. On 24 April 1932, the Free State of Prussia elections to the Landtag resulted in 36% of the votes and 162 seats for the NSDAP.

On 20 July 1932, the Prussian government was ousted by a coup, the Preussenschlag ; a few days later at the July 1932 Reichstag election the Nazis made another leap forward, polling 37% and becoming the largest party in parliament by a wide margin. Furthermore, the Nazis and the Communists between them won 52% of the vote and a majority of seats. Since both parties opposed the established political system and neither would join or support any ministry, this made the formation of a majority government impossible. The result was weak ministries governing by decree. Under Comintern directives, the Communists maintained their policy of treating the Social Democrats as the main enemy, calling them " social fascists ", thereby splintering opposition to the Nazis.

[ g ] Later, both the Social Democrats and the Communists accused each other of having facilitated Hitler's rise to power by their unwillingness to compromise.

Chancellor Franz von Papen called another Reichstag election in November, hoping to find a way out of this impasse. The electoral result was the same, with the Nazis and the Communists winning 50% of the vote between them and more than half the seats, rendering this Reichstag no more workable than its predecessor. However, support for the Nazis had fallen to 33.1%, suggesting that the Nazi surge had passed its peak—possibly because the worst of the Depression had passed, possibly because some middle-class voters had supported Hitler in July as a protest, but had now drawn back from the prospect of actually putting him into power. The Nazis interpreted the result as a warning that they must seize power before their moment passed. Had the other parties united, this could have been prevented, but their shortsightedness made a united front impossible. Papen, his successor Kurt von Schleicher and the nationalist press magnate Alfred Hugenberg spent December and January in political intrigues that eventually persuaded President Hindenburg that it was safe to appoint Hitler as Reich Chancellor, at the head of a cabinet including only a minority of Nazi ministers—which he did on 30 January 1933.

Ascension and consolidation Reichsparteitag (Nuremberg Rally): Nazi Party leader Adolf Hitler and SA-leader Ernst Röhm , August 1933 In Mein Kampf , Hitler directly attacked both left-wing and right-wing politics in Germany.

[ h ] However, a majority of scholars identify Nazism in practice as being a far-right form of politics.

[ 102 ] [ page needed ] When asked in an interview in 1934 whether the Nazis were "bourgeois right-wing" as alleged by their opponents, Hitler responded that Nazism was not exclusively for any class and indicated that it favoured neither the left nor the right, but preserved "pure" elements from both "camps" by stating: "From the camp of bourgeois tradition, it takes national resolve, and from the materialism of the Marxist dogma, living, creative Socialism".

[ 103 ] The votes that the Nazis received in the 1932 elections established the Nazi Party as the largest parliamentary faction of the Weimar Republic government. Hitler was appointed as Chancellor of Germany on 30 January 1933.

The Reichstag fire on 27 February 1933 gave Hitler a pretext for suppressing his political opponents. The following day he persuaded the Reich's President Paul von Hindenburg to issue the Reichstag Fire Decree , which suspended most civil liberties . The NSDAP won the parliamentary election on 5 March 1933 with 44% of votes, but failed to win an absolute majority. After the election, hundreds of thousands of new members joined the party for opportunistic reasons, most of them civil servants and white-collar workers. They were nicknamed the "casualties of March" (German: Märzgefallenen ) or "March violets" (German: Märzveilchen ).

[ 104 ] To protect the party from too many non-ideological turncoats who were viewed by the so-called "old fighters" (alte Kämpfer) with some mistrust, [ 104 ] the party issued a freeze on admissions that remained in force from May 1933 to 1937.

[ 105 ] On 23 March, the parliament passed the Enabling Act of 1933 , which gave the cabinet the right to enact laws without the consent of parliament. In effect, this gave Hitler dictatorial powers. Now possessing virtually absolute power, the Nazis established totalitarian control as they abolished labour unions and other political parties and imprisoned their political opponents, first at wilde Lager , improvised camps, then in concentration camps .

Nazi Germany had been established, yet the Reichswehr remained impartial. Nazi power over Germany remained virtual, not absolute.

NSDAP federal election results (1924–1933) [ 106 ] Election Votes Seats Notes No.

% +/– No.

+/– May 1924 (as National Socialist Freedom Movement ) 1,918,300 6.5 (No. 6) 32 / 472 Hitler in prison December 1924 (as National Socialist Freedom Movement ) 907,300 3.0 (No. 8) 3.5 14 / 493 18 Hitler released from prison May 1928 810,100 2.6 (No. 9) 0.4 12 / 491 2 September 1930 6,409,600 18.3 (No. 2) 15.7 107 / 577 95 After the financial crisis July 1932 13,745,000 37.3 ( No. 1 ) 19.0 230 / 608 123 After Hitler was candidate for presidency November 1932 11,737,000 33.1 ( No. 1 ) 4.2 196 / 584 34 March 1933 17,277,180 43.9 ( No. 1 ) 10.8 288 / 647 92 During Hitler's term as Chancellor of Germany After taking power: intertwining of party and state The Nazis embarked on a campaign of Gleichschaltung (coordination) to exert their control over all aspects of German government and society. During June and July 1933, all competing parties were either outlawed or dissolved themselves and subsequently the Law Against the Formation of Parties of 14 July 1933 legally established the Nazi Party's monopoly. On 1 December 1933, the Law to Secure the Unity of Party and State entered into force, which was the base for a progressive intertwining of party structures and state apparatus.

[ 107 ] By this law, the SA—actually a party division—was given quasi-governmental authority and their Stabschef became a cabinet minister without portfolio . By virtue of the 30 January 1934 Law on the Reconstruction of the Reich , the Länder (states) lost their sovereignty and were demoted to administrative divisions of the Reich government. Effectively, they lost most of their power to the Gaue that were originally just regional divisions of the party, but took over most competencies of the state administration in their respective sectors.

[ 108 ] During the Röhm Purge of 30 June to 2 July 1934 (also known as the "Night of the Long Knives"), Hitler disempowered the SA's leadership—most of whom belonged to the Strasserist (national revolutionary) faction within the NSDAP—and ordered them killed. He accused them of having conspired to stage a coup d'état , but it is believed that this was only a pretense to justify the suppression of any intraparty opposition. The purge was executed by the SS, assisted by the Gestapo and Reichswehr units. Aside from Strasserist Nazis, they also murdered anti-Nazi conservative figures like former chancellor von Schleicher.

[ 109 ] After this, the SA continued to exist but lost much of its importance, while the role of the SS grew significantly. Formerly only a sub-organisation of the SA, it was made into a separate organisation of the NSDAP in July 1934.

[ 110 ] Upon the death of President Hindenburg on 2 August 1934, Hitler merged the offices of party leader, head of state and chief of government in one, taking the title of Führer und Reichskanzler by passage of the Law Concerning the Head of State of the German Reich . The Chancellery of the Führer , officially an organisation of the Nazi Party, took over the functions of the Office of the President (a government agency), blurring the distinction between structures of party and state even further. The SS increasingly exerted police functions, a development which was formally documented by the merger of the offices of Reichsführer-SS and Chief of the German Police on 17 June 1936, as the position was held by Heinrich Himmler who derived his authority directly from Hitler.

[ 111 ] The Sicherheitsdienst (SD, formally the "Security Service of the Reichsführer-SS") that had been created in 1931 as an intraparty intelligence became the de facto intelligence agency of Nazi Germany. It was put under the Reich Security Main Office (RSHA) in 1939, which then coordinated SD, Gestapo and criminal police , therefore functioning as a hybrid organisation of state and party structures.

[ 112 ] Adolf Hitler in Bonn in 1938 NSDAP election and referendum results in the Reichstag under Nazi Germany (1933–1938) Election Votes % Seats November 1933 39,655,224 92.1 661 / 661 1936 44,462,458 98.8 741 / 741 1938 44,451,092 99.0 813 / 813 Defeat and abolition Officially, Nazi Germany lasted only 12 years. The Instrument of Surrender was signed by representatives of the German High Command at Berlin , on 8 May 1945, when the war ended in Europe.

[ 113 ] The party was formally abolished on 10 October 1945 by the Allied Control Council , followed by the process of denazification along with trials of major war criminals before the International Military Tribunal (IMT) in Nuremberg.

[ 114 ] Part of the Potsdam Agreement called for the destruction of the Nazi Party alongside the requirement for the reconstruction of the German political life.

[ 115 ] In addition, the Control Council Law no. 2 Providing for the Termination and Liquidation of the Nazi Organization specified the abolition of 52 other Nazi affiliated and supervised organisations and outlawed their activities.

[ 116 ] The denazification was carried out in Germany and continued until the onset of the Cold War.

[ 117 ] [ page needed ] [ 118 ] Between 1939 and 1945, the Nazi Party led regime, assisted by collaborationist governments and recruits from occupied countries, was responsible for the deaths of at least twenty million people, [ 119 ] including 5.5 to 6 million Jews (representing two-thirds of the Jewish population of Europe), [ 20 ] [ 120 ] [ 121 ] and between 200,000 and 1,500,000 Romani people .

[ 122 ] [ 123 ] The estimated total number includes the killing of nearly two million non-Jewish Poles , [ 123 ] over three million Soviet prisoners of war , [ 124 ] communists , and other political opponents, homosexuals, the physically and mentally disabled.

[ 125 ] [ 126 ] Political programme Main article: National Socialist Program The National Socialist Programme was a formulation of the policies of the party. It contained 25 points and is therefore also known as the "25-point plan" or "25-point programme". It was the official party programme, with minor changes, from its proclamation as such by Hitler in 1920, when the party was still the German Workers' Party, until its dissolution.

Party composition Command structure Top leadership Adolf Hitler and Rudolf Hess in Weimar in 1930 At the top of the Nazi Party was the party chairman (" Der Führer "), who held absolute power and full command over the party. All other party offices were subordinate to his position and had to depend on his instructions. In 1934, Hitler founded a separate body for the chairman, Chancellery of the Führer , with its own sub-units.

Below the Führer's chancellery was first the "Staff of the Deputy Führer ", headed by Rudolf Hess from 21 April 1933 to 10 May 1941; and then the " Party Chancellery " ( Parteikanzlei ), headed by Martin Bormann .

Following Hitler's suicide on 30 April 1945, Bormann would be named as Party Minister, which gave him the top position in the Nazi Party itself; [ 127 ] unlike Hitler, however, Bormann would not have a leadership role over the government of Nazi Germany.

[ 127 ] Bormann, whose fate would remain unknown for several decades, would soon afterwards commit suicide as well on 2 May 1945 while trying to flee Berlin around the time Soviet Union forces captured the city .

[ 128 ] [ 129 ] His remains were first identified in 1972, then again in 1998 through DNA testing.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] Reichsleiter Directly subjected to the Führer were the Reichsleiter ("Reich Leader(s)"—the singular and plural forms are identical in German), whose number was gradually increased to eighteen. They held power and influence comparable to the Reich Ministers' in Hitler's Cabinet . The eighteen Reichsleiter formed the "Reich Leadership of the Nazi Party" ( Reichsleitung der NSDAP ), which was established at the so-called Brown House in Munich. Unlike a Gauleiter , a Reichsleiter did not have individual geographic areas under their command, but were responsible for specific spheres of interest.

Nazi Party offices The Nazi Party had a number of party offices dealing with various political and other matters. These included: Rassenpolitisches Amt der NSDAP (RPA): "NSDAP Office of Racial Policy" Außenpolitische Amt der NSDAP (APA): "NSDAP Office of Foreign Affairs" Kolonialpolitisches Amt der NSDAP (KPA): "NSDAP Office of Colonial Policy" Wehrpolitisches Amt der NSDAP (WPA): "NSDAP Office of Military Policy" Amt Rosenberg (ARo): " Rosenberg Office" Paramilitary groups The SA in Berlin in 1932. The group had nearly two million members at the end of 1932.

In addition to the Nazi Party proper, several paramilitary groups existed which "supported" Nazi aims. All members of these paramilitary organisations were required to become regular Nazi Party members first and could then enlist in the group of their choice. An exception was the Waffen-SS , considered the military arm of the SS and Nazi Party, which during the Second World War allowed members to enlist without joining the Nazi Party. Foreign volunteers of the Waffen-SS were also not required to be members of the Nazi Party, although many joined local nationalist groups from their own countries with the same aims. Police officers, including members of the Gestapo , frequently held SS rank for administrative reasons (known as "rank parity") and were likewise not required to be members of the Nazi Party.

A vast system of Nazi Party paramilitary ranks developed for each of the various paramilitary groups. This was part of the process of Gleichschaltung with the paramilitary and auxiliary groups swallowing existing associations and federations after the Party was flooded by millions of membership applications.

[ 132 ] The major Nazi Party paramilitary groups were as follows: Schutzstaffel (SS): "Protection Squadron" (both Allgemeine SS and Waffen-SS ) Sturmabteilung (SA): "Storm Division" Nationalsozialistisches Fliegerkorps (NSFK): "National Socialist Flyers Corps" Nationalsozialistisches Kraftfahrerkorps (NSKK): "National Socialist Motor Corps" The Hitler Youth was a paramilitary group divided into an adult leadership corps and a general membership open to boys aged fourteen to eighteen. The League of German Girls was the equivalent group for girls.

Affiliated organisations Certain nominally independent organisations had their own legal representation and own property, but were supported by the Nazi Party. Many of these associated organisations were labour unions of various professions. Some were older organisations that were nazified according to the Gleichschaltung policy after the 1933 takeover.

Reich League of German Officials (union of civil servants, predecessor to German Civil Service Federation ) German Labour Front (DAF) National Socialist German Doctors' League National Socialist League for the Maintenance of the Law (NSRB, 1936–1945, earlier National Socialist German Lawyers' League) National Socialist War Victim's Care (NSKOV) National Socialist Teachers League (NSLB) National Socialist People's Welfare (NSV) Reich Labour Service (RAD) German Faith Movement German Colonial League (RKB) German Red Cross Kyffhäuser League Technical Emergency Relief (TENO) Reich's Union of Large Families Reichsluftschutzbund (RLB) Reichskolonialbund (RKB) Bund Deutscher Osten (BDO) German American Bund The employees of large businesses with international operations such as Deutsche Bank , Dresdner Bank , and Commerzbank were mostly party members.

[ 133 ] All German businesses abroad were also required to have their own Nazi Party Ausland-Organization liaison men, which enabled the party leadership to obtain updated and excellent intelligence on the actions of the global corporate elites.

[ 134 ] [ page needed ] Regional administration See also: Administrative divisions of Nazi Germany and List of Gauleiters Administrative units of the Nazi Party in 1944 For the purpose of centralisation in the Gleichschaltung process, a rigidly hierarchal structure was established in the Nazi Party, which it later carried through in the whole of Germany in order to consolidate total power under the person of Hitler ( Führerstaat ). It was regionally sub-divided into a number of Gaue (singular: Gau ) headed by a Gauleiter , who received their orders directly from Hitler. The name (originally a term for sub-regions of the Holy Roman Empire headed by a Gaugraf ) for these new provincial structures was deliberately chosen because of its mediaeval connotations. The term is approximately equivalent to the English shire .

While the Nazis maintained the nominal existence of state and regional governments in Germany itself, this policy was not extended to territories acquired after 1937. Even in German-speaking areas such as Austria, state and regional governments were formally disbanded as opposed to just being dis-empowered.

After the Anschluss a new type of administrative unit was introduced called a Reichsgau . In these territories the Gauleiters also held the position of Reichsstatthalter (Reich Governor) thereby formally combining the spheres of both party and state offices. The establishment of this type of district was subsequently carried out for any further territorial annexations of Germany both before and during World War II . Even the former territories of Prussia were never formally re-integrated into what was then Germany's largest state after being re-taken in the 1939 Polish campaign.

The Gaue and Reichsgaue (state or province) were further sub-divided into Kreise (counties) headed by a Kreisleiter , which were in turn sub-divided into Zellen (cells) and Blöcke (blocks), headed by a Zellenleiter and Blockleiter respectively.

A reorganisation of the Gaue was enacted on 1 October 1928. The given numbers were the official ordering numbers. The statistics are from 1941, for which the Gau organisation of that moment in time forms the basis. Their size and populations are not exact; for instance, according to the official party statistics the Gau Kurmark/Mark Brandenburg was the largest in the German Reich.

[ 135 ] [ page needed ] By 1941, there were 42 territorial Gaue for Greater Germany.

[ i ] Of these, 10 were designated as Reichsgaue: 7 of them for Austria, one for the Sudetenland (annexed from Czechoslovakia ) and two for the areas annexed from Poland and the Free City of Danzig after the joint invasion of Poland by Nazi Germany and the Soviet Union in 1939 at the onset of World War II.

[ 136 ] Getting the leadership of the individual Gaue to co-operate with one another proved difficult at times since there was constant administrative and financial jockeying for control going on between them.

[ 137 ] The first table below describes the organizational structure for the Gaue that existed before their dissolution in 1945.

[ 138 ] Information on former Gaue (that were either renamed, or dissolved by being divided or merged with other Gaue ) is provided in the second table.

[ 139 ] Nazi Party Gaue Nr.

Gau Headquarters Area (km 2 ) Inhabitants (1941) Gauleiter 01 Baden-Alsace Strasbourg 23,350 2,502,023 Robert Heinrich Wagner from 22 March 1941 02 Bayreuth , renaming of Gau Bayerische Ostmark 2 June 1942 Bayreuth 29,600 2,370,658 Hans Schemm (1933–1935) Fritz Wachtler (1935–1945) Ludwig Ruckdeschel from 19 April 1945 03 Berlin Berlin 884 4,338,756 Joseph Goebbels from 1 October 1928 04 Danzig-Westpreußen Danzig 26,057 2,287,394 Albert Forster from 10 October 1939 05 Düsseldorf Düsseldorf 2,672 2,261,909 Friedrich Karl Florian from 1 August 1930 06 Essen Essen 2,825 1,921,326 Josef Terboven from 1 August 1928 07 Franken , renaming of Gau Mittelfranken 21 April 1933 Nuremberg 7,618 1,077,216 Julius Streicher (1929–1940) Hans Zimmermann (1940–1942) Karl Holz from 19 March 1942 08 Halle-Merseburg Halle an der Saale 10,202 1,578,292 Walter Ernst (1925–1926) Paul Hinkler (1926–1931) Rudolf Jordan (1931–1937) Joachim Albrecht Eggeling from 20 April 1937 09 Hamburg Hamburg 747 1,711,877 Josef Klant (1925–1926) Albert Krebs (1926–1928) Hinrich Lohse (1928–1929) Karl Kaufmann from 15 April 1929 10 Hessen-Nassau Frankfurt 15,030 3,117,266 Jakob Sprenger from 1 January 1933 11 Kärnten Klagenfurt 11,554 449,713 Hans Mazenauer (1926–1927) Hugo Herzog (1927–1933) Hans vom Kothen (1933) Hubert Klausner (1933–1936) Peter Feistritzer (1936–1938) Hubert Klausner (1938–1939) Franz Kutschera (1939–1941) Friedrich Rainer from 27 November 1941 12 Köln-Aachen Köln 8,162 2,432,095 Joseph Grohé from 1 June 1931 13 Kurhessen , renaming of Gau Hessen-Nord 1934 Kassel 9,200 971,887 Walter Schultz (1925–1928) Karl Weinrich (1928–1943) Karl Gerland from 6 November 1943 14 Magdeburg-Anhalt , renaming of Gau Anhalt-Provinz Sachsen Nord 1 October 1928 Dessau 13,910 1,820,416 Gustav Hermann Schmischke (1926–1927) Wilhelm Friedrich Loeper (1927–1935) with a short replacement by Paul Hofmann from August to December 1932 Joachim Albrecht Eggeling (1935–1937) Rudolf Jordan from 20 April 1937 15 Mainfranken , renaming of Gau Unterfranken 30 July 1935 Würzburg 8,432 840,663 Otto Hellmuth from 1 October 1928 16 Mark Brandenburg , renaming of Gau Kurmark 1 January 1939 Berlin 38,278 3,007,933 Wilhelm Kube (1933–1936) Emil Stürtz from 7 August 1936 17 Mecklenburg , renaming of Gau Mecklenburg-Lübeck 1 April 1937 Schwerin 15,722 900,427 Friedrich Hildebrandt from 1925 with a short replacement by Herbert Albrecht (July 1930 – January 1931) 18 Moselland Koblenz 11,876 1,367,354 Gustav Simon from 24 January 1941 19 München-Oberbayern Munich 16,411 1,938,447 Adolf Wagner (1930–1944) Paul Giesler from 12 April 1944 20 Niederdonau , renaming of Gau Niederösterreich 21 May 1938 Nominal capital: Krems , District Headquarters: Vienna 23,502 1,697,676 Leopold Eder (1926–1927) Josef Leopold (1927–1938) Hugo Jury from 21 May 1938 21 Niederschlesien Breslau 26,985 3,286,539 Karl Hanke from 27 January 1941 22 Oberdonau , renaming of Gau Oberösterreich 22 May 1938 Linz 14,216 1,034,871 Alfred Proksch (1926–1927) Andreas Bolek (1927–1934) Rudolf Lengauer (1934–1935) Oscar Hinterleitner (1935) August Eigruber from 22 May 1938 23 Oberschlesien Kattowitz 20,636 4,341,084 Fritz Bracht from 27 January 1941 24 Ost-Hannover , renaming of Gau Lüneburg-Stade 1 October 1928 Buchholz , after 1 April 1937 Lüneburg 18,006 1,060,509 Otto Telschow from 27 March 1925 25 Ostpreußen Königsberg 52,731 3,336,777 Wilhelm Stich (1925–1926) Bruno Gustav Scherwitz (1926–1927) Hans Albert Hohnfeldt (1927–1928) Erich Koch from 1 October 1928 26 Pommern Stettin 38,409 2,393,844 Theodor Vahlen (1925–1927) Walther von Corswant (1927–1931) Wilhelm Karpenstein (1931–1934) Franz Schwede-Coburg from 21 July 1934 27 Sachsen Dresden 14,995 5,231,739 Martin Mutschmann from 27 March 1925 28 Salzburg Salzburg 7,153 257,226 Karl Scharizer (1932–1934) Anton Wintersteiger (1934–1938) Friedrich Rainer (1938–1941) Gustav Adolf Scheel from 27 November 1941 29 Schleswig-Holstein Kiel 15,687 1,589,267 Hinrich Lohse from 27 March 1925 30 Schwaben Augsburg 10,231 946,212 Karl Wahl from 1 October 1928 31 Steiermark Graz 17,384 1,116,407 Walther Oberhaidacher (1928–1934) Georg Bilgeri (1934–1935) Sepp Helfrich (1936–1938) Siegfried Uiberreither from 25 May 1938 32 Sudetenland (also known as Sudetengau) Reichenberg 22,608 2,943,187 Konrad Henlein from 1 October 1938 33 Südhannover-Braunschweig Hannover 14,553 2,136,961 Bernhard Rust (1928–1940) Hartmann Lauterbacher from 8 December 1940 34 Thüringen Weimar 15,763 2,446,182 Artur Dinter (1925–1927) Fritz Sauckel from 30 September 1927 35 Tirol-Vorarlberg Innsbruck 13,126 486,400 Franz Hofer from 25 May 1938 36 Wartheland (also known as Warthegau), renaming of Gau Posen (29 January 1940) Posen 43,905 4,693,722 Arthur Karl Greiser from 21 October 1939 37 Weser-Ems Oldenburg 15,044 1,839,302 Carl Röver (1928–1942) Paul Wegener from 26 May 1942 38 Westfalen-Nord Münster 14,559 2,822,603 Alfred Meyer from 31 January 1931 39 Westfalen-Süd Bochum 7,656 2,678,026 Josef Wagner (1931–1941) Paul Giesler (1941–1943) Albert Hoffmann from 26 January 1943 40 Westmark Saarbrücken 14,713 1,892,240 Josef Bürckel (1940–1944) Willi Stöhr from 29 September 1944 41 Wien Vienna 1,216 1,929,976 Walter Rentmeister (1926–1928) Eugen Werkowitsch (1928–1929) Robert Derda (1929) Alfred Frauenfeld (1930–1933) Leopold Tavs (1937–1938) Odilo Globocnik (1938–1939) Josef Bürckel (1939–1940) Baldur von Schirach from 8 August 1940 42 Württemberg-Hohenzollern Stuttgart 20,657 2,974,373 Eugen Munder (1925–1928) Wilhelm Murr from 1 February 1928 43 Auslandsorganisation (also known as NSDAP/AO) Berlin Hans Nieland (1932–1933) Ernst Wilhelm Bohle from 17 February 1934 Later Gaue: Flanders , existed from 15 December 1944 ( Gauleiter in German exile: Jef van de Wiele ) Wallonia , existed from 8 December 1944 ( Gauleiter in German exile: Léon Degrelle ) Gaue dissolved before 1945 The numbering is not based on any official former ranking, but merely listed alphabetically.

Gaue that were simply renamed without territorial changes bear the designation RN in the column "later became." Gaue that were divided into more than one Gau bear the designation D in the column "later became." Gaue that were merged with other Gaue (or occupied territory) bear the designation M in the column "together with." Nr.

Gau in existence later became together with Gauleiter 01 Anhalt 1925–1926 Anhalt-Provinz Sachsen Nord (1 September 1926) Magdeburg & Elbe-Havel M from 17 July 1925 to 1 September 1926 Gustav Hermann Schmischke 02 Anhalt-Provinz Sachsen Nord 1926–1928 Magdeburg-Anhalt (1 October 1928) RN see above table 03 Baden 1925–1941 Baden-Elsaß (22 March 1941) Alsace M from 25 March 1925 to 22 March 1941 Robert Heinrich Wagner 04 Bayerische Ostmark 1933–1942 Bayreuth (2 June 1942) RN see above table 05 Berlin-Brandenburg 1926–1928 Berlin & Brandenburg (II) (1 October 1928) D from 26 October 1926 to 1 October 1928 Joseph Goebbels 06 Brandenburg (I) 1925–1926 Potsdam (February 1926) RN from 5 November 1925 to February 1926 Walter Klaunig 07 Brandenburg (II) 1928–1933 Kurmark (6 March 1933) Ostmark M from 1 October 1928 to 1930 Emil Holtz , then from 18 October 1930 to 16 March 1933 Ernst Schlange 08 Burgenland 1935–1938 Niederdonau & Steiermark (1 October 1938) D from May 1935 to 1 October 1938 Tobias Portschy 09 Danzig 1926–1939 Danzig-Westpreußen (10 October 1939) Westpreußen M from 11 March 1926 to 20 June 1928 Hans Albert Hohnfeldt , then from 20 August 1928 to 1 March 1929 Walter Maass , then from 1 March 1929 to 30 September 1930 Erich Koch , then from 15 October 1930 to 10 October 1939 Albert Forster 10 Elbe-Havel 1925–1926 Anhalt-Provinz Sachsen Nord (1 September 1926) Anhalt & Magdeburg M from 25 November 1925 to 1 September 1926 Alois Bachschmid 11 Göttingen 1925 Hannover-Süd (December 1925) RN from 27 March 1925 to December 1925 Ludolf Haase 12 Groß-Berlin 1925–1926 Berlin-Brandenburg (26 October 1926) Potsdam M from 27 March 1925 to 20 June 1926 Ernst Schlange , then from 20 June 1926 to 26 October 1926 Erich Schmiedicke 13 Groß-München ("Traditionsgau") 1929–1930 München-Oberbayern (15 November 1930) Oberbayern M from 1 November 1929 to 15 November 1930 Adolf Wagner 14 Hannover-Braunschweig 1925 Hannover-Nord (December 1925) RN from 22 March 1925 to December 1925 Bernhard Rust 15 Hannover-Nord 1925–1928 Süd-Hannover-Braunschweig & Weser Ems (1 October 1928) D from December 1925 to 30 September 1928 Bernhard Rust 16 Hannover-Süd 1925–1928 Süd-Hannover-Braunschweig (1 October 1928) Hannover-Nord M from December 1925 to 30 September 1928 Ludolf Haase 17 Harzgau 1925–1926 Magdeburg (April 1926) RN from August 1925 to April 1926 Ludwig Viereck 18 Hessen-Darmstadt 1927–1933 Hessen-Nassau (1 January 1933) Hessen-Nassau-Süd M from 1 March 1927 to 9 January 1931 Friedrich Ringshausen , then Peter Gemeinder to 30 August 1931, then Karl Lenz to 15 December 1932 19 Hessen-Nassau-Nord 1925–1934 Kurhessen (1934) RN see above table 20 Hessen-Nassau-Süd 1925–1932 Hessen-Nassau (1 January 1933) Hessen-Darmstadt M from 1 April 1925 to 22 September 1926 Anton Haselmayer , then from 1 October 1926 to 1 April 1927 Karl Linder , then from 1 April 1927 to 1 January 1933 Jakob Sprenger with a short replacement by Karl Linder (August 1932 – December 1932) 21 Koblenz-Trier 1931–1941 Moselland (24 January 1941) Luxembourg M from 1 June 1931 to 24 January 1941 Gustav Simon 22 Köln 1925 Rhineland-Süd (27 March 1925) RN from 22 February 1925 to 27 March 1925 Heinrich Haake 23 Kurmark 1933–1939 Mark Brandenburg (1 January 1939) RN see above table 24 Lüneburg-Stade 1925–1928 Ost-Hannover (1 October 1928) RN see above table 25 Magdeburg 1926 Anhalt-Provinz Sachsen Nord (1 September 1926) Anhalt & Elbe-Havel M from April 1926 to 1 September 1926 Ludwig Viereck 26 Mecklenburg-Lübeck 1925– 1937 Mecklenburg (1 April 1937) RN see above table 27 Mittelfranken 1929–1933 Franken (21 April 1933) RN see above table 28 Mittelfranken-West 1928–1929 Mittelfranken (1 March 1929) Nürnburg-Fürth-Erlangen M from 1 October 1928 to 1 March 1929 Wilhelm Grimm 29 Niederbayern (I) 1925–1926 Niederbayern-Oberpfalz (I) (December 1926) Oberpfalz (I) M from February 1925 to December 1926 Gregor Strasser 30 Niederbayern (II) 1928–1932 Niederbayern-Oberpfalz (II) (1 April 1932) Oberpfalz (II) M from 1 October 1928 to 1 March 1929 Gregor Strasser , then from 1 March 1929 to 1 April 1932 Otto Erbersdobler , then from 1 April 1932 to 17 August 1932 Franz Maierhofer 31 Niederbayern-Oberpfalz (I) 1926–1928 Oberpfalz (II) & Niederbayern (II) (1 October 1928) D from December 1926 to 1 October 1928 Gregor Strasser 32 Niederbayern-Oberpfalz (II) 1932–1933 Bayerische Ostmark (19 January 1933) Oberfranken M from 17 August 1932 to 13 January 1933 Franz Maierhofer 33 Niederösterreich 1926–1938 Niederdonau (21 May 1938) RN see above table 34 Nordbayern 1925–1928 Mittelfranken-West, Nürnburg-Fürth, Oberfranken & Unterfranken (1 October 1928) D from 2 April 1925 to 1 October 1928 Julius Streicher 35 Nürnburg-Fürth-Erlangen 1925–1929 Mittelfranken (1 March 1929) Mittelfranken-West M from 2 April 1925 to 1 March 1929 Julius Streicher 36 Oberbayern 1928–1930 München-Oberbayern (15 November 1930) Groß-München M from 1 October 1928 to 1 November 1930 Fritz Reinhardt 37 Oberbayern-Schwaben 1926–1928 Oberbayern & Schwaben (1 October 1928) D from 16 September 1926 to May 1927 Hermann Esser , then from 1 June 1928 to 1 October 1928 Fritz Reinhardt 38 Oberfranken 1929–1933 Bayerische Ostmark (19 January 1933) Niederbayern-Oberpfalz (II) M from 1 March 1929 to 19 January 1933 Hans Schemm 39 Oberösterreich 1926–1938 Oberdonau (22 May 1938) RN see above table 40 Oberpfalz (I) 1925–1926 Niederbayern-Oberpfalz (I) (December 1926) Niederbayern (I) M unknown 41 Oberpfalz (II) 1928–1932 Niederbayern-Oberpfalz (II) (17 August 1932) Niederbayern (II) M from 1 October 1928 to 1 November 1929 Adolf Wagner , then from 1 November 1929 to June 1930 Franz Maierhofer , then from June 1930 to November 1930 Edmund Heines , then from 15 November 1930 to 17 August 1932 Franz Maierhofer 42 Ostmark 1928–1933 Kurmark (6 March 1933) Brandenburg (II) M from 2 January 1928 to 6 March 1933 Wilhelm Kube 43 Ostsachsen 1925–1926 Sachsen ( 16 May 1926) Sachsen M from 22 May 1925 to 16 May 1926 Anton Goss 44 Pfalz-Saar 1935–1936 Saarpfalz (13 January 1936) RN from 1 March 1935 to 13 January 1936 Josef Bürckel 45 Posen 1939–1940 Wartheland (29 January 1940) RN see above table 46 Potsdam 1926 Berlin-Brandenburg (26 October 1926) Groß-Berlin M from February to June 1926 Walter Klaunig 47 Rheinland 1926–1931 Köln-Aachen & Koblenz-Trier (1 June 1931) D from July 1926 to 1 June 1931 Robert Ley 48 Rheinland-Nord 1925–1926 Ruhr (7 March 1926) Westfalen (I) M from March 1925 to July 1925 Axel Ripke , then from July 1925 to 7 March 1926 Karl Kaufmann 49 Rheinland-Süd 1925–1926 Rhineland (July 1926) RN 27 March 1925 to 1 June 1925 Heinrich Haake , then from July 1925 to July 1926 Robert Ley 50 Rheinpfalz 1925–1935 Pfalz-Saar (1 March 1935) Saar M from February 1925 to 13 March 1926 Friedrich Wambsganss , then from February 1926 to 1 March 1935 Josef Bürckel 51 Rhein-Ruhr 1926 Ruhr (July 1926) RN from 7 March 1926 to 20 June 1926 Karl Kaufmann 52 Ruhr ("Großgau Ruhr") 1926–1928 Düsseldorf, Essen & Westfalen (II) (1 October 1928) D from 20 June 1926 to 1 October 1928 Karl Kaufmann 53 Saar 1926–1935 Pfalz-Saar (1 March 1935) Rheinpfalz M from 30 May 1926 to 8 December 1926 Walter Jung , then from 8 December 1926 to 21 April 1929 Jakob Jung , then from 21 April 1929 to 30 July 1929 Gustav Staebe (acting), then from 30 July 1929 to 1 September 1931 Adolf Ehrecke , then from 15 September 1931 to 6 May 1933 Karl Brück , then from 6 May 1933 to 1 March 1935 Josef Bürckel 54 Saarpfalz 1936–1940 Westmark (7 December 1940) Lorraine M from 13 January 1936 to 7 December 1940 Josef Bürckel 55 Schlesien 1935–1941 Niederschlesien & Oberschlesien (27 January 1941) D from 15 March 1925 to 4 December 1934 Helmuth Brückner , then from 12 December 1934 to 9 January 1941 Josef Wagner 56 Tirol 1932–1938 Tirol-Vorarlberg (22 May 1938) Vorarlberg M from 1 November 1932 to July 1934 Franz Hofer , then from 28 July 1934 to 1 February 1935 Friedrich Plattner , then from 15 August 1935 to 11 March 1938 Edmund Christoph 57 Unterfranken 1928–1935 Mainfranken (30 July 1935) RN see above table 58 Vorarlberg 1932–1938 Tirol-Vorarlberg (22 May 1938) Tirol M from 12 March 1938 to 22 May 1938 Anton Plankensteiner 59 Westfalen (I) 1925–1926 Ruhr (7 March 1926) Rheinland-Nord M from 27 March 1925 to 7 March 1926 Franz Pfeffer von Salomon 60 Westfalen (II) 1928–1931 Westfalen-Nord & Westfalen-Süd (1 January 1931) D from 1 October 1928 to 1 January 1931 Josef Wagner 61 Westgau 1928–1932 Salzburg, Tirol & Vorarlberg (1 July 1932) D from 1 October 1928 to 1931 Heinrich Suske , then from 1931 to 1 July 1932 Rudolf Riedel Associated organisations abroad See also: NSDAP/AO Gaue in Switzerland The irregular Swiss branch of the Nazi Party also established a number of Party Gaue in that country, most of them named after their regional capitals. These included Gau Basel - Solothurn , Gau Schaffhausen , Gau Luzern , Gau Bern and Gau Zürich .

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] [ 142 ] The Gau Ostschweiz (East Switzerland) combined the territories of three cantons: St. Gallen , Thurgau and Appenzell .

[ 143 ] Membership General membership Main article: List of Nazi Party members The general membership of the Nazi Party mainly consisted of the urban and rural lower middle classes . 7% belonged to the upper class, another 7% were peasants , 35% were industrial workers and 51% were what can be described as middle class. In early 1933, just before Hitler's appointment to the chancellorship, the party showed an under-representation of "workers", who made up 30% of the membership but 46% of German society. Conversely, white-collar employees (19% of members and 12% of Germans), the self-employed (20% of members and 10% of Germans) and civil servants (15% of members and 5% of the German population) had joined in proportions greater than their share of the general population.

[ 144 ] These members were affiliated with local branches of the party, of which there were 1,378 throughout the country in 1928. In 1932, the number had risen to 11,845, reflecting the party's growth in this period.

[ 144 ] When it came to power in 1933, the Nazi Party had over 2 million members. In 1939, the membership total rose to 5.3 million with 81% being male and 19% being female. It continued to attract many more and by 1945 the party reached its peak of 8 million with 63% being male and 37% being female (about 10% of the German population of 80 million).

[ 4 ] [ 145 ] Military membership See also: Nazism and the Wehrmacht Nazi members with military ambitions were encouraged to join the Waffen-SS, but a great number enlisted in the Wehrmacht and even more were drafted for service after World War II began. Early regulations required that all Wehrmacht members be non-political and any Nazi member joining in the 1930s was required to resign from the Nazi Party.

However, this regulation was soon waived and full Nazi Party members served in the Wehrmacht in particular after the outbreak of World War II. The Wehrmacht Reserves also saw a high number of senior Nazis enlisting, with Reinhard Heydrich and Fritz Todt joining the Luftwaffe , as well as Karl Hanke who served in the army.

The British historian Richard J. Evans wrote that junior officers in the army were inclined to be especially zealous National Socialists with a third of them having joined the Nazi Party by 1941. Reinforcing the work of the junior leaders were the National Socialist Leadership Guidance Officers, which were created with the purpose of indoctrinating the troops for the "war of extermination" against Soviet Russia.

[ 146 ] Among higher-ranking officers, 29% were NSDAP members by 1941.

[ 147 ] Student membership In 1926, the party formed a special division to engage the student population, known as the National Socialist German Students' League (NSDStB). A group for university lecturers, the National Socialist German University Lecturers' League (NSDDB), also existed until July 1944.

Women membership The National Socialist Women's League was the women's organization of the party and by 1938 it had approximately 2 million members.

Membership outside Germany Party members who lived outside Germany were pooled into the Auslands-Organisation ( NSDAP/AO , "Foreign Organization"). The organisation was limited only to so-called " Imperial Germans " (citizens of the German Empire); and "Ethnic Germans" ( Volksdeutsche ), who did not hold German citizenship were not permitted to join.

Under Beneš decree No. 16/1945 Coll.

, in case of citizens of Czechoslovakia membership of the Nazi Party was punishable by between five and twenty years of imprisonment.

Deutsche Gemeinschaft Deutsche Gemeinschaft was a branch of the Nazi Party founded in 1919, created for Germans with Volksdeutsche status.

[ 148 ] It is not to be confused with the post-war right-wing Deutsche Gemeinschaft [ de ] , which was founded in 1949.

Notable members included: [ 149 ] [ page needed ] Oswald Menghin ( Vienna ) Hermann Neubacher who was responsible for invading Yugoslavia.

Rudolf Much ( Vienna ) Arthur Seyß-Inquart ( Vienna ) Party symbols Nazi flags : The Nazi Party used a right-facing swastika as their symbol and the red and black colours were said to represent Blut und Boden ("blood and soil"). Another definition of the flag describes the colours as representing the ideology of National Socialism, the swastika representing the Aryan race and the Aryan nationalist agenda of the movement; white representing Aryan racial purity; and red representing the socialist agenda of the movement. Black, white and red were in fact the colours of the old North German Confederation flag (invented by Otto von Bismarck , based on the Prussian colours black and white and the red used by northern German states). In 1871, with the foundation of the German Reich the flag of the North German Confederation became the German Reichsflagge ("Reich flag"). Black, white and red became the colours of the nationalists through the following history (for example World War I and the Weimar Republic ).

The Parteiflagge design, with the centred swastika disc, served as the party flag from 1920. Between 1933 (when the Nazi Party came to power) and 1935, it was used as the National flag ( Nationalflagge ) and Merchant flag ( Handelsflagge ), but interchangeably with the black-white-red horizontal tricolour . In 1935, the black-white-red horizontal tricolour was scrapped (again) and the flag with the off-centre swastika and disc was instituted as the national flag, and remained as such until 1945. The flag with the centred disk continued to be used after 1935, but exclusively as the Parteiflagge , the flag of the party.

German eagle : The Nazi Party used the traditional German eagle , standing atop of a swastika inside a wreath of oak leaves. It is also known as the "Iron Eagle". When the eagle is looking to its left shoulder, it symbolises the Nazi Party and was called the Parteiadler . In contrast, when the eagle is looking to its right shoulder, it symbolises the country ( Reich ) and was therefore called the Reichsadler . After the Nazi Party came to national power in Germany, they replaced the traditional version of the German eagle with the modified party symbol throughout the country and all its institutions.

Ranks and rank insignia Main article: Ranks and insignia of the Nazi Party 1: Anwärter (not party member), 2: Anwärter, 3: Helfer, 4: Oberhelfer, 5: Arbeitsleiter, 6: Oberarbeitsleiter, 7: Hauptarbeitsleiter, 8: Bereitschaftsleiter, 9: Oberbereitschaftsleiter, 10: Hauptbereitschaftsleiter 11: Einsatzleiter, 12: Obereinsatzleiter, 13: Haupteinsatzleiter, 14: Gemeinschaftsleiter, 15: Obergemeinschaftsleiter, 16: Hauptgemeinschaftsleiter, 17: Abschnittsleiter, 18: Oberabschnittsleiter, 19: Hauptabschnittsleiter 20: Bereichsleiter, 21: Oberbereichsleiter, 22: Hauptbereichsleiter, 23: Dienstleiter, 24: Oberdienstleiter, 25: Hauptdienstleiter, 26: Befehlsleiter, 27: Oberbefehlsleiter, 28: Hauptbefehlsleiter, 29: Gauleiter, 30: Reichsleiter Slogans and songs Nazi slogans: " Sieg Heil !

"; " Heil Hitler " Nazi anthem: Horst-Wessel-Lied Election results See also: Nazi Party election results German Reichstag See also: Reichstag (Weimar Republic) Election year Votes % Seats won +/– Notes 1928 810,127 2.6 12 / 491 12 1930 6,379,672 18.3 107 / 577 95 July 1932 13,745,680 37.3 230 / 608 123 November 1932 11,737,021 33.1 196 / 584 34 Last free and fair election.

March 1933 17,277,180 43.9 288 / 647 92 Semi-free yet questionable election.

Last multi-party contested election.

November 1933 39,655,224 92.1 661 / 661 373 Sole legal party.

1936 44,462,458 98.8 741 / 741 80 Sole legal party.

1938 44,451,092 99.0 813 / 813 72 Sole legal party.

Presidential election See also: President of Germany (1919–1945) Election year Candidate First round Second round Votes % Place Votes % Place 1925 endorsed Ludendorff (1.1%) endorsed Hindenburg (48.3%) 1932 Adolf Hitler 11,339,446 30.1 2nd 13,418,547 36.8 2nd Volkstag of Danzig See also: Volkstag Election year Votes % Seats won +/– 1927 1,483 0.8 1 / 72 1 1930 32,457 16.4 12 / 72 11 1933 107,331 50.1 38 / 72 26 1935 139,423 59.3 43 / 72 5 See also Modern history portal Germany portal Business collaboration with Nazi Germany Collaboration with Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy Glossary of Nazi Germany List of books about Nazi Germany List of companies involved in the Holocaust List of Nazi Party leaders and officials Mass suicides in 1945 Nazi Germany Neo-Nazism Socialist Reich Party Volkssturm Notes ^ Officially called the "Reich Committee for the German People's Initiative against the Young Plan and the War Guilt Lie" ( Reichsausschuß für die Deutsche Volksinitiative gegen den Young-Plan und die Kriegsschuldlüge ) [ 7 ] ^ English: / ˈ n ɑː t s i , ˈ n æ t s i / NA(H)T -see [ 9 ] ^ Pronounced [natsi̯oˈnaːlzotsi̯aˌlɪstɪʃə ˈdɔʏtʃə ˈʔaʁbaɪtɐpaʁˌtaɪ] ⓘ ^ or Sozialdemokrat ( pronounced [zoˈtsi̯aːldemoˌkʁaːt] , " social democrat ") ^ Some sources say the name change happened on 1 April 1920.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] ^ Hitler's original name suggested was the Social Revolutionary Party (German: Sozialrevolutionäre Partei ).

[ 67 ] ^ "Social democracy is objectively the moderate wing of fascism. ... These organisations (ie Fascism and social democracy) are not antipodes, they are twins." ( J.V. Stalin : Concerning the International Situation (September 1924), in Works , Volume 6, 1953; p. 294.) This later led Otto Wille Kuusinen to conclude that "The aims of the fascists and the social-fascists are the same." (Report To the 10th Plenum of ECCI, in International Press Correspondence , Volume 9, no. 40, (20 August 1929), p. 848.) ^ Hitler stated: "Today our left-wing politicians in particular are constantly insisting that their craven-hearted and obsequious foreign policy necessarily results from the disarmament of Germany, whereas the truth is that this is the policy of traitors [...] But the politicians of the Right deserve exactly the same reproach. It was through their miserable cowardice that those ruffians of Jews who came into power in 1918 were able to rob the nation of its arms." [ 101 ] ^ The 43rd Gau known as the Auslandsorganisation was non-territorial.

Citations ^ Kershaw 1998 , pp. 164–65.

^ Steves 2010 , p. 28.

^ T. W. Mason, Social Policy in the Third Reich: The Working Class and the "National Community", 1918–1939, Oxford: UK, Berg Publishers, 1993, p. 77.

^ a b McNab 2011 , pp. 22, 23.

^ Davidson 1997 , p. 241.

^ Orlow 2010 , p. 29.

^ Pfleiderer, Doris (2007).

"Volksbegehren und Volksentscheid gegen den Youngplan, in: Archivnachrichten 35 / 2007" [Initiative and Referendum against the Young Plan, in: Archived News 35 / 2007] (PDF) .

Landesarchiv Baden-Württemberg (in German). p. 43.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 4 December 2022 . Retrieved 26 November 2022 .

^ Jones, Larry E. (Oct., 2006).

"Nationalists, Nazis, and the Assault against Weimar: Revisiting the Harzburg Rally of October 1931" Archived 26 April 2023 at the Wayback Machine .

German Studies Review.

Vol. 29, No. 3. pp. 483–94.

Johns Hopkins University Press .

^ Jones 2003 .

^ Fritzsche 1998 , pp. 143, 185, 193, 204–05, 210.

^ Eatwell, Roger (1997).

Fascism : a history . New York: Penguin Books. pp.

xvii– xxiv, 21, 26– 31, 114– 40, 352.

ISBN 0-14-025700-4 .

OCLC 37930848 .

^ a b "The Nazi Party" .

United States Holocaust Memorial Museum .

Archived from the original on 31 January 2023 . Retrieved 20 October 2022 .

^ Grant 2004 , pp. 30–34, 44.

^ Mitchell 2008 , p. 47.

^ Ray, Michael.

"Were the Nazis Socialists?" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ McDonough 2003 , p. 64.

^ Majer 2013 , p. 39.

^ Wildt 2012 , pp. 96–97.

^ Gigliotti & Lang 2005 , p. 14.

^ a b Evans 2008 , p. 318.

^ Arendt 1951 , p. 306.

^ Curtis 1979 , p. 36.

^ Burch 1964 , p. 58.

^ Maier 2004 , p. 32.

^ Elzer 2003 , p. 602.

^ Childers 2001a , 26:00–31:04.

^ a b Mautner 1944 , p. 93–100.

^ Hitler 1936 , p. 10.

^ Gottlieb & Morgensen 2007 , p. 247.

^ a b Harper n.d .

^ a b Rabinbach & Gilman 2013 , p. 4.

^ a b c d e Kershaw 2008 , p. 82.

^ Shirer 1991 , p. 34.

^ a b c Spector 2004 , p. 137.

^ Griffen 1995 , p. 105.

^ Abel 2012 , p. 55.

^ a b Carlsten 1982 , p. 91.

^ a b c d Fest 1979 , pp. 37–38.

^ van der Vat 1997 , p. 30.

^ Shirer 1991 , p. 33.

^ Kershaw 2008 , pp. 71–82.

^ Childers 2001a , 23:00–24:30.

^ a b Kershaw 2008 , p. 75.

^ Evans 2003 , p. 170.

^ Kershaw 2008 , pp. 75, 76.

^ Mitcham 1996 , p. 67.

^ Blamires 2006 , p. 185.

^ Shirer 1991 , p. 43.

^ Jaman 1956 , p. 88.

^ a b Rees 2006 , p. 23.

^ Kershaw 1998 , p. 127.

^ Kershaw 1998 , p. 126.

^ Childers 2001a , 15:00–25:00.

^ Kershaw 2008 , p. 76.

^ Childers 2001a , 24:00–25:00.

^ Kershaw 1998 , p. 140.

^ a b Jaman 1956 , p. 89.

^ Shirer 1991 , p. 36.

^ Shirer 1991 , p. 37.

^ Johnson 1984 , p. 133.

^ a b c Fest 1979 , p. 42.

^ Kershaw 2008 , p. 87.

^ Zentner & Bedürftig 1997 , p. 629.

^ Carruthers 2015 , p. ?.

^ Lepage 2009 , p. 9.

^ Childers, Thomas (2001).

"The Weimar Republic and the Rise of the Nazi Party" .

A History of Hitler's Empire, 2nd Edition . Episode 3.

The Great Courses .  Event occurs at 26:00–31:04 . Retrieved 27 March 2023 .

^ Konrad Heiden , "Les débuts du national-socialisme", Revue d'Allemagne, VII, No. 71 (Sept. 15, 1933), p. 821.

^ Mitcham 1996 , p. 68.

^ Ehrenreich 2007 , p. 58.

^ Weikart 2009 , p. 142.

^ Gordon 1984 , p. 265.

^ Fest 1979 , p. 39.

^ a b Kershaw 2008 , p. 89.

^ Franz-Willing 2001 , p. ?.

^ Shirer 1991 , p. 38.

^ Fest 1979 , p. 40.

^ Kershaw 2008 , pp. 100, 101.

^ Kershaw 2008 , p. 102.

^ a b Kershaw 2008 , p. 103.

^ a b c Kershaw 2008 , pp. 83, 103.

^ Hakim 1995 , p. ?.

^ a b Kershaw 2000 , p. 182.

^ Kershaw 2008 , p. 110.

^ Childers 2001a , 29:00–30:00.

^ Jablonsky 1989 , pp. 20–26, 30.

^ Shirer 1990 , p. 112.

^ Hanns Hubert Hofmann : Der Hitlerputsch. Krisenjahre deutschen Geschichte 1920–1924 . Nymphenburger Verlagshandlung, München 1961, S. 211, 272; als Karl Kulm bei Hans Günter Hockerts : „Hauptstadt der Bewegung“ . In: Richard Bauer et al. (Hrsg.): München – „Hauptstadt der Bewegung“. Bayerns Metropole und der Nationalsozialismus . 2. Auflage. Edition Minerva, München 2002, S. 355 f.

^ "Einsatz für Freiheit und Demokratie" . 11 June 2015. Archived from the original on 11 June 2015 . Retrieved 25 October 2023 .

^ a b Jablonsky 1989 , p. 57.

^ Kershaw 1998 , p. 239.

^ Childers 2001b , 13:45–14:12.

^ Childers 2001b , 15:50–16:10.

^ Weale 2010 , pp. 26–29.

^ Koehl 2004 , p. 34.

^ Childers 2001b , 17:00–17:27.

^ Kershaw 2008 , p. 194.

^ Childers 2001b , 23:30–24:00.

^ Evans 2005 , p. 372.

^ Kershaw 2008 , p. 224.

^ Childers 2001b , 30:35–30:57.

^ Hitler 2010 , p. 287.

^ Fritzsche 1998 , p. ?; Eatwell 1996 , pp. xvii–xxiv, 21, 26–31, 114–40, 352; Griffin 2000 , p. ?.

^ Domarus 2007 , pp. 171–73.

^ a b Beck 2013 , p. 259.

^ Ingrao 2013 , p. 77.

^ Kolb 2005 , pp. 224–225.

^ Kuntz 2011 , p. 73.

^ Schaarschmidt 2014 , pp. 104–05.

^ Evans 2015 , p. 98.

^ McNab 2013 , p. 20.

^ Kuntz 2011 , p. 74.

^ Delarue 2008 , pp. x–xi.

^ McNab 2009 , p. 25.

^ McNab 2009 , pp. 25, 26.

^ Lewkowicz 2008 , p. 74.

^ Cogen 2016 , p. 226.

^ Judt 2006 , p. ?.

^ Junker 2004 , p. 65.

^ Rummel 1994 , p. 112.

^ Fischel 1998 , p. 87.

^ Bauer & Rozett 1990 , p. 1799.

^ Hancock 2004 , pp. 383–96.

^ a b Holocaust Memorial Museum .

^ Snyder 2010 , p. 184.

^ Niewyk & Nicosia 2000 , p. 45.

^ Goldhagen 1996 , p. 290.

^ a b Joachimsthaler 1999 , p. 187.

^ Trevor-Roper 2002 , p. 193.

^ Miller 2006 , p. 154.

^ Whiting 1996 , pp. 217–218.

^ Karacs 1998 .

^ Steber & Gotto 2018 , p. 91.

^ Simpson 2002 , pp. 149, 257, 299.

^ Farrell 2008 , p. ?.

^ Materna & Ribbe 1995 , p. ?.

^ German Historical Institute 2008 .

^ Broszat 1985 , pp. 44–47.

^ Miller & Schulz 2012 , pp. 18–41.

^ Miller & Schulz 2012 , pp. 41–50.

^ Wolf 1969 , pp. 121, 253, 283.

^ Schom 1998 .

^ Historischer Verein des Kantons Bern 1973 , p. 150.

^ Glaus 1969 , p. 147.

^ a b Panayi 2007 , p. 40.

^ The History Place 2015 .

^ Evans 1989 , p. 59.

^ Bartov 1986 , p. 49.

^ Musiał 2009 .

^ Rosar 1971 , p. ?.

Bibliography Abel, Theodore Fred (2012) [1938].

The Nazi Movement . Aldine Transaction.

ISBN 978-1412846134 .

Arendt, Hannah (1951).

The Origins of Totalitarianism . London; New York; San Diego: Harvest Book.

OCLC 52814049 .

Bartov, Omer (1986).

The Eastern Front, 1941–45: German Troops and the Barbarisation of Warfare . New York: St. Martin's Press.

ISBN 978-0312224868 .

Bauer, Yehuda ; Rozett, Robert (1990).

"Appendix" . In Gutman, Israel (ed.).

Encyclopedia of the Holocaust . New York: Macmillan Library Reference. pp.

1797–1802 .

ISBN 0028960904 .

Beck, Hermann (2013).

The Fateful Alliance: German Conservatives and Nazis in 1933: The Machtergreifung in a New Light . Berghahn Books.

ISBN 978-0857454102 .

Blamires, Cyprian P. (2006).

World Fascism: A Historical Encyclopedia . ABC-CLIO.

ISBN 978-1576079409 .

Archived from the original on 22 June 2013 . Retrieved 13 March 2013 .

Broszat, Martin (1985).

The Hitler State: The Foundation and Development of the Internal Structure of the Third Reich . London and New York: Longman.

Burch, Betty Brand (1964).

Dictatorship and Totalitarianism: Selected Readings . Van Nostrand.

Carlsten, F. L. (1982).

The Rise of Fascism (2nd ed.). University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0520046436 .

Carruthers, Bob (2015).

Hitler's Violent Youth: How Trench Warfare and Street Fighting Moulded Hitler .

Pen and Sword .

ISBN 978-1473859647 .

Childers, Thomas (2001a).

"The Weimar Republic and the Rise of the Nazi Party" .

A History of Hitler's Empire, 2nd Edition . Episode 3.

The Great Courses .

Archived from the original on 27 March 2023 . Retrieved 27 March 2023 .

Childers, Thomas (2001b).

"The Twenties and the Great Depression" .

A History of Hitler's Empire, 2nd Edition . Episode 4.

The Great Courses .

Archived from the original on 27 March 2023 . Retrieved 28 March 2023 .

Cogen, Marc (2016).

Democracies and the Shock of War: The Law as a Battlefield . Oxon: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1409443636 .

Curtis, Michael (1979).

Totalitarianism . New Brunswick (US); London: Transactions Publishers.

ISBN 978-0878552887 .

Davidson, Eugene (1997).

The Making of Adolf Hitler: The Birth and Rise of Nazism . University of Missouri Press.

ISBN 978-0826211170 .

Archived from the original on 27 September 2015 . Retrieved 14 August 2015 .

Delarue, Jacques (2008).

The Gestapo: A History of Horror . Frontline Books.

ISBN 978-1602392465 .

Domarus, Max (2007). Romane, Patrick (ed.).

The Essential Hitler: Speeches and Commentary . Bolchazy-Carducci Pub.

ISBN 978-0865166271 .

Eatwell, Roger (1996).

Fascism, A History . Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-0140257007 .

Ehrenreich, Eric (2007).

The Nazi Ancestral Proof: Genealogy, Racial Science, and the Final Solution . Indiana University Press.

ISBN 978-0253116871 .

Elzer, Herbert, ed. (2003).

Dokumente Zur Deutschlandpolitik . Vol. First half band – Appendix B, Section XI, §39. Oldenbourg Wissenschaftverlag.

ISBN 3486566679 .

Archived from the original on 30 November 2015 . Retrieved 6 April 2015 .

Evans, Richard J.

(1989).

In Hitler's Shadow West German Historians and the Attempt to Escape the Nazi Past (f ed.). New York: Pantheon.

ISBN 978-0394576862 .

Evans, Richard J.

(2003).

The Coming of the Third Reich . New York; Toronto: Penguin.

ISBN 978-0143034698 .

Evans, Richard J.

(2005).

The Third Reich in Power . New York: Penguin.

ISBN 978-0143037903 .

Evans, Richard J.

(2008).

The Third Reich at War . New York: Penguin Group.

ISBN 978-0143116714 .

Evans, Richard J.

(2015).

The Third Reich in History and Memory . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0190228392 .

Farrell, Joseph (2008).

Nazi International: The Nazis' Postwar Plan to Control Finance, Conflict, Physics and Space . Kempton, Illinois: SCB Distributors.

ISBN 978-1931882934 .

Fest, Joachim (1979).

The Face of the Third Reich . Penguin books.

ISBN 978-0201407143 .

Fischel, Jack R. (1998).

The Holocaust . Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.

ISBN 0313298793 .

Franz-Willing, Georg (2001).

Die Hitler-Bewegung: 1925 bis 193 (in German). Deutsche Verlagsgesellschaft.

ISBN 978-3920722641 .

Fritzsche, Peter (1998).

Germans into Nazis . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674350922 .

German Historical Institute (2008).

"Administrative Structure under National Socialism (1941)" . Washington DC. Archived from the original on 10 January 2015 . Retrieved 9 January 2014 .

Gigliotti, Simone; Lang, Berel, eds. (2005).

The Holocaust: a reader . Malden, Massachusetts; Oxford, England; Carlton, Victoria, Australia: Blackwell Publishing.

ISBN 978-1405114004 .

Glaus, Beat (1969).

Die Nationale front (in German). Zürich.

Goldhagen, Daniel (1996).

Hitler's Willing Executioners: Ordinary Germans and the Holocaust . New York: Knopf.

ISBN 978-0679446958 .

Gordon, Sarah Ann (1984).

Hitler, Germans, and the "Jewish Question" . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0691101620 .

Gottlieb, Henrik; Morgensen, Jens Erik, eds. (2007).

Dictionary Visions, Research and Practice: Selected Papers from the 12th International Symposium on Lexicography, Copenhagen, 2004 (illustrated ed.). Amsterdam: J. Benjamins Pub. Co.

ISBN 978-9027223340 .

Archived from the original on 5 September 2015 . Retrieved 22 October 2014 .

Grant, Thomas D. (2004).

Stormtroopers and Crisis in the Nazi Movement: Activism, Ideology and Dissolution . London; New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415196024 .

Griffen, Roger, ed. (1995).

Fascism . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0192892492 .

Griffin, Roger (2000). "Revolution from the Right: Fascism". In Parker, David (ed.).

Revolutions and the Revolutionary Tradition in the West 1560–1991 . London: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415172950 .

Hakim, Joy (1995).

A History of Us: War, Peace and all that Jazz . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0195095146 .

Hancock, Ian (2004). "Romanies and the Holocaust: A Reevaluation and an Overview". In Stone, Dan (ed.).

The Historiography of the Holocaust . New York; Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0333997451 .

Harper, Douglas (n.d.).

"Nazi" .

etymonline.com . Online Etymology Dictionary.

Archived from the original on 6 October 2014 . Retrieved 22 October 2014 .

Historischer Verein des Kantons Bern (1973).

Archiv des Historischen Vereins des Kantons Bern, vol 57–60 . Stämpfliche Verlagshandlung.

[ ISBN missing ] The History Place (2015).

"German population in 1945" .

The History Place .

Archived from the original on 28 August 2015 . Retrieved 28 August 2015 .

Hitler, Adolf (1936).

Die Reden des Führers am Parteitag der Ehre, 1936 (in German). Munich: Zentralverlag der NSDAP.

Archived from the original on 25 October 2012 . Retrieved 25 March 2014 .

Parteigenossen! Parteigenossinnen! Nationalsozialisten!

Hitler, Adolf (2010).

Mein Kampf . Bottom of the Hill Publishing.

ISBN 978-1935785071 .

Holocaust Memorial Museum.

"Introduction to the Holocaust" .

United States Holocaust Memorial Museum .

Archived from the original on 30 June 2012 . Retrieved 23 October 2017 .

Höhne, Heinz (2000) [1969].

The Order of the Death's Head: The Story of Hitler's SS (Der Orden unter dem Totenkopf: Die Geschichte der SS) . London: Penguin.

ISBN 978-0141390123 .

Ingrao, Christian (2013).

Believe and Destroy: Intellectuals in the SS War Machine . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-0-7456-7004-1 .

Jablonsky, David (1989).

The Nazi Party in Dissolution: Hitler and the Verbotzeit, 1923–1925 . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0714633220 .

Jaman, T. L. (1956).

The Rise and Fall of Nazi Germany . New York: New York University Press.

Joachimsthaler, Anton (1999) [1995].

The Last Days of Hitler: The Legends, the Evidence, the Truth . Trans. Helmut Bögler. London: Brockhampton Press.

ISBN 978-1-86019-902-8 .

Johnson, Paul (1984).

A History of the Modern World: From 1917 to the 1980s . Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

ISBN 978-0297782261 .

Jones, Daniel (2003) [1917]. Roach, Peter; Hartmann, James; Setter, Jane (eds.).

English Pronouncing Dictionary . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 3125396832 .

Judt, Tony (2006).

Postwar: A History of Europe Since 1945 . London: Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-1440624766 .

Junker, Detlef (2004).

The United States and Germany in the Era of the Cold War, 1945–1990: A Handbook, Volume 1 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521791120 .

Karacs, Imre (4 May 1998).

"DNA test closes book on mystery of Martin Bormann" .

The Independent . London: Independent Print Limited.

Archived from the original on 7 November 2017 . Retrieved 1 May 2024 .

Kershaw, Ian (1998).

Hitler: 1889–1936: Hubris . New York: W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 0393046710 .

Kershaw, Ian (2000).

Hitler, 1889–1936: Hubris . New York; London: W.W. Norton & Company.

Kershaw, Ian (2008).

Hitler: A Biography . New York: W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0393067576 .

Koehl, Robert (2004).

The SS: A History 1919–45 . Stroud: Tempus.

ISBN 978-0752425597 .

Kolb, Eberhard (2005) [1984].

The Weimar Republic . London; New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415344418 .

Kuntz, Dieter (2011).

Hitler and the functioning of the Third Reich . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0415779562 .

Lepage, Jean-Denis G.G. (2009).

Hitler Youth, 1922–1945: An Illustrated History . McFarland.

ISBN 978-0786452811 .

Lewkowicz, Nicolas (2008).

The German Question and the Origins of the Cold War . Milan: Ipoc Press.

ISBN 978-8895145273 .

Maier, Hans, ed. (2004).

Totalitarianism and Political Religions: Concepts for the Comparison of Dictatorships . Translated by Bruhn, Jodi. Oxon (UK); New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0714656090 .

Majer, Diemut (2013).

"Non-Germans" Under The Third Reich: The Nazi Judicial and Administrative System in Germany and Occupied Eastern Europe, with Special Regard to Occupied Poland, 1939–1945 . Texas Tech University Press in association with the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum.

ISBN 978-0896728370 .

Materna, Ingo; Ribbe, Wolfgang, eds. (1995).

Brandenburgische Geschichte (in German). De Gruyter Akademie Forschung.

ISBN 978-3050025087 . Retrieved 12 November 2010 .

[ permanent dead link ] Mautner, Franz H. (1944). "Nazi und Sozi".

Modern Language Notes .

59 (2): 93– 100.

doi : 10.2307/2910599 .

ISSN 0149-6611 .

JSTOR 2910599 .

Dass Nazi eine Abkürzung von Nationalsozialist ist ... [u]nd zwar eine Verkürzung des Wortes auf seine ersten zwei Silben, aber nicht eine Zusammenziehung aus Na tionalso zi alist' ...[... that Nazi is an abbreviation of Nationalsozialist ... and to be precise a truncation of the word to its first two syllables, not a contraction of Na tionalso zi alist' ...] McDonough, Frank (2003).

Hitler and the Rise of the Nazi Party . Pearson/Longman.

ISBN 978-0582506060 .

McNab, Chris (2009).

The Third Reich . Amber Books.

ISBN 978-1906626518 .

McNab, Chris (2011).

Hitler's Masterplan: The Essential Facts and Figures for Hitler's Third Reich . Amber Books Ltd.

ISBN 978-1907446962 .

McNab, Chris (2013).

Hitler's Elite: The SS 1939–45 . Osprey.

ISBN 978-1782000884 .

Miller, Michael (2006).

Leaders of the SS and German Police, Vol. 1 . San Jose, CA: R. James Bender.

ISBN 978-93-297-0037-2 .

Miller, Michael D.; Schulz, Andreas (2012).

Gauleiter: The Regional Leaders of the Nazi Party and Their Deputies, 1925–1945 . Vol. 1 (Herbert Albrecht – H. Wilhelm Hüttmann). R. James Bender Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-932970-21-0 .

Mitcham, Samuel W.

(1996).

Why Hitler?: The Genesis of the Nazi Reich . Westport, Connecticut: Praeger.

ISBN 978-0275954857 .

Mitchell, Otis C. (2008).

Hitler's Stormtroopers and the Attack on the German Republic, 1919–1933 . Jefferson, North Carolina: McFarland & Company, Inc.

ISBN 978-0786477296 .

Musiał, Bogdan (2009).

"Fakty wypaczone przez Erikę Steinbach" (in Polish). Rzeczpospolita. Archived from the original on 3 March 2012 . Retrieved 24 June 2009 .

Niewyk, Donald L.; Nicosia, Francis R. (2000).

The Columbia Guide to the Holocaust . New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0231112000 .

Orlow, Dietrich (2010).

The Nazi Party 1919–1945: A Complete History . Enigma Books.

ISBN 978-0982491195 .

Archived from the original on 1 October 2015 . Retrieved 14 August 2015 .

Rabinbach, Anson; Gilman, Sander, eds. (2013).

The Third Reich Sourcebook . Berkeley: California University Press.

ISBN 978-0520955141 .

Archived from the original on 5 September 2015 . Retrieved 14 August 2015 .

Panayi, P. (2007).

Life and Death in a German Town: Osnabrück from the Weimar Republic to World War II and Beyond . New York: Tauris Academic Studies.

Rees, Laurence (2006).

The Nazis: A Warning From History . BBC Books.

ISBN 978-0563493334 .

Rosar, Wolfgang (1971).

Deutsche Gemeinschaft. Seyss-Inquart und der Anschluß (in German). Wien: Europa-Verlag.

ISBN 978-3203503844 .

Rummel, Rudolph (1994).

Death by Government . New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction.

ISBN 978-1560001454 .

Schaarschmidt, Thomas (2014).

Mobilizing German Society for War: The National Socialist Gaue . Visions of Community in Nazi Germany. Oxford University Press.

Schom, Alan Morris (1998). "NSDAP and Affiliated Meetings in Northern Switzerland for the Week of May 10–18, 1935".

A Survey of Nazi and Pro-Nazi Groups in Switzerland: 1930–1945 . Simon Wiesenthal Center. Archived from the original on 6 June 2011 . Retrieved 17 October 2010 .

Shirer, William L.

(1990) [1959].

The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich . New York: MJF Books.

ISBN 978-1-56731-163-1 .

Shirer, William L.

(1991) [1960].

The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich . London: Arrow Books.

ISBN 978-0099421764 .

Simpson, Christopher (2002).

War Crimes of the Deutsche Bank and the Dresdner Bank: Office of Military Government (U.S.) Reports . London: Lynne Rienner Publishers.

ISBN 978-0841914070 .

Snyder, Timothy (2010).

Bloodlands: Europe Between Hitler and Stalin . New York: Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0465002399 .

Spector, Robert (2004).

World Without Civilization: Mass Murder and the Holocaust, History, and Analysis . University of America Press.

ISBN 978-0761829638 .

Steber, Martina; Gotto, Bernhard (2018).

Visions of Community in Nazi Germany: Social Engineering and Private Lives . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199689590 .

Steves, Rick (2010).

Rick Steves' Snapshot Munich, Bavaria & Salzburg . Berkeley, California; New York: Avalon Travel.

ISBN 978-1598806892 .

Though the Nazis eventually gained power in Berlin, they remembered their roots, dubbing Munich "Capital of the Movement". The Nazi headquarters stood near today's obelisk on Brienner Strasse...

Trevor-Roper, Hugh (2002) [1947].

The Last Days of Hitler . London: Pan Books.

ISBN 978-0-330-49060-3 .

van der Vat, Dan (1997).

The Good Nazi: The Life and Lies of Albert Spee . George Weidenfeld & Nicolson.

ISBN 0297817213 .

Weale, Adrian (2010).

The SS: A New History . London: Little, Brown.

ISBN 978-1408703045 .

Weikart, Richard (2009).

Hitler's Ethic . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-0230623989 .

Whiting, Charles (1996) [1973].

The Hunt for Martin Bormann: The Truth . London: Pen & Sword.

ISBN 0-85052-527-6 .

Wildt, Michael (2012).

Hitler's Volksgemeinschaft and the Dynamics of Racial Exclusion: Violence Against Jews in Provincial Germany, 1919–1939 . Berghahn Books.

ISBN 978-0857453228 .

Wolf, Walter (1969).

Faschismus in der Schweiz . Flamberg. Archived from the original on 18 October 2015.

Zentner, Christian; Bedürftig, Friedemann (1997) [1991].

The Encyclopedia of the Third Reich . New York: Da Capo Press.

ISBN 978-0-3068079-3-0 .

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Socialist German Workers' Party .

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Program of the Nazi Party, its "Manifesto" Text of Mein Kampf (in German) Die Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei (NSDAP) 1920–1933 Archived 7 February 2009 at the Wayback Machine at Lebendiges Museum Online .

(in German) Die Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei (NSDAP) 1933–1945 Archived 6 July 2014 at the Wayback Machine at Lebendiges Museum Online .

Organisationsbuch NSDAP An encyclopedic reference guide to the Nazi Party, organisations, uniforms, flags etc. published by the party itself v t e Nazi Party Leader Anton Drexler (1919–1921) Adolf Hitler (1921–1945) Martin Bormann (1945) History Adolf Hitler's rise to power Beer Hall Putsch Brown House, Munich Denazification Enabling Act of 1933 German Workers' Party National Socialist Program Nazism Night of the Long Knives Nuremberg rallies Röhm scandal SA Thule Society Party offices Amt Rosenberg Hitler Youth Hitler's Chancellery Nazi Party Chancellery Office of Colonial Policy Office of Military Policy Office of Racial Policy Office of Foreign Affairs NSDAP/AO SS SS Education Office Publications Völkischer Beobachter Das Schwarze Korps Das Reich Innviertler Heimatblatt Arbeitertum Der Angriff Panzerbär Der Stürmer Kampfverlag Notable members Artur Axmann Houston Stewart Chamberlain Kurt Daluege Richard Walther Darré Rudolf Diels Karl Dönitz Dietrich Eckart Adolf Eichmann Hans Frank Roland Freisler Wilhelm Frick Walther Funk Joseph Goebbels Hermann Göring Ernst Hanfstaengl Rudolf Hess Reinhard Heydrich Heinrich Himmler Rudolf Höss Ernst Kaltenbrunner Robert Ley Josef Mengele Konstantin von Neurath Joachim von Ribbentrop Ernst Röhm Alfred Rosenberg Bernhard Rust Fritz Todt Baldur von Schirach Arthur Seyss-Inquart Albert Speer Gregor Strasser Otto Strasser Julius Streicher Derivatives Black Front ( Strasserism ) / German Social Union Deutsche Reichspartei / The Homeland Socialist Reich Party Third Way (Germany) Related articles Adolf Hitler Schools Munich Documentation Centre National Political Institutes of Education Nazi concentration camps Nazi Germany Nazi songs Horst-Wessel-Lied Ranks and insignia of the Nazi Party Samoan branch of the Nazi Party v t e Political parties in Germany in the Weimar Republic (1918–1933) Communist Communist Party of Germany (KPD) Communist Workers Party of Germany (KAPD) Communist Party Opposition (KPO) Socialist , Social Democratic and Democratic Socialist Social Democratic Party of Germany (SPD) Independent Social Democratic Party of Germany (USPD) Majority Social Democratic Party of Germany (MSPD) Old Social Democratic Party of Germany (ASPD) Socialist Workers' Party of Germany (SAPD) Agrarian Bavarian Peasants' League (BB) Agricultural League Schleswig-Holstein Farmers and Farmworkers Democracy (SHBLD) Christian National Peasants' and Farmers' Party (CNBL) German Farmers' Party (DBP) Catholic Bavarian People's Party (BVP) Centre Party (Zentrum) Christian People's Party (CVP) Liberal German Democratic Party (DDP) German People's Party (DVP) German State Party (DStP) Conservative German National People's Party (DnVp) Economic Party (WP) People's Justice Party (VRP) Christian Social People's Service (CSVD) Conservative People's Party (KVP) German-Hanoverian Party (DHP) Völkische and Nazi German Workers' Party (DAP) German Social Party (DtSP) German Socialist Party (DSP) Greater German People's Community (GVG) National Socialist German Workers' Party (NSDAP) German Völkisch Freedom Party (DVFP) National Socialist Freedom Movement (NSFB) Tannenberg Union (TB) Related topics: Weimar paramilitary groups v t e Nazism Organisation Ahnenerbe Artaman League Geheime Staatspolizei Deutscher Fichte-Bund Deutsches Jungvolk Franz Eher Nachfolger Hitler Youth League of German Girls Organisation Todt NSDÄB NSDStB NSRL NSFK NSKK NSF Nazi media organizations Nationalsozialistische Monatshefte Neues Volk NS-Frauen-Warte Das Reich Das Schwarze Korps Nazi Party Sicherheitsdienst (SD) Sturmabteilung (SA) Schutzstaffel (SS) SS Gefolge Waffen-SS History Early timeline National Socialist Program Hitler's rise to power Machtergreifung Gleichschaltung German rearmament Nazi Germany Kirchenkampf Hitler's personality cult Enabling Act of 1933 Night of the Long Knives Nuremberg rallies Nuremberg Laws Anti-Comintern Pact Kristallnacht Anschluss World War II The Holocaust 1938–1939 German expedition to Tibet Tripartite Pact Denazification Nuremberg trials Final solution Concentration camps Deportations Doctors' Trial Extermination camps Genocide Ghettos Human experimentation Labour camps Pogroms Racial segregation Ideology Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-liberalism Anti-pacifism Blood and soil Chauvinism Class collaboration Conspiracism Dolchstoßlegende International Jewry Judeo-Bolshevism Corporatism Counter-Enlightenment Cult of personality Dictatorship Führerprinzip Direct action Economic interventionism Eugenics Geopolitik Heimat Imperialism Greater Germanic Reich Heim ins Reich Lebensraum Pan-Germanism Militarism Morality Nationalism Ethno Racial Palingenetic Revolutionary Ultra New Man New Order One-party state Populism Propaganda Prussianism Racism Antisemitism Anti-Slavic sentiment Aryan race Aryanism Master race Nordicism Nordic Indo-Germanic people Renordification Rassenschande Untermenschen Völkisch equality Völkisch movement Reactionary modernism Romanticism Social Darwinism Social interventionism Social order State capitalism Syncretism Totalitarianism Volksgemeinschaft Volk ohne Raum Volkskörper Politicians Bloem Bormann Daluege Dönitz Drexler Eichmann Esser Fischer Frank Frick Hess Heydrich Himmler Hitler Goebbels Göring Keller Lammers Lutze Mitford von Neurath Quisling von Ribbentrop Röhm Schacht von Schirach Scholtz-Klink Seldte Seyss-Inquart Speer Strasser (Gregor) Strasser (Otto) Streicher Thierack Ideologues Pre- Machtergreifung Arndt Burnouf Chamberlain Drumont Eckart Fritsch de Gobineau Grant von Liebenfels von List Löns Lueger Marr Nietzsche (contentious) Ratzel Riehl Ruskin Wagner Post- Machtergreifung Anacker Baeumler Bergmann Berndt Darré Eggers Eichrodt Feder Ford Grimm Günther Hauer Haushofer Heidegger (contentious) Hentschel Hoche al-Husseini Jung Krannhals Kriek Lindbergh Müller Plenge Rahn Rosenberg Saadeh Schäfer Schmalenbach Schmitt (contentious) von Sebottendorf Schwarz Stapel Wirsing Zimmermann Atrocities and war crimes Action T4 Nazi concentration camps Extermination camp Final Solution Human experimentation Romani genocide Outside Germany Americas Brazil Chile Mexico Europe Greece Sweden Parties Arrow Cross Party Frontist movement German American Bund German National Movement in Liechtenstein Nasjonal Samling National Socialist Movement (Netherlands) National Socialist Movement of Chile National Socialist Workers' Party of Denmark Ossewabrandwag Lists Doctors Last surviving war crime suspects Nazi Party members Nicknames and pseudonyms NSDAP leaders and officials Publishers SS personnel Role and impact in German society The Wehrmacht Economy Nobility Related topics Analogies Art Architecture Cinema Atsızism " Beefsteak Nazi " Economy Denordification Renordification Glossary Drang nach Osten Generalplan Ost German American Bund Horst-Wessel-Lied Hitler's political views Propaganda and the UK Racial theories Strasserism Women Category v t e Fascism Themes Core tenets Actual idealism Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-materialism Anti-pacifism Authoritarianism Chauvinism Class collaboration Conspiracism Corporatism Cult of personality Dictatorship Direct action Dirigisme Economic interventionism Eugenics Heroic capitalism Heroic realism Heroism Imperialism Indoctrination Irrationalism Machismo Masculinity Militarism National syndicalism Nationalism Integral Palingenetic Ultra New Man One-party state Perpetual war Populism Proletarian nation Propaganda Racism Reactionary modernism Social Darwinism Social interventionism Social order State capitalism Statolatry Supercapitalism Syncretism Third Position Totalitarianism Topics Definitions Economics Fascism and ideology Fascism worldwide Symbolism Variants Arab Argentine Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Austrian Banderism Brazilian British Christian Christian Identity Mexican synarchism Clerical Crypto Eco English Falangism French Doriotism Pétainism Neo-Pétainism Jeune Nation L'Œuvre Française Valoisism Hindutva Hungarism Hutu Irish Islamic Ziaism Italian Intransigent Japanese Emperor-system Statism Restoration Ultra Jewish/Israeli Kahanism Revisionist Maximalism Korean Ilminism Nyulaiteu Latvian Mystical Nazism Austrian Esoteric Hitlerism Neo-Nazism Russian Strasserism Swedish Neo Finnish NRx Pan-Turkic Rexism Polish Romanian Legionarism Neo-Legionarism Romanianism/Stelism Russian Neo-Eurasianism Syndicalist Syrian Social Nationalism Techno Third Positionism National-anarchism National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism Uruguayan Marzism Revisionism Sosism Ustašism Movements Africa Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging Coalition for the Defence of the Republic Greyshirts Muslim Association of the Lictor National Revolutionary Movement for Development Ossewabrandwag Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines Republican Democratic Movement Young Egypt Party (1933) Asia Abhinav Bharat Al-Muthanna Club Aria Party Azerbaijan National Democrat Party Azure Party Black Dragon Society Brit HaBirionim Concordia Association Grey Wolves Golden Square Hindu Mahasabha Iran-e-No Party Jewish National Front Kach Kataeb Party Kenkokukai Kokumin Dōmei Korea Nationalist Party Korean National Youth Association Lehi Liberal Party (South Korea) Nasyonal Aktivite ve Zinde İnkişaf National Socialism Association National Socialist Japanese Workers' Party Nationalist Movement Party Nationalist Task Party National Will Party Nation Party of Iran Otzma Yehudit Pan-Iranist Party Palestine Arab Party Patrol 36 Progress Party (Iran) Philippine Falange Rastakhiz Party Rastriya Prajatantra Party Reform bureaucrats Religious Zionist Party Sakurakai Sangh Parivar Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad Bharatiya Gau Raksha Dal Bharatiya Janata Party Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha Bharatiya Jana Sangh Bharatiya Kisan Sangh Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh Bharat Vikas Parishad Ekal Vidyalaya Hindu Makkal Katchi Hindu Munnani Hindu Swayamsevak Sangh Jammu Praja Parishad Muslim Rashtriya Manch Ram Janmabhoomi Nyas Rashtra Sevika Samiti Rashtriya Sikh Sangat Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh Akhil Bharatiya Itihas Sankalan Yojana Seva Bharati Vidya Bharati Vanavasi Kalyan Ashram Vishva Hindu Parishad Bajrang Dal Durga Vahini SUMKA Syrian Social Nationalist Party Tōhōkai Tsagaan Khas Turkish Union Party Wang Jingwei Kuomintang Northern / Northwestern Europe Academic Karelia Society Ailtirí na hAiséirghe Autonome Nationalisten Bases Autónomas Black Front (Netherlands) Blood & Honour Blueshirts Breton Social-National Workers' Movement British Democratic Party British Fascists Britain First British League of Ex-Servicemen and Women British Movement British National Party (1960) British National Party British People's Party (1939) British People's Party (2005) British Union of Fascists The Britons La Cagoule Casuals United Centre Party '86 Clerical People's Party Dutch Defence League Dutch Fascist Union English Defence League European Defence League English National Association European Liberation Front Le Faisceau Fédération d'action nationale et européenne Finnish National Socialist Labor Organisation Finnish People's Organisation Finnish-Socialist Workers' Party Flemish National Union French National-Collectivist Party French Nationalist Party French Popular Party General Dutch Fascist League Greater Britain Movement Groupe Collaboration Heathen Front Imperial Fascist League International Third Position Jeune Nation Lalli Alliance of Finland Lapua Movement League of Saint George Les Identitaires Mouvement d'Action Civique Mouvement Franciste Nasjonal Samling National Action (UK) National Alliance (Sweden) National Corporate Party National Fascisti National Front (UK) National League of Sweden Nationalist Party National Popular Rally National Rally National Socialist Bloc National Socialist Dutch Workers Party National Socialist Front National Socialist League National Socialist Movement (UK, 1962) National Socialist Movement (United Kingdom) National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands National Socialist Movement of Norway National Socialist Union of Finland National Socialist Workers' Party (Sweden) National Socialist Workers' Party of Denmark National Socialists of Finland National Syndicalists National Union (Netherlands) National Union (Portugal) New Party Nipsters Nordic League The Nordic Realm Party Nordic Resistance Movement Northern League Norwegian Defence League Nouvelle Droite GRECE L'Œuvre Française Official National Front Order of Flemish Militants Order of Nine Angles Organisation of National Socialists Parti Communautaire National-Européen Party of Finnish Labor Party of the Swedes Patriotic Alternative Patriotic People's Movement Patriotic People's Movement (1993) Pērkonkrusts Phalange Française Ragnarock Rebelles Européens Rexist Party Rising Finland Scottish Democratic Fascist Party Scottish Protestant League Skrewdriver Skullhead Stormers Terre et Peuple Third Way (France) Third Way (UK) Union Movement Verdinaso Vigrid White Aryan Resistance World Union of National Socialists Central Europe Action Front of National Socialists/National Activists Arrow Cross Party Artgemeinschaft Austrian Nazism Black Front (Germany) Bund Deutscher Osten Christian National Socialist Front Deutsche Reichspartei Eidgenössische Sammlung Falanga Free German Workers' Party German Faith Movement German National Movement in Liechtenstein German National Socialist Workers' Party (Czechoslovakia) German Party (Slovakia) German Social Union Honor Hungarian National Front Hungarian National Socialist Agricultural Labourers' and Workers' Party Hungarian National Socialist Party Combat League of German Socialists Kotlebists – People's Party Our Slovakia Landser Liechtenstein Homeland Service National Democratic Party (Austria) National Democratic Party of Germany National Fascist Community National Front (Hungary) National Front (Switzerland) National Movement of Switzerland National Radical Camp National Radical Camp (1993) National Revival of Poland National Union (Switzerland) Nationalist Front (Germany) Nazi Party Greater German People's Community Nazi Germany National Socialist Freedom Movement National Socialist Working Association New Order Nipsters No Colours Records PC Records Positive Christianity German Christians Republic Movement The Right (Germany) Rock-O-Rama Records Shield and Sword Slovak People's Party Socialist Reich Party Stahlgewitter Sudeten German Party The Third Path United Hungarian National Socialist Party Vlajka Volksdeutsche Bewegung Volkssozialistische Bewegung Deutschlands/Partei der Arbeit Wiking-Jugend Southern Europe ADÑ–Spanish Identity Albanian Fascist Party Balli Kombëtar Brothers of Italy CEDADE Democratic Fascist Party European Nation State Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Fasci Italiani di Combattimento Fascio d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Falange Sección Femenina La Falange (1999) Falange Auténtica Falange Española Falange Española Auténtica Falange Española de las JONS Falange Española de las JONS (1976) Falange Española Independiente Falangist Movement of Spain Freethinkers' Party Imperium Europa Italian fascism National Fascist Party (Italy) Italian Social Republic Republican Fascist Party Italian Social Movement Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-Sindicalista Juntas Españolas National Alliance (Spain) National Alliance July 18 National Democracy (Italy) National Democracy (Spain) National Front (Spain, 1986) National Front (Spain, 2006) National Union (Italy, 1923) National Union (Spain) New Force (Italy) New Force (Spain) Republican Social Movement The Right (Italy) Sammarinese Fascist Party Spanish Military Union Struggle of the People Student Action Terza Posizione Tricolour Flame Unidad Falangista Montañesa Youth Front Eastern and Southeastern Europe Autochthonous Croatian Party of Rights Bosnian Movement of National Pride Bulgarian National Socialist Workers Party Croatian Liberation Movement Croatian National Resistance Croatian Party of Rights Crusade of Romanianism Ethnic National Union Eurasia Movement Eurasia Party Format18 For the Native Language!

Front of National Revolutionary Action German Party German People's Party Golden Dawn Greek National Socialist Party Hosank Iron Guard Kolovrat LEPEN Liberal Democratic Party of Russia Lithuanian Nationalist Union National Agrarian Party National Bolshevik Front National Bolshevik Party National-Christian Defense League National Christian Party National Fascist Movement National Italo-Romanian Cultural and Economic Movement National Party – Greeks National Socialist Patriotic Organisation National Socialist Society National Social Movement National Romanian Fascio National Renaissance Front National Salvation Front Nokturnal Mortum National Socialism / White Power Obraz Occupy Pedophilia Order of Nine Angles Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists The Other Russia of E. V. Limonov Pamyat Patriotic Alliance People's Party Progressive Socialist Party of Ukraine Ratniks (Bulgaria) Romanian Front Russian Imperial Movement Russian Fascist Party Russian National Unity Russian Women's Fascist Movement Serbian Action Serbian Radical Party Steel Shield Svoboda Union of Bulgarian National Legions Ustaše Ustaše in Australia Croatian Revolutionary Brotherhood Yugoslav Radical Union ZBOR North America Fascism in Canada Aryan Guard Aryan Nations Canadian Association for Free Expression Canadian Union of Fascists Citizens for Foreign Aid Reform Heritage Front Parti national social chrétien Fascism in the United States American Front American Nazi Party Betar US Creativity Fascist League of North America German American Bund Goyim Defense League Hammerskins Identity Evropa League of the South National Alliance (United States) National Renaissance Party Nationalist Social Club-131 National Socialist Legion National Socialist Liberation Front National Socialist Movement National States' Rights Party National Vanguard Nationalist Front (United States) Patriot Front Proud Boys Rise Above Movement Silver Legion of America Christian Party (United States, 1930s) Traditionalist Worker Party Vanguard America Volksfront White Aryan Resistance Wotansvolk Revolutionary Mexicanist Action Mexican Democratic Party Mexican Fascist Party National Pro Patria Party National Synarchist Union Nationalist Front of Mexico Order of Nine Angles Oceania Action Zealandia Antipodean Resistance Australia First Movement Australia First Party Australian Defence League Australian National Socialist Party Centre Party Lads Society National Action (Australia) National Socialist Network National Socialist Party of Australia Progressive Nationalist Party Reclaim Australia True Blue Crew United Patriots Front South America Agrarian Labor Party Argentine Anticommunist Alliance Argentine Fascist Party Argentine Nationalist Action Argentine Patriotic League Bolivian Socialist Falange Brazilian Integralism Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Integralist Front Falangism in Latin America Female Peronist Party Iron Guard (Argentina) Nacionalismo National Fascist Party (Argentina) National Fascist Union Nationalist Liberation Alliance National Liberation Movement National Socialist Movement of Chile National Universitary Concentration New Triumph Party Patriot Front (Argentina) Popular Dignity Popular Freedom Alliance Popular Representation Party Popular Socialist Vanguard Republican League La Resistencia Dios, Patria y Familia Revolutionary Union Tacuara Nationalist Movement People Australia Campbell (Eric) Campbell (Graeme) Cottrell Groot Mills Saleam Austria Dollfuss Miklas Pfrimer Planetta Schuschnigg Seyss-Inquart Starhemberg Belgium Daye Declercq Degrelle Denis Elias Eriksson Hermans Lagrou Poulet Severen Streel van de Wiele Croatia Boban Francetić Kraljević Kvaternik Luburić Pavelić Pavičić Rover Servatzy Finland Helanen Isotalo Kalsta Konkka Kosola Orko Simojoki Somersalo Törni Varjonen France Augier Bardèche Benoist-Méchin Béraud Brasillach Bucard Châteaubriant Déat Déroulède Dior Doriot La Rochelle Lagardelle Laval Pétain Rebatet Valois Vial Germany Abetz Andrae Baeumler Berchtold Berger Best Brunner Bühler Darré Falkenhausen Hocke Feder Forster Frank Franz V Gesche Goebbels Göring Graf Greiser Günther Hanke Heiden Hess Heydrich Himmler Hitler Klintzsch Kuhn Ludendorff Maurice Müller Niekisch Ploetz Rahn Reitsch Renthe-Fink Ribbentrop Rieger Rosenberg Schmitt Schreck Skorzeny Strasser (Gregor) Strasser (Otto) Streicher Terboven Thadden Krosigk Zündel Greece Dragoumis Kasidiaris Koryzis Lagos Michaloliakos Papadopoulos India Adityanath Advani Bose Godse Golwalkar Hedgewar Modi Mukherjee Savarkar Thakur Vajpayee Iran Forouhar Kashani Monshizadeh Pezeshkpour Teymourtash Israel Ahimeir Ben-Ari Ben-Gvir Eldad Eliyahu Goldstein Gopstein Greenberg Ha'ivri Heruti Kahane Marzel Natan-Zada Stern Yeivin Italy Acerbo Alfieri Ambris D'Annunzio Azara Badoglio Balbo Torrente Ballester Bastianini Bianchi Boni Bono Boselli Bottai Ciano (Costanzo) Ciano (Galeazzo) Cogni Corradini Freda Gentile Giuriati Gozi Grandi Graziani Guidi Malaparte Marinetti Michels Morgagni Mussolini Olivetti Panunzio Papini Pavolini Rauti Ricci Ridruejo Rocco Rossoni Sarfatti Soffici Spirito Volpi Japan Akao Araki Chō Hashimoto Honjō Kita Kodama Matsuoka Nonaka Ōkawa Sasakawa Romania Antonescu Bacaloglu Codreanu Crainic Cuza Gigurtu Goga Manoilescu Moța Ogoranu Sima Russia Astroŭski Borovikov Ilyin Kaminski Martsinkevich Milchakov Oktan Prilepin Prokhanov Rodzaevsky Spain Arrese Bau Nolla Bilbao Eguía Carrero Blanco Fernández-Cuesta Franco Franco y Polo Giménez Caballero Primo de Rivera Ramos Sánchez Mazas Serrano Suñer Ukraine Bandera Biletsky Dontsov Gubarev Klyachkivsky Lebed Rebet Samchuk Shukhevych Stetsko Tyahnybok Vitrenko United Kingdom Beckett Chamberlain Chesterton Lake Leese Mosley (Diana) Mosley (Oswald) Pankhurst Pearson Ramsay Robinson Southgate Tyndall Wellesley United States Auernheimer Collins Fuentes Joyce Pelley Pound Yockey Other Burdi Celmiņš Martínez Quisling Ramírez Riva-Agüero y Osma Šešelj Szálasi Works Literature 1776 Returns La Conquista del Estado The Culture of Critique Defiance Did Six Million Really Die?

The Doctrine of Fascism Essentials of Hindutva Fascist Manifesto For My Legionaries The Foundations of Geopolitics: The Geopolitical Future of Russia The Fourth Political Theory Hitlers Zweites Buch Hutu Ten Commandments Imperium: The Philosophy of History and Politics An Investigation of Global Policy with the Yamato Race as Nucleus Kokutairon and Pure Socialism The Last Will of a Russian Fascist Manifesto of Race Manifesto of the Fascist Intellectuals Mein Kampf My Autobiography My Life The Myth of the Twentieth Century OPROP!

Our Race Will Rule Undisputed Over The World Protestantische Rompilger A Racial Program for the Twentieth Century Uncomfortable Questions for Comfortable Jews A Warning to the Hindus Who Are the Mind Benders?

Periodicals Action Ajan Suunta L'Alba El Alcázar The American Review Der Angriff Arriba The Blackshirt La Conquista del Estado The Daily Stormer Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung Das Deutsche Mädel La Difesa della Razza Eleftheros Kosmos The European Fashist Fashizmi La France au travail Fritt Folk Fronten Gândirea Gioventù Fascista Golden Dawn Hamaas Hrvatski Domobran Je suis partout Kangura Kansallissosialisti Limonka Masada2000 Münchener Beobachter Nash Put' Nástup Nation Europa Neue Anthropologie Neues Volk Het Nieuwe Volk Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift Novopress Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift Organiser Panchjanya Panzerbär Parole der Woche Le Pays Réel Der Pimpf Il Popolo d'Italia Das Reich Revue d'histoire du fascisme Das Schwarze Korps Sfarmă-Piatră Signal Siniristi Spearhead Der Stürmer Türkische Post Der Umbruch Vairas Vlajka Volk en Staat Völkischer Beobachter Die Wehrmacht Wochenspruch der NSDAP Film L'Armata Azzurra Bengasi Condottieri The Daughter of the Samurai Erbkrank Europa: The Last Battle The Great Appeal The Old Guard Raza Scipio Africanus: The Defeat of Hannibal Der Sieg des Glaubens The Siege of the Alcazar Lo squadrone bianco Tag der Freiheit: Unsere Wehrmacht Triumph of the Will Music Fashwave Hindutva pop National Socialist black metal Nazi punk Rock Against Communism White power music Other Allach StoneToss Related topics Art of the Third Reich Fascist architecture Heroic realism Nazi architecture Nazism and cinema Organizations Institutional Ahnenerbe Chamber of Fasces and Corporations Grand Council of Fascism Imperial Way Faction Italian Nationalist Association National Socialist League of the Reich for Physical Exercise Quadrumvirs Activist Adelaide Institute Agrarian Trade Union Federation The Britons Casuals United DeVlag European Social Movement Finnish Realm Union Francisco Franco National Foundation Friends of New Germany German American Bund GRECE The Link Mladorossi National Party of Europe National Policy Institute National Popular Consciousness Panzerfaust Records Popular Force Party Right Club Russian Fascist Organization Youth Adler und Falke Albanian Lictor Youth Arab Lictor Youth Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha Blue-and-Blacks Ethiopian Lictor Youth Fascist Union of Youth Frente de Juventudes Al-Futuwwa Gioventù Italiana del Littorio Great Japan Youth Party Hitler Youth Faith and Beauty Society Deutsches Jungvolk Jungmädelbund League of German Girls Jeunesse Populaire Française Juventudes de Acción Popular Korean National Youth Association Levente Mocidade Portuguesa Nationale Jeugdstorm National League of Sweden National Socialist Liberation Front National Youth (Sweden) National Youth (Italy) National Youth Alliance National Youth Organisation (Greece) Opera Nazionale Balilla Österreichisches Jungvolk Patriotic/Eureka Youth League Union of Fascist Little Ones Union of Young Fascists – Vanguard (boys) Union of Young Fascists – Vanguard (girls) Ustaše Youth Wiking-Jugend Youth Front Paramilitary and terrorist Abhinav Bharat Albanian Fascist Militia Atomwaffen Division Azov Brigade Bajrang Dal Black Brigades Black Legion Blackshirts Blueshirts (Canada) Blueshirts (Ireland) Column 88 Combat Terrorist Organization Confederation of the Nation Corpul Muncitoresc Legionar Croatian Defence Forces Croatian National Resistance Croatian Revolutionary Brotherhood Bugojno group Einsatzgruppen Fasci di Azione Rivoluzionaria Falange Armata Falange Militia Flemish Guard Flemish Legion Frontbann Goldshirts Greenshirts Hilfspolizei Hitler Youth Greyshirts Heimwehr Hirden Hlinka Guard Hungarian National Defence Association Impuzamugambi Interbrigades Interahamwe Iron Wolf Jewish Defense League Jewish Defense Organization Kataeb Regulatory Forces Lăncieri Legion Wasa Lehava Lehi Levente Makapili Mano Blanca Misanthropic Division National Republican Guard New Guard Ostmärkische Sturmscharen Rodobrana Russian Imperial Movement Russian National Unity (2000) S14 Schutzstaffel Serbian Volunteer Corps Sicarii Sich Battalion Silver Shirts Sturmabteilung Sudetendeutsches Freikorps Terror Against Terror Third Klan Ukrainian Insurgent Army Ukrainian People's Militsiya Ustaše Militia Volkssport Walloon Guard Walloon Legion Waffen-SS Wagner Group Rusich Group Weerbaarheidsafdeling Werwolf Westland New Post Yokusan Sonendan Youth Front Student Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad Avanguardia Giovanile Fascista Frente de Estudiantes Sindicalistas German Student Union National Socialist German Students' League Sindicato Español Universitario Student Action International Axis powers NSDAP/AO ODESSA History 1900s Herero and Nama genocide and the Holocaust 1910s Arditi Fascio Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Armenian genocide and the Holocaust 1920s March on Rome Corfu incident Acerbo Law Beer Hall Putsch Aventine Secession Italian economic battles Le Faisceau 28 May 1926 coup d'état Libyan genocide 1930s March of the Iron Will November 1932 German federal election March 1933 German federal election Enabling Act Austrian Civil War July Putsch 1934 Montreux Fascist conference Romani Holocaust 4th of August Regime Anti-Comintern Pact Spanish Civil War 1940s World War II Nazi crimes against the Polish nation The Holocaust Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia End in Italy Nuremberg Trials Tokyo Trials Lists Anti-fascists Books about Hitler British fascist parties Fascist movements by country ( A-F G-M N-T U-Z ) Nazi ideologues Nazi leaders Secretaries of Italian fascist parties Speeches by Hitler SS personnel Related topics Authoritarian conservatism Chiangism Francoism Khomeinism Maurrassisme Pinochetism Putinism Ziaism Alt-right Alt-lite Alt-right pipeline Alt-tech Identitarian movement Anti-fascism Bahutu Manifesto Berlusconism Conservative Revolution Criticism of fascism Europe a Nation Fascist (epithet) Fascist mysticism Feudal fascism F-scale (personality test) Garveyism Germanisation of Poles during the Partitions Italianization of South Tyrol Japanization Morenazi Neosocialism Para-/semi-fascism Post-fascism Proto-fascism Red fascism Red–green–brown alliance Roman salute Saffronisation Sansepolcrismo Scientific racism Aryanism Nordicism Social fascism Sorelianism Synarchism Szeged Idea Trumpism Donald Trump and fascism Völkisch movement Women in Nazi Germany Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Norway Vatican Israel Catalonia Other IdRef Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐bw867
Cached time: 20250817043556
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, vary‐revision, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 3.889 seconds
Real time usage: 4.311 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 27389/1000000
Revision size: 137092/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 800922/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 37212/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 21/100
Expensive parser function count: 37/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 398444/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.465/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24523775/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 3388.070      1 -total
 16.63%  563.440     93 Template:Cite_book
 16.07%  544.432    168 Template:Sfn
 15.46%  523.727      9 Template:Navbox
 13.33%  451.716      1 Template:Nazism
 12.68%  429.569      8 Template:Excerpt
 12.50%  423.594    226 Template:Lang
 10.80%  366.037      1 Template:Infobox_political_party
 10.49%  355.285      1 Template:Infobox
  5.39%  182.565      1 Template:Nazism_sidebar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:21736:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043556 and revision id 1305825520. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nazi_Party&oldid=1305825520 " Categories : Nazi Party 1919 establishments in Germany 1945 disestablishments in Germany Adolf Hitler Anti-black racism in Germany Anti-communism in Germany Anti-communist parties Antisemitism in Germany Antiziganism in Germany Banned far-right parties Banned political parties in Germany Defunct political parties in Germany Far-right political parties in Germany Fascist parties in Germany Homophobia Identity politics Nazi parties Nazism Parties of one-party systems Political parties disestablished in 1945 Political parties established in 1919 Political parties in the Weimar Republic Right-wing populism in Germany The Holocaust in Germany Political parties of Bavaria Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Pages with German IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Articles containing German-language text CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia extended-confirmed-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use British English from January 2019 Use dmy dates from April 2020 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from June 2020 Articles needing additional references from February 2017 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2016 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2022 CS1: long volume value Pages with missing ISBNs All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) Commons category link is on Wikidata Wikisource templates with missing id Articles with German-language sources (de) Articles with excerpts Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 08:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nazi Party 107 languages Add topic

