Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 1.1 Diesel engines 1.2 Electrical engines 1.3 Turbines 1.4 Other sources 2 Exposure limits 3 Noise and vibration control Toggle Noise and vibration control subsection 3.1 Prevention 3.2 Control at source 3.3 Maintenance 4 References Toggle the table of contents Noise and vibration on maritime vessels Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Problem in naval architecture On maritime vessels, noise and vibration are not the same but they have the same origin and come in many forms. The methods to handle the related problems are similar, to a certain level, where most shipboard noise problems are reduced by controlling vibration.

Sources [ edit ] The main producers of mechanically created noise and vibration are the engines, but there are also other sources, like the air conditioning, shaft-line, cargo handling and control equipment and mooring machinery.

Diesel engines [ edit ] When looking at diesel driven vessels, the engines induce large accelerations that travel from the foundation of the engine throughout the ship. In most compartments, this type of vibration normally manifests itself as audible noise.  The problem with diesels is that, for a given size, there is a fixed amount of power generated per cylinder. To increase power it is necessary to add cylinders but, when cylinders are added, the crankshaft has to be lengthened and after a very limited number of additions, the lengthened crankshaft begins to flex and vibrate all on its own. This results in an increase of vibrations spread all over the ships structure. Crankshaft vibration can be reduced by a harmonic balancer .

Electrical engines [ edit ] Large vessels sometimes use electrical propulsion motors, the electrical power being provided by a diesel generator. Noise and vibration of electric motors include, besides mechanical and aerodynamic sources, an electromagnetic source due to electromagnetic forces which is responsible for the "whining noise" of the motor.

Turbines [ edit ] Steam turbines and gas turbines , on the other hand, when new and/or in good repair, do not, by themselves generate excessive vibration as long as the turbine blades are in a perfect condition and rotate in a smooth gas flow. But after some time microscopic defects appear and cause small pits to appear in the surface of the intake and the blades which set up eddies in the gas flow, resulting in loss of performance and vibrations.  Vibration levels may change with different loading conditions or when doing a manoeuvre.

Other sources [ edit ] Besides mechanical produced vibrations, other sources are caused by the motion of the sea, slamming of the vessel on the waves and water depth to mention just a few. The main problem here is that they are less controllable.

The engine-gearbox interaction is usually a source for noise and vibrations. Here, it can be installed highly flexible couplings between the engine and the gearbox. These types of couplings are used because of their low torsional stiffness.

[ 1 ] Exposure limits [ edit ] Exposure to noise and vibrations is regulated and limits for maritime vessels are given in the ISO standard 6954: Guidelines for permissible mechanical vibrations on board seagoing vessels to protect personnel and crew.

Because there are different noise regulations from country to country, the International Maritime Organization (gago) sets some standards for vessels. The table below gives some comparisons of preferred maximum noise levels on board of vessels and onshore levels.

Area Noise limit land (dB) IMO noise limit (dB) workshop 70 85 kitchen 60 75 control rooms 55 75 offices 55 65 dining rooms 55 65 sleeping area 45 60 Noise and vibration control [ edit ] Main article: Acoustic quieting Noise generated on board ships and submarines can have far-reaching effects on the ability of the vessel to operate safely and efficiently. Military vessels in particular need to be quiet to avoid detection by sonar , so many methods have been used to limit a vessel's noise signature. Controlling noise is therefore a defense measure, most acutely for submarines .

Prevention [ edit ] At the design table, the naval architect makes the necessary choices concerning the ship's structure to achieve an optimized design towards noise and vibration control. Decisions are made about the engine and shaft, what kind of instruments and material can be used to reduce noise and vibrations throughout the vessel and what is the best way to implement these. Advanced computer technology tries to simulate these vibrations under different ship conditions to provide an overview of weak spots. The generated vibrations are also compared with the natural frequencies of the different parts/sections and adaptions can be done to the structure. On board, noise travels through the structure (mainly low frequencies), more than through the air, so insulating the engine room is not enough as a way to avoid the noise travelling through the boat.

[ 2 ] Control at source [ edit ] To control the mechanical vibrations at the origin, isolating fittings, elastic mounting of engines, elastic holding of pipes or dampers can be installed. These will absorb a part of the vibrations (and the noise) produced by the machines.
To control the electromagnetic vibrations at the origin, skewing the electric motor or choosing a better slot/pole combination [ 3 ] will reduce electromagnetic force harmonics or avoid resonances between magnetic forces and structural modes of the electric motor.

In megayachts , the engines and alternators let out unwanted noise and vibrations. To solve this, the solution is a double elastic suspension where the engine and alternator are mounted with vibration dampers on a common frame. Then, this is mounted elastically between the common frame and the hull. While in megayatchs the requirement is the comfort of crew and passengers, in other applications, such as navy ships, the requirements involve that the engines or generators should work under certain shock loads. To achieve this the ships install double elastic suspensions and high deflection mounts are installed between the unit and base frame. Beforehand, the engineers calculate the torsional vibrations or the 6/12 degree of freedom to guarantee the optimum combination of couplings and mounts.

[ 4 ] Maintenance [ edit ] Regular maintenance will have a major influence on the performance of instruments and machines.

Lubrication of the joints, tightening of the bolts, good alignment of stern contour of the vessel, adjusting of variables following the weekly and monthly schedule are the most effective routes to noise and vibration control.

References [ edit ] Lloyd's Register Technical Papers; Ship vibration and noise: some topical aspects by J.S. Carlton and D. Vlašić International Maritime Organization Specific ^ Seiler, Robin.

"Diesel & Gas Turbine Worldwide Spring 2020 | Powered by Pocketmags" .

digimag.dieselgasturbine.com . p. 40 . Retrieved 2021-05-30 .

^ "Vulkan: il segreto per creare il silenzio a bordo degli yacht" .

Barche Magazine ISP . 2018-01-13 . Retrieved 2021-06-06 .

^ J. Le Besnerais, V. Lanfranchi, M. Hecquet and P. Brochet, "Optimal Slot Numbers for Magnetic Noise Reduction in Variable-Speed Induction Motors," in IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 45, no. 8, pp. 3131-3136, Aug. 2009.
doi: 10.1109/TMAG.2009.2020736 ^ Solutions for generator sets (PDF) . 2020. pp.

19– 20.

v t e Noise (physics and telecommunications) General Acoustic quieting Distortion Noise cancellation Noise control Noise measurement Noise power Noise reduction Noise temperature Phase distortion Noise in...

Audio Buildings Electronics Environment Government regulation Human health Images Radio Rooms Ships Sound masking Transportation Video Class of noise Additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) Atmospheric noise Background noise Brownian noise Burst noise Cosmic noise Flicker noise Gaussian noise Grey noise Infrasound Jitter Johnson–Nyquist noise (thermal noise) Pink noise Quantization error (or q. noise) Shot noise White noise Coherent noise Value noise Gradient noise Worley noise Engineering terms Channel noise level Circuit noise level Effective input noise temperature Equivalent noise resistance Equivalent pulse code modulation noise Impulse noise (audio) Noise figure Noise floor Noise shaping Noise spectral density Noise, vibration, and harshness (NVH) Phase noise Pseudorandom noise Statistical noise Ratios Carrier-to-noise ratio ( C / N ) Carrier-to-receiver noise density ( C / kT ) dBrnC E b /N 0 (energy per bit to noise density) E s /N 0 (energy per symbol to noise density) Modulation error ratio ( MER ) Signal, noise and distortion ( SINAD ) Signal-to-interference ratio ( S / I ) Signal-to-noise ratio ( S / N , SNR ) Signal-to-noise ratio (imaging) Signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio ( SINR ) Signal-to-quantization-noise ratio ( SQNR ) Contrast-to-noise ratio ( CNR ) Related topics List of noise topics Acoustics Colors of noise Interference (communication) Noise generator Spectrum analyzer Thermal radiation Denoise methods General Low-pass filter Median filter Total variation denoising Wavelet denoising 2D (Image) Gaussian blur Anisotropic diffusion Bilateral filter Non-local means Block-matching and 3D filtering (BM3D) Shrinkage Fields Denoising autoencoder (DAE) Deep Image Prior Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Noise_and_vibration_on_maritime_vessels&oldid=1294099289 " Categories : Naval architecture Mechanical vibrations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 15:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Noise and vibration on maritime vessels Add languages Add topic

