Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Family background 2 Early life and education 3 Personal life 4 World War I (1914–1918) 5 Between the Wars (1918–1939) Toggle Between the Wars (1918–1939) subsection 5.1 In service of generals 5.2 Philippine tenure (1935–1939) 6 World War II (1939–1945) Toggle World War II (1939–1945) subsection 6.1 Operations Torch and Avalanche 6.2 Supreme Allied commander and Operation Overlord 6.3 Liberation of France and victory in Europe 7 After World War II (1945–1953) Toggle After World War II (1945–1953) subsection 7.1 Military Governor of the American-occupied zone of Germany 7.2 Army Chief of Staff 7.3 1948 presidential election 7.4 President at Columbia University and NATO Supreme Commander 7.5 Presidential campaign of 1952 7.6 Election of 1956 8 Presidency (1953–1961) Toggle Presidency (1953–1961) subsection 8.1 Atoms for Peace 8.2 Interstate Highway System 8.3 ARPA 8.4 Foreign policy 8.4.1 Space Race 8.4.2 Korean War, Free China and Red China 8.4.3 Southeast Asia 8.4.4 Legitimation of Francoist Spain 8.4.5 Middle East and Eisenhower doctrine 8.4.6 1960 U-2 incident 8.5 Civil rights 8.5.1 LGBTQ rights 8.6 Relations with Congress 8.7 Judicial appointments 8.7.1 Supreme Court 8.8 States admitted to the Union 8.9 Health issues 8.10 End of presidency 9 Post-presidency (1961–1969) Toggle Post-presidency (1961–1969) subsection 9.1 Death 10 Legacy and memory Toggle Legacy and memory subsection 10.1 Public and scholarly assessments 10.2 Political practice 10.3 Tributes and memorials 11 Honors Toggle Honors subsection 11.1 Awards and decorations 11.2 Freedom of the City 11.3 Honorary degrees 12 Promotions 13 See also 14 Notes 15 References Toggle References subsection 15.1 Citations 15.2 Print sources 15.2.1 General biographies 15.2.2 Military career 15.2.3 Civilian career 15.2.4 General history 15.2.5 Primary sources 16 External links Toggle the table of contents Dwight D. Eisenhower 145 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc Аԥсшәа العربية Aragonés Asturianu Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Basa Bali বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Bikol Central Bislama Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hawaiʻi Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Kapampangan ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Ikinyarwanda Kiswahili Kurdî ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Ligure Limburgs Lingála Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qırımtatarca Ripoarisch Română Rumantsch Runa Simi Русский Саха тыла Sardu Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Vèneto Tiếng Việt Volapük Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Zeêuws Žemaitėška 中文 Tolışi Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Dwight Eisenhower ) World War II general, U.S. president from 1953 to 1961 "Dwight David Eisenhower" and "Eisenhower" redirect here. For his grandson, see David Eisenhower . For other uses, see Eisenhower (disambiguation) .

Dwight D. Eisenhower Official portrait, 1959 34th President of the United States In office January 20, 1953 – January 20, 1961 Vice President Richard Nixon Preceded by Harry S. Truman Succeeded by John F. Kennedy 1st Supreme Allied Commander Europe In office April 2, 1951 – May 30, 1952 President Harry S. Truman Deputy Bernard Montgomery Preceded by Position established Succeeded by Matthew Ridgway 13th President of Columbia University In office June 7, 1948 – January 19, 1953 Preceded by Nicholas Murray Butler Succeeded by Grayson L. Kirk 16th Chief of Staff of the Army In office November 19, 1945 – February 6, 1948 President Harry S. Truman Deputy J. Lawton Collins Preceded by George C. Marshall Succeeded by Omar Bradley 1st Military Governor of the American-occupied zone of Germany In office May 8, 1945 – November 10, 1945 President Harry S. Truman Preceded by Position established Succeeded by George S. Patton (acting) Supreme Commander Allied Expeditionary Force In office December 24, 1943 – July 14, 1945 Appointed by Franklin D. Roosevelt Deputy Arthur Tedder Preceded by Position established Succeeded by Position abolished Personal details Born David Dwight Eisenhower ( 1890-10-14 ) October 14, 1890 Denison, Texas , US Died March 28, 1969 (1969-03-28) (aged 78) Washington, D.C., US Resting place Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum and Boyhood Home Political party Republican (from 1952) Other political affiliations Democratic (1909) [ 1 ] Spouse Mamie Doud ​ ( m.

1916 ) ​ Children Doud John Relatives Eisenhower family Education United States Military Academy ( BS ) Occupation Military officer politician Signature Nickname "Ike" [ 2 ] Military service Branch/service United States Army Years of service 1915–1953 1961–1969 [ 3 ] Rank General of the Army Battles/wars See battles Border War Pancho Villa Expedition World War I World War II North African campaign Operation Torch Battle of Port Lyautey Tunisian campaign Battle of Kasserine Pass Italian campaign Operation Husky Allied invasion of Italy Operation Avalanche Operation Overlord Normandy landings Battle of the Falaise Pocket Liberation of Paris Operation Dragoon Siegfried Line campaign Operation Market Garden Operation Queen Battle of the Bulge Western Allied invasion of Germany Battle of Remagen Occupation of Germany Korean War Awards Army Distinguished Service Medal (5) Navy Distinguished Service Medal Legion of Merit (see § Awards and decorations ) Dwight D. Eisenhower's voice Eisenhower on military enforcement of school integration in Little Rock Recorded September 24, 1957 Dwight David " Ike " Eisenhower [ a ] (born David Dwight Eisenhower ; October 14, 1890 – March 28, 1969) was the 34th president of the United States , serving from 1953 to 1961. During World War II , he was Supreme Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force in Europe and achieved the five-star rank as General of the Army . Eisenhower planned and supervised two of the most consequential military campaigns of World War II : Operation Torch in the North Africa campaign in 1942–1943 and the invasion of Normandy in 1944.

Eisenhower was born in Denison, Texas , and raised in Abilene, Kansas . His family had a strong religious background, and his mother became a Jehovah's Witness . Eisenhower, however, belonged to no organized church until 1952. He graduated from West Point in 1915 and later married Mamie Doud , with whom he had two sons. During World War I , he was denied a request to serve in Europe and instead commanded a unit that trained tank crews. Between the wars he served in staff positions in the US and the Philippines, reaching the rank of brigadier general shortly before the entry of the US into World War II in 1941. After further promotion Eisenhower oversaw the Allied invasions of North Africa and Sicily before supervising the invasions of France and Germany . After the war ended in Europe, he served as military governor of the American-occupied zone of Germany (1945), Army Chief of Staff (1945–1948), president of Columbia University (1948–1953), and as the first supreme commander of NATO (1951–1952).

In 1952, Eisenhower entered the presidential race as a Republican to block the isolationist foreign policies of Senator Robert A. Taft , who opposed NATO . Eisenhower won that year's election and the 1956 election in landslides , both times defeating Adlai Stevenson II . Eisenhower's main goals in office were to contain the spread of communism and reduce federal deficits . In 1953, he considered using nuclear weapons to end the Korean War and may have threatened China with nuclear attack if an armistice was not reached quickly. China did agree and an armistice resulted, which remains in effect. His New Look policy of nuclear deterrence prioritized "inexpensive" nuclear weapons while reducing funding for expensive Army divisions. He continued Harry S. Truman 's policy of recognizing Taiwan as the legitimate government of China, and he won congressional approval of the Formosa Resolution . His administration provided aid to help the French try to fight Vietnamese Communists in the First Indochina War . After the French left, he gave strong financial support to the new state of South Vietnam .

He supported regime-changing military coups in Iran and Guatemala orchestrated by his own administration. During the Suez Crisis of 1956, he condemned the Israeli, British, and French invasion of Egypt, and he forced them to withdraw. He also condemned the Soviet invasion during the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 but took no action. He deployed 15,000 soldiers during the 1958 Lebanon crisis . Near the end of his term, a summit meeting with the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev was cancelled when a US spy plane was shot down over the Soviet Union. Eisenhower approved the Bay of Pigs Invasion , which was left to John F. Kennedy to carry out.

On the domestic front, Eisenhower governed as a moderate conservative who continued New Deal agencies and expanded Social Security . He covertly opposed Joseph McCarthy and contributed to the end of McCarthyism by openly invoking executive privilege . He signed the Civil Rights Act of 1957 and sent Army troops to enforce federal court orders which integrated schools in Little Rock, Arkansas . His administration undertook the development and construction of the Interstate Highway System , which remains the largest construction of roadways in American history. In 1957, following the Soviet launch of Sputnik , Eisenhower led the American response which included the creation of NASA and the establishment of a stronger, science-based education via the National Defense Education Act . The Soviet Union began to reinforce their own space program , escalating the Space Race . His two terms saw unprecedented economic prosperity except for a minor recession in 1958 . In his farewell address , he expressed his concerns about the dangers of massive military spending , particularly deficit spending and government contracts to private military manufacturers, which he dubbed "the military–industrial complex ". Historical evaluations of his presidency place him among the upper tier of US presidents .

Family background Further information: Family of Dwight D. Eisenhower The Eisenhauer (German for "iron hewer" or "iron miner") family migrated from the German village of Karlsbrunn to the Province of Pennsylvania in 1741.

[ 4 ] Accounts vary as to how and when the German name Eisenhauer was anglicized .

[ 5 ] David Jacob Eisenhower, Eisenhower's father, was a college-educated engineer, despite his own father's urging to stay on the family farm. Eisenhower's mother, Ida Elizabeth (Stover) Eisenhower , of predominantly German Protestant ancestry, moved to Kansas from Virginia. She married David on September 23, 1885, in Lecompton, Kansas , on the campus of their alma mater, Lane University .

[ 6 ] David owned a general store in Hope, Kansas , but the business failed due to economic conditions and the family became impoverished. The Eisenhowers lived in Texas from 1889 until 1892, and later returned to Kansas, with $24 (equivalent to $840 in 2024) to their name. David worked as a railroad mechanic and then at a creamery.

[ 6 ] By 1898, the parents made a decent living and provided a suitable home for their large family.

[ 7 ] Early life and education The Eisenhower family home in Abilene, Kansas Eisenhower was born David Dwight Eisenhower in Denison, Texas, on October 14, 1890, the third of seven sons born to Ida and David.

[ 8 ] His mother soon reversed his two forenames after his birth to avoid the confusion of having two Davids in the family.

[ 9 ] He was named Dwight after the evangelist Dwight L. Moody .

[ 10 ] All of the boys were nicknamed "Ike", such as "Big Ike" ( Edgar ) and "Little Ike" (Dwight); the nickname was intended as an abbreviation of their last name.

[ 11 ] By World War II, only Dwight was still called "Ike".

[ 4 ] In 1892, the family moved to Abilene, Kansas , which Eisenhower considered his hometown.

[ 4 ] As a child, he was involved in an accident that cost his younger brother Earl an eye, for which he was remorseful for the remainder of his life.

[ 12 ] Eisenhower developed a keen and enduring interest in exploring the outdoors. He learned about hunting and fishing, cooking, and card playing from a man named Bob Davis who camped on the Smoky Hill River .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] While his mother was against war, it was her collection of history books that first sparked Eisenhower's interest in military history; he became a voracious reader on the subject. Other favorite subjects early in his education were arithmetic and spelling.

[ 16 ] Eisenhower's parents set aside specific times at breakfast and at dinner for daily family Bible reading. Chores were regularly assigned and rotated among all the children, and misbehavior was met with unequivocal discipline, usually from David.

[ 17 ] His mother, previously a member (with David) of the River Brethren ( Brethren in Christ Church ) sect of the Mennonites , [ 18 ] joined the International Bible Students Association , later known as Jehovah's Witnesses . The Eisenhower home served as the local meeting hall from 1896 to 1915, though Dwight never joined.

[ 19 ] His later decision to attend West Point saddened his mother, who felt that warfare was "rather wicked", but she did not overrule his decision.

[ 20 ] Speaking of himself in 1948, Eisenhower said he was "one of the most deeply religious men I know" though unattached to any "sect or organization". He was baptized in the Presbyterian Church in 1953.

[ 18 ] Eisenhower attended Abilene High School and graduated in 1909.

[ 21 ] As a freshman, he injured his knee and developed a leg infection that extended into his groin, which his doctor diagnosed as life-threatening. The doctor insisted that the leg be amputated but Dwight refused to allow it, and surprisingly recovered, though he had to repeat his freshman year.

[ 22 ] He and brother Edgar both wanted to attend college, though they lacked the funds. They made a pact to take alternate years at college while the other worked to earn the tuitions.

[ 23 ] Edgar took the first turn at school, and Dwight was employed as a night supervisor at the Belle Springs Creamery.

[ 24 ] When Edgar asked for a second year, Dwight consented. At that time a friend, Edward "Swede" Hazlett , was applying to the Naval Academy and urged Dwight to apply, since no tuition was required. Eisenhower requested consideration for either Annapolis or West Point with his Senator, Joseph L. Bristow . Though Eisenhower was among the winners of the entrance-exam competition, he was beyond the age limit for the Naval Academy.

[ 25 ] He accepted an appointment to West Point in 1911.

[ 25 ] At West Point, Eisenhower relished the emphasis on traditions and on sports, but was less enthusiastic about the hazing, though he willingly accepted it as a plebe. He was also a regular violator of the more detailed regulations and finished school with a less than stellar discipline rating. Academically, Eisenhower's best subject by far was English. Otherwise, his performance was average, though he thoroughly enjoyed the typical emphasis of engineering on science and mathematics.

[ 26 ] In athletics, Eisenhower later said that "not making the baseball team at West Point was one of the greatest disappointments of my life, maybe my greatest".

[ 27 ] He made the varsity football team [ 28 ] [ 29 ] and was a starter at halfback in 1912, when he tried to tackle the legendary Jim Thorpe of the Carlisle Indians .

[ 30 ] Eisenhower suffered a torn knee while being tackled in the next game, which was the last he played; he reinjured his knee on horseback and in the boxing ring, [ 4 ] [ 13 ] [ 31 ] so he turned to fencing and gymnastics.

[ 4 ] West Point yearbook photo, 1915 Eisenhower later served as junior varsity football coach and cheerleader, which caught the attention of General Frederick Funston .

[ 32 ] He graduated from West Point in the middle of the class of 1915, [ 33 ] which became known as " the class the stars fell on ", because 59 members eventually became general officers . After graduation in 1915, Second Lieutenant Eisenhower requested an assignment in the Philippines, which was denied; because of the ongoing Mexican Revolution , he was posted to Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio , Texas, under the command of General Funston. In 1916, while stationed at Fort Sam Houston, Funston convinced him to become the football coach for Peacock Military Academy ; [ 32 ] he later became the coach at St. Louis College, now St. Mary's University , [ 34 ] and was an honorary member of the Sigma Beta Chi fraternity there.

[ 35 ] Personal life Main article: Family of Dwight D. Eisenhower While Eisenhower was stationed in Texas, he met Mamie Doud of Boone, Iowa .

[ 4 ] They were immediately taken with each other. He proposed to her on Valentine's Day in 1916.

[ 36 ] A November wedding date in Denver , Colorado, was moved up to July 1 due to the impending American entry into World War I ; Funston approved 10 days of leave for their wedding.

[ 37 ] The Eisenhowers moved many times during their first 35 years of marriage.

[ 38 ] The Eisenhowers had two sons. In late 1917 while he was in charge of training at Fort Oglethorpe in Georgia , his wife Mamie had their first son, Doud Dwight "Icky" Eisenhower , who died of scarlet fever at the age of three.

[ 39 ] Eisenhower was mostly reluctant to discuss his death.

[ 40 ] Their second son, John Eisenhower , was born in Denver.

[ 41 ] John served in the United States Army , retired as a brigadier general, became an author and served as Ambassador to Belgium from 1969 to 1971. He married Barbara Jean Thompson and had four children: David , Barbara Ann, Susan Elaine and Mary Jean . David, after whom Camp David is named, [ 42 ] married Richard Nixon 's daughter Julie in 1968.

Mamie Eisenhower, painted in 1953 by Thomas E. Stephens Eisenhower was a golf enthusiast later in life, and he joined the Augusta National Golf Club in 1948.

[ 43 ] He played golf frequently during and after his presidency and was unreserved in his passion for the game, to the point of golfing during winter; he ordered his golf balls painted black so he could see them better against snow. He had a basic golf facility installed at Camp David, and he became close friends with the Augusta National Chairman Clifford Roberts , inviting Roberts to stay at the White House on numerous occasions.

[ 44 ] Roberts, an investment broker, also handled the Eisenhower family's investments.

[ 45 ] He began oil painting while at Columbia University, after watching Thomas E. Stephens paint Mamie's portrait. Eisenhower painted about 260 oils during the last 20 years of his life. The images were mostly landscapes but also portraits of subjects such as Mamie, their grandchildren, Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery , George Washington , and Abraham Lincoln .

[ 46 ] Wendy Beckett stated that Eisenhower's paintings, "simple and earnest", caused her to "wonder at the hidden depths of this reticent president". A conservative in both art and politics, Eisenhower in a 1962 speech denounced modern art as "a piece of canvas that looks like a broken-down Tin Lizzie , loaded with paint, has been driven over it".

[ 40 ] Angels in the Outfield was Eisenhower's favorite movie.

[ 47 ] His favorite reading material for relaxation were the Western novels of Zane Grey .

[ 48 ] With his excellent memory and ability to focus, Eisenhower was skilled at cards. He learned poker, which he called his "favorite indoor sport", in Abilene. Eisenhower recorded West Point classmates' poker losses for payment after graduation and later stopped playing because his opponents resented having to pay him. A friend reported that after learning to play contract bridge at West Point, Eisenhower played the game six nights a week for five months.

[ 49 ] Eisenhower continued to play bridge throughout his military career. While stationed in the Philippines, he played regularly with President Manuel Quezon , earning him the nickname the "Bridge Wizard of Manila".

[ 50 ] An unwritten qualification for an officer's appointment to Eisenhower's staff during World War II was the ability to play bridge. He played even during the stressful weeks leading up to the D-Day landings. His favorite partner was General Alfred Gruenther , considered the best player in the US Army; he appointed Gruenther his second-in-command at NATO partly because of his skill at bridge. Saturday night bridge games at the White House were a feature of his presidency. He was a strong player, though not an expert by modern standards. The great bridge player and popularizer Ely Culbertson described his game as classic and sound with "flashes of brilliance" and said that "you can always judge a man's character by the way he plays cards. Eisenhower is a calm and collected player and never whines at his losses. He is brilliant in victory but never commits the bridge player's worst crime of gloating when he wins." Bridge expert Oswald Jacoby frequently participated in the White House games and said, "The President plays better bridge than golf. He tries to break 90 at golf. At bridge, you would say he plays in the 70s." [ 51 ] World War I (1914–1918) See also: Military career of Dwight D. Eisenhower Eisenhower served initially in logistics and then the infantry at various camps in Texas and Georgia until 1918. When the US entered World War I , he immediately requested an overseas assignment but was denied and assigned to Ft. Leavenworth, Kansas .

[ 52 ] In February 1918, he was transferred to Camp Meade in Maryland with the 65th Engineers . His unit was later ordered to France, but, to his chagrin, he received orders for the new tank corps , where he was promoted to brevet lieutenant colonel in the National Army .

[ 53 ] He commanded a unit that trained tank crews at Camp Colt – his first command. Though Eisenhower and his tank crews never saw combat, he displayed excellent organizational skills as well as an ability to accurately assess junior officers' strengths and make optimal placements of personnel.

[ 54 ] His spirits were raised when the unit under his command received orders overseas to France. This time his wishes were thwarted when the armistice was signed a week before his departure date.

[ 55 ] Completely missing out on the warfront left him depressed and bitter for a time, despite receiving the Distinguished Service Medal for his work at home.

[ 56 ] In World War II, rivals who had combat service in the Great War (led by Gen.

Bernard Montgomery ) sought to denigrate Eisenhower for his previous lack of combat duty, despite his stateside experience establishing a camp for thousands of troops and developing a full combat training schedule.

[ 57 ] Between the Wars (1918–1939) In service of generals Eisenhower (far right) with friends William Stuhler, Major Brett, and Paul V. Robinson in 1919, four years after graduating from the United States Military Academy at West Point After the war, Eisenhower reverted to his regular rank of captain and a few days later was promoted to major , a rank he held for 16 years.

[ 58 ] The major was assigned in 1919 to a transcontinental Army convoy to test vehicles and dramatize the need for improved roads. Indeed, the convoy averaged only 5 miles per hour (8.0 km/h) from Washington, D.C. to San Francisco; later the improvement of highways became a signature issue for Eisenhower as president.

[ 59 ] He assumed duties again at Camp Meade , Maryland, commanding a battalion of tanks, where he remained until 1922. His schooling continued, focused on the nature of the next war and the role of the tank. His new expertise in tank warfare was strengthened by a close collaboration with George S. Patton , Sereno E. Brett , and other senior tank leaders. Their leading-edge ideas of speed-oriented offensive tank warfare were strongly discouraged by superiors, who considered the new approach too radical and preferred to continue using tanks in a strictly supportive role for the infantry. Eisenhower was even threatened with court-martial for continued publication of these proposed methods of tank deployment, and he relented.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] From 1920, Eisenhower served under a succession of talented generals – Fox Conner , John J. Pershing , Douglas MacArthur and George Marshall . He first became executive officer to General Conner in the Panama Canal Zone , where, joined by Mamie, he served until 1924. Under Conner's tutelage, he studied military history and theory (including Carl von Clausewitz 's On War ), and later cited Conner's enormous influence on his military thinking, saying in 1962 that "Fox Conner was the ablest man I ever knew." Conner's comment on Eisenhower was, "[He] is one of the most capable, efficient and loyal officers I have ever met." [ 62 ] On Conner's recommendation, in 1925–1926 he attended the Command and General Staff College at Fort Leavenworth , Kansas, where he graduated first in a class of 245 officers.

[ 63 ] [ 64 ] During the late 1920s and early 1930s, Eisenhower's career stalled somewhat, as military priorities diminished; many of his friends resigned for high-paying business jobs. He was assigned to the American Battle Monuments Commission directed by General Pershing, and with the help of his brother Milton Eisenhower , then a journalist at the Agriculture Department , he produced a guide to American battlefields in Europe.

[ 65 ] He then was assigned to the Army War College and graduated in 1928. After a one-year assignment in France, Eisenhower served as executive officer to General George V. Moseley , Assistant Secretary of War , from 1929 to February 1933.

[ 66 ] Major Eisenhower graduated from the Army Industrial College in 1933 and later served on the faculty (it was later expanded to become the Industrial College of the Armed Services and is now known as the Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy).

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] His primary duty was planning for the next war, which proved most difficult in the midst of the Great Depression .

[ 69 ] He then was posted as chief military aide to General Douglas MacArthur, Army Chief of Staff. In 1932, he participated in the clearing of the Bonus March encampment in Washington, D.C. Although he was against the actions taken against the veterans and strongly advised MacArthur against taking a public role in it, he later wrote the Army's official incident report, endorsing MacArthur's conduct.

[ 70 ] [ 71 ] Philippine tenure (1935–1939) In 1935, Eisenhower accompanied MacArthur to the Philippines, where he served as assistant military adviser to the Philippine government in developing their army. MacArthur allowed Eisenhower to handpick an officer whom he thought would contribute to the mission. Hence he chose James Ord , a classmate of his at West Point. Having been brought up in Mexico, which inculcated into him the Spanish culture which influenced both Mexico and the Philippines, Ord was deemed the right pick for the job. Eisenhower had strong philosophical disagreements with MacArthur regarding the role of the Philippine Army and the leadership qualities that an American army officer should exhibit and develop in his subordinates. The antipathy between Eisenhower and MacArthur lasted the rest of their lives.

[ 72 ] Historians have concluded that this assignment provided valuable preparation for handling the challenging personalities of Winston Churchill , George S. Patton, George Marshall, and Bernard Montgomery during World War II. Eisenhower later emphasized that too much had been made of the disagreements with MacArthur and that a positive relationship endured.

[ 73 ] While in Manila, Mamie suffered a life-threatening stomach ailment but recovered fully. Eisenhower was promoted to the rank of permanent lieutenant colonel in 1936. He also learned to fly with the Philippine Army Air Corps at the Zablan Airfield in Camp Murphy under Capt.

Jesus Villamor , making a solo flight over the Philippines in 1937, and obtained his private pilot's license in 1939 at Fort Lewis .

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] [ 76 ] Also around this time, he was offered a post by the Philippine Commonwealth Government, namely by then Philippine President Manuel L. Quezon on recommendations by MacArthur, to become the chief of police of a new capital being planned, now named Quezon City , but he declined the offer.

[ 77 ] World War II (1939–1945) The meeting of War Plans Division, War Department General Staff in 1942 Eisenhower returned to the United States in December 1939 and was assigned as commanding officer of the 1st Battalion, 15th Infantry Regiment at Fort Lewis , Washington, later becoming the regimental executive officer. In March 1941 he was promoted to colonel and assigned as chief of staff of the newly activated IX Corps under Major General Kenyon Joyce . In June 1941, he was appointed chief of staff to General Walter Krueger , Commander of the Third Army , at Fort Sam Houston in San Antonio, Texas. After successfully participating in the Louisiana Maneuvers , he was promoted to brigadier general on October 3, 1941.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] After the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor , Eisenhower was assigned to the General Staff in Washington , where he served until June 1942 with responsibility for creating the major war plans to defeat Japan and Germany. He was appointed Deputy Chief in charge of Pacific Defenses under the Chief of War Plans Division (WPD), General Leonard T. Gerow , and then succeeded Gerow as Chief of the War Plans Division. Next, he was appointed Assistant Chief of Staff in charge of the new Operations Division (which replaced WPD) under Chief of Staff General George C. Marshall, who spotted talent and promoted accordingly.

[ 80 ] At the end of May 1942, Eisenhower accompanied Lt. Gen.

Henry H. Arnold , commanding general of the Army Air Forces , to London to assess the effectiveness of the theater commander in England, Maj. Gen.

James E. Chaney .

[ 81 ] He returned to Washington on June 3 with a pessimistic assessment, stating he had an "uneasy feeling" about Chaney and his staff. On June 23, 1942, he returned to London as Commanding General, European Theater of Operations (ETOUSA), based in London and with a house in Coombe, Kingston upon Thames , [ 82 ] and took over command of ETOUSA from Chaney.

[ 83 ] He was promoted to lieutenant general on July 7.

Operations Torch and Avalanche Eisenhower as a major general , 1942 In November 1942, Eisenhower was also appointed Supreme Commander Allied Expeditionary Force of the North African Theater of Operations (NATOUSA) through the new operational Headquarters Allied (Expeditionary) Force Headquarters (A(E)FHQ). The word "expeditionary" was dropped soon after his appointment for security reasons.

[ failed verification ] The campaign in North Africa was designated Operation Torch and was planned in the underground headquarters within the Rock of Gibraltar . Eisenhower was the first non-British person to command Gibraltar in 200 years.

[ 84 ] French cooperation was deemed necessary to the campaign and Eisenhower encountered a "preposterous situation" [ according to whom?

] with the multiple rival factions in France. His primary objective was to move forces successfully into Tunisia and intending to facilitate that objective, he gave his support to François Darlan as High Commissioner in North Africa, despite Darlan's previous high offices in Vichy France and his continued role as commander-in-chief of the French armed forces . The Allied leaders were "thunderstruck" [ according to whom?

] by this from a political standpoint, though none had offered Eisenhower guidance with the problem in planning the operation. Eisenhower was severely criticized [ by whom?

] for the move. Darlan was assassinated on December 24 by Fernand Bonnier de La Chapelle , a French antifascist monarchist.

[ 85 ] Eisenhower later appointed as High Commissioner General Henri Giraud , who had been installed by the Allies as Darlan's commander-in-chief.

[ 86 ] Operation Torch also served as a valuable training ground for Eisenhower's combat command skills; during the initial phase of Generalfeldmarschall Erwin Rommel 's move into the Kasserine Pass , Eisenhower created some confusion in the ranks by interference with the execution of battle plans by his subordinates. He also was initially indecisive in his removal of Lloyd Fredendall , commanding II Corps . He became more adroit in such matters in later campaigns.

[ 87 ] In February 1943, his authority was extended as commander of AFHQ across the Mediterranean basin to include the British Eighth Army , commanded by General Sir Bernard Montgomery. The Eighth Army had advanced across the Western Desert from the east and was ready for the start of the Tunisia Campaign .

After the capitulation of Axis forces in North Africa, Eisenhower oversaw the invasion of Sicily . Once Mussolini , the Italian leader , had fallen in Italy, the Allies switched their attention to the mainland with Operation Avalanche . But while Eisenhower argued with President Roosevelt and British Prime Minister Churchill, who both insisted on unconditional surrender in exchange for helping the Italians, the Germans pursued an aggressive buildup of forces in the country. The Germans made the already tough battle more difficult by adding 19 divisions and initially outnumbering the Allied forces 2 to 1.

[ 88 ] Supreme Allied commander and Operation Overlord General Eisenhower reads his order of the day for June 5, 1944, the day before D-Day.

In December 1943, President Roosevelt decided that Eisenhower – not Marshall – would be Supreme Allied Commander in Europe. The following month, he resumed command of ETOUSA and the following month was officially designated as the Supreme Allied Commander of the Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF), serving in a dual role until the end of hostilities in Europe in May 1945.

[ 89 ] He was charged in these positions with planning and carrying out the Allied assault on the coast of Normandy in June 1944 under the code name Operation Overlord, the liberation of Western Europe and the invasion of Germany.

[ 90 ] Eisenhower speaks with men of the 502nd Parachute Infantry Regiment (PIR), part of the 101st "Screaming Eagles" Airborne Division , on June 5, 1944, the day before the D-Day invasion. The officer Eisenhower is speaking to is First Lieutenant Wallace Strobel .

Eisenhower, as well as the officers and troops under him, had learned valuable lessons in their previous operations, and their skills had all strengthened in preparation for the next most difficult campaign against the Germans—a beach landing assault. His first struggles, however, were with Allied leaders and officers on matters vital to the success of the Normandy invasion; he argued with Roosevelt over an essential agreement with De Gaulle to use French resistance forces in covert operations against the Germans in advance of Operation Overlord.

[ 91 ] Admiral Ernest J. King fought with Eisenhower over King's refusal to provide additional landing craft from the Pacific.

[ 92 ] Eisenhower also insisted that the British give him exclusive command over all strategic air forces to facilitate Overlord, to the point of threatening to resign unless Churchill relented, which he did.

[ 93 ] Eisenhower then designed a bombing plan in France in advance of Overlord and argued with Churchill over the latter's concern with civilian casualties; de Gaulle interjected that the casualties were justified, and Eisenhower prevailed.

[ 94 ] He also had to skillfully manage to retain the services of the often unruly George S. Patton, by severely reprimanding him when Patton earlier had slapped a subordinate , and then when Patton gave a speech in which he made improper comments about postwar policy.

[ 95 ] The D-Day Normandy landings on June 6, 1944, were costly but successful. Two months later (August 15), the invasion of Southern France took place, and control of forces in the southern invasion passed from the AFHQ to the SHAEF. Many thought that victory in Europe would come by summer's end, but the Germans did not capitulate for almost a year. From then until the end of the war in Europe on May 8, 1945, Eisenhower, through SHAEF, commanded all Allied forces, and through his command of ETOUSA had administrative command of all US forces on the Western Front north of the Alps . He was ever mindful of the inevitable loss of life and suffering that would be experienced by the troops under his command and their families. This prompted him to make a point of visiting every division involved in the invasion.

[ 96 ] Eisenhower's sense of responsibility was underscored by his draft of a statement to be issued if the invasion failed. It has been called one of the great speeches of history: Our landings in the Cherbourg-Havre area have failed to gain a satisfactory foothold and I have withdrawn the troops. My decision to attack at this time and place was based on the best information available. The troops, the air and the Navy did all that bravery and devotion to duty could do. If any blame or fault attaches to the attempt, it is mine alone.

[ 97 ] Liberation of France and victory in Europe Eisenhower with Allied commanders following the signing of the German Instrument of Surrender at Reims Every ground commander seeks the battle of annihilation; so far as conditions permit, he tries to duplicate in modern war the classic example of Cannae .

— Eisenhower [ 98 ] Once the coastal assault had succeeded, Eisenhower insisted on retaining personal control over the land battle strategy and was immersed in the command and supply of multiple assaults through France on Germany. Field Marshal Montgomery insisted priority be given to his 21st Army Group 's attack being made in the north, while Generals Bradley ( 12th US Army Group ) and Devers ( Sixth US Army Group ) insisted they be given priority in the center and south of the front (respectively). Eisenhower worked tirelessly to address the demands of the rival commanders to optimize Allied forces, often by giving them tactical latitude; many historians conclude this delayed the Allied victory in Europe. However, due to Eisenhower's persistence, the pivotal supply port at Antwerp was successfully, albeit belatedly, opened in late 1944 .

[ 99 ] In recognition of his senior position in the Allied command, on December 20, 1944, he was promoted to General of the Army , equivalent to the rank of Field Marshal in most European armies. In this and the previous high commands he held, Eisenhower showed his great talents for leadership and diplomacy. Although he had never seen action himself, he won the respect of front-line commanders. He interacted adeptly with allies such as Winston Churchill , Field Marshal Bernard Montgomery and General Charles de Gaulle . He had serious disagreements with Churchill and Montgomery over questions of strategy, but these rarely upset his relationships with them. He dealt with Soviet Marshal Zhukov , his Russian counterpart, and they became good friends.

[ 100 ] Survivors of the Ohrdruf concentration camp demonstrate torture methods used in the camp In December 1944, the Germans launched a surprise counteroffensive, the Battle of the Bulge , which the Allies successfully repelled in early 1945 after Eisenhower repositioned his armies and improved weather allowed the Army Air Force to engage.

[ 101 ] German defenses continued to deteriorate on both the Eastern Front with the Red Army and the Western Front with the Western Allies. The British wanted to capture Berlin, but Eisenhower decided it would be a military mistake for him to attack Berlin and said orders to that effect would have to be explicit. The British backed down but then wanted Eisenhower to move into Czechoslovakia for political reasons. Washington refused to support Churchill's plan to use Eisenhower's army for political maneuvers against Moscow . The actual division of Germany followed the lines that Roosevelt, Churchill and Stalin had previously agreed upon. The Soviet Red Army captured Berlin in a very bloody large-scale battle , and the Germans finally surrendered on May 7, 1945.

[ 102 ] Throughout 1945, the allied armies liberated numerous Nazi concentration camps throughout Europe. As the allies learned the full extent of the Holocaust , Eisenhower anticipated that, in the future, attempts to recharacterize Nazi crimes as propaganda ( Holocaust denial ) would be made, and took steps against it by demanding extensive photo and film documentation of Nazi extermination camps .

[ 103 ] After World War II (1945–1953) Military Governor of the American-occupied zone of Germany General Eisenhower served as military governor of the American zone (highlighted) in Allied-occupied Germany from May through November 1945.

Eisenhower sharing a toast with Zhukov , Montgomery and other Allied officials, June 1945 Following the German unconditional surrender, Eisenhower was appointed military governor of the American-occupied zone of Germany, located primarily in Southern Germany , and headquartered in Frankfurt am Main . Upon discovery of the Nazi concentration camps , he ordered camera crews to document evidence for use in the Nuremberg Trials . He reclassified German prisoners of war (POWs) in US custody as Disarmed Enemy Forces (DEFs), who were no longer subject to the Geneva Convention . Eisenhower followed the orders laid down by the Joint Chiefs of Staff (JCS) in directive JCS 1067 but softened them by bringing in 400,000 tons of food for civilians and allowing more fraternization .

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] [ 106 ] In response to the devastation in Germany, including food shortages and an influx of refugees, he arranged distribution of American food and medical equipment.

[ 107 ] His actions reflected the new American attitudes of the German people as Nazi victims not villains, while aggressively purging the ex-Nazis.

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] Army Chief of Staff In November 1945, Eisenhower returned to Washington to replace Marshall as Chief of Staff of the Army . His main role was the rapid demobilization of millions of soldiers, which was delayed by lack of shipping. Eisenhower was convinced in 1946 that the Soviet Union did not want war and that friendly relations could be maintained; he strongly supported the new United Nations and favored its involvement in the control of atomic bombs. However, in formulating policies regarding the atomic bomb and relations with the Soviets, Truman was guided by the State Department and ignored Eisenhower and the Pentagon . Indeed, Eisenhower had opposed the use of the atomic bomb against the Japanese, writing, "First, the Japanese were ready to surrender and it wasn't necessary to hit them with that awful thing. Second, I hated to see our country be the first to use such a weapon." [ 110 ] Initially, Eisenhower hoped for cooperation with the Soviets.

[ 111 ] He even visited Warsaw in 1945. Invited by Bolesław Bierut and decorated with the highest military decoration , he was shocked by the scale of destruction in the city.

[ 112 ] However, by mid-1947, as east–west tensions over economic recovery in Germany and the Greek Civil War escalated, Eisenhower agreed with a containment policy to stop Soviet expansion.

[ 111 ] 1948 presidential election In June 1943, a visiting politician had suggested to Eisenhower that he might become president after the war. Believing that a general should not participate in politics, Merlo J. Pusey wrote that "figuratively speaking, [Eisenhower] kicked his political-minded visitor out of his office". As others asked him about his political future, Eisenhower told one that he could not imagine wanting to be considered for any political job "from dogcatcher to Grand High Supreme King of the Universe", and another that he could not serve as Army Chief of Staff if others believed he had political ambitions. In 1945, Truman told Eisenhower during the Potsdam Conference that if desired, the president would help the general win the 1948 election , [ 113 ] and in 1947 he offered to run as Eisenhower's running mate on the Democratic ticket if MacArthur won the Republican nomination.

[ 114 ] As the election approached, other prominent citizens and politicians from both parties urged Eisenhower to run. In January 1948, after learning of plans in New Hampshire to elect delegates supporting him for the forthcoming Republican National Convention , Eisenhower stated through the Army that he was "not available for and could not accept nomination to high political office"; "life-long professional soldiers", he wrote, "in the absence of some obvious and overriding reason, [should] abstain from seeking high political office".

[ 113 ] Eisenhower maintained no political party affiliation during this time. Many believed he was forgoing his only opportunity to be president as Republican Thomas E. Dewey was considered the probable winner and would presumably serve two terms, meaning that Eisenhower, at age 66 in 1956, would be too old to run.

[ 115 ] President at Columbia University and NATO Supreme Commander Eisenhower lighting the Columbia University Yule Log, 1949 Eisenhower posing in front of Alma Mater at Columbia in 1953 As president of Columbia , Eisenhower presents an honorary degree to Jawaharlal Nehru .

In 1948, Eisenhower became President of Columbia University , an Ivy League university in New York City, where he was inducted into Phi Beta Kappa .

[ 116 ] The choice was subsequently characterized as not having been a good fit for either party.

[ 117 ] During that year, Eisenhower's memoir, Crusade in Europe , was published.

[ 118 ] It was a major financial success.

[ 119 ] Eisenhower sought the advice of Augusta National's Roberts about the tax implications of this, [ 119 ] and in due course Eisenhower's profit on the book was substantially aided by what author David Pietrusza calls "a ruling without precedent" by the Department of the Treasury . It held that Eisenhower was not a professional writer, but rather, marketing the lifetime asset of his experiences, and thus he had to pay only capital gains tax on his $635,000 advance instead of the much higher personal tax rate. This ruling saved Eisenhower about $400,000.

[ 120 ] Eisenhower's stint as the president of Columbia was punctuated by his activity within the Council on Foreign Relations , a study group he led concerning the political and military implications of the Marshall Plan and The American Assembly , Eisenhower's "vision of a great cultural center where business, professional and governmental leaders could meet from time to time to discuss and reach conclusions concerning problems of a social and political nature".

[ 121 ] His biographer Blanche Wiesen Cook suggested that this period served his "political education", since he had to prioritize wide-ranging educational, administrative, and financial demands for the university.

[ 122 ] Through his involvement in the Council on Foreign Relations, he also gained exposure to economic analysis, which became the bedrock of his understanding in economic policy. "Whatever General Eisenhower knows about economics, he has learned at the study group meetings", one Aid to Europe member claimed.

[ 123 ] Eisenhower accepted the presidency of the university to expand his ability to promote "the American form of democracy" through education.

[ 124 ] He was clear on this point to the trustees on the search committee. He informed them that his main purpose was "to promote the basic concepts of education in a democracy".

[ 124 ] As a result, he was "almost incessantly" devoted to the idea of the American Assembly, a concept he developed into an institution by the end of 1950.

[ 121 ] Within months of becoming university president, Eisenhower was requested to advise Secretary of Defense James Forrestal on the unification of the armed services.

[ 125 ] About six months after his appointment, he became the informal Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in Washington.

[ 126 ] Two months later he fell ill with what was diagnosed as acute gastroenteritis, and he spent over a month in recovery at the Augusta National Golf Club .

[ 127 ] He returned to his post in New York in mid-May, and in July 1949 took a two-month vacation out-of-state.

[ 128 ] Because the American Assembly had begun to take shape, he traveled around the country during summer and fall 1950, building financial support for it, including from Columbia Associates , a recently created alumni and benefactor organization for which he had helped recruit members.

[ 129 ] Eisenhower was unknowingly building resentment and a reputation among the Columbia University faculty and staff as an absentee president who was using the university for his own interests. As a career military man, he naturally had little in common with the academics.

[ 130 ] The contacts gained through university and American Assembly fundraising activities would later become important supporters in Eisenhower's bid for the Republican party nomination and the presidency. Meanwhile, Columbia University's liberal faculty members became disenchanted with the university president's ties to oilmen and businessmen.

[ citation needed ] He did have some successes at Columbia. Puzzled as to why no American university had undertaken the "continuous study of the causes, conduct and consequences of war", [ 131 ] Eisenhower undertook the creation of the Institute of War and Peace Studies , a research facility to "study war as a tragic social phenomenon".

[ 132 ] Eisenhower was able to use his network of wealthy friends and acquaintances to secure initial funding for it.

[ 133 ] Under its founding director, international relations scholar William T. R. Fox , the institute began in 1951 and became a pioneer in international security studies , one that would be emulated by other institutes in the United States and Britain later in the decade.

[ 131 ] The Institute of War and Peace Studies thus became one of the projects which Eisenhower considered his "unique contribution" to Columbia.

[ 132 ] As the president of Columbia, Eisenhower gave voice to his opinions about the supremacy and difficulties of American democracy. His tenure marked his transformation from military to civilian leadership. His biographer Travis Beal Jacobs also suggested that the alienation of the Columbia faculty contributed to sharp intellectual criticism of him for many years.

[ 134 ] The trustees of Columbia University declined to accept Eisenhower's offer to resign in December 1950, when he took an extended leave from the university to become the Supreme Commander of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), and he was given operational command of NATO forces in Europe.

[ 135 ] Eisenhower retired from active service as an army general on June 3, 1952, [ 136 ] and he resumed his presidency of Columbia. Meanwhile, Eisenhower had become the Republican Party nominee for president of the United States, a contest that he won on November 4. Eisenhower tendered his resignation as university president on November 15, 1952, effective January 19, 1953, the day before his inauguration.

[ 137 ] At home, Eisenhower was more effective in making the case for NATO in Congress than the Truman administration had been. By the middle of 1951, with American and European support, NATO was a genuine military power. Nevertheless, Eisenhower thought that NATO would become a truly European alliance, with the American and Canadian commitments ending after about ten years.

[ 138 ] Presidential campaign of 1952 Main article: 1952 United States presidential election See also: Draft Eisenhower movement Eisenhower button from the 1952 campaign President Truman sensed a broad-based desire for an Eisenhower candidacy for president, and he again pressed him to run for the office as a Democrat in 1951. But Eisenhower voiced his disagreements with the Democrats and declared himself to be a Republican.

[ 139 ] A " Draft Eisenhower " movement in the Republican Party persuaded him to declare his candidacy in the 1952 presidential election to counter the candidacy of non-interventionist Senator Robert A. Taft . The effort was a long struggle; Eisenhower had to be convinced that political circumstances had created a genuine duty to offer himself as a candidate and that there was a mandate from the public for him to be their president.

Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

and others succeeded in convincing him, and he resigned his command at NATO in June 1952 to campaign full-time.

[ 140 ] "I Like Ike" televised campaign ad, 1952 Eisenhower defeated Taft for the nomination, having won critical delegate votes from Texas. His campaign was noted for the simple slogan " I Like Ike ". It was essential to his success that Eisenhower express opposition to Roosevelt's policy at the Yalta Conference and to Truman's policies in Korea and China—matters in which he had once participated.

[ 141 ] [ 142 ] In defeating Taft for the nomination, it became necessary for Eisenhower to appease the right-wing Old Guard of the Republican Party; his selection of Richard Nixon as the vice-president on the ticket was designed in part for that purpose. Nixon also provided a strong anti-communist reputation, as well as youth to counter Eisenhower's more advanced age.

[ 143 ] 1952 electoral vote results Eisenhower insisted on campaigning in the South in the general election, against the advice of his campaign team, refusing to surrender the region to the Democrats. The campaign strategy was dubbed "K 1 C 2 " and was intended to focus on attacking the Truman administration on three failures: the Korean War, Communism , and corruption .

[ 144 ] Two controversies tested him and his staff, but they did not damage the campaign. One involved a report that Nixon had improperly received funds from a secret trust. Nixon spoke out adroitly to avoid potential damage, but the matter permanently alienated the two candidates. The second issue centered on Eisenhower's relented decision to confront the controversial methods of Joseph McCarthy on his home turf in a Wisconsin appearance.

[ 145 ] Eisenhower condemned "wickedness in government", an allusion to gay government employees who were conflated with communism during McCarthyism.

[ 146 ] Eisenhower defeated Democratic candidate Adlai Stevenson II in a landslide, with an electoral margin of 442 to 89, marking the first Republican return to the White House in 20 years.

[ 142 ] He also brought a Republican majority in the House, by eight votes, and in the Senate, evenly divided with Vice President Nixon providing Republicans the majority.

[ 147 ] Eisenhower was the last president born in the 19th century, and he was the oldest president-elect at age 62 since James Buchanan in 1856.

[ 148 ] He was the third commanding general of the Army to serve as president, after George Washington and Ulysses S. Grant , and the last not to have held political office prior to becoming president until Donald Trump entered office in January 2017.

[ 149 ] Election of 1956 Main article: 1956 United States presidential election 1956 electoral vote results In the United States presidential election of 1956, Eisenhower, the popular incumbent, was re-elected. The election was a re-match of 1952, as his opponent in 1956 was Stevenson, a former Illinois governor, whom Eisenhower had defeated four years earlier. Compared to the 1952 election, Eisenhower gained Kentucky , Louisiana , and West Virginia from Stevenson, while losing Missouri . His voters were less likely to bring up his leadership record. Instead what stood out this time "was the response to personal qualities — to his sincerity, his integrity and sense of duty, his virtue as a family man, his religious devotion, and his sheer likeableness." [ 150 ] Presidency (1953–1961) Main article: Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the Dwight D. Eisenhower presidency .

Dwight D. Eisenhower takes the Presidential Oath of Office Dwight D. Eisenhower taking the Presidential Oath of Office on January 20, 1953.

Problems playing this file? See media help .

Truman and Eisenhower had minimal discussions about the transition of administrations due to a complete estrangement between them as a result of campaigning.

[ 151 ] Eisenhower selected Joseph M. Dodge as his budget director, then asked Herbert Brownell Jr.

and Lucius D. Clay to make recommendations for his cabinet appointments. He accepted their recommendations without exception; they included John Foster Dulles and George M. Humphrey with whom he developed his closest relationships, as well as Oveta Culp Hobby . His cabinet consisted of several corporate executives and one labor leader, and one journalist dubbed it "eight millionaires and a plumber".

[ 152 ] The cabinet was known for its lack of personal friends, office seekers, or experienced government administrators. He also upgraded the role of the National Security Council in planning all phases of the Cold War.

[ 153 ] Before his inauguration, Eisenhower led a meeting of advisors at Pearl Harbor where they set goals for his first term: balance the budget, end the Korean War, defend vital interests at lower cost through nuclear deterrent, and end price and wage controls.

[ 154 ] He also conducted the first pre-inaugural cabinet meeting in history in late 1952; he used this meeting to articulate his anti-communist Russia policy. His inaugural address was exclusively devoted to foreign policy and included this same philosophy as well as a commitment to foreign trade and the United Nations.

[ 155 ] February 1959 White House portrait Eisenhower made greater use of press conferences than any previous president, holding almost 200 over his two terms. He saw the benefit of maintaining a good relationship with the press, and he saw value in them as a means of direct communication with the American people.

[ 156 ] Throughout his presidency, Eisenhower adhered to a political philosophy of dynamic conservatism.

[ 157 ] He described himself as a " progressive conservative ", [ 158 ] and used terms such as "progressive moderate" and "dynamic conservatism" to describe his approach.

[ 159 ] He continued all the major New Deal programs still in operation, especially Social Security . He expanded its programs and rolled them into the new Cabinet-level agency of the Department of Health, Education and Welfare , while extending benefits to an additional ten million workers. He implemented racial integration in the Armed Services in two years, which had not been completed under Truman.

[ 160 ] In a private letter, Eisenhower wrote: Should any party attempt to abolish social security and eliminate labor laws and farm programs, you would not hear of that party again in our political history. There is a tiny splinter group of course, that believes you can do these things [...] Their number is negligible and they are stupid.

[ 161 ] When the 1954 Congressional elections approached, it became evident that the Republicans were in danger of losing their thin majority in both houses. Eisenhower was among those who blamed the Old Guard for the losses, and he took up the charge to stop suspected efforts by the right wing to take control of the GOP. He then articulated his position as a moderate, progressive Republican: "I have just one purpose ... and that is to build up a strong progressive Republican Party in this country. If the right wing wants a fight, they are going to get it ... before I end up, either this Republican Party will reflect progressivism or I won't be with them anymore." [ 162 ] Eisenhower with heavywight champion Rocky Marciano and World Series champion Joe Dimaggio in 1953 Eisenhower initially planned on serving only one term, but he remained flexible in case leading Republicans wanted him to run again. He was recovering from a heart attack late in September 1955 when he met with his closest advisors to evaluate the GOP's potential candidates; the group concluded that a second term was well advised, and he announced that he would run again in February 1956.

[ 163 ] [ 164 ] Eisenhower was publicly noncommittal about having Nixon as the Vice President on his ticket; the question was an especially important one in light of his heart condition. He personally favored Robert B. Anderson , a Democrat who rejected his offer, so Eisenhower resolved to leave the matter in the hands of the party, which chose Nixon nearly unanimously.

[ 165 ] In 1956, Eisenhower faced Adlai Stevenson again and won by an even larger landslide, with 457 of 531 electoral votes and 57.6 percent of the popular vote. His campaigning was curtailed by health considerations.

[ 166 ] Eisenhower made full use of his valet, chauffeur, and secretarial support; he rarely drove or even dialed a phone number. He was an avid fisherman, golfer, painter, and bridge player.

[ 167 ] On August 26, 1959, he was aboard the maiden flight of Air Force One , which replaced the Columbine as the presidential aircraft.

[ 168 ] Atoms for Peace See also: History of nuclear power and History of nuclear weapons Eisenhower gave the Atoms for Peace speech to the United Nations General Assembly on December 8, 1953, advocating for constructive use of nuclear fission for electrical energy and nuclear medicine instead of nuclear arms race proliferation . The speech led to the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 which allowed the civilian world to develop nuclear fission technology for peaceful and prosperous purposes.

[ 169 ] [ 170 ] Interstate Highway System Main article: Interstate Highway System Remarks in Cadillac Square, Detroit President Eisenhower delivered remarks about the need for a new highway program at Cadillac Square in Detroit on October 29, 1954 Text of speech excerpt Problems playing this file? See media help .

Eisenhower championed and signed the bill that authorized the Interstate Highway System in 1956.

[ 171 ] He justified the project through the Federal Aid Highway Act of 1956 as essential to American security during the Cold War .

Eisenhower's goal to create improved highways was influenced by his involvement in the Army's 1919 Transcontinental Motor Convoy . He was assigned as an observer for the mission, which involved sending a convoy of Army vehicles coast to coast.

[ 172 ] [ 173 ] His subsequent experience with the German autobahn convinced him of the benefits of an Interstate Highway System. The system could also be used as a runway for airplanes, which would be beneficial to war efforts. Franklin D. Roosevelt put this system into place with the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1944 . He thought that an interstate highway system would be beneficial for military operations and would support continued economic growth.

[ 174 ] The legislation initially stalled in Congress over the issuance of bonds to finance the project, but the legislative effort was renewed and Eisenhower signed the law in June 1956.

[ 175 ] ARPA The Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) was put together by Eisenhower and his Science Advisory Committee in early 1958 in response to the successful launch of the first orbital satellite from the Soviet Union, Sputnik 1 . ARPA eventually created the ARPANET which was a predecessor to the internet .

[ 176 ] [ 177 ] Foreign policy Eisenhower with Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser during Nasser's visit to the United Nations in New York, September 1960 Eisenhower with Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru Eisenhower visits the Republic of China and its President Chiang Kai-shek in Taipei.

This section is an excerpt from Foreign policy of the Dwight D. Eisenhower administration .

[ edit ] The United States foreign policy of the Dwight D. Eisenhower administration , from 1953 to 1961, focused on the Cold War with the Soviet Union and its satellites. The United States built up a stockpile of nuclear weapons and nuclear delivery systems to deter military threats and save money while cutting back on expensive Army combat units.  A major uprising broke out in Hungary in 1956; the Eisenhower administration did not become directly involved, but condemned the military invasion by the Soviet Union. Eisenhower sought to reach a nuclear test ban treaty with the Soviet Union, but following the 1960 U-2 incident the Kremlin canceled a scheduled summit in Paris.

As he promised, Eisenhower quickly ended the fighting in Korea , leaving it divided North and South.  The U.S. has kept major forces there ever since to deter North Korea. In 1954, he played a key role in the Senate's defeat of the Bricker Amendment , which would have limited the president's treaty making power and ability to enter into executive agreements with foreign leaders.  The Eisenhower administration used propaganda and covert action extensively, and the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) supported two military coups: the 1953 Iranian coup d'état and the 1954 Guatemalan coup d'état . The administration did not approve the partition of Vietnam at the 1954 Geneva Conference , and directed economic and military aid and advice to South Vietnam . Washington led the establishment of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization as an alliance of anti-Communist states in Southeast Asia . It ended two crises with China over Taiwan .

In 1956, Egyptian President Gamal Abdel Nasser nationalized the Suez Canal , sparking the Suez Crisis , in which a coalition of France, Britain, and Israel attacked Egypt. Concerned about the economic and political impacts of the invasion, Eisenhower had warned the three against any such action. When they invaded anyway he used heavy financial and diplomatic pressures to force a withdrawal. In the aftermath of the crisis, Eisenhower announced the Eisenhower Doctrine , under which any country in the Middle East  could request American economic assistance or aid from American military forces.

The Cuban Revolution broke out during Eisenhower's second term, resulting in the replacement of pro-U.S. military dictator Fulgencio Batista with Fidel Castro . In response to the revolution, the Eisenhower administration broke ties with Cuba and Eisenhower approved a CIA operation to carry out a campaign of terrorist attacks and sabotage , kill civilians, and cause economic damage. The CIA also trained and commanded pilots to bomb civilian airfields. The CIA began preparations for an invasion of Cuba by Cuban expatriates, ultimately resulting in the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion after Eisenhower left office.

Space Race Further information: Space Race In the 1970s, the reverse of the Eisenhower dollar celebrated America's Moon landings, which began 11 years after NASA was created during Eisenhower's presidency.

Eisenhower and the CIA had known since at least January 1957, nine months before Sputnik , that Russia had the capability to launch a small payload into orbit and was likely to do so within a year.

[ 178 ] Eisenhower's support of the nation's fledgling space program was officially modest until the Soviet launch of Sputnik in 1957, gaining the Cold War enemy enormous prestige. He then launched a national campaign that funded not just space exploration but a major strengthening of science and higher education. The Eisenhower administration determined to adopt a non-aggressive policy that would allow "space-crafts of any state to overfly all states, a region free of military posturing and launch Earth satellites to explore space".

[ 179 ] His Open Skies Policy attempted to legitimize illegal Lockheed U-2 flyovers and Project Genetrix while paving the way for spy satellite technology to orbit over sovereign territory, [ 180 ] but Nikolai Bulganin and Nikita Khrushchev declined Eisenhower's proposal at the Geneva conference in July 1955.

[ 181 ] In response to Sputnik being launched in October 1957, Eisenhower created NASA as a civilian space agency in October 1958, signed a landmark science education law, and improved relations with American scientists.

[ 182 ] Fear spread through the United States that the Soviet Union would invade and spread communism , so Eisenhower wanted to not only create a surveillance satellite to detect any threats but ballistic missiles that would protect the United States. In strategic terms, it was Eisenhower who devised the American basic strategy of nuclear deterrence based upon the triad of strategic bombers , land-based intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs), and submarine-launched ballistic missiles (SLBMs).

[ 183 ] NASA planners projected that human spaceflight would pull the United States ahead in the Space Race; however, in 1960, an Ad Hoc Panel on Man-in-Space concluded that "man-in-space can not be justified" and was too costly.

[ 184 ] Eisenhower later resented the space program and its gargantuan price tag—he was quoted as saying, "Anyone who would spend $40 billion in a race to the moon for national prestige is nuts." [ 185 ] Korean War, Free China and Red China In late 1952, Eisenhower went to Korea and discovered a military and political stalemate. Once in office, when the Chinese People's Volunteer Army began a buildup in the Kaesong sanctuary, he considered using nuclear weapons if an armistice was not reached. Whether China was informed of the potential for nuclear force is unknown.

[ 186 ] His earlier military reputation in Europe was effective with the Chinese communists.

[ 187 ] The National Security Council, the Joint Chiefs of Staff , and the Strategic Air Command (SAC) devised detailed plans for nuclear war against Red China.

[ 188 ] With the death of Stalin in March 1953, Russian support for a Chinese communist hard-line weakened and China decided to compromise on the prisoner issue.

[ 189 ] Eisenhower in Korea with General Chung Il-kwon , and Baik Seon-yup , 1952 In July 1953, an armistice took effect with Korea divided along approximately the same boundary as in 1950 . The armistice and boundary remain in effect today. The armistice, which concluded despite opposition from Secretary Dulles, South Korean President Syngman Rhee , and also within Eisenhower's party, has been described by biographer Stephen E. Ambrose as the greatest achievement of the administration. Eisenhower had the insight to realize that unlimited war in the nuclear age was unthinkable, and limited war unwinnable.

[ 189 ] A point of emphasis in Eisenhower's campaign had been his endorsement of a policy of liberation from communism as opposed to a policy of containment. This remained his preference despite the armistice with Korea.

[ 190 ] Throughout his terms Eisenhower took a hard-line attitude toward China, as demanded by conservative Republicans, with the goal of driving a wedge between China and the Soviet Union.

[ 191 ] Eisenhower continued Truman's policy of recognizing the Republic of China (Taiwan) as the legitimate government of China, not the Peking (Beijing) regime. There were localized flare-ups when the People's Liberation Army began shelling the islands of Quemoy and Matsu in September 1954. Eisenhower received recommendations embracing every variation of response; he thought it essential to have every possible option available to him as the crisis unfolded.

[ 192 ] The Sino-American Mutual Defense Treaty with the Republic of China was signed in December 1954. He requested and secured from Congress their "Free China Resolution" in January 1955, which gave Eisenhower unprecedented power in advance to use military force at any level in defense of Free China and the Pescadores. The Resolution bolstered the morale of the Chinese nationalists and signaled to Beijing that the US was committed to holding the line.

[ 192 ] During the First Taiwan Strait crisis , Eisenhower threatened to use nuclear weapons against PRC military targets in Fujian .

[ 193 ] : 89 These threats prompted Mao Zedong to launch China's nuclear weapons program .

[ 193 ] : 89–90 He authorized a series of bomb tests labeled Operation Teapot . Nevertheless, he left the Chinese communists guessing as to the exact nature of his nuclear response. This allowed Eisenhower to accomplish all of his objectives—the end of this communist encroachment, the retention of the Islands by the Chinese nationalists and continued peace.

[ 194 ] Defense of the Republic of China from an invasion remains a core American policy.

[ 195 ] China invited some American reporters to China in 1956, having previously ousted American reporters after the PRC's founding.

[ 196 ] : 115–116 Eisenhower upheld the US ban on travel to China.

[ 196 ] : 116 US newspapers, including The New York Times and The Washington Post criticized the Eisenhower's administration decision as antithetical to the free press.

[ 196 ] : 116 Southeast Asia Further information: United States in the Vietnam War Eisenhower and Secretary of State John Foster Dulles with South Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem , May 1957 Early in 1953, the French asked Eisenhower for help in French Indochina against the Communists, supplied from China, who were fighting the First Indochina War . Eisenhower sent Lt. General John W. O'Daniel to Vietnam to assess the French forces there.

[ 197 ] Chief of Staff Matthew Ridgway dissuaded the President from intervening by presenting a comprehensive estimate of the massive military deployment that would be necessary. Eisenhower stated prophetically that "this war would absorb our troops by divisions." [ 198 ] Eisenhower did provide France with bombers and non-combat personnel. After a few months with no success by the French, he added other aircraft to drop napalm for clearing purposes. Further requests for assistance from the French were agreed to but only on conditions Eisenhower knew were impossible to meet – allied participation and congressional approval.

[ 199 ] When the French fortress of Dien Bien Phu fell to the Vietnamese Communists in May 1954, Eisenhower refused to intervene despite urging from the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs, the Vice President and the head of NCS.

[ 200 ] Eisenhower responded to the French defeat with the formation of the SEATO (Southeast Asia Treaty Organization) Alliance with the UK, France, New Zealand and Australia in defense of Vietnam against communism. At that time the French and Chinese reconvened the Geneva peace talks; Eisenhower agreed the US would participate only as an observer. After France and the Communists agreed to a partition of Vietnam, Eisenhower rejected the agreement, offering military and economic aid to southern Vietnam.

[ 201 ] Ambrose argues that Eisenhower, by not participating in the Geneva agreement, had kept the US out of Vietnam; nevertheless, with the formation of SEATO, he had put the US back into the conflict.

[ 202 ] In late 1954, Gen. J. Lawton Collins was made ambassador to "Free Vietnam", effectively elevating the country to sovereign status. Collins' instructions were to support the leader Ngo Dinh Diem in subverting communism, by helping him to build an army and wage a military campaign.

[ 203 ] In February 1955, Eisenhower dispatched the first American soldiers to Vietnam as military advisors to Diem's army. After Diem announced the formation of the Republic of Vietnam (commonly known as South Vietnam ) in October, Eisenhower immediately recognized the new state and offered military, economic, and technical assistance.

[ 204 ] In the years that followed, Eisenhower increased the number of US military advisors in South Vietnam to 900.

[ 205 ] This was due to North Vietnam 's support of "uprisings" in the south and concern the nation would fall.

[ 201 ] In May 1957 Diem, then President of South Vietnam , made a state visit to the United States. Eisenhower pledged his continued support, and a parade was held in Diem's honor in New York City. Although Diem was publicly praised, in private Secretary of State John Foster Dulles conceded that Diem had been selected because there were no better alternatives.

[ 206 ] After the election of November 1960, Eisenhower, in a briefing with John F. Kennedy, pointed out the communist threat in Southeast Asia as requiring prioritization in the next administration. Eisenhower told Kennedy he considered Laos "the cork in the bottle" with regard to the regional threat.

[ 207 ] Legitimation of Francoist Spain Main article: Pact of Madrid Spanish dictator Francisco Franco and Eisenhower in Madrid in 1959 The Pact of Madrid, signed on September 23, 1953, by Francoist Spain and the United States, was a significant effort to break international isolation of Spain, together with the Concordat of 1953 . This development came at a time when other victorious Allies and much of the rest of the world remained hostile [ b ] to a fascist regime sympathetic to the cause of the former Axis powers and established with Nazi assistance . This accord took the form of three separate executive agreements that pledged the United States to furnish economic and military aid to Spain.

Middle East and Eisenhower doctrine Eisenhower with the Shah of Iran, Mohammad Reza Pahlavi (1959) Even before he was inaugurated Eisenhower accepted a request from the British government to restore the Shah of Iran (Mohammad Reza Pahlavi) to power. He therefore authorized the CIA to overthrow Prime Minister Mohammad Mosaddegh .

[ 209 ] This resulted in increased strategic control over Iranian oil by American and British companies .

[ 210 ] In November 1956, Eisenhower forced an end to the combined British, French and Israeli invasion of Egypt in response to the Suez Crisis , receiving praise from Egyptian president Gamal Abdel Nasser . Simultaneously he condemned the brutal Soviet invasion of Hungary in response to the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 . He publicly disavowed his allies at the United Nations and used financial and diplomatic pressure to make them withdraw from Egypt.

[ 211 ] Eisenhower explicitly defended his strong position against Britain and France in his memoirs, published in 1965.

[ 212 ] After the Suez Crisis, the United States became the protector of unstable friendly governments in the Middle East via the " Eisenhower Doctrine ".

[ 213 ] Designed by Secretary of State Dulles, it held the US would be "prepared to use armed force ... [to counter] aggression from any country controlled by international communism". Further, the US would provide economic and military aid and, if necessary, use military force to stop the spread of communism in the Middle East.

[ 214 ] Eisenhower and Vice President Richard Nixon with King Saud of Saudi Arabia at the Mayflower Hotel in 1957 Eisenhower applied the doctrine in 1957–1958 by dispensing economic aid to Jordan, and by encouraging Syria's neighbors to consider military operations against it. More dramatically, in July 1958, he sent 15,000 Marines and soldiers to Lebanon as part of Operation Blue Bat , a non-combat peacekeeping mission to stabilize the pro-Western government and to prevent a radical revolution.

[ 215 ] The Marines departed three months later. Washington considered the military intervention successful since it brought about regional stability, weakened Soviet influence, and intimidated the Egyptian and Syrian governments, whose anti-West political position had hardened after the Suez Crisis.

[ 215 ] Most Arab countries were skeptical about the "Eisenhower doctrine" because they considered "Zionist imperialism" the real danger. However, they did take the opportunity to obtain free money and weapons. Egypt and Syria, supported by the Soviet Union, openly opposed the initiative. However, Egypt received American aid until the Six-Day War in 1967.

[ 216 ] As the Cold War deepened, Dulles sought to isolate the Soviet Union by building regional alliances against it. Critics sometimes called it " pacto-mania ".

[ 217 ] 1960 U-2 incident This section is an excerpt from 1960 U-2 incident .

[ edit ] The wreckage of the American Lockheed U-2 Dragon Lady Shotdown 65 years ago now on display at the Central Armed Forces Museum in Moscow On 1 May 1960, a United States U-2 spy plane was shot down by the Soviet Air Defence Forces while conducting photographic aerial reconnaissance inside Soviet territory. Flown by American pilot Francis Gary Powers , the aircraft had taken off from Peshawar , Pakistan, and crashed near Sverdlovsk (present-day Yekaterinburg), after being hit by a surface-to-air missile . Powers parachuted to the ground and was captured.

Initially, American authorities claimed the incident involved the loss of a civilian weather research aircraft operated by NASA , but were forced to admit the mission's true purpose a few days later after the Soviet government produced the captured pilot and parts of the U-2's surveillance equipment, including photographs of Soviet military bases.

The incident occurred during the tenures of American president Dwight D. Eisenhower and Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev , around two weeks before the scheduled opening of an east–west summit in Paris , France. Khrushchev and Eisenhower had met face-to-face at Camp David in Maryland in September 1959, and the seeming thaw in U.S.-Soviet relations had raised hopes globally for a peaceful resolution to the Cold War . The U-2 incident shattered the amiable "Spirit of Camp David" that had prevailed for eight months, prompting the cancellation of the summit in Paris and embarrassing the U.S. on the international stage. The Pakistani government issued a formal apology to the Soviet Union for its role in the mission.

After his capture, Powers was convicted of espionage and sentenced to three years of imprisonment plus seven years of hard labour ; he was released two years later, in February 1962, in a prisoner exchange for Soviet intelligence officer Rudolf Abel .

Civil rights While President Truman's 1948 Executive Order 9981 had begun the process of desegregating the Armed Forces , actual implementation had been slow. Eisenhower made clear his stance in his first State of the Union address in February 1953, saying "I propose to use whatever authority exists in the office of the President to end segregation in the District of Columbia, including the Federal Government , and any segregation in the Armed Forces".

[ 218 ] When he encountered opposition from the services, he used government control of military spending to force the change through, stating "Wherever Federal Funds are expended ..., I do not see how any American can justify ... a discrimination in the expenditure of those funds".

[ 219 ] When Robert B. Anderson , Eisenhower's first Secretary of the Navy , argued that the US Navy must recognize the "customs and usages prevailing in certain geographic areas of our country which the Navy had no part in creating," Eisenhower overruled him: "We have not taken and we shall not take a single backward step. There must be no second class citizens in this country." [ 220 ] The administration declared racial discrimination a national security issue, as Communists around the world used the racial discrimination and history of violence in the US as a point of propaganda attack.

[ 221 ] Eisenhower told Washington, D.C.

officials to make the city a model for the rest of the country in integrating black and white public-school children.

[ 222 ] [ 223 ] He proposed to Congress the Civil Rights Acts of 1957 and 1960 and signed those acts into law. The 1957 act for the first time established a permanent civil rights office inside the Justice Department and a Civil Rights Commission to hear testimony about abuses of voting rights. Although both acts were much weaker than subsequent civil rights legislation, they constituted the first significant civil rights acts since 1875 .

[ 224 ] In 1957, Arkansas refused to honor a federal court order to integrate their public school system stemming from the Brown decision. Eisenhower demanded that Arkansas governor Orval Faubus obey the court order. When Faubus balked, the president placed the Arkansas National Guard under federal control and sent in the 101st Airborne Division . They protected nine black students ' entry to Little Rock Central High School , an all-white public school, marking the first time since the Reconstruction Era the federal government had used federal troops in the South to enforce the Constitution.

[ 225 ] : 191 Martin Luther King Jr.

wrote to Eisenhower to thank him for his actions, writing "The overwhelming majority of southerners, Negro and white, stand firmly behind your resolute action to restore law and order in Little Rock ".

[ 225 ] : 206 LGBTQ rights See also: Lavender Scare and Executive Order 10450 Eisenhower's administration contributed to the anti-gay McCarthyist Lavender Scare [ 226 ] [ 227 ] with Eisenhower issuing Executive Order 10450 in his first year in office in 1953.

[ 228 ] The order subjected all federal employees to invasive in-depth investigations and interviews of their friends and family in a witch hunt to fire (in large part) lesbian, gay, and bisexual federal employees. The indifference of Eisenhower to the extreme application of his order allowed for mass persecution of queer people within federal agencies, resulting in thousands of job losses, public outing of sexual orientation , and some suicides .

[ 226 ] During Eisenhower's two presidential terms, thousands of applicants were barred from federal employment and over 5,000 to 10,000 federal employees were fired under suspicions of being homosexual.

[ 229 ] [ 230 ] [ 226 ] From 1947 to 1961 the number of firings based on sexual orientation were far greater than those for membership in the Communist Party , [ 229 ] and government officials intentionally campaigned to make "homosexual" synonymous with "Communist traitor" such that non-heterosexual people were treated as a national security threat.

[ 231 ] Relations with Congress Official White House portrait of Eisenhower, c.

1960 Eisenhower had a Republican Congress for only his first two years in office; in the Senate, Republicans held the majority by a one-vote margin. Despite being Eisenhower's political opponent for the 1952 Republican presidential nomination, Senator Majority Leader Robert A. Taft assisted Eisenhower a great deal by promoting the President's proposals among the "Old Guard" Republican Senators. Taft's death in July 1953—six months into Eisenhower's presidency—affected Eisenhower both personally and professionally. The President noted he had lost "a dear friend" with Taft's passing. Eisenhower disliked Taft's successor as Majority Leader, Senator William Knowland , and the relationship between the two men led to tension between the Senate and the White House.

[ 232 ] This prevented Eisenhower from openly condemning Joseph McCarthy's highly criticized methods against communism. To facilitate relations with Congress, Eisenhower decided to ignore McCarthy's controversies and thereby deprive them of more energy from the involvement of the White House. This position drew criticism from a number of corners.

[ 233 ] In late 1953, McCarthy declared on national television that the employment of communists within the government was a menace and would be a pivotal issue in the 1954 Senate elections . Eisenhower was urged to respond directly and specify the various measures he had taken to purge the government of communists.

[ 234 ] Among Eisenhower's objectives in not directly confronting McCarthy was to prevent McCarthy from dragging the Atomic Energy Commission (AEC) into McCarthy's witchhunt, which might interfere with the AEC's work on hydrogen bombs and other weapons programs.

[ 235 ] [ 236 ] In December 1953, Eisenhower learned that nuclear scientist J. Robert Oppenheimer had been accused of being a spy for the Soviet Union .

[ 237 ] Although Eisenhower never really believed these allegations, [ 238 ] in January 1954 he ordered that "a blank wall" be placed between Oppenheimer and all defense-related activities.

[ 239 ] The Oppenheimer security hearing later that year resulted in the physicist losing his security clearance.

[ 240 ] The matter was controversial at the time and remained so in later years, with Oppenheimer achieving a certain martyrdom.

[ 236 ] The case would reflect poorly on Eisenhower, but the president had never examined it in any detail and had instead relied excessively upon the advice of his subordinates, especially that of AEC chairman Lewis Strauss .

[ 241 ] Eisenhower later suffered a major political defeat when his nomination of Strauss to be Secretary of Commerce was defeated in the Senate in 1959, in part due to Strauss's role in the Oppenheimer matter.

[ 242 ] In May 1954, McCarthy threatened to issue subpoenas to White House personnel. Eisenhower was furious, and issued an order as follows: "It is essential to efficient and effective administration that employees of the Executive Branch be in a position to be completely candid in advising with each other on official matters ... it is not in the public interest that any of their conversations or communications, or any documents or reproductions, concerning such advice be disclosed." This was an unprecedented step by Eisenhower to protect communication beyond the confines of a cabinet meeting, and soon became a tradition known as executive privilege . Eisenhower's denial of McCarthy's access to his staff reduced McCarthy's hearings to rants about trivial matters and contributed to his ultimate downfall.

[ 243 ] In early 1954, the Old Guard put forward a constitutional amendment, called the Bricker Amendment , which would curtail international agreements by the Chief Executive, such as the Yalta Agreements . Eisenhower opposed the measure.

[ 244 ] The Old Guard agreed with Eisenhower on the development and ownership of nuclear reactors by private enterprises, which the Democrats opposed. The President succeeded in getting legislation creating a system of licensure for nuclear plants by the AEC.

[ 245 ] The Democrats gained a majority in both houses in the 1954 election.

[ 246 ] Eisenhower had to work with the Democratic Majority Leader Lyndon B. Johnson (later US president) in the Senate and Speaker Sam Rayburn in the House.

Joe Martin , the Republican Speaker from 1947 to 1949 and again from 1953 to 1955, wrote that Eisenhower "never surrounded himself with assistants who could solve political problems with professional skill. There were exceptions, Leonard W. Hall , for example, who as chairman of the Republican National Committee tried to open the administration's eyes to the political facts of life, with occasional success. However, these exceptions were not enough to right the balance." [ 247 ] Speaker Martin concluded that Eisenhower worked too much through subordinates in dealing with Congress, with results, "often the reverse of what he has desired" because Members of Congress, "resent having some young fellow who was picked up by the White House without ever having been elected to office himself coming around and telling them 'The Chief wants this'. The administration never made use of many Republicans of consequence whose services in one form or another would have been available for the asking." [ 247 ] Eisenhower was relatively active with legislative vetoes , with 181 vetoes of which only two were overridden.

[ 248 ] Judicial appointments Supreme Court Main articles: Dwight D. Eisenhower Supreme Court candidates and Dwight D. Eisenhower judicial appointments Eisenhower appointed the following Justices to the Supreme Court of the United States : Earl Warren , 1953 ( Chief Justice ) John Marshall Harlan II , 1954 William J. Brennan , 1956 Charles Evans Whittaker , 1957 Potter Stewart , 1958 Whittaker was unsuited for the role and retired in 1962, after Eisenhower's presidency had ended. Stewart and Harlan were conservative Republicans, while Brennan was a Democrat who became a leading voice for liberalism.

[ 249 ] In selecting a Chief Justice, Eisenhower looked for an experienced jurist who could appeal to liberals in the party as well as law-and-order conservatives, noting privately that Warren "represents the kind of political, economic, and social thinking that I believe we need on the Supreme Court ... He has a national name for integrity, uprightness, and courage that, again, I believe we need on the Court".

[ 250 ] States admitted to the Union Two states were admitted to the Union during Eisenhower's presidency.

Alaska – January 3, 1959 (49th state) Hawaii – August 21, 1959 (50th state) Health issues Eisenhower began chain smoking cigarettes at West Point, often three or four packs a day. He joked that he "gave [himself] an order" to stop cold turkey in 1949. However, Evan Thomas says the true story was more complex. At first, he removed cigarettes and ashtrays , but that did not work. He told a friend: I decided to make a game of the whole business and try to achieve a feeling of some superiority ... So I stuffed cigarettes in every pocket, put them around my office on the desk ... [and] made it a practice to offer a cigarette to anyone who came in ... while mentally reminding myself as I sat down, "I do not have to do what that poor fellow is doing." [ 251 ] He was the first president to release information about his health and medical records while in office, but people around him deliberately misled the public about his health. On September 24, 1955, while vacationing in Colorado , he had a serious heart attack . While Eisenhower convalesced at Fitzsimons Army Medical Center , [ 252 ] Howard McCrum Snyder , his personal physician, misdiagnosed the symptoms as indigestion , and failed to call in help that was urgently needed. Snyder later falsified his own records to cover his blunder and to allow Eisenhower to imply that he was healthy enough to do his job.

[ 253 ] [ 254 ] [ 255 ] The heart attack required six weeks' hospitalization, during which time Nixon, Dulles, and White House Chief of Staff Sherman Adams assumed administrative duties and provided communication with the president.

[ 256 ] He was treated by Paul Dudley White , a cardiologist with a national reputation, who regularly informed the press of the president's progress. Snyder recommended a second presidential term as essential to his recovery.

[ 257 ] As a consequence of his heart attack, Eisenhower developed a left ventricular aneurysm , which caused a mild stroke during a cabinet meeting on November 25, 1957, when Eisenhower suddenly found himself unable to move his right hand or to speak. The president also suffered from Crohn's disease , [ 258 ] [ 259 ] which necessitated surgery for a bowel obstruction on June 9, 1956.

[ 260 ] To treat the intestinal block, surgeons bypassed about ten inches of his small intestine .

[ 261 ] His scheduled meeting with Indian Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru was postponed so he could recover at his farm.

[ 262 ] He was still recovering from this operation during the Suez Crisis. Eisenhower's health issues forced him to give up smoking and make some changes to his diet, but he still drank alcohol. During a visit to England on August 29, 1959, he complained of dizziness and had to have his blood pressure checked; however, his physician, Snyder, recalled that before dinner at the prime minister's manor house Chequers the next day, Eisenhower "drank several gin-and-tonics , and one or two gins on the rocks ... three or four wines with the dinner".

[ 263 ] Eisenhower's health during the last three years of his second term in office was relatively good. After leaving the White House, he suffered several additional and ultimately crippling heart attacks.

[ 264 ] A severe heart attack in August 1965 largely ended his participation in public affairs.

[ 3 ] On December 12, 1966, his gallbladder was removed, containing 16 gallstones .

[ 264 ] After Eisenhower's death in 1969, an autopsy revealed an undiagnosed adrenal pheochromocytoma , [ 265 ] a benign adrenalin-secreting tumor that may have made him more vulnerable to heart disease . Eisenhower had seven heart attacks from 1955 until his death.

[ 264 ] End of presidency The 22nd Amendment to the US Constitution , which set a two-term limit on the presidency, was ratified in 1951. Eisenhower was the first president constitutionally prevented from serving a third term.

Eisenhower was also the first outgoing president to come under the protection of the Former Presidents Act . Under the act, Eisenhower was entitled to a lifetime pension, state-provided staff and a Secret Service security detail.

[ 266 ] In the 1960 election to choose his successor, Eisenhower endorsed Nixon over Democrat John F. Kennedy. He told friends, "I will do almost anything to avoid turning my chair and country over to Kennedy." [ 142 ] He actively campaigned for Nixon in the final days, although he may have done Nixon some harm. When asked by reporters at the end of a televised press conference to list one of Nixon's policy ideas he had adopted, Eisenhower joked, "If you give me a week, I might think of one. I don't remember." Kennedy's campaign used the quote in one of its campaign commercials. Nixon narrowly lost to Kennedy. Eisenhower, who was, at 70, the oldest president to date, was succeeded by 43-year-old Kennedy, the youngest elected president.

[ 142 ] It was originally intended for Eisenhower to have a more active role in the campaign as he wanted to respond to attacks Kennedy made on his administration. However, First Lady Mamie Eisenhower expressed concern to Second Lady Pat Nixon about the strain campaigning would put on his heart, and wanted the president to withdraw, without letting him know of her intervention. Vice President Nixon himself was informed by Major General Howard Snyder, the White House physician, that he could not approve a heavy campaign schedule for the president, whose health problems had been exacerbated by Kennedy's attacks. Nixon then convinced Eisenhower not to go ahead with the expanded campaign schedule and limit himself to the original schedule. Nixon reflected that if Eisenhower had carried out his expanded campaign schedule, he might have had a decisive impact on the outcome of the election, especially in states that Kennedy won with razor-thin margins. Mamie did not tell Dwight why Nixon changed his mind on Dwight's campaigning until years later.

[ 267 ] Eisenhower sharing a light moment  with President-elect John F. Kennedy during their meeting in the Oval Office at White House Eisenhower's farewell address, January 17, 1961 On January 17, 1961, Eisenhower gave his final televised Address to the Nation from the Oval Office .

[ 268 ] In his farewell speech , Eisenhower raised the issue of the Cold War and role of the armed forces. He described the Cold War: "We face a hostile ideology global in scope, atheistic in character, ruthless in purpose and insidious in method ..." and warned about what he saw as unjustified government spending proposals. He continued with a warning that "we must guard against the acquisition of unwarranted influence, whether sought or unsought, by the military–industrial complex." [ 268 ] Eisenhower elaborated, "we recognize the imperative need for this development ... the potential for the disastrous rise of misplaced power exists and will persist ... Only an alert and knowledgeable citizenry can compel the proper meshing of the huge industrial and military machinery of defense with our peaceful methods and goals, so that security and liberty may prosper together." [ 268 ] Because of legal issues related to holding a military rank while in a civilian office, Eisenhower had resigned his permanent commission as General of the Army before assuming the presidency. Upon completion of his presidential term, his commission was reactivated by Congress.

[ 3 ] [ 269 ] Post-presidency (1961–1969) President Lyndon Johnson with Eisenhower aboard Air Force One in October 1965 Eisenhower's funeral service Graves of Dwight D. Eisenhower, Doud Dwight "Icky" Eisenhower and Mamie Eisenhower in Abilene, Kansas Following the presidency, Eisenhower moved to the place where he and Mamie had spent much of their post-war time, a working farm adjacent to the battlefield at Gettysburg, Pennsylvania .

[ 270 ] [ 271 ] They also maintained a retirement home in Palm Desert, California .

[ 272 ] After leaving office, Eisenhower did not completely retreat from political life. He flew to San Antonio, where he had been stationed years earlier, to support John W. Goode , the unsuccessful Republican candidate against the Democrat Henry B. Gonzalez for Texas's 20th congressional district seat.

[ 273 ] He addressed the 1964 Republican National Convention , in San Francisco, and appeared with party nominee Barry Goldwater in a campaign commercial.

[ 274 ] That endorsement came somewhat reluctantly, because Goldwater had in the late 1950s criticized Eisenhower's administration as "a dime-store New Deal".

[ 275 ] On January 20, 1969, the day Nixon was inaugurated as President , Eisenhower issued a statement praising his former vice president and calling it a "day for rejoicing".

[ 276 ] Death At 12:25 p.m. on March 28, 1969, Eisenhower died from congestive heart failure at Walter Reed Army Medical Center in Washington, D.C., at age 78. His last words were: "I've always loved my wife, my children, and my grandchildren, and I've always loved my country. I want to go. God, take me." [ 277 ] The following day, his body was moved to the Washington National Cathedral 's Bethlehem Chapel, where he lay in repose for 28 hours.

[ 278 ] He was then transported to the United States Capitol , where he lay in state in the Capitol Rotunda on March 30 and 31.

[ 279 ] A state funeral was conducted at the Washington National Cathedral on March 31.

[ 280 ] The president and first lady, Richard and Pat Nixon, attended, as did former president Lyndon B. Johnson. Former President Harry S. Truman was unable to attend due to a vacation.

[ clarification needed ] Also among the 2,000 guests invited were UN Secretary-General U Thant and 191 foreign delegates from 78 countries, including 10 foreign heads of state and government —among them President Charles de Gaulle of France, who was in the United States for the first time since the state funeral of John F. Kennedy , [ 281 ] Chancellor Kurt-Georg Kiesinger of West Germany, King Baudouin of Belgium and Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi of Iran.

[ 280 ] The service included the singing of Faure's "The Palms", and the playing of the hymn " Onward, Christian Soldiers ".

[ 282 ] That evening, Eisenhower's body was placed on a special funeral train for its journey from the capital to his hometown of Abilene, Kansas . First incorporated into President Abraham Lincoln's funeral in 1865, a funeral train would not be part of a U.S. state funeral again until 2018 .

[ 283 ] On April 2, 1969, Eisenhower was buried inside the Place of Meditation, the chapel on the grounds of the Eisenhower Presidential Center in Abilene. As requested, he was buried in a Government Issue casket, wearing his World War II uniform , decorated with Army Distinguished Service Medal with three oak leaf clusters, Navy Distinguished Service Medal, and the Legion of Merit. Buried alongside Eisenhower are his son Doud, who died at age 3 in 1921, and wife Mamie, who died in 1979.

[ 278 ] President Richard Nixon eulogized Eisenhower in 1969, saying: Some men are considered great because they lead great armies or they lead powerful nations. For eight years now, Dwight Eisenhower has neither commanded an army nor led a nation; and yet he remained through his final days the world's most admired and respected man, truly the first citizen of the world.

[ 284 ] Legacy and memory Public and scholarly assessments A statue of Dwight D. Eisenhower by Jim Brothers stands in the rotunda of the United States Capitol in Washington, D.C.

During his two terms as president, Eisenhower's approval ratings were consistently high, only briefly falling below 50 percent in 1958 and again in 1960.

[ 285 ] His overall average of 63 percent in the Gallup poll remains the second highest in history.

[ 286 ] With the popularity of his successor, John F. Kennedy, Eisenhower's reputation declined in the years after he left office. He was widely seen by critics as an inactive, uninspiring, golf-playing president, which was in stark contrast to Kennedy, who was 26 years his junior. Critics also compared Eisenhower with the likes of Calvin Coolidge as a "do nothing president".

[ 287 ] Despite his unprecedented use of Army troops to enforce a federal desegregation order at Central High School in Little Rock, Eisenhower was criticized for his reluctance to support the civil rights movement to the degree that activists wanted. Eisenhower also attracted criticism for his handling of the 1960 U-2 incident and the associated international embarrassment, [ 288 ] [ 289 ] for the Soviet Union's perceived leadership in the nuclear arms race and the Space Race , and for his failure to publicly oppose McCarthyism .

[ 290 ] In particular, Eisenhower was criticized for failing to defend George C. Marshall from attacks by Joseph McCarthy , though he privately deplored McCarthy's tactics.

[ 291 ] Following the access of Eisenhower's private papers, his reputation changed amongst presidential historians.

[ 292 ] [ 293 ] [ 294 ] Historian John Lewis Gaddis has summarized a more recent turnaround in evaluations by historians: Historians long ago abandoned the view that Eisenhower's was a failed presidency. He did, after all, end the Korean War without getting into any others. He stabilized, and did not escalate, the Soviet–American rivalry. He strengthened European alliances while withdrawing support from European colonialism. He rescued the Republican Party from isolationism and McCarthyism. He maintained prosperity, balanced the budget, promoted technological innovation, facilitated (if reluctantly) the civil rights movement and warned, in the most memorable farewell address since Washington's, of a "military–industrial complex" that could endanger the nation's liberties. Not until Reagan would another president leave office with so strong a sense of having accomplished what he set out to do.

[ 295 ] Since 1982, scholars and historians have typically ranked Eisenhower among the ten best US presidents.

[ 296 ] Rexford Tugwell , a top aide to Franklin Roosevelt, referred to Eisenhower as "the least partisan president since George Washington ." Historian Garry Wills called Eisenhower "a political genius" for making difficult foreign policy goals "look easy" to the general public to prevent further stress.

[ 286 ] President John F. Kennedy meets with General Eisenhower at Camp David , April 22, 1961, three days after the failed Bay of Pigs Invasion .

Political practice Although conservatism in politics was strong during the 1950s, and Eisenhower generally espoused conservative sentiments, his administration concerned itself mostly with foreign affairs and pursued a hands-off domestic policy. Eisenhower looked to moderation and cooperation as a means of governance, which he dubbed "The Middle Way".

[ 297 ] [ 298 ] Although he sought to slow or contain the New Deal and other federal programs, he did not attempt to repeal them outright. In doing so, Eisenhower was popular among the liberal wing of the Republican Party.

[ 297 ] Conservative critics of his administration thought that he did not do enough to advance the goals of the right; according to Hans Morgenthau , "Eisenhower's victories were but accidents without consequence in the history of the Republican party." [ 299 ] Since the 19th century, many if not all presidents were assisted by a central figure or "gatekeeper", sometimes described as the president's private secretary, sometimes with no official title.

[ 300 ] Eisenhower formalized this role, introducing the office of White House Chief of Staff – an idea he borrowed from the United States Army. Every president after Lyndon Johnson has appointed staff to this position.

[ citation needed ] As president, Eisenhower also initiated the " up or out " policy that still prevails in the US military. Officers who are passed over for promotion twice are then usually honorably but quickly discharged to make way for younger and more able officers.

[ citation needed ] On December 20, 1944, Eisenhower was appointed to the rank of General of the Army , placing him in the company of George Marshall, Henry "Hap" Arnold , and Douglas MacArthur , the only four men to achieve the rank in World War II. Along with Omar Bradley, they were the only five men to achieve the rank since the August 5, 1888, death of Philip Sheridan , and the only five men to hold the rank of five-star general . The rank was created by an Act of Congress on a temporary basis, when Public Law 78-482 was passed on December 14, 1944, [ 301 ] as a temporary rank, subject to reversion to permanent rank six months after the end of the war. The temporary rank was declared permanent on March 23, 1946, by Public Law 333 of the 79th Congress , which also awarded full pay and allowances in the grade to those on the retired list.

[ 302 ] [ 303 ] It was created to give the most senior American commanders parity of rank with their British counterparts holding the ranks of field marshal and admiral of the fleet .

[ citation needed ] Frank Gasparro 's obverse design (left) and reverse design (right) of the Presidential Medal of Appreciation award during Eisenhower's official visit to the State of Hawaii from June 20 to 25, 1960 Eisenhower founded People to People International in 1956, believing that citizen interaction would promote cultural interaction and world peace . The program includes a student ambassador component , which sends American youth on educational trips to other countries.

[ 304 ] During his second term as president, Eisenhower awarded a series of specially designed US Mint presidential appreciation medals. Eisenhower presented the medal to individuals as an expression of his appreciation.

[ 305 ] The development of the appreciation medals was initiated by the White House and executed by the United States Mint , through the Philadelphia Mint . The medals were struck from September 1958 through October 1960. A total of twenty designs are cataloged with a total mintage of 9,858. Prior to the end of his second term as president, 1,451 medals were turned in to the Bureau of the Mint and destroyed.

[ 305 ] The Eisenhower appreciation medals are part of the Presidential Medal of Appreciation Award Medal Series.

[ 305 ] Tributes and memorials Main article: List of memorials to Dwight D. Eisenhower The Eisenhower dollar was the official dollar coin from 1971 to 1978.

The Interstate Highway System is officially known as the "Dwight D. Eisenhower National System of Interstate and Defense Highways". It was inspired in part by Eisenhower's experiences in World War II, where he recognized the advantages of the autobahn system in Germany.

[ 174 ] Commemorative signs reading "Eisenhower Interstate System" and bearing Eisenhower's permanent 5-star rank insignia were introduced in 1993 and now are displayed throughout the Interstate System. Several highways are also named for him, including the Eisenhower Expressway (Interstate 290) near Chicago, the Eisenhower Tunnel on Interstate 70 west of Denver , and Interstate 80 in California .

[ 306 ] Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy is a senior war college of the Department of Defense's National Defense University in Washington, DC. Eisenhower graduated from this school when it was known as the Army Industrial College.

[ citation needed ] Eisenhower was honored on the Eisenhower dollar , minted from 1971 to 1978. His centenary was honored on the Eisenhower commemorative dollar issued in 1990.

[ 307 ] In 1969 four major record companies – ABC Records , MGM Records , Buddha Records and Caedmon Audio – released tribute albums in Eisenhower's honor.

[ 308 ] In 1999, the United States Congress created the Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial Commission, to create an enduring national memorial in Washington, D.C. In 2009 the commission chose the architect Frank Gehry to design the memorial.

[ 309 ] [ 310 ] The groundbreaking ceremony of the memorial was held on November 3, 2017, and was dedicated on September 17, 2020.

[ 311 ] [ 312 ] It stands on a 4-acre (1.6 ha) site near the National Mall on Maryland Avenue, across the street from the National Air and Space Museum .

[ 313 ] In December 1999 he was listed on Gallup's List of Most Widely Admired People of the 20th century . In 2009 he was named to the World Golf Hall of Fame in the Lifetime Achievement category for his contributions to the sport.

[ 314 ] In 1973, he was inducted into the Hall of Great Westerners of the National Cowboy & Western Heritage Museum .

[ 315 ] On October 27, 2023, Fort Gordon was redesignated Fort Eisenhower .

[ c ] [ 317 ] [ 318 ] Honors Awards and decorations The star of the Soviet Order of Victory awarded to Eisenhower [ 319 ] The coat of arms granted to Eisenhower upon his incorporation as a knight of the Danish Order of the Elephant in 1950.

[ 320 ] The anvil represents the fact that his name is derived from the German for "iron hewer", making these an example of canting arms .

US military decorations [ 321 ] Army Distinguished Service Medal w/ 4 oak leaf clusters Navy Distinguished Service Medal Legion of Merit US service medals [ 321 ] Mexican Border Service Medal World War I Victory Medal American Defense Service Medal European–African–Middle Eastern Campaign Medal w/ 7 campaign stars World War II Victory Medal Army of Occupation Medal w/ "Germany" clasp National Defense Service Medal w/ 1 service star International and foreign awards [ 322 ] Order of the Liberator San Martin , Grand Cross (Argentina) Grand Decoration of Honour in Gold with Sash (Austria) [ 323 ] Order of Leopold , Grand Cordon (Belgium) – 1945 Croix de guerre w/ palm (Belgium) Order of the Southern Cross , Grand Cross (Brazil) Order of Military Merit (Brazil) , Grand Cross Order of Aeronautical Merit , Grand Cross (Brazil) War Medal (Brazil) Campaign Medal (Brazil) Order of Merit , Grand Cross (Chile) Order of the Cloud and Banner , with Special Grand Cordon, (China) Military Order of the White Lion , Grand Cross (Czechoslovakia) War Cross 1939–1945 ( Czechoslovakia ) Order of the Elephant , Knight (Denmark) – December 15, 1945 Order of Abdon Calderón , First Class (Ecuador) Order of Ismail , Grand Cordon (Egypt) Order of Solomon , Knight Grand Cross with Cordon ( Ethiopia ) Order of the Queen of Sheba , Member ( Ethiopia ) Legion of Honour , Grand Cross (France) – 1943 Order of Liberation , Companion (France) Military Medal (France) [ 324 ] Croix de guerre w/ palm (France) Royal Order of George I , Knight Grand Cross with Swords ( Greece ) Order of the Redeemer , Knight Grand Cross ( Greece ) Cross of Military Merit , First Class (Guatemala) National Order of Honour and Merit , Grand Cross with Gold Badge (Haiti) Order of the Holy Sepulchre , Knight Grand Cross ( Holy See ) Military Order of Italy , Knight Grand Cross (Italy) Order of the Chrysanthemum , Collar (Japan) Order of the Oak Crown , Grand Cross (Luxembourg) Military Medal (Luxembourg) Order pro merito Melitensi , KGC ( Sovereign Military Order of Malta ) Order of the Aztec Eagle , Collar (Mexico) – 1945 Medal of Military Merit (Mexico) Medal of Civic Merit (Mexico) Order of Muhammad , (Morocco) Order of Ouissam Alaouite , Grand Cross (Morocco) Order of the Netherlands Lion , Knight Grand Cross (Netherlands) – October 6, 1945 Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav , Grand Cross (Norway) Order of Nishan-e-Pakistan , First Class (Pakistan) – December 7, 1957 Order of Manuel Amador Guerrero , Grand Officer (Panama) Orden Vasco Núñez de Balboa , Grand Cross (Panama) Order of Sikatuna , Grand Collar (Philippines) Legion of Honor (Philippines) , Chief Commander (Philippines) Distinguished Service Star , (Philippines) Order of Polonia Restituta , Grand Cross (Poland) Order of Virtuti Militari , First Class (Poland) Cross of Grunwald , First Class (Poland) Order of the Royal House of Chakri , Knight (Thailand) Order of Glory , Grand Cordon (Tunisia) Order of the Bath , Knight Grand Cross (United Kingdom) Military Division 1945 Civil Division 1957 Order of Merit (United Kingdom) Member Military Division June 12, 1945 Africa Star , with 8th Army clasp (United Kingdom) War Medal 1939–1945 (United Kingdom) Order of Victory (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) [ 325 ] Order of Suvorov First Class (Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) [ 325 ] The Royal Yugoslav Commemorative War Cross ( Yugoslavia ) Freedom of the City Eisenhower received the Freedom honor from several locations, including: Freedom of the City of London on June 12, 1945 [ 326 ] [ 327 ] Freedom of the City of Belfast on August 24, 1945 [ 328 ] Freedom of the City of Edinburgh in 1946 [ 329 ] Freedom of the Burgh of Maybole in October 1946 [ 330 ] Honorary degrees Eisenhower received many honorary degrees from universities and colleges around the world. These included: Location Date School Degree Gave commencement address Northern Ireland August 24, 1945 Queen's University Belfast Doctor of Laws (LL.D) [ 328 ] [ 331 ] England 1945 University of Oxford Doctor of Civil Law (DCL) [ 332 ] Massachusetts 1946 Harvard University Doctor of Laws (LL.D) [ 333 ] Pennsylvania 1946 Gettysburg College Doctorate [ 334 ] Ontario 1946 University of Toronto Doctor of Laws (LL.D) [ 335 ] Pennsylvania 1947 University of Pennsylvania Doctor of Laws (LL.D) [ 336 ] Connecticut 1948 Yale University Doctor of Laws (LL.D) [ 337 ] New York 1950 Hofstra University Doctorate [ 338 ] New Hampshire June 14, 1953 Dartmouth College Doctorate Yes [ 339 ] Washington, D.C.

November 19, 1953 Catholic University of America Doctor of Laws (LL.D) [ 340 ] Virginia 1953 College of William and Mary Doctor of Laws (LL.D) Illinois 1954 Northwestern University Doctor of Laws (LL.D) [ 341 ] Maryland June 7, 1954 Washington College Doctor of Laws (LL.D) [ 342 ] Yes Maryland 1958 Johns Hopkins University Doctor of Laws (LL.D) [ 343 ] India December 17, 1959 University of Delhi Doctor of Laws (LL.D) [ 344 ] Indiana June 5, 1960 University of Notre Dame Doctor of Laws (LL.D) [ 345 ] New York June 20, 1964 Bard College Doctor of Laws (LL.D) [ 346 ] Iowa 1965 Grinnell College Doctor of Laws (LL.D) [ 347 ] Ohio October 5, 1965 Ohio University Doctor of Humane Letters (DHL) [ 348 ] Yes Promotions No insignia Cadet , United States Military Academy: June 14, 1911 No pin insignia in 1915 Second Lieutenant , Regular Army : June 12, 1915 First Lieutenant , Regular Army: July 1, 1916 Captain , Regular Army: May 15, 1917 Major , National Army : June 17, 1918 Lieutenant Colonel , National Army: October 20, 1918 Captain , Regular Army: June 30, 1920 (Reverted to permanent rank.) Major , Regular Army: July 2, 1920 Captain , Regular Army: November 4, 1922 (Discharged as major and appointed as captain due to reduction of Army.) Major , Regular Army: August 26, 1924 Lieutenant Colonel , Regular Army: July 1, 1936 Colonel , Army of the United States : March 6, 1941 Brigadier General , Army of the United States: September 29, 1941 (temporary) Major General , Army of the United States: March 27, 1942 (temporary) Lieutenant General , Army of the United States: July 7, 1942 (temporary) General , Army of the United States: February 11, 1943 (temporary) Brigadier General , Regular Army: August 30, 1943 Major General , Regular Army: August 30, 1943 General of the Army , Army of the United States: December 20, 1944 General of the Army , Regular Army: April 11, 1946 See also " And I don't care what it is ", phrase on religion by Eisenhower, 1952 Atoms for Peace , speech to the UN General Assembly, 1953 Committee on Scientists and Engineers Eisenhower baseball controversy Eisenhower method for time management Eisenhower National Historic Site Eisenhower Presidential Center Ike: Countdown to D-Day , American television film, 2004 Kay Summersby , chauffeur and secretary People to People Student Ambassador Program General Historical rankings of presidents of the United States History of the United States (1945–1964) List of presidents of the United States List of presidents of the United States by previous experience Notes ^ Pronounced / ˈ aɪ z ən h aʊ .

ər / ⓘ EYE -zən-how-ər .

^ For the 1946 United Nations condemnation [ 208 ] of the Francoist regime, see " Spanish Question " ^ Redesignation to Fort Eisenhower was on October 27, 2023.

[ 316 ] References Citations ^ Ferrell, Robert H. (1990).

"Eisenhower Was a Democrat" (PDF) .

Kansas History .

13 : 134 . Retrieved June 2, 2024 .

^ "The Eisenhowers" .

Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum and Boyhood Home .

Archived from the original on August 18, 2021 . Retrieved October 1, 2021 .

^ a b c "Post-presidential years" . The Eisenhower Presidential Library and Museum. Archived from the original on October 23, 2013 . Retrieved September 5, 2012 .

^ a b c d e f Barnett, Lincoln (November 9, 1942).

"General "Ike" Eisenhower" .

Life . p. 112 . Retrieved May 31, 2011 .

^ Korda, Michael (2007).

"Ike: An American Hero" . Harper Collins. p. 63.

ISBN 9780061744969 . Retrieved July 22, 2012 .

^ a b Ambrose 1983 , pp. 16–18 ^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 19 ^ D'Este, Carlo (2003).

Eisenhower: A Soldier's Life . Macmillan. pp.

21– 22.

ISBN 0805056874 . Retrieved September 13, 2016 .

^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 18 ^ Eisenhower, Dwight David "Ike".

, biography on World War II graves website ^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 22 ^ D'Este, Carlo (2003).

Eisenhower: A Soldier's Life . Macmillan. p. 31.

ISBN 0805056874 . Retrieved June 12, 2020 .

^ a b Eisenhower, Dwight D. (1967).

At Ease: Stories I Tell to Friends , Garden City, New York, Doubleday & Company, Inc.

^ D'Este, Carlo (2002).

Eisenhower: A Soldier's Life , p. 25.

^ "Getting on the Right TRRACC" (PDF) .

Lesson Plans: The Molding of a Leader . Eisenhower National Historic Site. Archived from the original (PDF) on March 26, 2014 . Retrieved April 27, 2013 .

... Ike spent his weekends at Davis's camp on the Smoky Hill River.

^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 32 ^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 25 ^ a b "Faith Staked Down" Archived August 20, 2010, at the Wayback Machine , Time , February 9, 1953.

^ Bergman, Jerry. "Steeped in Religion: President Eisenhower and the Influence of the Jehovah's Witnesses", Kansas History (Autumn 1998).

^ D'Este, Carlo (2002).

Eisenhower: A Soldier's Life , p. 58.

^ "Public School Products" .

Time . September 14, 1959.

^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 36 ^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 37 ^ "Eisenhower: Soldier of Peace" .

Time . April 4, 1969. Archived from the original on May 24, 2008 . Retrieved May 23, 2008 .

^ a b "Biography: Dwight David Eisenhower" .

Eisenhower Foundation . Archived from the original on May 23, 2008 . Retrieved May 23, 2008 .

^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 44–48 ^ "President Dwight D. Eisenhower Baseball Related Quotations" . Baseball Almanac.

Archived from the original on May 21, 2008 . Retrieved May 23, 2008 .

^ "Eisenhower BOQ 1915" .

Fort Sam Houston . Archived from the original on July 17, 2007 . Retrieved August 23, 2012 .

^ "Lt Eisenhower and Football Team" .

Fort Sam Houston . Archived from the original on July 17, 2007 . Retrieved August 23, 2012 .

^ Botelho, Greg (July 15, 1912).

"Roller-coaster life of Indian icon, sports' first star" . CNN.

Archived from the original on November 14, 2007 . Retrieved May 23, 2008 .

^ "Ike and the Team" .

Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial . Archived from the original on July 25, 2008 . Retrieved May 23, 2008 .

^ a b O'Connell, Robert L. (2022).

Team America (1st ed.).

HarperCollins . pp.

117– 119.

ISBN 9780062883322 .

^ "Dwight David Eisenhower" .

Internet Public Library . Archived from the original on May 11, 2008 . Retrieved May 23, 2008 .

^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 56 ^ "We Remember" .

Sigma Beta Chi .

Archived from the original on March 20, 2018 . Retrieved March 20, 2018 .

^ Weingroff, Richard F. (March–April 2003).

"The Man Who Changed America, Part I" .

Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) . Archived from the original on May 9, 2013 . Retrieved April 17, 2013 .

^ O'Connell, Robert L. (2022).

Team America (1st ed.).

HarperCollins . p. 122.

ISBN 9780062883322 .

^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 59–60 ^ Berger-Knorr, Lawrence.

The Pennsylvania Relations of Dwight D. Eisenhower . p. 8.

^ a b Beckett, Wendy.

"President Eisenhower: Painter" (PDF) .

White House History (21): 30– 40. Archived from the original (PDF) on June 5, 2012.

^ Weil, Martin; Langer, Emily (December 21, 2013).

"John S.D. Eisenhower dies; historian and president's son was 91" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on August 17, 2017 . Retrieved August 16, 2017 .

^ "Camp David" . Dwight D. Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum, and Boyhood Home.

Archived from the original on July 6, 2017 . Retrieved August 16, 2017 .

Ike re-named it 'Camp David' in honor of his grandson David Eisenhower ^ Owen 1999 , pp. 165–167 ^ Owen 1999 , p. 169 ^ Owen 1999 , pp. 172–173 ^ Dodson, Marcida (November 17, 1990).

"New Exhibit Offers a Look at Eisenhower the Artist" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on March 9, 2012 . Retrieved January 13, 2012 .

^ Erickson, Hal (2013).

"Angels in the Outfield (1951): Review Summary" . Movies & TV Dept.

The New York Times . Archived from the original on September 28, 2013 . Retrieved September 25, 2013 .

^ Schaeper, Thomas J. (2010).

Rhodes Scholars, Oxford, and the Creation of an American Elite . Berghahn Books. p. 210.

ISBN 978-1845457211 .

^ Smith, Jean Edward (2012).

Eisenhower in War and Peace . Random House. pp.

31– 32, 38.

ISBN 978-0679644293 .

^ "Manuel L. Quezon: 15 Mesmerizing Facts About Philippines' 2nd President" .

FilipiKnow . June 3, 2019 . Retrieved October 27, 2020 .

^ Walker, Karen (June 2009).

"D-Day Memories of the Bridge Player in Chief" .

ACBL District 8 .

Archived from the original on June 30, 2016 . Retrieved May 25, 2016 .

^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 61–62 ^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 62 ^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 63 ^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 65 ^ "Dwight David Eisenhower" .

MilitaryTimes.com . Sightline Media Group . Retrieved January 30, 2021 .

^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 68 ^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 14 ^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 69 ^ Sixsmith, E. K. G. (1973).

Eisenhower, His Life and Campaigns . Conshohocken, PA Combined Publishing. p. 6.

^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 70–73 ^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 73–76 ^ Bender, Mark C. (1990).

"Watershed at Leavenworth" . U.S. Army Command and General Staff College. Archived from the original on October 29, 2008 . Retrieved September 6, 2008 .

^ American President: An Online Reference Resource, Dwight David Eisenhower (1890–1969) , "Life Before the Presidency" , Archived June 5, 2011, at the Wayback Machine Miller Center of Public Affairs, University of Virginia.

^ Trout, Steven (2010).

On the Battlefield of Memory: The First World War and American Remembrance, 1919–1941 . pp.

xv– xxxii.

^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 82 ^ "General of the Army Dwight David Eisenhower" . Army Historical Foundation. January 22, 2015.

Archived from the original on March 24, 2016 . Retrieved March 16, 2016 .

^ "Dwight David Eisenhower, The Centennial" . U.S. Army Center of Military History. 1990. Archived from the original on March 5, 2016 . Retrieved March 16, 2016 .

^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 88 ^ Wukovits, John F. (2006).

Eisenhower . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 43.

ISBN 978-0-230-61394-2 . Retrieved June 15, 2011 .

^ D'Este, Carlo (2002).

Eisenhower: A Soldier's Life . Henry Holt & Co. p.

223 .

ISBN 0-8050-5687-4 . Retrieved June 15, 2011 .

^ Irish, Kerry. "Dwight Eisenhower and Douglas MacArthur in the Philippines: There Must Be a Day of Reckoning", Journal of Military History , April 2010, Vol. 74, Issue 2, pp. 439–473.

^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 94 ^ Villamor, Jesus; Snyder, Gerald (1968).

They Never Surrendered . Vera-Reyes, Inc.

^ "Dwight D. Eisenhower Pre-Presidential Papers, 1916–52" (PDF) . Eisenhower Presidential Library. 1997. p. 74.

Archived (PDF) from the original on February 9, 2017 . Retrieved August 16, 2017 .

references to Eisenhower's pilot's license ^ Komons, Nick (August 1989). "unknown title".

Air Progress : 62.

^ Merrit, Jésus V. (1962).

Our presidents: profiles in history . p. 77.

^ Korda (2007), pp 239–243 ^ "The Eisenhowers: The General" .

Dwightdeisenhower.com . Archived from the original on December 30, 2010 . Retrieved May 3, 2010 .

^ Ambrose 1983 ^ "Major General James E. Chaney" .

Air Force . U.S. Air Force.

Archived from the original on June 13, 2018 . Retrieved August 16, 2017 .

From January 1942 to June 1942, he was the commanding general, U.S. Army Forces in the British Isles.

^ Eisenhower lived in 'Telegraph Cottage', Warren Road, Coombe, from 1942 to 1944. In 1995, a plaque commemorating this was placed there by the Royal Borough of Kingston upon Thames. It can be seen at the north end of Warren Road.

^ Huston, John W. (2002). Maj. Gen. John W. Huston, USAF (ed.).

American Airpower Comes of Age: General Henry H. "Hap" Arnold's World War II Diaries . Air University Press. pp.

288, 312 .

ISBN 1585660930 .

^ Gallagher, Wes (December 1942).

"Eisenhower Commanded Gibraltar" .

The Lewiston Daily Sun .

Archived from the original on September 20, 2015 . Retrieved April 29, 2013 .

^ Atkinson, An Army at Dawn , pp. 251–252.

^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 204–210 ^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 230–233 ^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 254–255 ^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 275–276 ^ Hitchcock, W (2018).

The Age of Eisenhower .

Simon & Schuster . pp.

21– 23.

ISBN 978-1439175668 .

^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 280–281 ^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 284 ^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 286–288 ^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 289 ^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 250, 298 ^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 278 ^ William Safire, Lend me your ears: great speeches in history (2004), p. 1143 ^ Grant 2001 .

^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 340–354 ^ Jean Edward Smith, Eisenhower in War and Peace (2012) p. 451.

^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 375–380 ^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 395–406 ^ Hobbs 1999 , p. 223 ^ Zink, Harold (1947).

American Military Government in Germany , pp. 39–86 ^ Goedde, Petra. "From Villains to Victims: Fraternization and the Feminization of Germany, 1945–1947", Diplomatic History , Winter 1999, Vol. 23, Issue 1, pp. 1–19 ^ Tent, James F. (1982), Mission on the Rhine: Reeducation and Denazification in American-Occupied Germany ^ Zink, Harold (1957).

The United States in Germany, 1944–1955 ^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 421–425 ^ Goedde, Petra (2002).

GIs and Germans: Culture, Gender and Foreign Relations, 1945–1949 ^ Richard Rhodes, The Making of the Atomic Bomb, with Rhodes citing a 1963 profile called "Ike on Ike, in Newsweek November 11, 1963 ^ a b Ambrose 1983 , pp. 432–452 ^ "Dwight Eisenhower in Poland" . Polish Radio.

Archived from the original on April 20, 2016 . Retrieved April 3, 2016 .

^ a b Pusey, Merlo J. (1956).

Eisenhower, the President . Macmillan. pp.

1– 6.

Archived from the original on October 21, 2014 . Retrieved November 7, 2013 .

^ " Truman Wrote of '48 Offer to Eisenhower Archived June 3, 2017, at the Wayback Machine " The New York Times , July 11, 2003.

^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 455–460 ^ "ΦΒΚ U.S. Presidents" (PDF) . Phi Beta Kappa.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 8, 2016 . Retrieved August 16, 2017 .

^ Ambrose 1983 , ch. 24 ^ Crusade in Europe , Doubleday; 1st edition (1948), 559 pages, ISBN 1125300914 ^ a b Owen 1999 , pp. 171–172 ^ Pietrusza, David, 1948: Harry Truman's Victory and the Year That Transformed America , Union Square Publishing, 2011, p. 201 ^ a b Jacobs 1993 , p. 20 ^ Cook 1981 , ch. 3 ^ Cook 1981 , p. 79 ^ a b Jacobs 1993 , p. 18 ^ Jacobs 2001 , pp. 140–141 ^ Jacobs 2001 , pp. 145–146 ^ Jacobs 2001 , pp. 162–164 ^ Jacobs 2001 , pp. 168–169, 175 ^ Jacobs 2001 , pp. 152, 238–242, 245–249 ^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 479–483 ^ a b Young & Schilling 2019 , p. ix ^ a b Jacobs 2001 , pp. 235–236 ^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 484–485 ^ Jacobs 1993 , pp. 17ff ^ Jacobs 2001 , pp. 251–254 ^ Jacobs 2001 , p. 279 ^ Jacobs 2001 , p. 299 ^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 502–511 ^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 512 ^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 524–528 ^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 530 ^ a b c d Gibbs, Nancy (November 10, 2008).

"When New President Meets Old, It's Not Always Pretty" .

Time . Archived from the original on November 11, 2008 . Retrieved November 12, 2008 .

^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 541–546 ^ Herbert H. Hyman, and Paul B. Sheatsley, "The political appeal of President Eisenhower." Public Opinion Quarterly 17.4 (1953): 443–460 online .

^ Ambrose 1983 , pp. 556–567 ^ Johnson, David K. (March 22, 2023).

The Lavender Scare . The University of Chicago Press. p. 121.

ISBN 978-0226825724 .

^ Ambrose 1983 , p. 571 ^ Frum 2000 , p. 7 ^ Crockett, Zachary (January 23, 2017).

"Donald Trump is the only US president ever with no political or military experience" .

vox.com .

Archived from the original on January 6, 2017 . Retrieved January 8, 2019 .

^ Campbell, Angus; Converse, Philip L.; Miller, Warren E.; Stokes, Donald E. (1960).

The American Voter . University of Chicago Press. p. 56.

ISBN 978-0226092546 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 14 ^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 24 ^ Ambrose 1984 , pp. 20–25 ^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 32 ^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 43 ^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 52 ^ Black, Allida; Hopkins, June; et al., eds. (2003).

"Teaching Eleanor Roosevelt: Dwight Eisenhower" .

Eleanor Roosevelt National Historic Site . Archived from the original on January 5, 2007 . Retrieved November 26, 2011 .

^ Eisenhower, David; Julie Nixon Eisenhower (October 11, 2011).

Going Home To Glory: A Memoir of Life with Dwight D. Eisenhower, 1961–1969 . Simon and Schuster. p. 126.

ISBN 978-1439190913 .

^ Eisenhower, Dwight D. (1959).

Public Papers of the Presidents of the United States: Dwight D. Eisenhower . Best Books on. p. 270.

ISBN 978-1623768300 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Miller, James A. (November 21, 2007).

"An inside look at Eisenhower's civil rights record" .

The Boston Globe . Archived from the original on January 7, 2012.

^ Mayer, Michael S. (2009).

The Eisenhower Years . Facts On File. p. xii.

ISBN 978-0-8160-5387-2 .

^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 220 ^ Ambrose 1984 , pp. 285–288 ^ Jean Edward Smith (2012).

Eisenhower in War and Peace . Random House. pp.

674– 683.

ISBN 978-0679644293 . Retrieved June 27, 2015 .

^ Ambrose 1984 , pp. 321–325 ^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 297 ^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 25 ^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 537 ^ "Atoms for Peace Speech" . July 16, 2014.

^ "Summary of the Atomic Energy Act" . February 22, 2013.

^ "The cracks are showing" .

The Economist . June 26, 2008.

Archived from the original on November 20, 2007 . Retrieved October 23, 2008 .

^ "The Last Week – The Road to War" .

USS Washington (BB-56) . Archived from the original on March 23, 2007 . Retrieved May 23, 2008 .

^ "About the Author" .

USS Washington (BB-56) . Archived from the original on May 13, 2008 . Retrieved May 23, 2008 .

^ a b "Interstate Highway System" .

Eisenhower Presidential Center .

Archived from the original on January 17, 2013 . Retrieved August 21, 2012 .

^ Ambrose 1984 , pp. 301, 326 ^ "Internet History" .

^ "The Birth of the Internet | the Engines of Our Ingenuity" .

^ John M. Logsdon, "Exploring the Unknown: Selected Documents in the History of the U.S. Civil Space Program" (NASA; 1995) ^ Logsdon, John M., and Lear, Linda J. Exploring the Unknown:Selected Documents in the History of the U.S. Civil Space Program/ Washington D.C.

^ W. D. Kay, Defining NASA The Historical Debate Over the Agency's Mission, 2005.

^ Parmet, Herbert S. Eisenhower and the American Crusades (New York: The Macmillan Company, 1972) ^ Yankek Mieczkowski, Eisenhower's Sputnik Moment: The Race for Space and World Prestige (Cornell University Press; 2013) ^ Peter J. Roman, Eisenhower and the Missile Gap (1996) ^ The Presidents's Science Advisory Committee, "Report of the Ad Hoc Panel on Man-in-Space" December 16, 1960. NASA Historical Collection ^ Greg Ward, "A Rough Guide History of the USA" (Penguin Group: London, 2003) ^ Jackson, Michael Gordon (2005).

"Beyond Brinkmanship: Eisenhower, Nuclear War Fighting, and Korea, 1953–1968" .

Presidential Studies Quarterly .

35 (1): 52– 75.

doi : 10.1111/j.1741-5705.2004.00235.x .

ISSN 0360-4918 .

JSTOR 27552659 .

^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 51 ^ Jones, Matthew (2008). "Targeting China: U.S. Nuclear Planning and 'Massive Retaliation' in East Asia, 1953–1955".

Journal of Cold War Studies .

10 (4): 37– 65.

doi : 10.1162/jcws.2008.10.4.37 .

ISSN 1520-3972 .

S2CID 57564482 .

^ a b Ambrose 1984 , pp. 106–107 ^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 173 ^ Zhai, Qiang (2000).

"Crisis and Confrontations: Chinese-American Relations during the Eisenhower Administration" .

Journal of American-East Asian Relations .

9 (3/4): 221– 249.

doi : 10.1163/187656100793645921 .

^ a b Ambrose 1984 , p. 231 ^ a b Crean, Jeffrey (2024).

The Fear of Chinese Power: an International History . New Approaches to International History series. London, UK: Bloomsbury Academic .

ISBN 978-1-350-23394-2 .

^ Ambrose 1984 , pp. 245, 246 ^ Accinelli, Robert (1990). "Eisenhower, Congress, and the 1954–55 offshore island crisis".

Presidential Studies Quarterly .

20 (2): 329– 348.

JSTOR 27550618 .

^ a b c Minami, Kazushi (2024).

People's Diplomacy: How Americans and Chinese Transformed US-China Relations during the Cold War . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press .

ISBN 9781501774157 .

^ Dunnigan, James and Nofi, Albert (1999), Dirty Little Secrets of the Vietnam War . St. Martins Press, p. 85.

^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 175 ^ Ambrose 1984 , pp. 175–157 ^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 185 ^ a b Dunnigan, James and Nofi, Albert (1999), Dirty Little Secrets of the Vietnam War , p. 257 ^ Ambrose 1984 , pp. 204–209 ^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 215 ^ Anderson, David L. (1991).

Trapped by Success: The Eisenhower Administration and Vietnam, 1953–1961 . Columbia U.P.

ISBN 978-0231515337 .

^ "Vietnam War" . Swarthmore College Peace Collection. Archived from the original on August 3, 2016.

^ Karnow, Stanley. (1991), Vietnam, A History , p. 230.

^ Reeves, Richard (1993), President Kennedy: Profile of Power , p. 75.

^ "Resolution 39 (I) of the UN General Assembly on the Spanish question" .

^ Eisenhower gave verbal approval to Secretary of State John Foster Dulles and to Director of Central Intelligence Allen Dulles to proceed with the coup; Ambrose, Eisenhower, Vol. 2: The President p. 111; Ambrose (1990), Eisenhower: Soldier and President , New York: Simon and Schuster, p. 333.

^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 129 ^ Kingseed, Cole (1995), Eisenhower and the Suez Crisis of 1956 , ch. 6 ^ Dwight D. Eisenhower, Waging Peace: 1956–1961 (1965) p. 99 ^ Lahav, Pnina.

"The Suez Crisis of 1956 and Its Aftermath: A Comparative Study of Constitutions, Use of Force, Diplomacy and International Relations" .

Boston University Law Review .

95 .

^ Isaac Alteras, Eisenhower and Israel: U.S.–Israeli Relations, 1953–1960 (1993), p. 296.

^ a b Little, Douglas (1996). "His finest hour? Eisenhower, Lebanon, and the 1958 Middle East Crisis".

Diplomatic History .

20 (1): 27– 54.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-7709.1996.tb00251.x .

^ Hahn, Peter L. (2006). "Securing the Middle East: The Eisenhower Doctrine of 1957".

Presidential Studies Quarterly .

36 (1): 38– 47.

doi : 10.1111/j.1741-5705.2006.00285.x .

^ Navari, Cornelia (2000).

Internationalism and the State in the Twentieth Century . Routledge. p. 316.

ISBN 978-0415097475 .

^ Eisenhower, Dwight D. (February 2, 1953).

"Annual Message to the Congress on the State of the Union" . Retrieved March 14, 2024 – via The American Presidency Project .

^ "Eisenhower Press Conference, March 19, 1953" .

Archived from the original on January 31, 2013 . Retrieved October 17, 2012 – via The American Presidency Project .

^ United States of America Congressional Record: Proceedings and Debates of the 84th Congress, First Session, Volume 101, Part 8, July 1, 1955 to July 19, 1955 .

United States Government Publishing Office . 1955. p. 9743 – via Google Books .

^ Dudziak, Mary L.

(2002).

Cold War Civil Rights: Race and the Image of American Democracy .

Princeton University Press . p. 153.

ISBN 1-4008-3988-2 – via Google Books .

^ Eisenhower 1963 , p. 230 ^ Parmet 1972 , pp. 438–439 ^ Mayer, Michael S. (1989). "The Eisenhower Administration and the Civil Rights Act of 1957".

Congress & the Presidency .

16 (2).

Taylor & Francis : 137– 154.

doi : 10.1080/07343468909507929 .

^ a b Nichol, David (2007).

A Matter of Justice: Eisenhower and the Beginning of the Civil Rights Revolution .

Simon & Schuster .

ISBN 978-1416541509 .

^ a b c "Executive Order 10450: Eisenhower and the Lavender Scare" . Washington D.C.: US National Park Service .

^ "An interview with David K. Johnson author of The Lavender Scare: The Cold War Persecution of Gays and Lesbians in the Federal Government" .

University of Chicago Press . 2004.

Archived from the original on December 20, 2017 . Retrieved December 16, 2017 .

^ Adkins, Judith (August 15, 2016).

" 'These People Are Frightened to Death' Congressional Investigations and the Lavender Scare" .

Prologue . Vol. 48, no. 2. US National Archives and Records Administration .

Archived from the original on January 16, 2018 . Retrieved January 15, 2018 .

Most significantly, the 1950 congressional investigations and the Hoey committee's final report helped institutionalize discrimination by laying the groundwork for President Dwight D. Eisenhower's 1953 Executive Order #10450, 'Security Requirements for Government Employment.' That order explicitly added sexuality to the criteria used to determine suitability for federal employment.

^ a b Sears, Brad; Hunter, Nan D.; Mallory, Christy (September 2009).

"Chapter 5: The Legacy of Discriminatory State Laws, Policies, and Practices, 1945-Present" (PDF) .

Documenting Discrimination on the Basis of Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity in State Employment . Los Angeles: Williams Institute at UCLA School of Law . p. 3.

From 1947 to 1961, more than 5,000 allegedly homosexual federal civil servants lost their jobs in the purges for no reason other than sexual orientation, and thousands of applicants were also rejected for federal employment for the same reason. During this period, more than 1,000 men and women were fired for suspected homosexuality from the State Department alone—a far greater number than were dismissed for their membership in the Communist party.

^ Adkins, Judith (August 15, 2016).

" 'These People Are Frightened to Death' Congressional Investigations and the Lavender Scare" .

Prologue . Vol. 48, no. 2. US National Archives and Records Administration .

Archived from the original on January 16, 2018 . Retrieved January 15, 2018 .

Historians estimate that somewhere between 5,000 and tens of thousands of gay workers lost their jobs during the Lavender Scare.

^ Sears, Brad; Hunter, Nan D.; Mallory, Christy (September 2009).

"Chapter 5: The Legacy of Discriminatory State Laws, Policies, and Practices, 1945-Present" (PDF) .

Documenting Discrimination on the Basis of Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity in State Employment . Los Angeles: Williams Institute at UCLA School of Law . p. 3.

Johnson has demonstrated that during this era government officials intentionally engaged in campaigns to associate homosexuality with Communism: 'homosexual' and 'pervert' became synonyms for 'Communist' and 'traitor.' ^ Ambrose 1984 , pp. 118–119 ^ Ambrose 1984 , pp. 56–62 ^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 140 ^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 167 ^ a b Young & Schilling 2019 , p. 132 ^ Bundy 1988 , pp. 305–306 ^ Bundy 1988 , p. 305 ^ Young & Schilling 2019 , p. 128 ^ Bundy 1988 , pp. 310–311 ^ Bundy 1988 , pp. 316–317 ^ Young & Schilling 2019 , pp. 147, 150 ^ Ambrose 1984 , pp. 188–189 ^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 154 ^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 157 ^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 219 ^ a b Joseph W. Martin as told to Donavan, Robert J. (1960), My First Fifty Years in Politics , New York: McGraw Hill, p. 227 ^ "U.S. Senate: Vetoes by President Dwight D. Eisenhower" .

^ Newton, Eisenhower (2011) pp. 356–357 ^ Eisenhower, Dwight D. (October 9, 1953).

"Personal and confidential To Milton Stover Eisenhower" .

Papers of Dwight David Eisenhower . Eisenhower Memorial. doc. 460. Archived from the original on January 18, 2012 . Retrieved January 26, 2012 .

^ Thomas, Evan (2012).

Ike's Bluff: President Eisenhower's Secret Battle to Save the World . Little, Brown. p.

175 .

ISBN 978-0316217279 . Retrieved April 28, 2017 .

^ Newton, Eisenhower pp. 196–199.

^ Clarence G. Lasby, Eisenhower's Heart Attack: How Ike Beat Heart Disease and Held on to the Presidency (1997) pp. 57–113.

^ Robert P. Hudson, "Eisenhower's Heart Attack: How Ike Beat Heart Disease and Held on to the Presidency (review)" Bulletin of the History of Medicine 72#1 (1998) pp. 161–162 online Archived April 29, 2017, at the Wayback Machine .

^ R.H. Ferrell, Ill-Advised: Presidential Health & Public Trust (1992), pp. 53–150 ^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 272 ^ Ambrose 1984 , p. 281 ^ Johnston, Richard J. H. (June 13, 1956).

"Butler Criticizes Illness Reports: Says News Has Been Handled in Terms of Propaganda—Hagerty Denies It" .

The New York Times . p. 32A . Retrieved December 22, 2016 .

Paul M. Butler, the Democratic National Chairman, ... declared that the physicians who operated on and attended the President in his most recent illness 'have done a terrific job of trying to convince the American people that a man who has had a heart attack and then was afflicted with Crohn's disease is a better man physically.' He added: 'Whether the American people will buy that, I don't know.' ^ Clark, Robert E (June 9, 1956).

"President's Heart Reported Sound; Surgery Is Indicated: Inflamed, Obstructed, Intestine Is Blamed" .

Atlanta Daily World . p. 1 . Retrieved December 22, 2016 .

^ Leviero, Anthony (June 9, 1956).

"President Undergoes Surgery on Intestine Block at 2:59 A.M.: Doctors Pronounce It Success : Condition Is Good: Operation Lasts Hour and 53 Minutes–13 Attend Him" .

The New York Times . p. 1 . Retrieved December 22, 2016 .

President Eisenhower was operated on at 2:59 A.M. today for relief of an intestinal obstruction. At 4:55 A.M., the operation was pronounced a success by the surgeons. ... The President's condition was diagnosed as ileitis. This is an inflamation of the ileum—the lowest portion of the small intestine, where it joins the large intestine. ... The President first felt ill shortly after midnight yesterday. He had attended a dinner of the White House News Photographers Association Thursday night and had returned to the White House at 11. Mrs. Eisenhower called Maj. Gen. Howard McC. Snyder, the President's personal physician, at 12:45 A.M. yesterday, telling him the President had some discomfort in his stomach. He recommended a slight dose of milk of magnesia. At 1:20 Mrs. Eisenhower called again, saying the President was still complaining of not feeling well. This time she asked Dr. Snyder to come to the White House from his home about a mile away on Connecticut Avenue. He arrived at 2 A.M. and has not left the President's side since.

^ Knighton, William Jr. (June 10, 1956).

"Eisenhower Out Of Danger; Will Be Able To Resume Duties And Seek Reelection: Doctors See Prospect of Full Return to Job in Four to Six Weeks: Operation Performed to Prevent Gangrene of Bowel: Signing of Official Papers Viewed as Likely by Tomorrow or Tuesday" .

The Baltimore Sun . p. 1 . Retrieved December 22, 2016 .

^ "Out of Hospital Visit Postponed" .

The New York Times . July 1, 1956. p. E2 . Retrieved December 22, 2016 .

^ Williams, Charles Harold Macmillan (2009) p. 345 ^ a b c "President Dwight Eisenhower: Health & Medical History" . doctorzebra.com.

Archived from the original on January 17, 2013 . Retrieved January 22, 2013 .

^ Messerli F. H., Loughlin K. R., Messerli A. W., Welch W. R.: The President and the pheochromocytoma.

Am J Cardiol 2007; 99: 1325–1329.

^ "Former Presidents Act" .

National Archives and Records Administration .

Archived from the original on June 14, 2008 . Retrieved May 23, 2008 .

^ Nixon, Richard, The Memoirs of Richard Nixon, 1978, pp. 222–223.

^ a b c "Dwight D. Eisenhower Farewell Address" . USA Presidents. January 17, 1961. Archived from the original on May 13, 2008 . Retrieved May 23, 2008 .

^ "A Chronology from The New York Times , March 1961" .

John F. Kennedy Presidential Library & Museum . March 23, 1961. Archived from the original on May 3, 2006 . Retrieved May 30, 2009 .

Mr. Kennedy signed into law the act of Congress restoring the five-star rank of General of the Army to his predecessor, Dwight D. Eisenhower. (15:5) ^ Klaus, Mary (August 8, 1985).

"Tiny Pennsylvania Town An Escape From Modernity" .

Sun-Sentinel . Archived from the original on February 25, 2016 . Retrieved January 4, 2016 .

From this farm the family migrated to Kansas in the summer of 1878.

^ Gasbarro, Norman (November 29, 2010).

"Eisenhower Family Civil War Veterans" .

Civil War Blog .

Archived from the original on February 25, 2016 . Retrieved January 4, 2016 .

a stately old home, identified as the ancestral home of President Dwight D. Eisenhower ^ Historical Society of Palm Desert; Rover, Hal; Kousken, Kim; Romer, Brett (2009).

Palm Desert . Arcadia Publishing. p. 103.

ISBN 978-0738559643 .

^ "Inventory of the San Antonio Express-News Photograph Collection, 1960-1969" . University of Texas Library. Archived from the original on June 2, 2016 . Retrieved May 17, 2016 .

Eisenhower, Dwight D.:  visit to San Antonio in behalf of John Goode and Henry Catto, Jr.; downtown S.A. 10/29/1961 ^ "Ike at Gettysburg (Goldwater, 1964)" .

1964: Johnson vs. Goldwater . Museum of the Moving Image. Archived from the original on October 19, 2013 . Retrieved January 20, 2011 .

^ Goldschlag, William (May 11, 2016).

"When an ex-president helped an 'extreme' Republican candidate" .

Newsday .

Archived from the original on December 20, 2016 . Retrieved December 9, 2016 .

^ "Inauguration Is a Day For Rejoicing: Ike" .

Chicago Tribune . January 21, 1969.

Archived from the original on August 19, 2017 . Retrieved August 19, 2017 .

^ Belair, Felix Jr. (March 29, 1969). "Eisenhower Dead at 78 as Ailing Heart Fails; Rites Will Start Today".

The New York Times . p. 1.

^ a b "Dwight D. Eisenhower – Final Post" . Presidential Libraries System, National Archives and Records Administration.

Archived from the original on March 8, 2019 . Retrieved May 19, 2019 .

^ "Lying in State or in Honor" . Architect of the Capitol.

Archived from the original on May 18, 2019 . Retrieved May 19, 2019 .

^ a b Belair, Felix Jr. (April 1, 1969). "World's Leaders Join in Services for Eisenhower".

The New York Times . p. 1.

^ Grose, Peter (March 31, 1969). "Nixon will Meet with De Gaulle Today".

The New York Times . p. 1.

President de Gaulle arrived by plane from Paris, on his first visit to the United States since the funeral of President Kennedy in 1963.

^ "For A Modest Man: A Simple Funeral Honors Ike" .

The Desert Sun . Vol. 42, no. 205.

UPI . April 1, 1969 . Retrieved May 19, 2019 – via California Digital Newspaper Collection , Center for Bibliographical Studies and Research at the University of California Riverside.

^ Weissert, Will; Phillip, David J. (December 6, 2018).

"Bushes depart on first presidential funeral train since 1969" .

MilitaryTimes.com . Sightline Media Group. The Associated Press.

Archived from the original on August 9, 2019 . Retrieved May 19, 2019 .

^ "1969 Year in Review: Eisenhower, Judy Garland die" . UPI. October 25, 2005.

Archived from the original on October 10, 2016 . Retrieved December 19, 2016 .

^ Lippman, Theo Jr. (September 19, 1979).

RUNNING AGAINST CARTER .

The Baltimore Sun . Retrieved November 25, 2024.

^ a b Reddy, Patrick (July 2, 2006).

Is Bush like Ike?

.

The Buffalo News . Retrieved November 24, 2024.

^ Alsop, Joseph (July 28, 1966).

Assaying the Presidents .

The Calgary Albertan . Retrieved November 30, 2024.

^ Frum 2000 , p. 27 ^ Walsh, Kenneth T. (June 6, 2008).

"Presidential Lies and Deceptions" .

U.S. News & World Report . Archived from the original on September 29, 2008.

^ Walker, Samuel, ed. (2012).

Presidents and Civil Liberties from Wilson to Obama . Cambridge University Press. pp.

i– ii.

ISBN 978-1-107-01660-6 . Retrieved February 26, 2023 .

^ "Presidential Politics" .

Public Broadcasting Service . Archived from the original on June 6, 2008 . Retrieved May 23, 2008 .

^ McMahon, Robert J. (1986).

"Eisenhower and Third World Nationalism: A Critique of the Revisionists" .

Political Science Quarterly .

101 (3): 453– 473.

doi : 10.2307/2151625 .

ISSN 0032-3195 .

JSTOR 2151625 .

^ Pach, Chester J. Jr. (October 4, 2016).

"Dwight D. Eisenhower: Impact and Legacy" .

Miller Center . Retrieved February 26, 2023 .

^ RABE, STEPHEN G. (1993).

"Eisenhower Revisionism: A Decade of Scholarship" .

Diplomatic History .

17 (1): 97– 115.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-7709.1993.tb00160.x .

ISSN 0145-2096 .

JSTOR 24912261 .

^ John Lewis Gaddis, "He Made It Look Easy: 'Eisenhower in War and Peace', by Jean Edward Smith" Archived February 6, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , New York Times Book Review , April 20, 2012.

^ Presidents rated: Truman, Ike near the top .

The Chicago Tribune .

The World . February 4, 1982. Retrieved November 24, 2024.

^ a b Griffith, Robert (January 1, 1982). "Dwight D. Eisenhower and the Corporate Commonwealth".

The American Historical Review .

87 (1): 87– 122.

doi : 10.2307/1863309 .

JSTOR 1863309 .

^ "The President and His Decision".

Life . March 12, 1956.

^ Morgenthau, Hans J.: "Goldwater – The Romantic Regression", in Commentary , September 1964.

^ Medved, Michael (1979).

The Shadow Presidents: The Secret History of the Chief Executives and Their Top Aides . Times Books.

ISBN 0812908163 .

^ "Public Law 482" .

Archived from the original on October 13, 2007 . Retrieved April 29, 2008 .

This law allowed only 75% of pay and allowances to the grade for those on the retired list.

^ "Public Law 333, 79th Congress" .

Naval Historical Center . April 11, 2007. Archived from the original on October 13, 2007 . Retrieved October 22, 2007 .

The retirement provisions were also applied to the World War II Commandant of the Marine Corps and the Commandant of the Coast Guard , both of whom held four-star rank.

^ "Public Law 79-333" (PDF) .

legisworks.org . Legis Works. Archived from the original on November 21, 2015 . Retrieved October 19, 2015 .

^ "Our Heritage" . People to People International. Archived from the original on March 1, 2009 . Retrieved September 29, 2009 .

^ a b c Gomez, Darryl (2015).

Authoritative Numismatic Reference: Presidential Medal of Appreciation Award Medals 1958–1963 . CreateSpace Independent Publishing Platform.

ISBN 978-1511786744 .

^ "Dwight D. Eisenhower Highway" .

Federal Highway Administration .

Archived from the original on August 25, 2016 . Retrieved August 22, 2016 .

^ admin (June 5, 2009).

"1990 Eisenhower Centennial Silver Dollar Commemorative Coin" .

Modern Commemoratives . Retrieved July 25, 2025 .

The 1990 Eisenhower Silver Dollar [...] was issued to mark the centennial of the birth of Dwight D. Eisenhower on October 14, 1890. He is honored as both a five-star General and the 34th President of the United States.

^ "Record Companies Run With Eisenhower Tribute Albums" .

Billboard . April 12, 1969 . Retrieved December 2, 2015 .

^ "Frank Gehry to design Eisenhower Memorial" .

American City Business Journals . April 1, 2009.

Archived from the original on April 4, 2009.

^ Trescott, Jacqueline (April 2, 2009).

"Architect Gehry Gets Design Gig For Eisenhower Memorial" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on July 3, 2017 . Retrieved August 26, 2017 .

^ Horan, Tim (May 8, 2020).

"Eisenhower Memorial in D.C. is complete. Coronavirus delays dedication to September" .

The Wichita Eagle . Retrieved May 8, 2020 .

^ "Dedication Of Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial" (PDF) .

Eisenhower Memorial Commission . Archived from the original (PDF) on October 22, 2020 . Retrieved April 9, 2023 .

^ Plumb, Tiereny (January 22, 2010).

"Gilbane to manage design and construction of Eisenhower Memorial" .

American City Business Journals .

^ "President Eisenhower named to World Golf Hall of Fame" . PGA Tour. Archived from the original on June 29, 2009 . Retrieved May 3, 2010 .

^ "Hall of Great Westerners" .

National Cowboy & Western Heritage Museum . Retrieved November 22, 2019 .

^ (27 Oct 2023) Fort Eisenhower redesignation ceremony ^ "Plans are coming together for Fort Gordon renaming ceremony" .

MSN .

Archived from the original on March 17, 2023 . Retrieved April 27, 2023 .

^ Scribner, Herb (March 25, 2023).

"6 Army bases named after Confederate leaders get dates for new names" .

Axios .

Archived from the original on April 18, 2023 . Retrieved April 27, 2023 .

^ Prince Bernhard of the Netherlands in an interview with H.G. Meijer, published in "Het Vliegerkruis", Amsterdam 1997, ISBN 9067073474 . p. 92.

^ "The Arms of Dwight D. Eisenhower" . American Heraldry Society. Archived from the original on February 2, 2015.

^ a b "Awards & Medals | Eisenhower Presidential Library" .

www.eisenhowerlibrary.gov . Retrieved April 28, 2020 .

^ "USA and Foreign Decorations of Dwight D. Eisenhower" .

Eisenhower Presidential Center . Archived from the original on November 18, 2016 . Retrieved June 10, 2012 .

^ "Questions to the Chancellor" (PDF) . Austrian Parliament. 2012. p. 194.

Archived (PDF) from the original on October 22, 2012 . Retrieved September 30, 2012 .

^ Eisenhower, John S. D.

Allies .

^ a b Empric, Bruce E. (2024), Uncommon Allies: U.S. Army Recipients of Soviet Military Decorations in World War II , Teufelsberg Press, pp. 35, 45, ISBN 979-8-3444-6807-5 ^ "Eisenhower to get honor" .

The New York Times . June 10, 1945 . Retrieved August 26, 2020 .

^ London Welcomes Her Newest Citizen (Newsreel).

British Movietone News . 1945.  Event occurs at 1:18. Archived from the original on October 27, 2021 . Retrieved August 26, 2020 – via Associated Press and YouTube.

^ a b "Eisenhower in Ulster" .

Belfast Telegraph . July 5, 2008 . Retrieved August 26, 2020 .

^ Eisenhower's Scottish Diary (Newsreel).

British Pathé .  Event occurs at 0:13 . Retrieved August 26, 2020 .

^ "President Eisenhower in Carrick" .

maybole.org . Archived from the original on October 25, 2020 . Retrieved August 26, 2020 .

^ "Honorary Degrees 1871–2018" (PDF) .

Queen's University Belfast .

Archived (PDF) from the original on August 4, 2020.

^ "Oxford Degrees for War Leaders" .

British Pathé . 1945.

^ "Honorary Degrees" .

Harvard University . Archived from the original on November 4, 2017 . Retrieved August 26, 2020 .

^ "Honorary degree recipients" .

Gettysburg College . Archived from the original on September 9, 2019 . Retrieved August 26, 2020 .

^ "Honorary Degree Recipients, 1850–2021" (PDF) .

University of Toronto .

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 1, 2020.

^ "Chronological Listing of Honorary Degree Recipients" (PDF) .

University of Pennsylvania .

Archived (PDF) from the original on June 29, 2019.

^ "Honorary Degrees Since 1702" .

Office of the Secretary and Vice President for University Life, Yale University .

^ "About: Honorary Degrees" .

Hofstra University .

^ "President Eisenhower's Commencement Address" .

Dartmouth College . November 28, 2018.

^ "Honorary Degrees Conferred by The Catholic University of America" (PDF) .

Catholic University of America .

Archived (PDF) from the original on November 22, 2020.

^ "Honorary Degree Recipients" .

Office of the Provost, Northwestern University .

^ Eisenhower, Dwight D.

(June 7, 1954).

Remarks at Washington College on Receiving an Honorary Doctor of Laws Degree (Speech). Washington College, Maryland: Washington College . Archived from the original on October 20, 2020 . Retrieved January 9, 2022 .

^ "Honorary Degrees Awarded" .

Johns Hopkins University .

^ "India Likes Ike" .

British Pathé . 1959.

^ "Honorary Degree Recipients, 1844–2019" (PDF) .

University of Notre Dame . November 2019. Archived from the original (PDF) on October 22, 2020 . Retrieved August 26, 2020 .

^ "Eisenhower Given Honorary Degree at Bard College" .

The New York Times . June 21, 1964.

^ "Past Honorary Degrees" .

Grinnell College .

^ "U.S. President Dwight Eisenhower with commemorative plaque at Ohio University Memorial Auditorium" .

Ohio University Libraries . October 5, 1965.

Print sources Main article: Bibliography of Dwight D. Eisenhower General biographies Ambrose, Stephen (1983).

Eisenhower: Soldier, General of the Army, President-Elect (1893–1952) . Vol. I.

Simon & Schuster .

Ambrose, Stephen (1984).

Eisenhower: The President (1952–1969) . Vol. II.

Simon & Schuster .

Boyle, Peter G. (2005).

Eisenhower . Pearson/Longman.

ISBN 0582287200 .

D'Este, Carlo (2002).

Eisenhower: A Soldier's Life . Macmillan.

ISBN 0805056866 .

Krieg, Joann P. ed. (1987).

Dwight D. Eisenhower, Soldier, President, Statesman . 24 essays by scholars.

ISBN 0313259550 Newton, Jim (2011).

Eisenhower: The White House Years . Doubleday.

ISBN 978-0-385-52353-0 .

, popular history.

Parmet, Herbert S. (1972).

Eisenhower and the American Crusades .

OCLC 482017 .

Smith, Jean Edward (2012).

Eisenhower in War and Peace . Random House.

ISBN 978-1400066933 .

Wicker, Tom (2002).

Dwight D. Eisenhower . Times Books.

ISBN 0805069070 .

, popular history Military career Ambrose, Stephen E. (January 17, 2012).

The Supreme Commander . Knopf Doubleday Publishing.

ISBN 9780307946638 .

Ambrose, Stephen E. (July 15, 1999).

The Victors: Eisenhower and His Boys the Men of World War II . Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 9780684864549 .

Eisenhower, David (1986).

Eisenhower at War 1943–1945 , Random House.

ISBN 0394412370 . A detailed study by his grandson.

Eisenhower, John S. D.

(2003).

General Ike , Free Press.

ISBN 0743244745 , by his son.

Hatch, Alden.

General Eisenhower (1944) online , early popular biography.

Hobbs, Joseph Patrick (1999).

Dear General: Eisenhower's Wartime Letters to Marshall . Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 0801862191 .

Irish, Kerry E. "Apt Pupil: Dwight Eisenhower and the 1930 Industrial Mobilization Plan", The Journal of Military History 70.1 (2006) 31–61 online in Project Muse.

Jordan, Jonathan W. (2011).

Brothers Rivals Victors: Eisenhower, Patton, Bradley, and the Partnership that Drove the Allied Conquest in Europe . NAL/Caliber.

ISBN 978-0451232120 .

Jordan, Jonathan W. (2015).

American Warlords: How Roosevelt's High Command Led America to Victory in World War II . NAL/Caliber.

ISBN 978-0451414571 .

Pogue, Forrest C.

(1954).

The Supreme Command .

Office of the Chief of Military History , Dept. of the Army.

OCLC 1247005 .

Weigley, Russell (1981).

Eisenhower's Lieutenants: the Campaign of France and Germany, 1944–1945 . Indiana University Press.

ISBN 0253133335 .

Sixsmith, Major General E. K. G.

(1973).

Eisenhower as Military Commander .

B. C. T. Batsford Limited .

ISBN 978-0713412123 .

Civilian career Bowie, Robert R.

; Immerman, Richard H.

(February 12, 1998).

Waging Peace: How Eisenhower Shaped an Enduring Cold War Strategy . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199879083 .

Chernus, Ira (2008).

Apocalypse Management: Eisenhower and the Discourse of National Insecurity . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0804758079 .

Cook, Blanche Wiesen (1981).

The Declassified Eisenhower: A Divided Legacy . Doubleday.

Damms, Richard V. (2002).

The Eisenhower Presidency, 1953–1961 David Paul T., ed. (1954).

Presidential Nominating Politics in 1952 . 5 vols., Johns Hopkins Press.

OCLC 519846 Divine, Robert A. (1981).

Eisenhower and the Cold War .

Gellman, Irwin F. (2015).

The President and the Apprentice: Eisenhower and Nixon, 1952–1961.

New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0300181050 Greenstein, Fred I.

(1991).

The Hidden-Hand Presidency: Eisenhower as Leader . Basic Books.

ISBN 0465029485 Harris, Douglas B. "Dwight Eisenhower and the New Deal: The Politics of Preemption", Presidential Studies Quarterly , Vol. 27, 1997.

Harris, Seymour E. (1962).

The Economics of the Political Parties, with Special Attention to Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy .

OCLC 174566 Jacobs, Travis Beal (1993). "Eisenhower, the American Assembly, and the 1952 Elections". In Warshaw, Shirley Anne (ed.).

Reexamining the Eisenhower presidency . Greenwood Press. pp.

17– 32.

ISBN 0313287929 .

Jacobs, Travis Beal (2001).

Eisenhower at Columbia . Transaction Publishers.

ISBN 0-7658-0036-5 .

Mason, Robert. "War Hero in the White House: Dwight Eisenhower and the Politics of Peace, Prosperity, and Party." in Profiles in Power (Brill, 2020) pp. 112–128.

Medhurst, Martin J. (1993).

Dwight D. Eisenhower: Strategic Communicator.

Greenwood Press.

ISBN 0313261407 Mayer, Michael S. (2009).

The Eisenhower Years Facts on File.

ISBN 0816053871 Newton, Jim. (2011) Eisenhower: The White House Years ISBN 978-0385523530 Pach, Chester J., and Richardson, Elmo (1991).

Presidency of Dwight D. Eisenhower . University Press of Kansas.

ISBN 0700604367 Pickett, William B.

(2000).

Eisenhower Decides to Run: Presidential Politics and Cold War Strategy . Ivan R. Dee.

ISBN 1-56-663787-2 .

Pickett, William B.

(1995).

Dwight David Eisenhower and American Power . Harlan Davidson.

ISBN 0-88-295918-2 .

Watry, David M. (2014).

Diplomacy at the Brink: Eisenhower, Churchill and Eden in the Cold War . Louisiana State University Press.

General history Bundy, McGeorge (1988).

Danger and Survival: Choices About the Bomb in the First Fifty Years . Random House.

ISBN 0-394-52278-8 .

Frum, David (2000).

How We Got Here: The 70s The Decade That Brought You Modern Life – For Better Or Worse . Basic Books.

ISBN 0-465-04196-5 .

Grant, Rebecca (June 1, 2001).

"Deep Strife" .

Air & Space Forces Magazine .

Owen, David (1999).

The Making of the Masters: Clifford Roberts, Augusta National, and Golf's Most Prestigious Tournament . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 0684857294 .

Young, Ken; Schilling, Warner R. (2019).

Super Bomb: Organizational Conflict and the Development of the Hydrogen Bomb . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 978-1-5017-4516-4 .

Primary sources Boyle, Peter G., ed. (1990).

The Churchill–Eisenhower Correspondence, 1953–1955 . University of North Carolina Press.

Boyle, Peter G., ed. (2005).

The Eden–Eisenhower correspondence, 1955–1957 . University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 0807829358 Butcher, Harry C. (1946).

My Three Years With Eisenhower The Personal Diary of Captain Harry C. Butcher, USNR , candid memoir by a top aide.

online Eisenhower, Dwight D. (1948).

Crusade in Europe , his war memoirs.

Eisenhower, Dwight D. (1963).

Mandate for Change, 1953–1956 .

Eisenhower, Dwight D. (1965).

The White House Years: Waging Peace 1956–1961 , Doubleday and Co.

Eisenhower Papers 21-volume scholarly edition; complete for 1940–1961.

Summersby, Kay (1948).

Eisenhower Was My Boss , Prentice Hall; (1949) Dell paperback.

External links Dwight D. Eisenhower at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource White House biography Eisenhower Presidential Library and Museum Eisenhower National Historic Site Eisenhower Foundation Major speeches of Dwight Eisenhower Dwight David Eisenhower collected news and commentary at The New York Times Dwight D. Eisenhower: A Resource Guide from the Library of Congress Extensive essays on Dwight Eisenhower and shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public Affairs "Life Portrait of Dwight D. Eisenhower" , from C-SPAN 's American Presidents: Life Portraits , October 25, 1999 Works by Dwight David Eisenhower at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Dwight D. Eisenhower at the Internet Archive Appearances on C-SPAN v t e Dwight D. Eisenhower 34th President of the United States (1953–1961) Supreme Allied Commander Europe (1951–1952) Chief of Staff of the Army (1945–1948) Commander, Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force (1943–1945) Military career Military career 1919 Motor Transport Corps convoy Louisiana Maneuvers Operation Torch European Theater of Operations Allied invasion of Sicily Armistice of Cassibile June 6, 1944, order of the day People of Western Europe speech Normandy landings Operation Veritable Berlin Declaration Military Governor, U.S. Occupation Zone in Germany Disarmed Enemy Forces European Advisory Commission Supreme Commander of NATO, 1951-1952 Presidency ( timeline ) Transition 1953 inauguration 1957 inauguration State of the Union Address 1953 1954 1955 1956 1957 1958 1959 1960 1961 Cabinet Judicial appointments Supreme Court Farewell address " Military–industrial complex " Kennedy transition Executive Orders Presidential Proclamations Foreign policy Eisenhower Doctrine Korean War 1953; Korean Armistice Agreement 1953 Iranian coup d'état "Chance for Peace" speech (1953) Cold War Domino theory Khrushchev, Eisenhower and De-Stalinization New Look policy 1955 Geneva Summit 1960 U-2 incident Atomic Energy Act of 1954 Atoms for Peace Restricted Data Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954 Food for Peace Suez Crisis (1956) DARPA (1958) EURATOM Cooperation Act of 1958 National Aeronautics and Space Act 1958; NASA Operation 40 (1960) Domestic policy Executive Order 10479 (1953) Outer Continental Shelf Act (1953) Refugee Relief Act (1953) Submerged Lands Act (1953) U.S. Department of Health, Education, and Welfare (1953) Agricultural Act of 1954 National Wool Act of 1954 Special Milk Program Excise Tax Reduction Act of 1954 Internal Revenue Code of 1954 Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act of 1954 Small Watershed Program Air Pollution Control Act of 1955 Agricultural Act of 1956 Soil Bank Act Soil Bank Program Federal Voting Assistance Program (1955) Bank Holding Company Act (1956) Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1956 Interstate Highway System Highway Trust Fund Fish and Wildlife Act (1956) People to People Student Ambassador Program (1956) President's Council on Physical Fitness and Sports (1956) Civil Rights Act of 1957 U.S. Commission on Civil Rights U.S. Department of Justice Civil Rights Division Federal Plant Pest Act of 1957 Little Rock Nine intervention (1957) Price–Anderson Nuclear Industries Indemnity Act (1957) Alaska Statehood Act (1958) Humane Slaughter Act (1958) National Defense Education Act 1958; Federal Perkins Loan Student loans in the United States Hawaii Admission Act (1959) Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act of 1960 Civil Rights Act of 1960 Sikes Act (1960) Books Crusade in Europe (1948) Elections Draft Eisenhower movement Republican Party presidential primaries (1948 1952 1956) Republican National Convention (1952 1956) United States Presidential election (1952 1956) Legacy Bibliography Birthplace Eisenhower Presidential Library, Museum, gravesite Boyhood home Eisenhower National Historic Site Dwight D. Eisenhower Memorial Eisenhower Executive Office Building Wichita Dwight D. Eisenhower National Airport Eisenhower Fellowships Eisenhower Institute Eisenhower Monument Eisenhower dollar Eisenhower Centennial silver dollar U.S. Postage stamps Dwight D. Eisenhower Army Medical Center Eisenhower Medical Center Eisenhower Trophy Eisenhower Tunnel Eisenhower Golf Club Eisenhower Theater Statue of Dwight D. Eisenhower (U.S. Capitol) Fort Eisenhower Mount Eisenhower Places named for Eisenhower Other tributes and memorials Popular culture Eisenhower jacket Eisenhower Tree Crusade in Europe (1949 television series) Backstairs at the White House (1979 miniseries) Ike (1979 miniseries) Ike: Countdown to D-Day (2004 film) Pressure (2014 play) Family Mary "Mamie" Geneva Doud Eisenhower (wife) John Eisenhower (son) David Eisenhower (grandson) Anne Eisenhower (granddaughter) Susan Eisenhower (granddaughter) Mary Jean Eisenhower (granddaughter) Jennie Eisenhower (great-granddaughter) Ida Stover Eisenhower (mother) Arthur Eisenhower (brother) Edgar N. Eisenhower (brother) Roy Eisenhower (brother) Earl D. Eisenhower (brother) Milton S. Eisenhower (brother) Related Eisenhower baseball controversy Camp David " And I don't care what it is " Atoms for Peace Award Introduction to Outer Space Eddie Slovik Kay Summersby ← Harry S. Truman John F. Kennedy → Category Offices and distinctions Military offices Preceded by James E. Chaney Jacob L. Devers Commanding General of the United States Army Europe 1942–1943 1944–1945 Succeeded by Frank Maxwell Andrews Joseph T. McNarney New office Supreme Commander Allied Expeditionary Force 1944–1945 Office abolished Governor of the American Zone of Occupied Germany 1945 Succeeded by George S. Patton as acting governor Preceded by George Marshall Chief of Staff of the United States Army 1945–1948 Succeeded by Omar Bradley New office Supreme Allied Commander Europe 1951–1952 Succeeded by Matthew Ridgway Academic offices Preceded by Frank D. Fackenthal as acting president President of Columbia University 1948–1953 Succeeded by Grayson L. Kirk Party political offices Preceded by Thomas E. Dewey Republican nominee for President of the United States 1952 , 1956 Succeeded by Richard Nixon Political offices Preceded by Harry S. Truman President of the United States 1953–1961 Succeeded by John F. Kennedy Honorary titles Preceded by Herbert Hoover People who have lain in state or honor in the United States Capitol rotunda 1969 Succeeded by Everett Dirksen Articles related to Dwight D. Eisenhower v t e St. Mary's Rattlers head football coaches Dwight D. Eisenhower (1916) Homer Baker (1923) J. Kraus (1924) Mose Sims (1925) Tom O'Donnell (1926) Tim Griesenbeck (1927) Jim Hendricks (1928) Barlow Irvin (1929–1930) No team (1932–1934) Frank Bridges (1935–1939) Mose Sims (1940) Lloyd Russell (1941) v t e Leaders of the United States Army Senior officers / commanding generals Washington Knox Doughty Harmar St. Clair Wayne Hamilton Wilkinson Dearborn J. Brown Macomb W. Scott McClellan Halleck Grant Sherman Sheridan Schofield Miles Chiefs of staff Young Chaffee Bates Bell Wood Wotherspoon H. Scott Bliss March Pershing Hines Summerall MacArthur Craig Marshall Eisenhower Bradley Collins Ridgway Taylor Lemnitzer Decker Wheeler Johnson Westmoreland B. Palmer Abrams Weyand Rogers Meyer Wickham Vuono Sullivan Reimer Shinseki Schoomaker Casey Dempsey Odierno Milley McConville George Vice chiefs of staff Collins Haislip Hull Bolte W. Palmer Lemnitzer Decker Eddleman Hamlett Abrams Haines B. Palmer Haig Weyand Kerwin Kroesen Vessey Wickham Thurman A. Brown RisCassi Sullivan Reimer Peay Tilelli Griffith Crouch Shinseki Keane Casey Cody Chiarelli Austin Campbell Allyn McConville Martin George Mingus Commanders of United States European Command and Supreme Allied Commanders, Europe Eisenhower * Ridgway Gruenther Norstad Lemnitzer Goodpaster Haig Rogers Galvin Shalikashvili Joulwan Clark Ralston Jones Craddock Stavridis Breedlove Scaparrotti Wolters Cavoli Grynkewich * only Supreme Allied Commander v t e Republican Party History National Union Party Third Party System Fourth Party System Fifth Party System Sixth Party System Presidential tickets , national conventions , and presidential primaries 1856 (Philadelphia) : Frémont / Dayton 1860 (Chicago) : Lincoln / Hamlin 1864 (Baltimore) : Lincoln / Johnson 1868 (Chicago) : Grant / Colfax 1872 (Philadelphia) : Grant / Wilson 1876 (Cincinnati) : Hayes / Wheeler 1880 (Chicago) : Garfield / Arthur 1884 (Chicago) : Blaine / Logan 1888 (Chicago) : Harrison / Morton 1892 (Minneapolis) : Harrison / Reid 1896 (Saint Louis) : McKinley / Hobart 1900 (Philadelphia) : McKinley / Roosevelt 1904 (Chicago) : Roosevelt / Fairbanks 1908 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman 1912 (Chicago) : Taft / Sherman / Butler primaries 1916 (Chicago) : Hughes / Fairbanks primaries 1920 (Chicago) : Harding / Coolidge primaries 1924 (Cleveland) : Coolidge / Dawes primaries 1928 (Kansas City) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1932 (Chicago) : Hoover / Curtis primaries 1936 (Cleveland) : Landon / Knox primaries 1940 (Philadelphia) : Willkie / McNary primaries 1944 (Chicago) : Dewey / Bricker primaries 1948 (Philadelphia) : Dewey / Warren primaries 1952 (Chicago) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1956 (San Francisco) : Eisenhower / Nixon primaries 1960 (Chicago) : Nixon / Lodge primaries 1964 (San Francisco) : Goldwater / Miller primaries 1968 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1972 (Miami Beach) : Nixon / Agnew primaries 1976 (Kansas City) : Ford / Dole primaries 1980 (Detroit) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1984 (Dallas) : Reagan / G. H. W. Bush primaries 1988 (New Orleans) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1992 (Houston) : G. H. W. Bush / Quayle primaries 1996 (San Diego) : Dole / Kemp primaries 2000 (Philadelphia) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2004 (New York) : G. W. Bush / Cheney primaries 2008 (St. Paul) : McCain / Palin primaries 2012 (Tampa) : Romney / Ryan primaries 2016 (Cleveland) : Trump / Pence primaries 2020 (Charlotte/other locations) : Trump / Pence primaries 2024 (Milwaukee) : Trump / Vance primaries 2028 (Houston) Presidential administrations Lincoln (1861–1865) Johnson (1865–1868) Grant (1869–1877) Hayes (1877–1881) Garfield (1881) Arthur (1881–1885) Harrison (1889–1893) McKinley (1897–1901) Roosevelt (1901–1909) Taft (1909–1913) Harding (1921–1923) Coolidge (1923–1929) Hoover (1929–1933) Eisenhower (1953–1961) Nixon (1969–1974) Ford (1974–1977) Reagan (1981–1989) G. H. W. Bush (1989–1993) G. W. Bush (2001–2009) Trump ( 2017–2021 ; 2025–present ) U.S. Senate leaders and Conference chairs J. P. Hale (1859–1862) Anthony (1862–1884) Sherman (1884–1885) Edmunds (1885–1891) Sherman (1891–1897) Allison (1897–1908) E. Hale (1908–1911) Cullom (1911–1913) Gallinger (1913–1918) Lodge (1918–1924) Curtis (1924–1929) Watson (1929–1933) McNary (1933–1940) Austin (1940–1941) McNary (1941–1944) White (1944–1949) Wherry (1949–1952) Bridges (1952–1953) Taft (1953) Knowland (1953–1959) Dirksen (1959–1969) Scott (1969–1977) Baker (1977–1979) Stevens (1979–1980) Baker (1980–1985) Dole (1985–1996) Lott (1996–2003) Frist (2003–2007) McConnell (2007–2025) Thune (2025–present) U.S. House leaders , Speakers , and Conference chairs Pennington (1860–1861) Grow (1861–1863) Colfax (1863–1869) Pomeroy (1869) Blaine (1869–1875) McCrary (1875–1877) Hale (1877–1879) Frye (1879–1881) Keifer (1881–1883) Cannon (1883–1889) Reed (1889–1891) T. J. Henderson (1891–1895) Reed (1895–1899) D. B. Henderson (1899–1903) Cannon (1903–1911) Mann (1911–1919) Gillett (1919–1925) Longworth (1925–1931) Snell (1931–1939) Martin (1939–1959) Halleck (1959–1965) Ford (1965–1973) Rhodes (1973–1981) Michel (1981–1995) Gingrich (1995–1999) Hastert (1999–2007) Boehner (2007–2015) Ryan (2015–2019) McCarthy (2019–2023) Johnson (2023–present) RNC Chairs Morgan Raymond Ward Claflin Morgan Chandler Cameron Jewell Sabin Jones Quay Clarkson Campbell Carter Hanna Payne Cortelyou New Hitchcock Hill Rosewater Hilles Wilcox Hays Adams Butler Work Huston Fess Sanders Fletcher Hamilton Martin Walsh Spangler Brownell Reece Scott Gabrielson Summerfield Roberts Hall Alcorn T. Morton Miller Burch Bliss R. Morton Dole Bush Smith Brock Richards Laxalt / Fahrenkopf Fahrenkopf Atwater Yeutter Bond Barbour Nicholson Gilmore Racicot Gillespie Mehlman Martínez / Duncan Duncan Steele Priebus McDaniel Whatley Chair elections 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023 2024 Parties by state and territory State Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Territory American Samoa District of Columbia Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico Virgin Islands Affiliated organizations Congress House Conference Legislative Digest Steering and Policy Committees Senate Conference Policy Committee Factions Freedom Caucus Problem Solvers Caucus Republican Governance Group Republican Study Committee Campaign committees National Republican Congressional Committee National Republican Redistricting Trust National Republican Senatorial Committee Republican Attorneys General Association Republican Governors Association Constituency groups College Republicans Chairmen Congressional Hispanic Conference Log Cabin Republicans National Black Republican Association Republican Hindu Coalition Republican Jewish Coalition Republican Muslim Coalition Republican National Hispanic Assembly Republicans Abroad Teen Age Republicans Young Republicans Republicans Overseas Factional groups Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Majority for Choice Republican Liberty Caucus Republican National Coalition for Life ConservAmerica Liberty Caucus Ripon Society The Wish List Related Primaries Debates Bibliography International Democracy Union Three Legged Stool Timeline of modern American conservatism Trumpism v t e Presidents of the United States Presidents and presidencies George Washington ( 1789–1797 ) John Adams ( 1797–1801 ) Thomas Jefferson ( 1801–1809 ) James Madison ( 1809–1817 ) James Monroe ( 1817–1825 ) John Quincy Adams ( 1825–1829 ) Andrew Jackson ( 1829–1837 ) Martin Van Buren ( 1837–1841 ) William Henry Harrison ( 1841 ) John Tyler ( 1841–1845 ) James K. Polk ( 1845–1849 ) Zachary Taylor ( 1849–1850 ) Millard Fillmore ( 1850–1853 ) Franklin Pierce ( 1853–1857 ) James Buchanan ( 1857–1861 ) Abraham Lincoln ( 1861–1865 ) Andrew Johnson ( 1865–1869 ) Ulysses S. Grant ( 1869–1877 ) Rutherford B. Hayes ( 1877–1881 ) James A. Garfield ( 1881 ) Chester A. Arthur ( 1881–1885 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1885–1889 ) Benjamin Harrison ( 1889–1893 ) Grover Cleveland ( 1893–1897 ) William McKinley ( 1897–1901 ) Theodore Roosevelt ( 1901–1909 ) William Howard Taft ( 1909–1913 ) Woodrow Wilson ( 1913–1921 ) Warren G. Harding ( 1921–1923 ) Calvin Coolidge ( 1923–1929 ) Herbert Hoover ( 1929–1933 ) Franklin D. Roosevelt ( 1933–1945 ) Harry S. Truman ( 1945–1953 ) Dwight D. Eisenhower ( 1953–1961 ) John F. Kennedy ( 1961–1963 ) Lyndon B. Johnson ( 1963–1969 ) Richard Nixon ( 1969–1974 ) Gerald Ford ( 1974–1977 ) Jimmy Carter ( 1977–1981 ) Ronald Reagan ( 1981–1989 ) George H. W. Bush ( 1989–1993 ) Bill Clinton ( 1993–2001 ) George W. Bush ( 2001–2009 ) Barack Obama ( 2009–2017 ) Donald Trump ( 2017–2021 ) Joe Biden ( 2021–2025 ) Donald Trump ( 2025–present ) Presidency timelines Washington J. Adams McKinley T. Roosevelt Taft Wilson Harding Coolidge Hoover F. D. Roosevelt Truman Eisenhower Kennedy L. B. Johnson Nixon Ford Carter Reagan G. H. W. Bush Clinton G. W. Bush Obama Trump Biden Category List v t e Cabinet of President Dwight D. Eisenhower (1953–1961) Cabinet Vice President Richard Nixon (1953–1961) Secretary of State John Foster Dulles (1953–1959) Christian Herter (1959–1961) Secretary of the Treasury George M. Humphrey (1953–1957) Robert B. Anderson (1957–1961) Secretary of Defense Charles Erwin Wilson (1953–1957) Neil H. McElroy (1957–1959) Thomas S. Gates Jr.

(1959–1961) Attorney General Herbert Brownell Jr.

(1953–1957) William P. Rogers (1957–1961) Postmaster General Arthur Summerfield (1953–1961) Secretary of the Interior Douglas McKay (1953–1956) Fred A. Seaton (1956–1961) Secretary of Agriculture Ezra Taft Benson (1953–1961) Secretary of Commerce Sinclair Weeks (1953–1958) Frederick H. Mueller (1959–1961) Secretary of Labor Martin Patrick Durkin (1953) James P. Mitchell (1953–1961) Secretary of Health, Education, and Welfare Oveta Culp Hobby (1953–1955) Marion B. Folsom (1955–1958) Arthur Flemming (1958–1961) Cabinet-level Director of the Bureau of the Budget Joseph Dodge (1953–1954) Rowland Hughes (1954–1956) Percival Brundage (1956–1958) Maurice Stans (1958–1961) Ambassador to the United Nations Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

(1953–1960) James Jeremiah Wadsworth (1960–1961) Director of the Mutual Security Agency Harold Stassen (1953) Director of the Office of Defense Mobilization Arthur Flemming (1953–1957) Gordon Gray (1957–1958) Administrator of the Federal Civil Defense Administration Val Peterson (1953–1957) Leo Hoegh (1957–1958) Director of the Office of Civil and Defense Mobilization Leo Hoegh (1958–1961) Chair of the Atomic Energy Commission John A. McCone (1958–1961) White House Chief of Staff Sherman Adams (1953–1958) Wilton Persons (1958–1961) White House Deputy Chief of Staff Wilton Persons (1953–1958) Gerald D. Morgan (1958–1961) White House Cabinet Secretary Maxwell M. Rabb (1954–1958) Robert Keith Gray (1958–1961) v t e Presidents of Columbia University S. Johnson (1754–1763) Cooper (1763–1775) B. Moore (1775–1776)* Clinton (1784–1787)* W. Johnson (1787–1800) Wharton (1801) B. Moore (1801–1810) Harris (1811–1829) Duer (1829–1842) N. Moore (1842–1849) King (1849–1863) Barnard (1864–1888) Drisler (1888–1889)* Low (1890–1901) Van Amringe (1899)* Butler (1902–1945) Fackenthal (1945–1948)* Eisenhower (1948–1953) Kirk (1953–1968) Cordier (1969–1970) McGill (1970–1980) Sovern (1980–1993) Rupp (1993–2002) Bollinger (2002–2023) Shafik (2023–2024) Armstrong (2024–2025)* Shipman (2025–present)* * indicates acting or interim president or chancellor v t e ( ← 1948 ) 1952 United States presidential election ( → 1956 ) Republican Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: Dwight D. Eisenhower VP nominee: Richard Nixon Other candidates: Riley A. Bender George T. Mickelson Harold Stassen Robert Taft Earl Warren Democratic Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: Adlai Stevenson II VP nominee: John Sparkman Other candidates: Alben W. Barkley Paul A. Dever W. Averell Harriman Hubert Humphrey Estes Kefauver Robert S. Kerr Richard Russell Jr.

Third-party and independent candidates Prohibition Party Nominee: Stuart Hamblen VP nominee: Enoch A. Holtwick Progressive Party Convention Nominee: Vincent Hallinan VP nominee: Charlotta Bass Socialist Labor Party Nominee: Eric Hass Socialist Party Nominee: Darlington Hoopes VP nominee: Samuel H. Friedman Socialist Workers Party Nominee: Farrell Dobbs VP nominee: Myra Tanner Weiss Independents and other candidates Edward Longstreet Bodin Henry B. Krajewski Homer Aubrey Tomlinson Other 1952 elections : House Senate v t e ( ← 1952 ) 1956 United States presidential election ( → 1960 ) Republican Party Convention Primaries Candidates Incumbent nominee: Dwight D. Eisenhower Incumbent VP nominee: Richard Nixon Democratic Party Convention Primaries Candidates Nominee: Adlai Stevenson II VP nominee: Estes Kefauver Other candidates: John S. Battle Happy Chandler James C. Davis John F. Kennedy W. Averell Harriman Lyndon B. Johnson Frank Lausche George Bell Timmerman Jr.

Third-party and independent candidates American Vegetarian Party Nominee: Herbert M. Shelton VP nominee: Symon Gould Prohibition Party Nominee: Enoch A. Holtwick VP nominee: Herbert C. Holdridge Socialist Labor Party Nominee: Eric Hass VP nominee: Georgia Cozzini Socialist Party Nominee: Darlington Hoopes VP nominee: Samuel H. Friedman Socialist Workers Party Nominee: Farrell Dobbs VP nominee: Myra Tanner Weiss Independents and other candidates T. Coleman Andrews Gerald L. K. Smith Other 1956 elections : House Senate v t e Theodore Roosevelt Award winners 1967: Eisenhower 1968: Saltonstall 1969: White 1970: Hovde 1971: Kraft Jr.

1972: Holland 1973: Omar Bradley 1974: Owens 1975: Ford 1976: Hamilton 1977: Tom Bradley 1978: Zornow 1979: Chandler 1980: Cooley 1981: Linkletter 1982: Cosby 1983: Palmer 1984: Lawrence 1985: Fleming 1986: Bush 1987: Zable 1988: Not presented 1989: Ebert 1990: Reagan 1991: Gibson 1992: Kemp 1993: Alexander 1994: Johnson 1995: Mathias 1996: Wooden 1997: Payne 1998: Dole 1999: Richardson 2000: Staubach 2001: Cohen 2002: Shriver 2003: de Varona 2004: Page 2005: Ride 2006: Kraft 2007: Tagliabue 2008: Glenn 2009: Albright 2010: Mitchell 2011: Dunwoody 2012: Allen 2013: Dungy 2014: Mills 2015: Jackson 2016: Ueberroth 2017: Brooke-Marciniak 2018: Wilmore 2019: Caslen 2020: Delaney 2021: McLendon 2022: Boudreaux 2023: Shields 2024: Catena 2025: Sloan Green v t e National Football Foundation Gold Medal winners 1958: Dwight D. Eisenhower 1959: Douglas MacArthur 1960: Herbert Hoover & Amos Alonzo Stagg 1961: John F. Kennedy 1962: Byron "Whizzer" White 1963: Roger Blough 1964: Donold B. Lourie 1965: Juan T. Trippe 1966: Earl H. "Red" Blaik 1967: Frederick L. Hovde 1968: Chester J. LaRoche 1969: Richard Nixon 1970: Thomas J. Hamilton 1971: Ronald Reagan 1972: Gerald Ford 1973: John Wayne 1974: Gerald B. Zornow 1975: David Packard 1976: Edgar B. Speer 1977: Louis H. Wilson 1978: Vincent dePaul Draddy 1979: William P. Lawrence 1980: Walter J. Zable 1981: Justin W. Dart 1982: Silver Anniversary Awards (NCAA) - All Honored Jim Brown , Willie Davis , Jack Kemp , Ron Kramer , Jim Swink 1983: Jack Kemp 1984: John F. McGillicuddy 1985: William I. Spencer 1986: William H. Morton 1987: Charles R. Meyer 1988: Clinton E. Frank 1989: Paul Brown 1990: Thomas H. Moorer 1991: George H. W. Bush 1992: Donald R. Keough 1993: Norman Schwarzkopf 1994: Thomas S. Murphy 1995: Harold Alfond 1996: Gene Corrigan 1997: Jackie Robinson 1998: John H. McConnell 1999: Keith Jackson 2000: Fred M. Kirby II 2001: Billy Joe "Red" McCombs 2002: George Steinbrenner 2003: Tommy Franks 2004: William V. Campbell 2005: Jon F. Hanson 2006: Joe Paterno & Bobby Bowden 2007: Pete Dawkins & Roger Staubach 2008: John Glenn 2009: Phil Knight & Bill Bowerman 2010: Bill Cosby 2011: Robert Gates 2012: Roscoe Brown 2013: National Football League & Roger Goodell 2014: Tom Catena & George Weiss 2015: Condoleezza Rice 2016: Archie Manning 2017: None awarded 2018: Aaron Feis & Jason Seaman 2019: Mark Harmon v t e Time Persons of the Year 1927–1950 Charles Lindbergh (1927) Walter Chrysler (1928) Owen D. Young (1929) Mohandas Gandhi (1930) Pierre Laval (1931) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1932) Hugh S. Johnson (1933) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1934) Haile Selassie (1935) Wallis Simpson (1936) Chiang Kai-shek / Soong Mei-ling (1937) Adolf Hitler (1938) Joseph Stalin (1939) Winston Churchill (1940) Franklin D. Roosevelt (1941) Joseph Stalin (1942) George Marshall (1943) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1944) Harry S. Truman (1945) James F. Byrnes (1946) George Marshall (1947) Harry S. Truman (1948) Winston Churchill (1949) The American Fighting-Man (1950) 1951–1975 Mohammed Mosaddeq (1951) Elizabeth II (1952) Konrad Adenauer (1953) John Foster Dulles (1954) Harlow Curtice (1955) Hungarian Freedom Fighters (1956) Nikita Khrushchev (1957) Charles de Gaulle (1958) Dwight D. Eisenhower (1959) U.S. Scientists: George Beadle / Charles Draper / John Enders / Donald A. Glaser / Joshua Lederberg / Willard Libby / Linus Pauling / Edward Purcell / Isidor Rabi / Emilio Segrè / William Shockley / Edward Teller / Charles Townes / James Van Allen / Robert Woodward (1960) John F. Kennedy (1961) Pope John XXIII (1962) Martin Luther King Jr.

(1963) Lyndon B. Johnson (1964) William Westmoreland (1965) The Generation Twenty-Five and Under (1966) Lyndon B. Johnson (1967) The Apollo 8 Astronauts : William Anders / Frank Borman / Jim Lovell (1968) The Middle Americans (1969) Willy Brandt (1970) Richard Nixon (1971) Henry Kissinger / Richard Nixon (1972) John Sirica (1973) King Faisal (1974) American Women: Susan Brownmiller / Kathleen Byerly / Alison Cheek / Jill Conway / Betty Ford / Ella Grasso / Carla Hills / Barbara Jordan / Billie Jean King / Susie Sharp / Carol Sutton / Addie Wyatt (1975) 1976–2000 Jimmy Carter (1976) Anwar Sadat (1977) Deng Xiaoping (1978) Ayatollah Khomeini (1979) Ronald Reagan (1980) Lech Wałęsa (1981) The Computer (1982) Ronald Reagan / Yuri Andropov (1983) Peter Ueberroth (1984) Deng Xiaoping (1985) Corazon Aquino (1986) Mikhail Gorbachev (1987) The Endangered Earth (1988) Mikhail Gorbachev (1989) George H. W. Bush (1990) Ted Turner (1991) Bill Clinton (1992) The Peacemakers: Yasser Arafat / F. W. de Klerk / Nelson Mandela / Yitzhak Rabin (1993) Pope John Paul II (1994) Newt Gingrich (1995) David Ho (1996) Andrew Grove (1997) Bill Clinton / Ken Starr (1998) Jeff Bezos (1999) George W. Bush (2000) 2001–present Rudolph Giuliani (2001) The Whistleblowers: Cynthia Cooper / Coleen Rowley / Sherron Watkins (2002) The American Soldier (2003) George W. Bush (2004) The Good Samaritans: Bono / Bill Gates / Melinda Gates (2005) You (2006) Vladimir Putin (2007) Barack Obama (2008) Ben Bernanke (2009) Mark Zuckerberg (2010) The Protester (2011) Barack Obama (2012) Pope Francis (2013) Ebola Fighters : Dr. Jerry Brown / Dr.

Kent Brantly /  Ella Watson-Stryker / Foday Gollah / Salome Karwah (2014) Angela Merkel (2015) Donald Trump (2016) The Silence Breakers (2017) The Guardians: Jamal Khashoggi / Maria Ressa / Wa Lone / Kyaw Soe Oo / Staff of The Capital (2018) Greta Thunberg (2019) Joe Biden / Kamala Harris (2020) Elon Musk (2021) Volodymyr Zelenskyy / Spirit of Ukraine (2022) Taylor Swift (2023) Donald Trump (2024) v t e Philippine Legion of Honor recipients Chief Commander (Punong Komandante) Emilio Aguinaldo Hassanal Bolkiah Chiang Kai-shek Dwight D. Eisenhower Leonardo Espina Francisco Franco José P. Laurel Douglas MacArthur Ferdinand Marcos Imelda Marcos Sergio Osmeña Jesse Robredo Chino Roces Franklin D. Roosevelt Jaime Sin Achmad Sukarno Lorenzo Tañada Maxwell D. Taylor Claudio Teehankee Grand Commander (Marangal na Komandante) Gilbert Teodoro Emilio Yap Fernando Zobel de Ayala Jaime Zobel de Ayala Jaime Augusto Zobel de Ayala Napoleon G. Rama Grand Officer (Marangal na Pinuno) Teodoro Locsin Jr.

Commander (Komandante) Benigno Aquino Jr.

Eulogio Balao Sotero Cabahug Alfredo Montelibano Sr.

Officer (Pinuno) Benigno Aquino Jr.

Manny Pacquiao Legionnaire (Lehiyonaryo) Escuadrón 201 Teodoro Locsin Sr.

Geronima Pecson Edith Nourse Rogers Richard Sakakida v t e Order of Sikatuna recipients Grand Collar (Raja) Juan Carlos I Dwight D. Eisenhower Bhumibol Adulyadej Suharto Chuan Leekpai Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono Akihito Shinzō Abe Jaime Sin Grand Cross (Datu) Robert Gerard Brinks Daniel Inouye Aftab Ahmad Khan Graeme Matheson Jerril Santos George Yeo Sadako Ogata Manny Pacquiao Tess Lazaro v t e Individuals lain in state , in honor and in repose in the United States State funerals in the United States Lain in state US Capitol rotunda Clay (1852) Lincoln (1865, funeral ) Stevens (1868) Sumner (1874) Wilson (1875) Garfield (1881) Logan (1886) McKinley (1901) L'Enfant (1909) Dewey (1917) Unknown Soldier for World War I (1921) Harding (1923) W. H. Taft (1930) Pershing (1948) R. A. Taft (1953) Unknown Soldiers for World War II and the Korean War (1958) Kennedy (1963, funeral ) MacArthur (1964) H. Hoover (1964) Eisenhower (1969) Dirksen (1969) J. E. Hoover (1972) Johnson (1973) Humphrey (1978) Blassie / Unknown Soldier for the Vietnam War (1984) Pepper (1989) Reagan (2004, funeral ) Ford (2006–07, funeral ) Inouye (2012) McCain (2018) Bush (2018, funeral ) Lewis (2020) Dole (2021) Reid (2022) Carter (2024–25, funeral ) National Statuary Hall Cummings (2019) Ginsburg (2020, funeral ) Young (2022) House Chamber Hooper (1875) Herbert C. Hoover Building Brown (1996) Old Senate Chamber Chase (1873) Lain in honor US Capitol rotunda Chestnut and Gibson (1998) Parks (2005) Graham (2018) Sicknick (2021) Evans (2021) Williams (2022) Lain in repose East Room Harrison (1841) Taylor (1850) Lincoln (1865, funeral ) McKinley (1901) Harding (1923) Roosevelt (1945) Kennedy (1963, funeral ) Great Hall of the US Supreme Court Warren (1974) Marshall (1993) Burger (1995) Brennan (1997) Blackmun (1999) Rehnquist (2005) Scalia (2016) Stevens (2019) Ginsburg (2020, funeral ) O'Connor (2023) Senate Chamber Byrd (2010) Lautenberg (2013) Bold : Presidents and chief justices Portals : 1940s 1950s Biography Kansas Law Politics Texas United States Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists ULAN MusicBrainz RKD Artists People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef NARA SNAC Te Papa (New Zealand) Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dwight_D._Eisenhower&oldid=1304804975 " Categories : Dwight D. Eisenhower 1890 births 1969 deaths 20th-century Presbyterians 20th-century presidents of the United States American anti-communists American anti-fascists American five-star officers American football halfbacks American people of Pennsylvania Dutch descent American people of the Korean War American Presbyterians Army Black Knights football players Candidates in the 1952 United States presidential election Candidates in the 1956 United States presidential election Carnegie Endowment for International Peace Companions of the Liberation Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy alumni Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy Eisenhower family Graduates of the United States Military Academy Class of 1915 Grand Cross of the Legion of Honour Grand Crosses of the Order of George I with Swords Grand Crosses of the Order of Polonia Restituta Grand Crosses of the Order of the Liberator General San Martin Grand Crosses of the Order of the White Lion Grand Crosses of the Virtuti Militari Honorary Knights Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath Honorary members of the Order of Merit Kansas Republicans Knights Grand Cross of the Military Order of Savoy Members of the Order of the Holy Sepulchre Military personnel from Kansas Military personnel from Pennsylvania Military personnel from Texas NATO Supreme Allied Commanders New York (state) Republicans Pennsylvania Republicans Politicians from Abilene, Kansas People from Denison, Texas Politicians from Gettysburg, Pennsylvania People of the Cold War People of the Congo Crisis People with Crohn's disease Presidents of Columbia University Presidents of the United States American recipients of the Croix de guerre (Belgium) American recipients of the Croix de Guerre 1939–1945 (France) Recipients of the Czechoslovak War Cross 1939–1945 Recipients of the Distinguished Service Medal (US Army) Recipients of the Distinguished Service Star Recipients of the Grand Decoration with Sash for Services to the Republic of Austria Recipients of the Legion of Merit Recipients of the National Order of Merit (Malta) Recipients of the Navy Distinguished Service Medal Recipients of the Order of Military Merit (Brazil) Recipients of the Order of Suvorov, 1st class Recipients of the Order of the Cross of Grunwald, 1st class Recipients of the Order of Victory Republican Party (United States) presidential nominees Republican Party presidents of the United States Residents of Thatched House Lodge Members of the Sons of the American Revolution St. Mary's Rattlers football coaches Time Person of the Year Chiefs of Staff of the United States Army United States Army Command and General Staff College alumni United States Army generals of World War II United States Army generals United States Army personnel of World War I United States Army War College alumni United States Military Academy alumni United States military governors World Golf Hall of Fame inductees Writers from Kansas Writers from Pennsylvania Writers from Texas Players of American football from Kansas Coaches of American football from Kansas United States Army Infantry Branch personnel Centrism in the United States Recipients of orders, decorations, and medals of Ethiopia Deaths from congestive heart failure in the United States 20th-century American farmers Progressive conservatism Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Pages including recorded pronunciations Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalism Use American English from July 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from July 2025 Articles with hAudio microformats All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from July 2016 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from March 2019 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2023 Articles with excerpts Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles containing French-language text Pages using Sister project links with wikidata mismatch Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 07:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dwight D. Eisenhower 145 languages Add topic

