Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition in the real numbers 2 Definition in a metric space 3 Boundedness in topological vector spaces 4 Boundedness in order theory 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Bounded set 30 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Íslenska Italiano עברית Қазақша Latviešu Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 文言 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Collection of mathematical objects of finite size This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( November 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) An artist's impression of a bounded set (top) and of an unbounded set (bottom). The set at the bottom continues forever towards the right.

In mathematical analysis and related areas of mathematics , a set is called bounded if all of its points are within a certain distance of each other. Conversely, a set which is not bounded is called unbounded . The word "bounded" makes no sense in a general topological space without a corresponding metric .

Boundary is a distinct concept; for example, a circle (not to be confused with a disk ) in isolation is a boundaryless bounded set, while the half plane is unbounded yet has a boundary.

A bounded set is not necessarily a closed set and vice versa. For example, a subset S of a 2-dimensional real space R 2 constrained by two parabolic curves x 2 + 1 and x 2 − 1 defined in a Cartesian coordinate system is closed by the curves but not bounded (so unbounded).

Definition in the real numbers [ edit ] A real set with upper bounds and its supremum .

A set S of real numbers is called bounded from above if there exists some real number k (not necessarily in S ) such that k ≥ s for all s in S . The number k is called an upper bound of S . The terms bounded from below and lower bound are similarly defined.

A set S is bounded if it has both upper and lower bounds. Therefore, a set of real numbers is bounded if it is contained in a finite interval .

Definition in a metric space [ edit ] A subset S of a metric space ( M , d ) is bounded if there exists r > 0 such that for all s and t in S , we have d ( s , t ) < r . The metric space ( M , d ) is a bounded metric space (or d is a bounded metric) if M is bounded as a subset of itself.

Total boundedness implies boundedness. For subsets of R n the two are equivalent.

A metric space is compact if and only if it is complete and totally bounded.

A subset of Euclidean space R n is compact if and only if it is closed and bounded. This is also called the Heine-Borel theorem .

Boundedness in topological vector spaces [ edit ] Main article: Bounded set (topological vector space) In topological vector spaces , a different definition for bounded sets exists which is sometimes called von Neumann boundedness . If the topology of the topological vector space is induced by a metric which is homogeneous , as in the case of a metric induced by the norm of normed vector spaces , then the two definitions coincide.

Boundedness in order theory [ edit ] A set of real numbers is bounded if and only if it has an upper and lower bound. This definition is extendable to subsets of any partially ordered set . Note that this more general concept of boundedness does not correspond to a notion of "size".

A subset S of a partially ordered set P is called bounded above if there is an element k in P such that k ≥ s for all s in S . The element k is called an upper bound of S . The concepts of bounded below and lower bound are defined similarly.  (See also upper and lower bounds .) A subset S of a partially ordered set P is called bounded if it has both an upper and a lower bound, or equivalently, if it is contained in an interval . Note that this is not just a property of the set S but also one of the set S as subset of P .

A bounded poset P (that is, by itself, not as subset) is one that has a least element and a greatest element . Note that this concept of boundedness has nothing to do with finite size, and that a subset S of a bounded poset P with as order the restriction of the order on P is not necessarily a bounded poset.

A subset S of R n is bounded with respect to the Euclidean distance if and only if it bounded as subset of R n with the product order . However, S may be bounded as subset of R n with the lexicographical order , but not with respect to the Euclidean distance.

A class of ordinal numbers is said to be unbounded, or cofinal , when given any ordinal, there is always some element of the class greater than it. Thus in this case "unbounded" does not mean unbounded by itself but unbounded as a subclass of the class of all ordinal numbers.

See also [ edit ] Bounded domain Bounded function Local boundedness Order theory Totally bounded References [ edit ] Bartle, Robert G.

; Sherbert, Donald R. (1982).

Introduction to Real Analysis . New York: John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 0-471-05944-7 .

Richtmyer, Robert D.

(1978).

Principles of Advanced Mathematical Physics . New York: Springer.

ISBN 0-387-08873-3 .

v t e Metric spaces ( Category ) Basic concepts Metric space Cauchy sequence Completeness Equivalent metrics Metrizable space Triangle inequality Main results Baire category theorem Banach fixed-point Kuratowski embedding Lebesgue's number lemma Metrization theorems : Bing Nagata–Smirnov Urysohn's Maps Contraction Metric map Dilation Equicontinuity ( Quasi- ) Isometry Lipschitz continuity Metric derivative Metric outer measure Metric projection Motion Quasisymmetric Stretch factor Uniform continuity Isomorphism Uniform convergence Types of metric spaces Complete Convex Doubling Hyperbolic Injective Length metric space Metric space aimed at its subspace Polish Totally bounded Tree-graded Ultrametric space Uniformly disconnected Urysohn universal Sets Balls Borel Bounded Delone Diameter Distance set Gromov product Gromov–Hausdorff convergence Hausdorff distance Kuratowski convergence Meyer Packing dimension Porous Positively separated sets Tight span Examples Manifolds Euclidean distance Riemannian Functional analysis and Measure theory Chebyshev distance Inner product space Lévy metric Lévy–Prokhorov metric Metrizable topological vector space Normed space Taxicab geometry Wasserstein metric General topology Discrete space Intrinsic metric Laakso space Product metric Related Category of metric spaces Cantor space Generalizations Approach space Cauchy space Coarse structure Cosmic space Diversity Generalised metric Measure space Probabilistic metric space Proximity space Pseudometric space Uniform space Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Bounded_set&oldid=1286211856 " Categories : Functional analysis Mathematical analysis Order theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from November 2023 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 18 April 2025, at 12:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Bounded set 30 languages Add topic

