Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Recipients 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents I. I. Rabi Prize 2 languages বাংলা Deutsch Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about an award given by the American Physical Society. For the similarly named award given by the IEEE, see I. I. Rabi Award .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "I. I. Rabi Prize" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) American award for atomic, molecular, and optical physics The I. I. Rabi Prize in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics is given by the American Physical Society to recognize outstanding work by mid-career researchers in the field of atomic, molecular, and optical physics . The award was endowed in 1989 in honor of the physicist I. I. Rabi and has been awarded biannually since 1991.

The prize citation reads: "To recognize and encourage outstanding research in Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics by investigators who have held a Ph.D. for no more than 10 years prior to the nomination deadline. The prize consists of $10,000 and a certificate citing the contributions made by the recipient. An allowance will be provided for travel expenses of the recipient to the Society meeting at which the prize is presented. It is awarded in odd-numbered years." [ 1 ] Recipients [ edit ] Source: [ 2 ] 1991 Chris H. Greene : "For his many contributions to atomic and molecular theory including studies of resonance vibronic processes, multiple electron excitations, photo-absorption in external fields, and threshold effects of long range forces." 1993 Timothy E. Chupp : "For his contributions to the development of high density polarized noble gases by spin exchange with optically pumped alkali atoms and in particular for his leadership and use of polarized 3He as a target for fundamental experiments in nuclear physics." 1995 Randall G. Hulet : "For his contributions to a broad range of important problems in atomic and optical physics including cavity quantum electrodynamics, quantum jumps, ion storage, and laser cooling of atoms. In the latter field, in particular for his demonstration of multiphoton cooling involving Doppleron resonances in neutral Lithium and his collision experiments with cooled Lithium vapor." 1997 Eric Allin Cornell and Wolfgang Ketterle : "For achieving Bose-Einstein condensation of an atomic gas, for creating techniques for studying the Bose condensate, and for measuring the physical properties of the weakly interacting atomic Bose gas." 1999 Mark G. Raizen : "For his pioneering advances in the experimental study of atom optics, and especially for the insightful connections he has developed between this discipline and studies of chaotic dynamics, condensed matter physics, and dissipative quantum systems." 2001 Christopher Monroe : "For his pivotal experiments that implemented quantum logic using trapped atomic ions, and for his fundamental studies of coherence and decoherence in entangled quantum systems." 2003 Mark A. Kasevich : "For developing atom interferometer inertial sensors with unprecedented precision, and for pioneering studies of Bose-Einstein condensates, especially the achievement of non-classical spin states and the demonstration of a mode-locked atom laser." 2005 Deborah Jin : 2007 Jun Ye : "For advances in precision measurement, including techniques for stabilizing and measuring optical frequencies, controlling the phase of femtosecond laser pulses, and measuring molecular transitions." 2009 Mikhail Lukin : "For pioneering theoretical and experimental work at the interface between quantum optics, quantum information processing, and the quantum many body problem." 2011 Cheng Chin: "For pioneering work in strongly interacting Fermi gas and few body physics including the discovery of the Effimov effect." 2013 Markus Greiner : "For seminal contributions to the field of ultracold atoms, including the observation of the superfluid-to-Mott-insulator transition, the study of the BEC-BCS cross over for fermions, and the development of imaging techniques for atoms in optical lattices with single-atom resolution" 2015 Ian Spielman : "For the development of quantum simulations using ultra-cold atoms, creation of synthetic electromagnetic fields, demonstration of synthetic spinorbit coupling, and applications to studying new physical systems." 2017 Martin Zwierlein : "For seminal studies of ultracold Fermi gases, including precision measurements of the equation of state, the observation of superfluidity, solitons, vortices, and polarons, the realization of a microscope for fermions in a lattice; and the production of chemically stable polar molecules." 2019 Kang-Kuen Ni : "For seminal work on ultracold molecules, including original contributions to the understanding of chemical reactions in the quantum regime, deterministic creation of individual molecules with optical tweezers, and development of novel, high-precision techniques to interrogate and control the complete set of internal molecular resources." 2021 Monika Schleier-Smith : "For seminal work in quantum optics and for discoveries at the intersection of AMO, condensed matter, and quantum information, including original contributions to spin squeezing in optical cavities, engineering long-range interactions for quantum simulations, and metrology, and for theoretical development of a measurement protocol related to the scrambling of quantum information." 2023 Adam M. Kaufman : "For seminal developments in optical tweezer arrays and clocks based on alkaline earth atoms, with applications to metrology and quantum information processing." See also [ edit ] List of physics awards Arthur L. Schawlow Prize in Laser Science Norman F. Ramsey Prize in Atomic, Molecular and Optical Physics, and in Precision Tests of Fundamental Laws and Symmetries References [ edit ] ^ a b American Physical Society.

"I. I. Rabi Prize in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics" . Retrieved July 22, 2019 .

^ The source of all citations quoted in this section is: American Physical Society.

"I. I. Rabi Prize in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics" . Retrieved July 22, 2019 .

External links [ edit ] I.I. Rabi Prize in Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics (official site) v t e American Physical Society Membership Fellows (1921–1971) Fellows (1972–1997) Fellows (1998–2010) Fellows (2011–present) Awards Full list of awards Abraham Pais Prize Andrei Sakharov Prize Aneesur Rahman Prize Arthur L. Schawlow Prize Dannie Heinemann Prize David Adler Lectureship Award Davisson–Germer Prize Earle K. Plyler Prize Einstein Prize Fluid Dynamics Prize Francis M. Pipkin Award Frank Isakson Prize George E. Pake Prize Hans A. Bethe Prize Herbert P. Broida Prize Herman Feshbach Prize I. I. Rabi Prize Irving Langmuir Award James C. McGroddy Prize James Clerk Maxwell Prize John H. Dillon Medal Joseph F. Keithley Award Lars Onsager Prize Leo P. Kadanoff Prize Leo Szilard Lectureship Award LeRoy Apker Award Lilienfeld Prize Maria Goeppert-Mayer Award Max Delbruck Prize Norman F. Ramsey Prize Oliver E. Buckley Prize Panofsky Prize Robert R. Wilson Prize Sakurai Prize Tom W. Bonner Prize Publications Physics Today Physics Magazine Journals Physical Review Letters A B C D E X Accelerators and Beams Applied Fluids Materials Physics Education Research Research Reviews of Modern Physics Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=I._I._Rabi_Prize&oldid=1209901830 " Categories : Awards of the American Physical Society Atomic physics Atomic, molecular, and optical physics Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from January 2020 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 February 2024, at 02:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents I. I. Rabi Prize 2 languages Add topic

