Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Civic duty 2 Duties of employment 3 Legal duties 4 Filial duty 5 In various cultures 6 Philosophical perspectives Toggle Philosophical perspectives subsection 6.1 Epictetus 6.2 Marcus Aurelius 6.3 Nietzsche 6.4 George Howison 6.5 Ayn Rand 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Duty 52 languages العربية Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Kiswahili Kreyòl ayisyen Кыргызча Latina Lietuvių Nederlands नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Polski Português Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Українська اردو 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Commitment or expectation to act This article is about the ethical concept. For other uses, see Duty (disambiguation) .

"Duty" by Edmund Leighton A duty (from "due" meaning "that which is owing"; Old French : deu, did , past participle of devoir ; Latin : debere, debitum , whence " debt ") is a commitment or expectation to perform some action in general or if certain circumstances arise. A duty may arise from a system of ethics or morality , especially in an honor culture . Many duties are created by law, sometimes including a codified punishment or liability for non-performance. Performing one's duty may require some sacrifice of self-interest .

A sense-of-duty is also a virtue or personality trait that characterizes someone who is diligent about fulfilling individual duties or who confidently knows their calling . A sense-of-duty can also come from a need to fulfill familial pressures and desires. This is typically seen in a militaristic or patriotic way.

[ 1 ] A distinction is commonly made between "positive duties", which a person must undertake, and "negative duties", which relate to actions from which a person must refrain. Michael Freeman notes that negative duties may be easier to fulfill as they do not require any action.

[ 2 ] Cicero , an early Roman philosopher who discusses duty in his work "On Duties", suggests that duties can come from four different sources: [ 3 ] as a result of being a human as a result of one's particular place in life (one's family, one's country, one's job) as a result of one's character as a result of one's own moral expectations for oneself.

The specific duties imposed by law or culture vary considerably, depending on jurisdiction, religion , and social normalities .

Civic duty [ edit ] Main article: Civic virtue Duty is also often perceived as something owed to one's country (patriotism), or to one's homeland or community.

[ 4 ] Civic duties could include: Obey the law Pay taxes Provide for a common defense, should the need arise Enroll to vote, and vote at all elections and referendums (unless there is a reasonable excuse such as a religious objection, being overseas, or illness on polling day) Serve on a jury, if called upon Go to the aid of victims of accidents and street crime and testifying as a witness later in court Report contagious illnesses or pestilence to public-health authorities Volunteer for public services (e.g. life-saving drills) Donate blood periodically or when needed Give time to voice advice on a relevant field of expertise, benefits, workplace improvements and on how it is conducted or run Revolt against an unjust government Duties of employment [ edit ] Specific obligations arise in the services performed by a minister of a church, by a soldier, or by any employee or servant.

[ 5 ] Examples: Dereliction of duty is an offense in U.S. military law [ 6 ] Duty to protect , in medicine [ 7 ] [ 8 ] In loco parentis , for schools [ 9 ] Professional responsibility for lawyers [ 10 ] and accountants [ 11 ] Legal duties [ edit ] Examples of legal duties include: Duty of care Duty of candour Duty to defend and duty to settle , in insurance Duty to pay tax (for instance: import duty ) Duty to rescue Duty to retreat Duty to report a felony [ 12 ] Duty to vote (in countries with mandatory voting) Duty to warn Fiduciary duties Duty to care for children as legal guardian (opposite of child neglect ) Special duties created by a contract In loco parentis (duty like a parent to child towards nonhuman entities, such as animals, river, environment, etc. e.g. by treating them as legal person .

[ 13 ] Filial duty [ edit ] See also: Filial piety Lady Feng and the Bear In most cultures, children are expected to take on duties in relation to their families. This may take the form of behaving in such a way that upholds the family's honor in the eyes of the community, entering into arranged marriages that benefit the family's status, or caring for ailing relatives.

This family-oriented sense of duty is a particularly central aspect to the teachings of Confucius , and is known as xiao , or filial piety . As such, the duties of filial piety have played an enormous role in the lives of people in eastern Asia for centuries. For example, the painting Lady Feng and the Bear , from ancient China, depicts the heroic act of a consort of the emperor placing herself between her husband and a rampaging bear. This is meant to be taken as an example of admirable filial behavior.

[ clarification needed ] Filial piety is considered so important that in some cases, it outweighs other cardinal virtues: [ clarification needed ] In a modern example, "concerns with filial piety of the same general sort that motivate women to engage in factory work in Korea, Japan, Taiwan, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, and elsewhere in Asia are commonly cited by Thai prostitutes as one of their primary rationales for working in the skin trade ".

[ 14 ] The importance of filial piety can be expressed in this quote from the Analects of Confucius: "Yu Tzu said, 'It is rare for a man whose character is such that he is good as a son and obedient as a young man to have the inclination to transgress against his superiors; it is unheard of for one who has no such inclination to be inclined to start a rebellion. The gentleman devotes his efforts to the roots, for once the roots are established, the Way will grow there from. Being good as a son and obedient as a young man is, perhaps, the root of a man's character'".

[ citation needed ] In various cultures [ edit ] Duty varies between different cultures and continents. Duty in Asia and Latin America is commonly more heavily weighted than in Western culture . According to a study done on attitudes toward family obligation : Asian and Latin American adolescents possessed stronger values and greater expectations regarding their duty to assist, respect, and support their families than their peers with European backgrounds.

[ 15 ] The deeply rooted tradition of duty among both Asian and Latin American cultures contributes to much of the strong sense of duty that exists in comparison to western cultures.

[ clarification needed ] Michael Peletz discusses the concept of duty in his book Gender, Sexuality, and Body Politics in Modern Asia : Notions of filial duty … are commonly invoked to mobilize the loyalties, labor power, and other resources children in the ostensible interests of the household and, in some cases, those of the lineage clan as a whole. Doctrines of filial piety … attuned to them may thus be a source of great comfort and solace to the elders but they can also be experienced as stressful, repressive, or both by those who are  enjoined to honor their parents’ (and grandparents’) wishes and unspoken expectations.

[ 14 ] An arranged marriage is an example of an expected duty in Asia and the Middle East. In an arranged marriage relating to duty, it is expected that the wife will move in with the husband's family and household to raise their children.

Patrilocal residence is usual; rarely does the man move in with the woman, or is the married couple allowed to start their own household and life somewhere else. They need to provide for the entire family in labor and care for the farms and family.

[ clarification needed ] Older generations rely on help from their children's and grandchildren's families. This form of duty is in response to [ clarification needed ] keeping the lineage of a family intact and obliging to the needs of elders.

Philosophical perspectives [ edit ] Epictetus [ edit ] In his Discourses , Epictetus employs the analogy of the human foot to elucidate the moral significance of duty: "Do you not know, that as a foot is no longer a foot if it is detached from the body, so you are no longer a man if you are separated from other men." Just as a human foot may sometimes get dirty or pierced by thorns in service to the body, individuals must also fulfil their roles, even if it entails facing sickness, perilous journeys, or premature death. Epictetus states, "It is your duty then, since you are come here, to say what you ought, to arrange these things as it is fit." [ 16 ] Marcus Aurelius [ edit ] Marcus Aurelius extensively discusses duty in his Meditations , in a way that can be summarised using a key section from Book VIII: It is thy duty to order thy life well in every single act; and if every act does its duty, as far as is possible, be content; and no one is able to hinder thee so that each act shall not do its duty.- But something external will stand in the way.- Nothing will stand in the way of thy acting justly and soberly and considerately.- But perhaps some other active power will be hindered.- Well, but by acquiescing in the hindrance and by being content to transfer thy efforts to that which is allowed, another opportunity of action is immediately put before thee in place of that which was hindered, and one which will adapt itself to this ordering of which we are speaking.

[ 17 ] Similar to Epictetus, he emphasises the importance of duty for humans beings in their social dimension, but goes further by grounding duty in rationality. Marcus traces the origins of social obligation through a logical progression, viewing duty as stemming from the shared human capacity to reason: "which commands us what to do, and what not to do; if this is so, we are fellow-citizens; if this is so, we are members of some political community." [ 18 ] This connection between reason and duty is highlighted too in Book VI, where he states: "I do my duty: other things trouble me not; for they are either things without life, or things without reason, or things that have rambled and know not the way." [ 19 ] In fact, earlier in the Meditations , Marcus expresses concern about the decline of cognitive abilities with age as it affects the fulfilment of duty, noting that "the conception of things and the understanding of them cease first," which weakens "the power of making use of ourselves, and filling up the measure of our duty." [ 20 ] He also urges readers to derive their sense of duty from within, rather than from external pressures, encouraging them to "stand erect; not be kept erect by others" and to "Labour not unwillingly, nor without regard to the common interest". Marcus repeatedly comes back to duty as a concept grounded in the human mind, but he does not ignore its social component, advising the reader to accept help, just as a lame solder ought to when fulfilling his duty to climb the battlements during a siege.

[ 21 ] Nietzsche [ edit ] Friedrich Nietzsche is among the fiercest critics of the concept of duty. "What destroys a man more quickly", he asks, "than to work, think, and feel without inner necessity, without any deep personal desire, without pleasure—as a mere automaton of 'duty'?" [ 22 ] Nietzsche claims that the task of all higher education is "to turn men into machines". The way to turn men into machines is to teach them to tolerate boredom. This is accomplished, Nietzsche says, by means of the concept of duty.

[ 23 ] The writings of Arthur Schopenhauer , including On the Basis of Morality , greatly influenced Nietzsche. These influences led Nietzsche to undertake a series of inversions, challenging the idea that morality stemmed from "compassion or sympathy." Instead, Nietzsche asserted that morality was rooted in life's self-overcoming through the will to power . As part of these inversions, Nietzsche explored concepts like "duty" and "pity", previously discussed by Immanuel Kant and Schopenhauer respectively.

[ citation needed ] George Howison [ edit ] George Howison anchored freedom in duty, writing: "Accordingly we may explicate the new doctrine of Jesus into these three truths: (1) That God is the perfect Person, the central member in the universal society actuated by love; (2) that the soul is immortal; (3) that it is free, both in the sense of being the responsible author of all its acts, and in the sense that its fund of ultimate resources is equal to fulfilling its duty to love as God loves." [ 24 ] Ayn Rand [ edit ] Ayn Rand , a youthful admirer of Nietzsche, anchored her morality against Kant's notion of duty. "In a deontological theory, all personal desires are banished from the realm of morality; a personal desire has no moral significance, be it a desire to create or a desire to kill. For example, if a man is not supporting his life from duty, such a morality makes no distinction between supporting it by honest labor or by robbery. If a man wants to be honest, he deserves no moral credit; as Kant would put it, such honesty is 'praiseworthy,' but without 'moral import.'" [ 25 ] See also [ edit ] Deontological ethics – Class of ethical theories Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Dharma – Key concept in Indian philosophy and Eastern religions, with multiple meanings Filial piety – Virtue and practice in Chinese classics and Chinese society at large Mitzvah – Precepts and commandments in Judaism Morality – Distinction between right and wrong or good and bad behavior References [ edit ] ^ Spence, Naomi J.; Henderson, Kathryn A.; Elder, Glen H. (September 2013).

"Does Adolescent Family Structure Predict Military Enlistment? A Comparison of Post–High School Activities" .

Journal of Family Issues .

34 (9): 1194– 1216.

doi : 10.1177/0192513X12457347 .

PMC 3757947 .

PMID 24000268 .

^ Freeman, Michael (2009). David P. Forsythe (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Human Rights . Oxford Reference. Philosophy.

^ Cicero, Marcus T. (1913) [44 BCE ].

De Officiis . Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

^ Ekman, Joakim; Amnå, Erik (2012).

"Political Participation and Civic Engagement: Towards A New Typology" .

Human Affairs .

22 (3): 283– 300.

doi : 10.2478/s13374-012-0024-1 .

S2CID 38562562 .

^ One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Duty ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 8 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 736.

^ 10 U.S.C.

§ 892 ^ Felthous, Alan R. (March 1999). "The Clinician's Duty to Protect Third Parties".

Psychiatric Clinics of North America .

22 (1): 49– 60.

doi : 10.1016/S0193-953X(05)70058-7 .

PMID 10083944 .

^ Kendler, Seth; Kodner, Ira J.; Keune, Jason D. (February 2013). "The role of the poor in medical research and the physician's duty to protect".

Surgery .

153 (2): 287– 291.

doi : 10.1016/j.surg.2012.11.002 .

PMID 23451343 .

^ Rumel, John (2013). "Back to the Future: The in Loco Parentis Doctrine and its Impact on Whether K-12 Schools and Teachers Owe a Fiduciary Duty to Students".

Indiana Law Review .

46 (3): 711– 751.

SSRN 2771309 .

^ Parness, Jeffrey (2022).

"Presuit Lawyer Information Duties Relevant to Civil Litigation" .

Marquette Law Review .

105 (4): 921– 961.

SSRN 3934638 .

^ Love, Vincent J; Eickemeyer, John H (March 2020). "Fiduciary Duty, Due Care, and the Public Interest: A Practical Dilemma for CPAs".

The CPA Journal .

90 (3): 6– 9.

ProQuest 2376135078 .

^ 18 U.S.C.

§ 4 ^ Bhattacharya, Ananya (7 June 2019).

"Birds to holy rivers: A list of everything India considers 'legal persons' " .

Quartz .

^ a b Peletz, Michael G. (2017).

Gender, Sexuality, and Body Politics in Modern Asia . Association for Asian Studies, Incorporated.

ISBN 978-0-924304-81-1 .

[ page needed ] ^ Fuligni, A.J.; Tseng, V.; Lam, M. (1999). "Attitudes toward Family Obligations among American Adolescents with Asian, Latin American, and European Backgrounds".

Child Development .

70 (4): 1030– 1044.

doi : 10.1111/1467-8624.00075 .

^ "The Project Gutenberg eBook of A Selection from the Discourses of Epictetus With the Encheiridion, Translated by George Long" .

www.gutenberg.org . Retrieved 3 August 2024 .

^ "The Internet Classics Archive | The Meditations by Marcus Aurelius" .

classics.mit.edu . Retrieved 5 August 2024 .

^ "The Internet Classics Archive | The Meditations by Marcus Aurelius" .

classics.mit.edu . Retrieved 3 August 2024 .

^ "The Internet Classics Archive | The Meditations by Marcus Aurelius" .

classics.mit.edu . Retrieved 3 August 2024 .

^ "The Internet Classics Archive | The Meditations by Marcus Aurelius" .

classics.mit.edu . Retrieved 5 August 2024 .

^ "The Internet Classics Archive | The Meditations by Marcus Aurelius" .

classics.mit.edu . Retrieved 5 August 2024 .

^ Nietzsche, Friedrich (1895).

The Antichrist . §11.

^ Nietzsche, Friedrich (1889). "Skirmishes of an untimely man".

Twilight of the Idols . §9.29.

^ The Limits of Evolution , George Howison, 1905, pp. 256-257, http://books.google.com/books?id=dg3wkAkfKQ4C&pg=PA257#v=onepage&q&f=false ^ Rand, Ayn (July 1970).

"Causality Versus Duty" .

The Objectivist .

9 (7): 3.

External links [ edit ] Duty on In Our Time at the BBC v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Portals : Law Philosophy Duty at Wikipedia's sister projects : Quotations from Wikiquote Data from Wikidata Authority control databases National Germany United States Japan Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐fpkrh
Cached time: 20250814215308
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.694 seconds
Real time usage: 0.845 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 5236/1000000
Revision size: 19807/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 133579/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6798/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 106053/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.442/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14409941/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  708.623      1 -total
 30.82%  218.386      1 Template:Reflist
 15.06%  106.688      9 Template:Cite_journal
 12.90%   91.430      2 Template:Langx
 12.07%   85.506      2 Template:Navbox
 10.55%   74.780      1 Template:Virtues
  9.81%   69.542      1 Template:Subject_bar
  7.50%   53.167      1 Template:Short_description
  6.13%   43.418      5 Template:Clarify
  5.59%   39.588      5 Template:Fix-span Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:183749:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215308 and revision id 1301384854. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Duty&oldid=1301384854 " Categories : Contract law Deontology Concepts in ethics Tort law Virtue Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from January 2025 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2025 Articles containing Old French (842-ca. 1400)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from July 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 14:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Duty 52 languages Add topic

