Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 2.1 In visual art 2.2 In literature 2.3 In music 2.4 Recent examples 3 See also 4 Further reading 5 References Toggle the table of contents Transgressive art 7 languages Azərbaycanca فارسی Français 日本語 Русский Shqip Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art that intends to outrage or violate basic morals and sensibilities This article needs to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( October 2024 ) Transgressive art is art that aims to outrage or cause a reaction from the observer. The term transgressive was first used in this sense by American filmmaker Nick Zedd and his Cinema of Transgression in 1985.

[ 1 ] Zedd used it to describe his legacy with underground film-makers like Paul Morrissey , John Waters , and Kenneth Anger , and the relationship they shared with Zedd and his New York City peers in the early 1980s.

[ 2 ] Definition [ edit ] From an academic perspective, many traces of transgression can be found in any art which is considered offensive because of its shock value ; from the French Salon des Refusés artists to Dada and Surrealism . Philosophers Mikhail Bakhtin and Georges Bataille have published works on the nature of transgression.
Transgressional works share some themes with art that deals with psychological dislocation and mental illness . Examples of this relationship, between social transgression and the exploration of mental states relating to illness, include many of the activities and works of the Dadaists , Surrealists , and Fluxus -related artists, such as Carolee Schneemann – and, in literature, Albert Camus 's L'Etranger or J.D. Salinger 's The Catcher in the Rye .

Examples [ edit ] In visual art [ edit ] Transgressive artist Richard Kern began making films in New York City with actors Nick Zedd and Lung Leg in the early 1980s. Some were videos for musical artists, including the Butthole Surfers and Sonic Youth .

[ 3 ] During the 1980s, artists such as Dread Scott created art that was so controversial that it ended up in the supreme court. In the case of Scott, United States v. Eichman , the Supreme Court ruled that it was unconstitutional for the government to prohibit an artwork that desecrates the American Flag.

[ 4 ] Another artist, Robert Mapplethorpe , caused the Director of the Contemporary Arts Center in Cincinnati to be put on trial for obscenity in 1990.

[ 5 ] Both cases were ruled in favor of the artists.

Among the most notorious works of transgressive art among the general public have been sculpture, collages, and installation art which offended Christian religious sensibilities.  These include Andres Serrano 's Piss Christ , [ 6 ] featuring a crucifix in a beaker of urine, and Chris Ofili 's The Holy Virgin Mary , a multi-media painting which is partially made of elephant dung.

Jeffrey Weiss of Artforum considers some of the work of Cy Twombly to be transgressive, citing "drawing as a form of scrawl".

[ 7 ] In literature [ edit ] The term can also be applied to transgressive literature as well. Examples include Trainspotting by Irvine Welsh , Blood and Guts in High School by Kathy Acker , American Psycho by Bret Easton Ellis , Fight Club by Chuck Palahniuk , Behead All Satans by MNM-DR, and J. G. Ballard 's short story "The Enormous Space". These works deal with issues that were considered to be outside the social norms. Their characters abuse drugs, engage in violent behaviour, and could be considered sexual deviants.

[ 8 ] Transgressive writing can also be reflected in non-fiction, such as in the writing style of Jim Goad .

[ 9 ] In music [ edit ] Subsequent transgressive artists of the 1990s overlapped the boundaries of literature, art, and music, including GG Allin , Lisa Crystal Carver , Shane Bugbee , and Costes . With these artists came a greater emphasis on life itself (or death) as art, rather than simply depicting a certain mindset in film or music. They were instrumental in creating a new type of visionary art and music, and influenced artists including Alec Empire , Cock E.S.P.

, Crash Worship , Usama Alshaibi , Liz Armstrong , Lennie Lee , Weasel Walter , Andy Ortmann , and the later work featured in Peter Bagge 's comic Hate .

Rock and roll music has inspired controversy and been transgressive from its inception. As certain other musical genres grew in popularity, some transgressive artists used controversy to make a statement, gain attention, or make a profit (or a combination of these).

[ 10 ] Among certain musical genres and movements, offending modern sensibilities was an integral part of the music. Musical genres that utilize transgressive themes or music include genres such as shock rock , punk rock , trap , grindcore , black metal and death metal , and various bands within the avant-garde rock or experimental rock genre.

[ citation needed ] Since the late twentieth century, the term has been most frequently applied to artists of musical genres such as hardcore hip hop , gangsta rap , and horrorcore .

Eminem was a major subject of such controversy; his early works, most notably The Slim Shady LP (1999) and The Marshall Mathers LP (2000), were subjects of backlash surrounding their violent lyricism.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Another major figure of criticism was rapper Tyler, the Creator , whose horrorcore-influenced debut studio album, Goblin , described graphic violence, which subsequently got his concerts banned from countries such as New Zealand [1] and the United Kingdom [2] . Though his former negative reputation softened to the masses [3] , Tyler, the Creator and his former hip-hop group, Odd Future 's music still faced major criticism for graphic lyrics present in their songs in the early 2010s.

Some musical artists use the controversy that surrounds transgressive art as a form of publicity.

[ 13 ] Recent examples [ edit ] Since the late 1990s, a new group of transgressive artists has emerged, such as the Canadian artist Rick Gibson who made a pair of earrings out of human fetuses and ate a piece of human testicle. In China, several artists have produced transgressive art; these include Zhu Yu (who published images of himself eating what appeared to be a human fetus ) and Yang Zhichao (who is known for extreme body art ).

See also [ edit ] Anti-art Artistic scandal Black comedy Cinema of Transgression New French Extremity New Gothic Art Pink Flamingos (1972 film) Shock art Stonetoss Subvertising Torture porn Transgressive fiction Extreme cinema Exploitation film Further reading [ edit ] Transgressions: The Offences of Art (2003) – Anthony Julius ISBN 0-500-23799-9 Deathtripping: The Cinema of Transgression (1995) – Jack Sargeant References [ edit ] ^ Shock Value: New York’s underground ‘Cinema of Transgression’-Dangerous Minds ^ Zedd, Nick (1985).

"The Cinema of Transgression Manifesto" . Retrieved 7 June 2014 .

^ Films by Richard Kern: Program 2 | MoMA ^ Cohen, Alina (2018-07-25).

"It's Legal to Burn the American Flag. This Artist Helped Make It A Form of Free Speech" .

Artsy . Retrieved 2021-05-04 .

^ Palmer, Alex.

"When Art Fought the Law and the Art Won" .

Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved 2021-05-04 .

^ Transgressive Art as a Form of Protest-Art News & Views [ usurped ] ^ By Jeffrey Weiss , Artforum ^ Word Watch — December 1996 from The Atlantic Monthly ^ Joseph Gallivan (30 Oct 2009).

"Citizen Goad" .

Entertainment . Portland Life. Archived from the original on December 21, 2008 . Retrieved 3 October 2011 .

^ "How to Effectively Use Controversy in Your Music Marketing Strategy" .

Becks Marketer . 9 March 2023 . Retrieved 21 June 2024 .

^ Harvilla, Rob (2019-02-20).

"Eminem Has Been America's Nightmare for 20 Years" .

The Ringer . Retrieved 2024-01-25 .

^ Mancini, Robert (September 13, 2000).

"Eminem Targeted At Senate Hearing" .

MTV News . Viacom. Archived from the original on February 22, 2014 . Retrieved February 9, 2014 .

^ "Transcendence, Transgression, and Rock & Roll: The Music of Luxury - Christ and Pop Culture" .

Christ and Pop Culture . Retrieved 2017-09-09 .

v t e Film genres By style Action Heroic bloodshed Hong Kong action Adventure Art Biographical Comedy Action Black Commedia all'italiana Sexy Dramedy Gross out Horror Parody Mo lei tau Remarriage Romantic Sex Screwball Silent Slapstick Cyberpunk Japanese Documentary Animated City symphony Direct cinema Docudrama Mockumentary Mondo Pseudo Semi Travel Video essay Drama Calligrafismo Dramedy Historical Legal Erotic Category III films Commedia sexy all'italiana Pink Sexploitation Thriller Educational Social guidance Epic Sword-and-sandal Experimental Exploitation see Exploitation film template Fantasy Comedy Contemporary Fantastique High Historical Magic realism Science Film noir Neo-noir Pulp noir Tech noir Gothic Romance Southern Space Suburban Urban Horror Arthouse Black Body Cannibal Chinese horror Christmas horror Comedy Eco Fantastique Found footage German underground Ghost Giallo List of films Holiday Japanese horror Korean horror Lovecraftian Melodrama Korean Natural New French Extremity Psycho-biddy Psychological Science fiction Slasher Splatter Satanic Maximalist film Minimalist film Mumblecore Musical Arthouse Backstage Jukebox Musicarello Operetta Sceneggiata Mystery Detective Occult detective Whodunit Giallo Crossover Pornographic Hardcore pornography Softcore pornography ( Malayalam ) Propaganda Reality Romantic Comedy Bromantic Fantasy Gothic Paranormal Thriller Science fiction Art Comedy Fantastique Fantasy Gothic Horror Military New Wave Space opera Steampunk Tokusatsu Western Slice of life Iyashikei Slow cinema Survival Thriller Comedy Erotic Financial Giallo Legal New French Extremity Political Psychological Romantic Techno Transgressive Cinema of Transgression Extreme cinema New French Extremity Trick By theme Animals Beach party Body swap Buddy Buddy cop Female Cabrito Cannibal Chicano Colonial Coming-of-age Concert Crime Detective Gangster Gentleman thief Gokudō Gong'an Heist Heroic bloodshed Hood Mafia Mafia comedy Mumbai underworld Poliziotteschi Yakuza Cute Girls Doing Cute Things Dance Disaster Apocalyptic Drug Psychedelic Stoner Dystopian Ecchi Ero guro Ethnographic Exploitation Blaxploitation Mexploitation Turksploitation Extraterrestrial Food and drink Gendai-geki Ghost Goona-goona epic Gothic Romance Space Suburban Girls with guns Harem Hentai Lolicon Shotacon Tentacle erotica Homeland Isekai Jidaigeki Samurai Kaitō LGBTQ Yaoi Yuri Luchador Magical girl Martial arts Bruceploitation Chopsocky Gun fu Kung fu Ninja Wuxia Mecha Anime Monster Giant monster Kaiju Mummy Vampire Zombie Zombie comedy Mountain Mouth of Garbage Muslim social Nature Environmental issues Opera Outlaw biker Ozploitation Partisan film Prison Women Race Rape and revenge Road Rubble Rumberas Sageuk Sexploitation Bavarian porn Commedia sexy all'italiana Mexican sex comedy Nazi exploitation Pornochanchada Nunsploitation Sex report Shoshimin-eiga Slavery Slice of life Snuff South Seas Sports Spy Eurospy Superhero Surfing Swashbuckler Sword-and-sandal Sword and sorcery Travel imaginary voyage Trial Vigilante War Anti-war Euro War Submarine Western Acid Contemporary Western Dacoit Western Fantasy Florida Horror Meat pie Northern Ostern Revisionist Science fiction Singing cowboy Space Spaghetti Weird Western Zapata Western By movement or period Absolute American eccentric cinema Australian New Wave Auteur films Berlin School Bourekas Brighton School British New Wave Kitchen sink realism Budapest school Calligrafismo Cannibal boom Cinéma du look Cinema Novo Cinema of Moral Anxiety Cinema of Transgression Cinéma pur Commedia all'italiana Czechoslovak New Wave Documentary Film Movement Dogme 95 Erra Cinema European art cinema Film d'art Film gris Free Cinema French Impressionist French New Wave German Expressionist German underground horror Golden Age of Argentine cinema Golden Age of Mexican Cinema Golden Age of Nigerian Cinema Grupo Cine Liberación Heimatfilm Hollywood on the Tiber Hong Kong New Wave Indiewood Iranian New Wave Italian futurist Italian neorealist Japanese New Wave Kammerspielfilm L.A. Rebellion Lettrist Modernist film Mumblecore Neorealist New French Extremity New German New generation New Hollywood New Nollywood New Objectivity New Queer No Wave Nuevo Cine Mexicano Pan-Indian film Parallel cinema Persian Film Philippine New Wave Poetic realist Polish Film School Poliziotteschi The Prague film school Prussian film Pure Film Movement Remodernist Romanian New Wave Slow cinema Spaghetti Western Socialist realist Social realist Kitchen sink realism Soviet parallel Structural Surrealist Sword-and-sandal Taiwan New Cinema Telefoni Bianchi Thai New Wave Third Cinema Toronto New Wave Vulgar auteurism Yugoslav Black Wave By demographic Adult Black Children and family Anime Men Seinen Stag Teen Shōnen Shōjo Women Chick flick Josei By format, technique, approach, or production 3D Actuality Animation Anime Art Cartoon Computer Stop-motion Traditional Anthology Art B movie Behind-the-scenes Black-and-white Blockbuster Cinéma vérité Classical Hollywood cinema Collage Color Compilation Composite Computer screen Cult midnight movie Database cinema Direct-to-video ONA OVA Docufiction Ethnofiction Experimental Abstract Feature Featurette Film à clef Film-poem Found footage High concept Hyperlink cinema Independent Guerrilla filmmaking List of American independent films Interstitial art Live action animation Low-budget Major film studios Masala Maximalist film Message picture Meta-film Minimalist film Mockbuster Modernist film Musical short Mythopoeia Neorealist No-budget One-shot Paracinema Participatory Poetry Postmodernist Reverse motion Satire Sceneggiata Semidocumentary Serial Shinpa Short Silent Slow cinema Socialist realist Sound Television film Underground Video nasty Vulgar auteurism Z movie Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transgressive_art&oldid=1302695633 " Categories : Visual arts genres Film genres Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles in need of updating from October 2024 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2023 This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 01:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transgressive art 7 languages Add topic

