Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Women's emancipation in colonial Malaya 2 Issues in Malaysian feminist struggle Toggle Issues in Malaysian feminist struggle subsection 2.1 Sexual and domestic violence against women 2.2 Child brides and forced marriages 3 Criticism and backlash Toggle Criticism and backlash subsection 3.1 The NGO-isation of feminism in Malaysia 4 Prominent Malaysian feminists 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Feminism in Malaysia 5 languages বাংলা فارسی Bahasa Melayu ਪੰਜਾਬੀ 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fiesta Feminista in Kota Kinabalu , Sabah Part of a series on Feminism History Feminist history Women's history American British Canadian German Waves First Second Third Fourth Timelines Women's suffrage Muslim countries US Other women's rights Women's suffrage by country Austria Australia Canada Colombia India Japan Kuwait Liechtenstein New Zealand Spain Second Republic Francoist Switzerland United Kingdom Cayman Islands Wales United States states Intersectional variants Fat Lesbian Lesbian of color Radical lesbianism Separatist Sex-positive Transfeminism Postgenderism Vegetarian ecofeminism Socialist Anarchist Queer Jineology Marxist Critical theory Standpoint Materialist Ecofeminist Postcolonial Global Transnational Xenofeminism Jineoloji Multicultural Africana womanism Black Hip hop Lesbian Ratchet Chicana Lesbian Indigenous Native American Multiracial Romani Womanism Other variants Anti-abortion Conservative Equity Femonationalism Liberal Maternal Postfeminism Reactionary State Carceral Imperial Embedded Gender-critical or trans-exclusionary Victim White Religious variants Atheist Buddhist Christian Mormon New Womanist Asian Neopagan Dianic Wicca Reclaiming Ecofeminist Hindu Islamic Jewish Orthodox Sikh Movements and ideologies 4B movement White Feather Campaign Analytical Anti-fascist Anti-pornography Cyber HCI Networked Xeno Difference Cultural Neo Ecofeminism Eugenic Individualist Liberal Equality Social Labor Libertarian Lipstick Stiletto Post-structural Postmodern Radical Political lesbianism Separatist Technofeminism Women's liberation Concepts Antinaturalism Choice feminism Cognitive labor Conscription Complementarianism Literature Children's literature Diversity (politics) Diversity, equity, and inclusion Effects on society Equality Female education Female genital mutilation Femicide Femonationalism Feminism in culture Feminist movement African-American women's suffrage movement Art movement In hip hop Feminist stripper Formal equality Gender equality Gender quota Gender role Girl power Honor killing Ideal womanhood Invisible labor Internalized sexism International Girl's Day and Women's Day Language reform Feminist capitalism Gender-blind Likeability trap Male privilege Matriarchal religion Media Men in feminism Misogyny Trans Oedipus complex Opposition to feminism Pro-feminism Protofeminism Purplewashing Racism Reproductive justice Sentencing disparity Sex workers' rights Sexual harassment Sexual objectification Substantive equality Toxic masculinity Transmisogyny Triple oppression Violence against women War on women Women's empowerment Women-only space Women's health Women's rights Women in the workforce Outlooks Abortion-rights Bicycling and feminism Bodily integrity Criticism of marriage Views on BDSM Views on pornography Views on prostitution Views on sexual orientation Views on sexuality Views on transgender topics Reproductive rights Sexual and reproductive health and rights SCUM Manifesto Theory Feminist method Gender studies Gender mainstreaming Gynocentrism Kyriarchy Male gaze Matriarchy Women's studies Men's studies Patriarchy Écriture féminine Areas of study Anthropology Archaeology Architecture Art Art criticism Literary criticism Film theory Science fiction Biology Composition studies Criminology Pathways perspective Economics FDPA Geography International relations Constructivism Legal theory Pedagogy Philosophy Aesthetics Empiricism Epistemology Ethics Justice ethics Existentialism Metaphysics science Political ecology Political theory Pornography Psychology Therapy Revisionist mythology Sex wars Sexology Sociology Technoscience Theology womanist theology By continent/country Africa Democratic Republic of the Congo Egypt Ethiopia Ghana Mali Nigeria Senegal South Africa Albania Australia Bangladesh Canada China Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Iraq Republic of Ireland Israel Italy Japan Latin America Argentina Brazil Chile Haiti Honduras Mexico Paraguay Trinidad and Tobago Lebanon Malaysia Nepal Netherlands New Zealand Northern Cyprus Norway Pakistan Philippines Poland Russia Saudi Arabia South Korea Sweden Syria Taiwan Thailand Turkey Vietnam Ukraine United Kingdom United States History of women Lists and categories Lists Articles Feminists by nationality Literature American feminist literature Feminist comic books Feminist songs Conservative feminisms Ecofeminist authors Feminist art critics Feminist economists Feminist philosophers Feminist poets Feminist rhetoricians Jewish feminists Muslim feminists Feminist parties Suffragists and suffragettes Women's rights activists Women's studies journals Women's suffrage organizations Categories Women's rights by country Feminists by nationality Feminism portal v t e This article is part of a series on the Politics of Malaysia Head of State Yang di-Pertuan Agong Ibrahim Iskandar Conference of Rulers Legislature Parliament of Malaysia 15th Parliament Senate (Dewan Negara) President Awang Bemee Awang Ali Basah House of Representatives (Dewan Rakyat) Speaker Johari Abdul Leader of the Government Anwar Ibrahim Leader of the Opposition Hamzah Zainudin Executive Cabinet Prime Minister Anwar Ibrahim Civil service ( agencies ) Chief Secretary Shamsul Azri Abu Bakar Judiciary Federal Court Chief Justice Wan Ahmad Farid Wan Salleh Court of Appeal President Zabariah Mohd Yusof (acting) High Court in Malaya ∙ High Court in Sabah and Sarawak Chief Judge of Malaya Hasnah Mohammed Hashim Chief Judge of Sabah and Sarawak Abdul Rahman Sebli Elections Election Commission of Malaysia General elections : 2022 Electoral districts Political parties BN PH PN GPS GRS List of political parties in Malaysia Federalism State governments Chief ministers of the states State legislatures ( members ) Local governments ( list ) Ideologies and concepts Anarchism Communism Conservatism Feminism Rukun Negara Malay nationalism Reformasi Islam Hadhari Asian values Race and politics Dayaks in politics Ketuanan Melayu Bumiputera Malaysian Malaysia Social contract Malaysia portal Politics portal Other countries v t e The feminist movement in Malaysia is a multicultural coalition of women's organisations committed to the end of gender-based discrimination , harassment and violence against women . Having first emerged as women's shelters in the mid 1980s, [ 1 ] feminist women's organisations in Malaysia later developed alliances with other social justice movements. Today, the feminist movement in Malaysia is one of the most active actors in the country's civil society .

History [ edit ] The history of feminist movement in Malaysia, its birth and the usage of the very term 'feminist' are contested. Unlike the history of the feminist movement in Britain and the United States for instance, the struggle for women's rights in Malaysia were not founded on women's right to vote . Like many other postcolonial countries during the fall of the British empire, all Malaysian citizens, both male and female, were granted the right to vote during the country's political independence in 1957.

[ 2 ] Women's emancipation in colonial Malaya [ edit ] To avoid the anachronism of the term feminist , it may be advisable to chart the history of feminism in Malaysia with the recorded usage and political championing of ' women's liberation ' in the early twentieth century. The first documented use of women's liberation or women's emancipation as a political and social project in 1920s Malaya was by Malay Muslim male reformers and writers Syed Syeikh Al-Hadi and Zainal Abidin Ahmad, better known as Za'aba .

[ 3 ] Although they advocated the education of women and girls as a means to women's emancipation, the Malay Muslim modernists, or kaum muda , stressed the importance of Islamic learning as a way of equipping Malay women with the skills to fulfill their primary role, as educators of their children.

[ 4 ] In the post-war years between 1946 and 1948, women from different ethnic groups mobilised against anti-colonialism and issues related to women's inferior status in occupied Malaya.

[ 5 ] Although they were members of the female-arm of nationalist and communist parties founded by men, the women became more radicalised in their gender-oriented anti-colonial aims and eventually gained semi-autonomous status from their parent parties. Prominent radical women of the period included the likes of Shamsiah Fakeh and later, Khatijah Sidek .

Issues in Malaysian feminist struggle [ edit ] Sexual and domestic violence against women [ edit ] Main article: Violence against women in Malaysia The first women's NGO in Malaysia, the Women's Aid Organisation (WAO), was founded in the mid 1980s as a shelter for women and children who needed legal consultation and protection from domestic violence . Soon, other NGOs, such as All Women's Action Society (AWAM) emerged to campaign against the rising number of reported incidences of violence against women . Most women's NGOs which were founded since are located in the urban centres of Peninsular Malaysia .

Malaysia outlawed marital rape in 2007.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Child brides and forced marriages [ edit ] Cases of child marriages gained nationwide attention in recent years as a human rights and gender issue. In nearly all cases, under-aged girls were married off to men much older than themselves. As most child marriages occur in Malaysia's Malay-Muslim community and thereby sanctioned by Sharia courts, Islamic reasons are often cited as a moral and legal justification for marrying off under-aged girls.

[ 8 ] Young female rape survivors are sometimes pressured into marrying their abusers as a way of mitigating gross sexual abuses.

[ 9 ] Criticism and backlash [ edit ] In 2012, Malaysia's previous prime minister , Najib Razak , declared that "There is no need for a women’s rights movement in Malaysia because equality has been given from the start." [ 10 ] The Malaysian premier's views did not go unchallenged in civil society [ 11 ] and online.

[ 12 ] In April 2014, feminism was accused of being a "facade used by a secret Zionist-Christian alliance to dishonour Muslim women" by Abdullah Zaik Abdul Rahman, the president of the Islamic organisation Malaysian Muslim Solidarity (ISMA).

[ 13 ] The NGO-isation of feminism in Malaysia [ edit ] Feminism in Malaysia is championed primarily by activists within women's NGOs. There are setbacks to the apparent NGO-isnation of feminism in Malaysia, defined as the donor-led and institutionalisation of activism or 'Activism Inc.' [ 14 ] The funder-led agenda of women's NGOs in Malaysia resulted in the constraining of feminist activism to fulfill the requirement and targets set by donors. Other problems arise from the NGO-isation of feminism that appear at odds with the spirit of feminism, namely the inter- and intra-organisational income inequalities amongst women workers of NGOs resulting from unequal distribution of funding.

Prominent Malaysian feminists [ edit ] Cecilia Ng – Academic and activist Irene Fernandez – Feminist and human rights activist who championed migrant worker's rights Ivy Josiah – Feminist activist Maria Chin Abdullah – Feminist and human rights activist and co-founder of Bersih 2.0 Marina Mahathir – Human rights activist and writer, daughter of former prime minister Mahathir Mohamad Norani Othman – Academic and editor of Muslim Women and the Challenge of Islamic Extremism , co-founder of Sisters in Islam Toni Kasim – Feminist activist and political campaigner Zainah Anwar – Islamic feminist activist and co-founder of Sisters in Islam Rohana Ariffin – Academic and activist, co-founder of Women Crisis Centre and former president of PRM (Parti Rakyat Malaysia).

Khatijah Sidek – Leader of Kaum Ibu UMNO 1954–1956 and early Malaysian Feminist.

[ 15 ] Kicked out by UMNO leadership for breaking party discipline, "providing the first challenge to male dominance in the party".

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] Aurat (Malay language) Human rights in Malaysia Islamic feminism Musawah Sisters in Islam Women in Malaysia Women's rights References [ edit ] ^ Ng, Cecilia (2013).

Feminism and the Women's Movement in Malaysia: An Unsung (R)evolution . Routledge.

^ Ariffin, Rohana (1999). "Feminism in malaysia".

Women's Studies International Forum .

22 (4): 417– 423.

doi : 10.1016/S0277-5395(99)00039-4 .

^ Izharuddin, Alicia (2013).

"The use of English in contemporary Malaysian feminism" .

Analize: Journal of Gender and Feminist Studies .

1 (15): 4.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Manderson, Lenore (October 1977). "The Shaping of the Kaum Ibu (Women's Section) of the United Malays National Organization".

Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society .

3 (1): 210– 228.

doi : 10.1086/493453 .

JSTOR 3173093 .

S2CID 144802708 .

^ Aljunied, S. M. K. (2013). "Against Multiple Hegemonies: Radical Malay Women in Colonial Malaya".

Journal of Social History .

47 (1): 153– 175.

doi : 10.1093/jsh/sht056 .

S2CID 145060739 .

^ MP Teresa Kok, Mixed reaction to marital rape reform Archived 2022-12-08 at the Wayback Machine , Sassy MP , September 15, 2007.

^ AP, " Malaysian jailed for marital rape ," Sydney Morning Herald , August 6, 2009.

^ "Calls to end child marriages in Malaysia after 12 year old weds," The New York Times , 26 November 2012.

^ "Malaysian court jails man who raped then married 12 year old girl" , The Guardian , 5 February 2014.

^ "PM: No need for women's rights movement in Malaysia" Archived 2014-07-15 at the Wayback Machine , Yahoo! News Malaysia , 2 October 2012.

^ Women's Aid Organisation 'Aiyoh What Lah!' Awards, Letter to the editor Archived 2014-07-14 at the Wayback Machine , 23 April 2014.

^ "Why Malaysia needs feminism" Archived 2014-07-01 at the Wayback Machine , Feminspire.

^ "Feminism is a facade to dishonour Muslim women, says Isma chief" , 27 April 2014, Malay Mail Online . Accessed 11 August 2014 ^ Tan Beng Hui (2012) 'Movement building and feminism in Asia: challenges and opportunities' Archived 2014-08-12 at the Wayback Machine in The Future of Asian Feminisms: Confronting Fundamentalisms, Conflicts, and Neoliberalism , edited by Nursyahbani Katjasungkana and Saskia E. Wierenga, Cambridge Scholars Publishing: Cambridge ^ Abdul Aziz, Sohaimi (2011).

"Khatijah Sidek: Suara Pejuang Terpinggir yang Dibisukan dalam Sejarah Perkembangan Politik UMNO (Khatijah Sidek: The Silenced Voice of a Freedom Fighter in the UMNO Political Struggle)" .

Akademika .

81 (3): 43– 47.

^ Mohamad, Maznah (1988–1989).

"Islam, the Secular State and Muslim women in Malaysia" .

Women Living Under Muslim Laws . Dossier 5-6. Archived from the original on 2020-10-30 . Retrieved 2020-01-02 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Feminism in Malaysia .

All Women's Action Society (AWAM) v t e Feminism in Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Feminism_in_Malaysia&oldid=1290875577 " Categories : Feminism in Malaysia Women in Malaysia Feminism by country Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from April 2024 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 May 2025, at 17:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Feminism in Malaysia 5 languages Add topic

