Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structures 2 Formation Toggle Formation subsection 2.1 Sinuous rilles 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Rille 14 languages العربية Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Français Italiano Lëtzebuergesch Nederlands 日本語 Svenska Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fissure, especially on the Moon This article is about lunar features. For other uses, see Rille (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Rille" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Rima Hyginus, an eminent rille, in selenochromatic format [ 1 ] Rimae on the floor of the lunar crater Gassendi , from Apollo 16 .

Mamers Valles rille on Mars.

Rima Ariadaeus is categorized as a straight rille (graben) and is over 300 km in length.

Hadley Rille at center is a sinuous rille visited by the Apollo 15 mission.

Detail of part of Hadley Rille Rille / ˈ r ɪ l / [ 2 ] (German for 'groove') is typically used to describe any of the long, narrow depressions in the surface of the Moon that resemble channels . The Latin term is rima , plural rimae . Typically, a rille can be several kilometers wide and hundreds of kilometers in length. However, the term has also been used loosely to describe similar structures on a number of planets in the Solar System , including Mars , Venus , and on a number of moons . All bear a structural resemblance to each other.

Structures [ edit ] Three types of rille are found on the lunar surface: Sinuous rilles meander in a curved path like a mature river, and are commonly thought to be the remains of collapsed lava tubes or extinct lava flows. They usually begin at an extinct volcano , then meander and sometimes split as they are followed across the surface. As of 2013 [update] , 195 sinuous rilles have been identified on the Moon.

[ 3 ] Vallis Schröteri in Oceanus Procellarum is the largest sinuous rille, and Rima Hadley is the only one visited by humans, on the Apollo 15 mission.  Another prominent example is Rima Herigonius .

Arcuate rilles have a smooth curve and are found on the edges of the dark lunar maria . They are believed to have formed when the lava flows that created a mare cooled, contracted and sank. These are found all over the Moon, examples can be seen near the south-western border of Mare Tranquillitatis and on the south-eastern border of Mare Humorum .

Rima Sulpicius Gallus is a clear example in southwestern Mare Serenitatis .

Straight rilles follow long, linear paths and are believed to be grabens , sections of the crust that have sunk between two parallel faults . These can be readily identified when they pass through craters or mountain ranges.

Vallis Alpes is by far the largest graben rille, indeed it is regarded as too large to be called a rille and is itself bisected by a linear rille; Rima Ariadaeus , west of Mare Tranquillitatis, is a clearer example.

Rilles which show more than one structure are termed hybrid rilles.

Rima Hyginus in Sinus Medii is an example, initially formed through a fault and subsequently subject to volcanic activity.

Formation [ edit ] Precise formation mechanisms of rilles have yet to be determined. It is likely that the different types are formed by different processes. Common features shared by lunar rilles and similar structures on other bodies suggest that common causative mechanisms operate widely in the solar system. Leading theories include lava channels , collapsed lava tubes, near-surface dike intrusion, nuée ardente (pyroclastic cloud), subsidence of lava-covered basin and crater floors, and tectonic extension. On-site examination would be necessary to clarify exact methods.

Sinuous rilles [ edit ] According to NASA, the origin of lunar sinuous rilles remains controversial.

[ 4 ] The Hadley Rille is a 1.5 km wide and over 300 m deep sinuous rille. It is thought to be a giant conduit that carried lava from an eruptive vent far to the south. Topographic information obtained from the Apollo 15 photographs supports this possibility; however, many puzzles about the rille remain.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Arachnoid (astrogeology) Chaos terrain Dark dune spot List of features on the Moon Lunar lava tube Martian spiders (dark dune spots) Planetary geology References [ edit ] ^ "Selenocromatica" .

GAWH . Retrieved 19 January 2025 .

^ "rille" .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ Hurwitz, D.M.; Head, J.W.; Kring, D.A. (2019).

"Atlas of Lunar Sinuous Rilles" . Lunar and Planetary Institute . Retrieved 20 July 2021 .

^ a b "ch6.2" . History.nasa.gov . Retrieved 2012-09-17 .

General Ewen A. Whitaker, Mapping and Naming the Moon , Cambridge University Press, 1999 , ISBN 0-521-62248-4 .

American Astronomers Report: What Formed the Moon's Sinuous Rilles?

, Sky & Telescope, Vol. XXVI, No. 1, July, 1963.

Atlas of Lunar Sinuous Rilles v t e Moon Outline Physical properties Internal structure Topography Atmosphere Gravity field Hill sphere Magnetic field Sodium tail Moonlight Earthlight Orbit Orbital elements Distance Perigee and apogee Libration Nodes Nodal period Precession Syzygy New moon Full moon Eclipses Lunar eclipse Total penumbral lunar eclipse Tetrad Solar eclipse Solar eclipses on the Moon Eclipse cycle Supermoon Tide Tidal force Tidal locking Tidal acceleration Tidal range Lunar station Surface and features Selenography Terminator Limb Hemispheres Near side Far side Poles North pole South pole Face Maria List Mountains Peak of eternal light Valleys Volcanic features Domes Calderas Lava tubes Craters List Ray systems Permanently shadowed craters South Pole–Aitken basin Regolith swirls Rilles Wrinkle ridges Rocks Lunar basalt 70017 Changesite-(Y) Water Space weathering Micrometeorite Sputtering Quakes Transient lunar phenomenon Selenographic coordinate system Science Observation Libration Lunar theory Origin Giant-impact hypothesis Theia Lunar magma ocean Geology Timescale Late Heavy Bombardment Lunar meteorites KREEP Volcanism Experiments Lunar laser ranging ALSEP Lunar sample displays Apollo 11 Apollo 17 Lunar seismology Exploration Missions Apollo program Explorers Probes Landing Colonization Moonbase Tourism Lunar resources Time-telling and navigation Lunar calendar Lunisolar calendar Month Lunar month Nodal period Fortnight Sennight Lunar station Lunar distance Phases and names New Full Names Crescent Super and micro Blood Blue Black Dark Wet Tetrad Daily phenomena Moonrise Meridian passage Moonset Related Lunar deities Lunar effect Earth phase Moon illusion Pareidolia Man in the Moon Moon rabbit Craters named after people Artificial objects on the Moon Memorials on the Moon Moon in science fiction list Apollo era futuristic exploration Hollow Moon Moon landing conspiracy theories Moon Treaty " Moon is made of green cheese " Natural satellite Double planet Lilith (hypothetical second moon) Splitting of the Moon Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Rille&oldid=1287231553 " Categories : Surface features of the Moon Valleys and canyons on Mars Planetary geology Volcanic landforms Volcanism on the Moon Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2016 All articles needing additional references Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2013 All articles containing potentially dated statements This page was last edited on 24 April 2025, at 21:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Rille 14 languages Add topic

