Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 See also 2 References 3 Further reading 4 External links Toggle the table of contents List of ancient Greek philosophers 4 languages Português தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Lists of philosophers By century born BC 1st–10th 11th–14th 15th–16th 17th 18th 19th 20th By nationality Afghan Azerbaijani British Canadian Chinese Croatian Finnish French German-language Icelandic Iranian Italian Jewish American Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Romanian Russian Slovene v t e This article is missing information about the lives, and, or, significance of the philosophers as shown within the Notes column.

Please expand the article to include this information. Further details may exist on the talk page .

( March 2021 ) This list of ancient Greek philosophers contains philosophers who studied in ancient Greece or spoke Greek .

Ancient Greek philosophy began in Miletus with the pre-Socratic philosopher Thales [ 1 ] [ 2 ] and lasted through Late Antiquity . Some of the most famous and influential philosophers of all time were from the ancient Greek world, including Socrates , Plato and Aristotle .

↵Abbreviations used in this list: c.

= circa fl.

= flourished Name Life School Notes Acrion 5th/4th century BC Pythagorean visited by Plato Adrastus of Aphrodisias 2nd century AD Peripatetic wrote commentaries on Aristotle's works and a commentary on Plato's Timaeus Aedesia 5th century Neoplatonic wife of Hermias , and mother of Ammonius and Heliodorus Aedesius 3rd/4th century Neoplatonic studied under Iamblichus before founding his own school in Pergamum Aeneas of Gaza 5th/6th century Neoplatonic Christian convert who studied under Hierocles Aenesidemus 1st century BC?

Pyrrhonist wrote a book called Pyrrhonist Discourses which became a central text for the Pyrrhonists Aesara 5th/4th century BC Pythagorean wrote On Human Nature, of which a fragment is preserved by Stobaeus Aeschines of Neapolis 2nd/1st century BC Academic skeptic shared the leadership of the Academy at Athens together with Charmadas and Clitomachus about 110 BC Aeschines of Sphettus 5th/4th century BC Socratic part of Socrates' circle and likely present at his death Aetius 4th century AD Peripatetic Antiochean convert to Christianity who studied in Alexandria Agapius 5th/6th century AD Neoplatonic studied under Marinus of Neapolis . known for his learning Agathobulus 1st/2nd century AD Cynic known for his severe asceticism and teacher of Demonax Agathosthenes uncertain date geographer, historian or philosopher referred to by Tzetzes as his authority in matters connected with geography.

Agrippa the Skeptic 1st/2nd century AD Pyrrhonist thought to be the creator of the "five grounds of doubt" Albinus 2nd century AD Middle Platonist Alcibiades 450-404 BC Socratic Athenian General and Politician Alcinous 2nd century AD?

Middle Platonist Alcmaeon of Croton 5th century BC Pythagorean interested in medicine Alexamenus of Teos 5th century BC?

Socratic may have been the first to write philosophical dialogues Alexander of Aegae 1st century AD Peripatetic tutored the emperor Nero Alexander of Aphrodisias 2nd/3rd century AD Peripatetic influential commentator on the Corpus Aristotelicum Alexicrates 1st/2nd century AD Pythagorean Alexinus 4th/3rd century BC Megarian founded his own school which did not fare well Amelius 3rd century AD Neoplatonic student of Plotinus who wrote voluminously Ammonius Hermiae 5th/6th century AD Neoplatonic Ammonius of Athens 1st century AD Middle Platonist teacher of Plutarch Ammonius Saccas 2nd/3rd century AD Neoplatonic Plotinus ' teacher Anaxagoras 5th century BC Pluralist Anaxarchus 4th century BC Atomist first Greek to attempt the problem of squaring the circle Anaxilaus 1st century BC / 1st century AD Pythagorean Banished from Rome for practising magic Anaximander 7th/6th century BC Milesian First to conceive a mechanical model of the world Anaximenes of Miletus 6th century BC Milesian Androcydes 2nd century BC?

Pythagorean Andronicus of Rhodes 1st century BC Peripatetic Anniceris 4th/3rd century BC Cyrenaic Antiochus of Ascalon 2nd/1st century BC Middle Platonist Antipater of Cyrene 4th century BC Cyrenaic Antipater of Tarsus 2nd century BC Stoic Antipater of Tyre 1st century BC Stoic Antisthenes 5th/4th century BC Cynic Antoninus 4th century AD Neoplatonic Apollodorus of Athens 2nd century BC Stoic Apollodorus of Seleucia 2nd century BC Stoic Apollodorus the Epicurean 2nd century BC Epicurean Apollonius Cronus 4th century BC Megarian Apollonius of Tyana 1st century AD Neopythagorean Apollonius of Tyre 1st century BC Stoic Arcesilaus 4th/3rd century BC Academic skeptic Archedemus of Tarsus 2nd century BC Stoic Archelaus 5th century BC Pluralist Archytas 5th/4th century BC Pythagorean Arete of Cyrene 4th century BC Cyrenaic Arignote 6th/5th century BC Pythagorean Aristarchus of Samos 4th/3rd century BC Academic skeptic presented the first known model that placed the Sun at the center of the known universe with the Earth revolving around it.

Aristippus 5th/4th century BC Cyrenaic Aristippus the Younger 4th century BC Cyrenaic Aristoclea fl. 6th century BC Aristocles of Messene 1st century AD?

Peripatetic Aristocreon 3rd/2nd century BC Stoic Aristo of Alexandria 2nd /1st century BC Peripatetic Aristo of Ceos 3rd/2nd century BC Peripatetic Aristo of Chios 4th/3rd century BC Stoic Aristotle 4th century BC Peripatetic founder of Peripatetic school; student of Plato Aristotle of Cyrene 4th/3rd century BC Cyrenaic Aristotle of Mytilene 2nd century AD Peripatetic Aristoxenus 4th century BC Peripatetic Arius Didymus 1st century BC Stoic Asclepiades of Phlius 4th/3rd century BC Eretrian Asclepiades the Cynic 4th century AD Cynic Asclepigenia 5th/6th century AD Neoplatonic Asclepiodotus 1st century BC Asclepiodotus of Alexandria 5th century AD Neoplatonic Aspasius 2nd century AD Peripatetic Athenaeus of Seleucia 1st century BC Peripatetic Athenodoros Cananites 1st century BC Stoic Athenodoros Cordylion 2nd /1st century BC Stoic Athenodorus of Soli 3rd century BC Stoic Attalus 1st century BC - 1st century AD Stoic Atticus 2nd century AD Middle Platonist Basilides (Stoic) 2nd century BC Stoic Denied the existence of incorporeal entities Basilides the Epicurean 3rd/2nd century BC Epicurean Succeeded Dionysius of Lamptrai as the head of the Epicurean school at Athens Batis of Lampsacus 3rd century BC Epicurean Bion of Borysthenes 4th/3rd century BC Cynic Once was a slave, later to be released Boethus [ ca ] 4th century BC Platonist Boethus the Epicurean [ ca ; gl ] 1st century AD Epicurean Boethus of Sidon 1st century BC Peripatetic Boethus of Sidon 2nd century BC Stoic Bolus of Mendes fl. 3rd century BC Pythagorean Brontinus fl. 6th century BC Pythagorean Bryson of Achaea fl. 330 BC Megarian Callicles 5th century BCE Sophist ?

Calliphon 2nd century BC Peripatetic Calliphon of Croton 6th century BC Pythagorean Callistratus fl. 3rd century AD Sophist Carneades c. 214 – 129/8 BC Academic skeptic Carneiscus c. 300 BC Epicurean Cassius Longinus c. 213–273 Middle Platonist Cebes c. 430–350 BC Pythagorean Celsus 2nd century Cercidas 3rd century BC Cynic Cercops Pythagorean Chaerephon c. 470/460 – 403/399 BCE Socratic Chamaeleon 350-275 BC Peripatetic Charmadas 164 - c. 95 BC Academic skeptic Chrysanthius fl. 4th century Neoplatonic Chrysippus 279-206 BC Stoic Cleanthes 330-230 BC Stoic Clearchus of Soli 4th/3rd century BC (fl. 320 BC) Peripatetic Cleinias of Tarentum 4th century BC Pythagorean Cleomedes Stoic Cleomenes fl. c. 300 BC Cynic Clinomachus 4th century BC Megarian Clitomachus 187 - 109 BC Academic skeptic Colotes 320-268 BC Epicurean Crantor born c. 350 BC Academic Platonist Crates of Athens died 268-265 BC Academic Platonist Crates of Mallus fl. 2nd century BC Stoic Crates of Thebes c. 365 – c. 285 BC Cynic husband of Hipparchia of Maroneia Cratippus of Pergamon 1st century BC Peripatetic friend of Cicero Cratylus 5th century BC Ephesian Crescens the Cynic 2nd century Cynic Crinis 1st/2nd century BC Stoic Critolaus c. 200 – c. 118 BC Peripatetic Cronius fl. 2nd century A.D.

Neopythagorean Damascius born c. 458, died after 538 Neoplatonic Damis 1st/2nd century A.D.

Neopythagorean Damo 5th century BC Pythagorean reportedly the daughter of Pythagoras and Theano Dardanus of Athens 160-85 BC Stoic one of the several leaders of Stoa after the death of Panaetius Demetrius Lacon fl. late 2nd century BC Epicurean Demetrius of Amphipolis fl. 4th century BC Academic Platonist Demetrius Phalereus c. 350 – c. 280 BC Peripatetic Governed Athens Demetrius the Cynic fl. 1st century Cynic Democrates unknown Pythagorean ?

Democritus c. 460 – c. 370 BC Presocratic , Atomist Demonax Cynic Dexippus fl. 350 Neoplatonic Diagoras of Melos Sophist Dicaearchus Peripatetic Dio of Alexandria fl. 1st century BC Academic skeptic Dio Chrysostom Sophist Diocles of Cnidus fl. 3rd or 2nd century BC?

Academic Platonist Diodorus Cronus Megarian Diodorus of Adramyttium fl. 1st century BC Academic skeptic Diodorus of Aspendus Pythagorean Diodorus of Tyre Peripatetic Diodotus Stoic Diogenes of Apollonia Presocratic Diogenes of Babylon Stoic Diogenes of Oenoanda Epicurean Diogenes of Seleucia Epicurean Diogenes of Sinope 412/404 - 323 BC Cynic Lived in a clay wine jar Diogenes of Tarsus Epicurean Dionysius of Chalcedon Megarian Dionysius of Cyrene Stoic Dionysius of Lamptrai Epicurean Dionysius the Renegade Stoic abandoned Stoicism for Cyrenaicism Dios fl. 7th century BC ?

Pythagorean Diotima of Mantinea Diotimus Stoic Domninus of Larissa c. 420 - c. 480 Neoplatonic Echecrates Pythagorean Ecphantus Pythagorean Empedocles Presocratic , Pluralist Epicharmus of Kos Pythagorean Epictetus Stoic wrote The Enchiridion , a handbook of Stoic ethical advice Epicurus Epicurean said that the purpose of philosophy was to attain tranquility characterized by ataraxia Eubulides Megarian Euclid of Megara Megarian Eudemus of Rhodes Peripatetic Eudorus of Alexandria Peripatetic Eudoxus of Cnidus 410/408 – 355/347 BC Academic Platonist Euenus Sophist Euphantus Megarian Euphraeus Euphrates Stoic Eurytus Pythagorean Eusebius of Myndus fl. 4th century Neoplatonic Eustathius of Cappadocia c. 400 Neoplatonic Evander fl. c. 215 - c. 205 Academic skeptic Favorinus Academic skeptic Gaius the Platonist fl. 2nd century Middle Platonist Geminus Stoic Gorgias Sophist Hagnon of Tarsus fl. 2nd century BC Academic skeptic Hecataeus of Abdera Pyrrhonist Hecato of Rhodes Stoic Hegesias of Cyrene Cyrenaic Hegesinus of Pergamon fl. c. 160 BC Academic skeptic Hegias fl. c. 500 Neoplatonic Heliodorus of Alexandria fl. 5th century Neoplatonic Heraclides Lembus Heraclides Ponticus 387 - 312 BC Academic Platonist Heraclitus Presocratic , Ephesian claimed that "You cannot step in the same river twice" and "All is fire." Heraclius Cynic Herillus of Carthage Stoic Hermagoras of Amphipolis Stoic Hermarchus Epicurean Hermias born c. 410 - died c. 450 Neoplatonic Herminus Peripatetic Hermippus of Smyrna Peripatetic Hermotimus of Clazomenae Hicetas Pythagorean Hierius fl c. 500 Neoplatonic Hierocles of Alexandria fl. c. 430 Neoplatonic Hierocles (Stoic) 2nd century CE Stoic Hieronymus of Rhodes c.

290 – c.

230 BC Peripatetic Himerius Sophist Hipparchia of Maroneia fl. c. 325 BC Cynic Genus of butterflies, Hipparchia (butterfly) , named after her Hippasus Pythagorean Hippias Sophist Hippo 5th century BC Presocratic Horus Cynic Hypatia of Alexandria born 350-370 – 415 Neoplatonic Iamblichus c. 245-c. 325 Neoplatonic Ichthyas Megarian Idomeneus of Lampsacus Epicurean Ion of Chios Pythagorean Isidore of Alexandria fl. c. 475 Neoplatonic Jason of Nysa Stoic Lacydes of Cyrene before 241 - c. 205 BC Academic skeptic Leonteus of Lampsacus Epicurean Leontion Epicurean Leucippus Presocratic , Atomist Lyco of Iasos Pythagorean Lyco of Troas Peripatetic Lycophron Sophist Lysis of Taras Pythagorean Marinus of Neapolis born c. 450 Neoplatonic Maximus of Ephesus died 372 Neoplatonic Maximus of Tyre fl. 2nd century Middle Platonist Meleager of Gadara Cynic Melissus of Samos Presocratic , Eleatic Menedemus Eretrian Menedemus of Pyrrha fl. c. 350 BC Academic Platonist Menedemus the Cynic Cynic Menippus Cynic Metrocles Cynic Metrodorus of Athens Metrodorus of Chios Atomist Metrodorus of Cos Pythagorean Metrodorus of Lampsacus (the elder) Presocratic Metrodorus of Lampsacus (the younger) Epicurean Metrodorus of Stratonicea fl. 2nd century BC Academic skeptic Mnesarchus of Athens Stoic Moderatus of Gades Neopythagorean Monimus Cynic Myia Pythagorean Nausiphanes Atomist Nicarete of Megara Megarian Nicolaus of Damascus Nicomachus Neopythagorean Nicomachus (son of Aristotle) Peripatetic Numenius of Apamea fl. c. 275 Neopythagorean Nymphidianus of Smyrna fl. c. 360 Neoplatonic Ocellus Lucanus Pythagorean Oenomaus of Gadara Cynic Olympiodorus the Elder Peripatetic Olympiodorus the Younger c. 495-570 Neoplatonic Onasander fl. 1st century Middle Platonist Onatas Pythagorean Origen the Pagan fl. c. 250 Middle Platonist Panaetius Stoic Pancrates of Athens Cynic Panthoides Megarian Parmenides of Elea Presocratic , Eleatic held that the only thing that exists is being itself; teacher of Zeno of Elea Pasicles of Thebes Megarian Patro the Epicurean Epicurean Peregrinus Proteus Cynic Persaeus Stoic Phaedo of Elis Eretrian Originally founded the School of Elis; it was later transferred to Eretria by his pupil Menedemus.

Phaedrus Epicurean Phanias of Eresus Peripatetic Phanto of Phlius Pythagorean Philip of Opus fl. 4th century BC Academic Philiscus of Aegina Cynic Philiscus of Thessaly Sophist Philo 20 BC - 50 AD Middle Platonist Philo of Larissa 159/158 – 84/83 BC Academic skeptic Philo the Dialectician Megarian Philodemus Epicurean Philolaus Pythagorean Philonides of Laodicea Epicurean Philostratus Sophist Phintys Pythagorean Plato 428/427 - 348/347 BC Academic student of Socrates and teacher of Aristotle; famous for the Theory of Forms Plotinus c. 204 – 270 Neoplatonic Plutarch c. 46 – 120 Middle Platonist Plutarch of Athens c. 350 – 430 Neoplatonic Polemarchus Polemon of Athens Stoic Polemon of Athens (scholarch) before 314 - 270/269 BC Academic Polemon of Laodicea Sophist Polus Polyaenus of Lampsacus Epicurean Polystratus Epicurean Porphyry 234 – c. 305 Neoplatonic taught by Plotinus ; wrote the Isagoge , an introduction to Aristotle's "Categories" , Posidonius Stoic Potamo of Alexandria Eclecticism Praxiphanes Peripatetic Priscian of Lydia fl. c. 550 Neoplatonic Priscus of Epirus c. 305-c. 395 Neoplatonic Proclus 412 – 485 Neoplatonic Proclus of Laodicea Proclus Mallotes Stoic Prodicus Sophist Protagoras Sophist Ptolemy-el-Garib fl. c. 300 AD Peripatetic Pyrrho Pyrrhonist credited as being the first skeptic philosopher Pythagoras c. 570 – c. 495 BC Pythagorean Credited with discovering the Pythagorean theorem Sallustius Neoplatonic Sallustius of Emesa Cynic Satyrus Peripatetic Secundus the Silent Cynic Sextus of Chaeronea Sextus Empiricus Pyrrhonist Simmias of Thebes Pythagorean Simon the Shoemaker Socratic Simplicius of Cilicia c. 490 - c. 560 Neoplatonic Siro Epicurean Socrates c.

470–399 BC Socratic considered one of the founders of Western philosophy; credited as being the first moral philosopher Sopater of Apamea died before 337 Neoplatonic Sosigenes Peripatetic Sosipatra fl. c. 325 Neoplatonic Sotion Neopythagorean Speusippus c. 407 – 339 BC Academic Sphaerus Stoic Stilpo Megarian Strato of Lampsacus Peripatetic Syrianus died c. 437 Neoplatonic Telauges Pythagorean Telecles of Phocis died 167/166 BC Academic skeptic Teles the Cynic Cynic Thales c. 626/623  – c. 548/545 BC Presocratic , Milesian first philosopher; held that the first principle ( arche ) is water; one of the Seven Sages of Greece Theagenes of Patras Cynic Theano Pythagorean Themista of Lampsacus Epicurean Themistius Neoplatonic Theodorus of Asine fl. 3rd century Neoplatonic Theodorus the Atheist c. 340 – c. 250 BCE Cyrenaic Theon of Smyrna Neopythagorean Theophrastus Peripatetic Thrasymachus Sophist Thrasymachus of Corinth Megarian Timaeus of Locri Pythagorean Timaeus the Sophist fl. between 1st and 4th centuries Middle Platonist Timon Pyrrhonist Timycha Pythagorean Tisias Sophist Xenarchus of Seleucia Peripatetic Xeniades Pyrrhonist Xenocrates c. 396 – 314 BC Academic Xenophanes of Colophon Presocratic , Eleatic claimed that if oxen were able to imagine gods, those gods would be in the image of oxen Xenophilus Pythagorean friend and teacher of Aristoxenus Xenophon Zenobius 2nd century A.D.

Sophist flourished in the times of the emperor Hadrian Zenodotus fl. c. 475 Neoplatonic described as "the darling of Proclus " Zeno of Citium 334-262 BC Stoic founder of the Stoic school of philosophy Zeno of Elea Presocratic , Eleatic famous creator of Zeno's paradoxes Zeno of Sidon 150-75 BC Epicurean sometimes termed the "leading Epicurean" Zeno of Tarsus fl. 200 BC Stoic See also [ edit ] List of ancient Platonists List of Cynic philosophers List of Epicurean philosophers List of Stoic philosophers References [ edit ] ^ Aristotle , Metaphysics Alpha, 983b18.

^ Russell, Bertrand. "The History of Western Philosophy." 1945 Further reading [ edit ] Curnow, Trevor (22 June 2006).

The Philosophers of the Ancient World: An A-Z Guide . A&C Black.

ISBN 978-0-7156-3497-4 . Retrieved 12 June 2025 .

External links [ edit ] "Greek philosophy" at the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy "Presocratic philosophy" at the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_ancient_Greek_philosophers&oldid=1295272789 " Categories : Ancient Greek philosophers Ancient Greek philosophy-related lists Lists of philosophers Lists of ancient Greek people Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles to be expanded from March 2021 This page was last edited on 12 June 2025, at 19:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of ancient Greek philosophers 4 languages Add topic

