Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Thought 2 Notable proponents Toggle Notable proponents subsection 2.1 Jean-Paul Sartre 2.2 Albert Camus 2.3 Friedrich Nietzsche 3 See also 4 Notes 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Atheistic existentialism 12 languages العربية Català Dansk Español فارسی Français हिन्दी Italiano ქართული Norsk bokmål Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Kind of existentialism This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Atheistic existentialism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( April 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Atheism Concepts Implicit and explicit atheism Naturalism Negative and positive atheism History History of atheism Atheism during the Age of Enlightenment New Atheism Society Atheist feminism Criticism of religion Demographics of atheism Discrimination against atheists Secular ethics Secularism Separation of church and state State atheism Atheism and religion Arguments Arguments for atheism Atheist's wager Creator of God Evil God challenge Fate of the unlearned Free will God of the gaps Hitchens's razor Incompatible properties Inconsistent revelation Nonbelief Occam's razor Omnipotence paradox Parody religion Poor design Problem of evil Problem of Hell Russell's teapot Theological noncognitivism People Lists of atheists Julian Baggini Mikhail Bakunin Mario Bunge Albert Camus Richard Dawkins Daniel Dennett Denis Diderot Ludwig Feuerbach A. C. Grayling Sam Harris Christopher Hitchens Baron d'Holbach Lawrence Krauss Michael Lou Martin Karl Marx Jean Meslier Friedrich Nietzsche Michel Onfray Bertrand Russell Peter Singer Victor J. Stenger Books Atheism: The Case Against God Breaking the Spell De rerum natura The End of Faith The God Delusion God Is Not Great The System of Nature Related stances Irreligion Agnosticism Freethought Secular humanism Atheism and religion Criticism of atheism LaVeyan Satanism Secular paganism Secular Buddhism Outline Category Philosophy portal WikiProject v t e Atheistic existentialism is a kind of existentialism which strongly diverged from the Christian existential works of Søren Kierkegaard and developed within the context of an atheistic world view .

[ 1 ] The philosophies of Søren Kierkegaard and Friedrich Nietzsche provided existentialism's theoretical foundation in the 19th century, although their differing views on religion proved essential to the development of alternate types of existentialism. Atheistic existentialism was formally recognized after the 1943 publication of Being and Nothingness by Jean-Paul Sartre and Sartre later explicitly alluded to it in Existentialism is a Humanism in 1946.

Thought [ edit ] Atheistic existentialism is the exclusion of any transcendental , metaphysical , or religious beliefs from philosophical existentialist thought (e.g. anguish or rebellion in light of human finitude and limitations). Nevertheless, it shares elements with religious existentialism (e.g. the philosophy of Søren Kierkegaard ) and with metaphysical existentialism (e.g. through phenomenology and the works of Heidegger ). Atheistic existentialism confronts death anxiety without appealing to a hope of somehow being saved by God (i.e.

eternal life ) and often without any appeal to alternate forms of supernatural salvation such as reincarnation . For some thinkers, existential malaise is mostly theoretical (as it is with Jean-Paul Sartre ) while others are quite affected by existential anguish (e.g.

Albert Camus and his discussion of the Absurd and Friedrich Nietzsche who articulated the will to power ).

Notable proponents [ edit ] Jean-Paul Sartre [ edit ] Jean-Paul Sartre was a well-known French philosopher who was concerned with human authenticity and individuality. His novel Nausea is in some ways a manifesto of atheistic existentialism. It deals with a dejected researcher (Antoine Roquentin) in an anonymous French town, where Roquentin becomes conscious of the fact that nature as well as every inanimate object is indifferent towards him and his tormented existence. The existential angst experienced by the protagonist allows him to eventually understand that meaning exists only when he creates it for himself. Sartre once said "existence precedes essence". What he meant was "that, first of all, man exists, turns up, appears on the scene, and, only afterwards, defines himself. If man, as the existentialist conceives him, is indefinable, it is because at first he is nothing. Only afterward will he be something, and he himself will have made what he will be. Thus, there is no human nature, since there is no God to conceive it. Not only is man what he conceives himself to be, but he is also only what he wills himself to be after this thrust toward existence" (Jean-Paul Sartre, Existentialism , trans. Bernard Frechtman (New York, 1947)). Sartre wrote other works in the spirit of atheistic existentialism (e.g. the short stories in his 1939 collection The Wall ).

Albert Camus [ edit ] Albert Camus writes of dualisms—between happiness and sadness—as well as life and death. In The Myth of Sisyphus , such dualism becomes paradoxical because humans greatly value their existence while at the same time being aware of their mortality . Camus believes it is human nature to have difficulty reconciling these paradoxes; and indeed, he believed humankind must accept what he called the Absurd . On the other hand, Camus is not strictly an existential atheist because the acceptance of the Absurd implies neither the existence of God nor the nonexistence of God (compare agnosticism ).

Friedrich Nietzsche [ edit ] Considered one of the founding fathers of existentialism, German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche was a critic of Christian theology.

[ 2 ] Arguing that morality itself is a human construct as opposed to the laws of nature, which are inherently morally neutral, Nietzsche divided morality into two types: slave morality and master morality.

[ 3 ] It is this first type, slave morality, which he associates with religion, specifically, with Christianity.

[ 3 ] In his book, The Gay Science , Nietzsche utters his famous statement " God is dead ", which refers to his belief that morality can no longer be reasonably dictated by religion.

[ 4 ] It is for this reason that many associate Nietzsche's philosophy with nihilism .

[ 5 ] By contrast, others claim his assertion that nothing exists beyond this life merely requires us to rethink the tenets of morality, not to throw the concept of morality itself out the window. Indeed, they argue that while Nietzsche believed humanity was on track toward nihilism, he was not directly advocating it as the direction in which we should head.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Absurdism – Theory that life in general is meaningless Antitheism – Opposition to theism, and usually to religion Christian existentialism – Existentialist approach to Christian theology Existence precedes essence – Central claim of existentialism formulated by Sartre Existentialist anarchism – School of anarchist thought Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Existential nihilism – Theory that life has no inherent meaning Jewish existentialism – Jewish theology Secularism – Position that religion should not influence civic and state affairs Meaning (existential) – Description of the significance of life Notes [ edit ] ^ "Christian Existentialism" .

Learn Religions . Retrieved 2022-07-14 .

^ Wicks, Robert, "Friedrich Nietzsche", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2014 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.).

^ a b Wildman, Wesley. "Profound Atheism: Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900)," Boston University.

^ Samual, Adrian. "Nietzsche and God (Part 1)," Richmond Journal of Philosophy (Spring 2007 Edition).

^ Pratt, Alan. "Nihilism," The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ Michels, Steven. "Nietzsche, Nihilism, and the Virtue of Nature", Dogma: Revue de Philosophie et de Sciences Humaines (Oct. 2004).

External links [ edit ] Enc. Britannica, art. "Atheistic Existentialism" About Atheistic Existentialism Archived 2009-02-22 at the Wayback Machine Atheistic existentialism The absurd in atheistic existentialism v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Atheistic_existentialism&oldid=1219011049 " Categories : Atheistic existentialism Types of existentialism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from April 2009 All articles needing additional references Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 15 April 2024, at 06:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Atheistic existentialism 12 languages Add topic

