Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 ERM Options 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Electronic resource management 3 languages Azərbaycanca Français 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Electronic resource management" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Electronic resource management ( ERM ) encompasses the practices, techniques, and software used by librarians and other information professionals to manage the electronic resources within their collections. Electronic resource management may include selecting, licensing, maintaining, evaluating, or removing electronic resources.

[ 1 ] Electronic resources include, but are not limited to, electronic journals , electronic books , streaming media , databases , datasets , CD-ROMs , and computer software . Libraries can purchase ERM software through commercial, third-party vendors, use online open-source software options, or create their own in-house ERM workflows.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] During the Information Age , libraries and other cultural heritage institutions began to manage some print resources electronically, such as through the use of CD-ROM databases.

[ 3 ] Libraries also began to include more electronic resources in their collections, such as online journals, over the course of the 1980s and 1990s. Given the increasing prevalence of electronic resources, the Digital Library Federation (DLF) conducted an informal survey in 2000 to identify the challenges facing research libraries regarding their use of digital technologies.

[ 4 ] The resulting report revealed that managing digital information was seen as the greatest source of anxiety and uncertainty among librarians at the turn of the century. In response, the DLF created the Electronic Resources Management Initiative (ERMI) in 2002 and commissioned several reports with the goal of documenting effective practices in electronic resource management throughout the early 2000s.

[ 5 ] One successor to ERMI was the National Information Standards Organization (NISO)'s ERM Data Standards and Best Practices Project, which began in 2009. This initiative explored the potential of establishing formal ERM data standards and best practices.

[ 6 ] The authors ultimately recommended that NISO not take responsibility for maintaining ERM data standards but rather provide ERM workflow support through a series of webinars and presentations. Despite these strides in assessing ERM and making suggestions for improving existing practices, many librarians still expressed frustration with the "nonlinear and non-standardized" nature of managing electronic resources in the 2010s.

[ 7 ] ERM Options [ edit ] Several companies offer ERM services and software to public libraries, academic libraries, and other cultural heritage institutions. Major commercial vendors include EBSCO , Ex Libris , and ProQuest . Major open-source options, which are freely available to download, include CORAL and FOLIO . Other institutions have developed their own in-house ERM workflows, such as the Smithsonian Institution Libraries .

[ 8 ] See also [ edit ] ERAMS (e-resource access and management services) OpenURL knowledge base UKSG E-Resources Management Handbook References [ edit ] ^ Yu, Holly; Breivold, Scott, eds. (2008).

Electronic Resource Management in Libraries: Research and Practice . IGI Global.

doi : 10.4018/978-1-59904-891-8 .

ISBN 978-1-59904-891-8 .

^ Anderson, Elsa (2014).

Electronic resource management systems: a workflow approach . Library technology reports. ALA TechSource. Chicago, IL: ALA TechSource.

ISBN 978-0-8389-5922-0 .

^ Metz, Sara (2015).

"Disruption in the library: ACRL in the 1980s" .

College and Research Libraries News .

76 (7) – via Association of College and Research Libraries.

^ Jewell, Timothy D. (2001).

Selection and Presentation of Commercially Available Electronic Resources: Issues and Practices (PDF) (Report). Digital Library Federation. p. iv . Retrieved 2016-06-30 .

^ Chang, Sheau‐Hwang (2003-01-01).

"The DLF electronic resource management initiative" .

OCLC Systems & Services: International digital library perspectives .

19 (2): 45– 47.

doi : 10.1108/10650750310733180 .

ISSN 1065-075X .

^ "Making Good on the Promise of ERM: A Standards and Best Practices Discussion Paper" .

NISO . January 2012 . Retrieved April 23, 2025 .

^ Grogg, Maria Collins & Jill E.

"Building A Better ERMS" .

Library Journal . Retrieved 2025-04-23 .

^ Khater, Polly; and Appleton, Betsy (2010-04-01).

"Using a Local Electronic Resource Management System to Manage E-journals: Can It Get Any Better Than This?" .

The Serials Librarian .

58 ( 1– 4): 250– 256.

doi : 10.1080/03615261003626016 .

ISSN 0361-526X .

v t e Libraries and library science Types of library Academic Archive Branch Children's Christian Consortium Digital shadow Hybrid Law Lending Library of things Map Medicine Mobile Music National Presidential U.S.

Prison Private Public Carnegie Research School Learning Resource Centre virtual Special collections Special library Street Subscription Tool Toy Transportation Traveling Types of librarian Distance education E-science Law Music ensemble Periodicals/serials School Information professional Informationist Library and information scientist Library science Five laws Library and information science Education for librarianship Acquisitions Archival science Assessment Cataloging catalog OPAC Circulation Classification Collection development Collective collection Conservation Discovery system Electronic resource management Information literacy Inventory Legal deposit Library history Library instruction Library management Library publishing Preservation Readers' advisory Reference virtual roving Technical services Weeding History History of libraries History of library science Lists Libraries by country by size ancient destroyed medical national Library associations Library schools Librarians women fictional Archivists women Category:Libraries Category:Library science Commons Glossary Outline WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Electronic_resource_management&oldid=1292356484 " Categories : Library management Library automation Library science Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from February 2025 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 15:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Electronic resource management 3 languages Add topic

