Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theorists Toggle Theorists subsection 1.1 Paul Woodruff 1.2 Abraham Maslow 1.3 Albert Schweitzer 2 Empirical studies Toggle Empirical studies subsection 2.1 Patient recovery 2.2 Awe 2.3 Art 2.4 Transpersonality 3 Religion and music 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Reverence (emotion) 6 languages বাংলা Чӑвашла Igbo IsiZulu Tagalog Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Attitude of deep respect tinged with awe Not to be confused with Deference .

This article may need to be rewritten to comply with Wikipedia's quality standards , as it summarizes in-depth a few sources rather than giving an encyclopedic overview of the topic.

You can help . The talk page may contain suggestions.

( November 2019 ) Reverence is "a feeling or attitude of deep respect tinged with awe ; veneration ".

[ 1 ] Reverence involves a humbling of the self in respectful recognition of something perceived to be greater than the self.

The word "reverence" is often used in relationship with religion . This is because religion often stimulates this emotion through recognition of a god , the supernatural , and the ineffable . Like awe , it is an emotion in its own right, and can be felt outside of the realm of religion .

[ 2 ] Whereas awe may be characterized as an overwhelming " sensitivity to greatness," reverence is seen more as "acknowledging a subjective response to something excellent in a personal ( moral or spiritual ) way, but qualitatively above oneself".

[ 3 ] Robert C. Solomon describes awe as passive, but reverence as active, noting that the feeling of awe (i.e., becoming awestruck) implies paralysis , whereas feelings of reverence are associated more with active engagement and responsibility toward that which one reveres.

[ 4 ] Nature , science , literature , philosophy , great philosophers , leaders , artists , art , music , wisdom , and beauty may each act as the stimulus and focus of reverence.

Theorists [ edit ] Paul Woodruff [ edit ] In his book "Reverence: Renewing a Forgotten Virtue," Paul Woodruff explores the contemporary concept of reverence.

[ 5 ] He notes that both modern society and its discussions about ancient cultures in which reverence was prized, such as Greece and China, often lack a genuine understanding of reverence.

[ 5 ] : 3 Woodruff defines reverence as the ability to feel awe directed at the transcendent, respect for others, and shame over one's own faults, when these emotions are appropriate.

[ 5 ] : 8, 65 This definition encompasses respect, shame, and  aspects. While recognizing the connection between reverence and religion, Woodruff argues that politics plays a significant role in this virtue.

[ 5 ] : 4 His goal in the book is to dispel the common misconception that reverent emotions are exclusively tied to religion.

According to Woodruff, meaningful human life relies on ceremony and ritual , but "[w]ithout reverence, rituals are empty".

[ 5 ] : 19 These ceremonial practices occur in various settings, including homes, meetings, voting, and religious contexts, shaping the backdrop for experiencing reverence. Because these are banal and commonplace, the emotion of reverence often fades without us noticing.

[ 5 ] : 35 Woodruff contends that in a functioning society, reverence, ceremony, and respect remain indispensable even though their significance may go unnoticed.

[ 5 ] : 36 He clarifies that it's not reverence itself but rather the concept of reverence that is absent.

[ 5 ] : 36 Woodruff hopes for a renewed recognition of reverence in society.

[ 5 ] : 38 Woodruff asserts that true reverence pertains to aspects beyond human influence: the "ideal of unity," which transcends political concerns.

[ 5 ] : 28 The object of reverence may vary, encompassing God, unity, or anything surpassing human capabilities. Woodruff emphasizes that reverence values truth itself more than any human creation that attempts to represent truth.

[ 5 ] : 39 Furthermore, he posits that the primary focus of reverence is something that serves as a reminder of human limitations.

[ 5 ] : 65 Woodruff highlights the role of music, asserting that "[r]everence cannot be expressed in a creed; its most apt expression is in music".

[ 5 ] : 123 He illustrates this idea through an analogy involving a quartet with varying skill levels performing a Mozart piece. In this scenario, reverence arises because: [ 5 ] : 48–49 The musicians collaborate harmoniously on a shared project Their endeavor involves a sense of ceremony They transcend personal ego during the performance They function within a well-defined hierarchy that is agreeable to all They collectively experience a sense of "inarticulate awe" Woodruff believes "[a]rt speaks the language of reverence better than philosophy does" and connects most fluently with preexisting reverential instincts.

[ 5 ] : 25 In the presence of death, says Woodruff, an expectation of reverence is natural, though its expression is culturally-variant.

[ 5 ] : 50 Religions come and go, but cultural expressions of reverence are constant.

[ 5 ] : 54 "You need not believe in God to be reverent, but to develop an occasion for reverence you must share a culture with others, and this must support a degree of ceremony." [ 5 ] : 50 Religion is not required to provoke reverence, but rather religion depends on the emotion of reverence.

Paul Woodruff examines the historical significance of reverence as a virtue. In both Ancient Greek and Chinese civilizations, reverence was a force that upheld social order and harmony.

[ 5 ] : 60 In Greek culture, reverence had roots in a myth crafted by Protagoras in which Zeus bestowed reverence and justice upon humanity so that society would survive.

[ 5 ] : 57 In classical Greek society, as illustrated in its surviving literature, reverence served as a motivating force, encouraging people to act justly and humbly to contribute to societal improvement. The feeling of awe toward what transcends humanity helps people better respect one another.

[ 5 ] : 63 After examining classical Greek culture, Woodruff turns his attention to classical Chinese Confucian society, particularly the Analects , where he finds filial piety to express reverence in the family context.

[ 5 ] : 103 He highlights the significance of the concept of " li ", which also encompasses civility and reverence.

[ 5 ] : 105 There's a parallel between Greek and Chinese societies in that in both, notions of reverence flourished as polytheism gave way to agnosticism. In these changing circumstances, reverence endures and prospers because it addresses fundamental aspects of human life—family, hierarchy, and mortality.

[ 5 ] : 110 Woodruff argues that deviating from tradition does not necessarily imply irreverence, and he critiques relativism , advocating instead that people critically evaluate all cultures and forms of reverence.

[ 5 ] : 155 Abraham Maslow [ edit ] Abraham Maslow in his Religions, Values, and Peak Experiences , deals extensively with reverence.

[ 6 ] Reverence is an ingredient in what he terms a peak experience , which is crucial to having a fulfilling life. Maslow states that "wonder, awe, reverence, humility, surrender, and even worship before the greatness of the experience are often reported" in peak experiences.

[ 6 ] : 65 Religion is a possible, but not a necessary context for this. Indeed, religion can unfortunately sequester reverence: "'Religionizing' only one part of life secularizes the rest of it".

[ 6 ] : 31 Maslow contends that religion seeks to access reverence through ritual, but that the familiarity of the ritual can deaden any reverent feelings.

[ 6 ] : 34 Albert Schweitzer [ edit ] Albert Schweitzer sought for years for the basis of a new worldview. One day, while in a boat on the river in Gabon, it struck him with great force and clarity: " Reverence for Life " (In German: Ehrfurcht vor dem Leben ).

[ 7 ] Empirical studies [ edit ] Patient recovery [ edit ] Empirical studies on reverence are scarce. One intriguing study examined a "sense of reverence in religious and secular contexts" in 177 patients following a coronary artery bypass.

[ 8 ] The researchers sought to find if religious forms of reverence practiced through faith and prayer yielded similar results to secular forms of reverence in patient recovery. "Because reverence includes an affective as well as a cognitive component, we see it as a form of positive feeling/emotion associated with injection of the sacred into various worldviews." [ 8 ] [ page needed ] Such positive emotions were believed to help in patient recovery. They found that traditional religious involvement improved health outcomes, and secular reverence reduced the likelihood of postoperative complications, but that "[r]eligious reverence did not have the same beneficial effect as secular reverence on bypass recovery".

[ 8 ] [ page needed ] They inferred that reverence "seems to enhance recovery following bypass".

[ 8 ] [ page needed ] Awe [ edit ] Keltner and Haidt studied the importance of vastness and accommodation in experiencing awe.

[ 9 ] "Vastness refers to anything that is experienced as being much larger than the self"; accommodation means "adjusting mental structures that cannot assimilate a new experience".

[ 9 ] [ page needed ] Their research how awe is experienced through moral, spiritual, and aesthetic means, helps us understand reverence. Their study includes a survey of previous literature about awe "in religion, philosophy, sociology, and psychology" and "[r]elated states such as admiration, elevation, and the epiphanic experience".

[ 9 ] [ page needed ] Haidt notes that since Maslow [ 6 ] studied peak experiences, little empirical research has been done to examine such experiences and the moral transformations associated with emotions such as gratitude, elevation, awe, admiration, and reverence.

[ 10 ] : 287 Haidt's own work in these areas suggests that potent feelings of reverence may be associated with the peak experiences accompanying moral transformation which "seem to push a mental ‘reset button,’ wiping out feelings of cynicism and replacing them with feelings of hope, love, and optimism, and a sense of moral inspiration".

[ 10 ] : 287 Art [ edit ] Great artists sometimes give concrete form to culturally derived beliefs, values, and group identities that propose profound meaning and purpose. Reverence for artworks that instantiate such central aspects of culture can buffer the existential anxiety that follows from reminders of the inevitability of human mortality.

[ 11 ] Across history, cultures have revered art as a "forum for representing in an enduring medium those individuals who are held up as embodiments of virtue and lasting significance".

[ 11 ] : 123 Transpersonality [ edit ] From the standpoint of experiential personal construct psychology (EPCP), [ 12 ] Thomas and Schlutsmeyer suggest that "[r]everence felt in meaningful interpersonal connectedness is one starting point for the development of a larger sense of connection with the world and the many others (human and nonhuman) in it".

[ 13 ] They call this "transpersonal reverence" and make a case for the role of reverence as "a goal of therapy, a sign of optimal functioning".

[ 13 ] They believe a therapist must revere the patient and the patient must learn to revere others and themselves in order for the therapy to be effective.

Religion and music [ edit ] This section relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "Reverence" emotion – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2019 ) David Pugmire's article, "The Secular Reception of Religious Music" explores the experience of reverence through music.

[ 14 ] In particular he looks at how religious music has the capacity to instill emotions of reverence, awe, wonder, and veneration in secular people who lack the context to understand the transcendent through the religion associated with the music. "Sacred music seems to have a surprising power over unbelievers not just to quicken or delight them as other music does, but also to ply them, as little else can, with what might be called devotional feelings".

[ 14 ] Even with this though, Pugmire argues that the secularist cannot fully comprehend the nature of sacred art including sacred music. "Its undoubted expressiveness can lead him at most to excesses of feeling, not to emotion in the fullest sense, i.e., emotion with appropriate objects sustained by appropriate judgments".

[ 14 ] Pugmire believes that reverence belongs to the range of emotions that can be classified in their devotional or sacred forms, "Emotions of reverence, solemnity, agape, hope, serenity, and ecstasy".

[ 14 ] But this classification of emotions poses an interesting question: can any emotion be purely religious? "A central candidate for a distinctively religious emotion would be reverence".

[ 14 ] But it is not entirely distinct from emotions that are not related to transcendence or religion. "Reverence is indeed graver, and an attitude in which one is more given over, than its secular approximations in the shape of approval or esteem or respect".

[ 14 ] But this does not make it purely religious.

Immanuel Kant "was able to claim reverence as our principal moral emotion without invoking any grounding theological basis for this".

[ 14 ] "Similarly for its bracing sibling, awe: it figures in our experience of the sublime, of which Kant purports to find an entirely secular account." [ 14 ] To connect the secular and the sacred emotions Pugmire looks at the emotions which can be experienced equally in both contexts. These are "Love, humility, sorrow, pity, joy, serenity, ecstasy".

[ 14 ] Pugmire then suggests that devotional emotion is "The transfiguring of mundane emotion into what one might call emotion of the last instance, to the reception and expression of which religious imagery is especially well-suited, and not accidentally".

[ 14 ] The emotion of the last instance refers to the capacity of the emotional imagination to lose the sense of self and engage in the infinite and the ineffable. Pugmire suggests that religion "Provides a strikingly apt vocabulary for the expression of emotion of the last instance".

[ 14 ] Reverence is perhaps the most critical of these "emotions of the last instance" and can be adequately accessed through religious music.

See also [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Reverence .

In Memoriam by Tennyson Deference Emotion Moral emotions Social emotions References [ edit ] ^ "reverence" .

Dictionary.com .

^ Gibbons, Kendyl R. (July 23, 2012).

"Primal reverence" .

UU World . XXVII No. 2 (Summer 2012).

Unitarian Universalist Association of Congregations . Retrieved July 24, 2012 .

Reverence is an organic human experience that requires no supernatural explanations.' ^ Roberts, Robert C. (2003).

Emotions: An essay in aid of moral psychology . New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 268.

^ Solomon, Robert C. (2002).

Spirituality for the skeptic: The thoughtful love of life . New York: Oxford University Press. p. 40.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y Woodruff, Paul (2001).

Reverence: renewing a forgotten virtue . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

^ a b c d e Maslow, Abraham H. (1964).

Religions, Values, and Peak-Experiences . Columbus, Ohio: Ohio State University Press.

^ Schweitzer, Albert (2009) [1931].

Out of My Life and Thought: An Autobiography . Translated by Lemke, Antje Bultmann. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press. pp.

154– 55.

^ a b c d Ai, A. L.; Wink, P.; Tice, T. N.; Bolling, S. F.; Shearer, M. (2009). "Prayer and reverence in naturalistic, aesthetic, and socio-moral contexts predicted fewer complications following coronary artery bypass".

Journal of Behavioral Medicine .

32 (6): 570– 581.

doi : 10.1007/s10865-009-9228-1 .

PMID 19856203 .

S2CID 34733299 .

^ a b c Keltner, D.; Haidt, J. (2003). "Approaching awe, a moral, spiritual, and aesthetic emotion".

Cognition and Emotion .

17 (2): 297– 314.

doi : 10.1080/02699930302297 .

PMID 29715721 .

S2CID 1101237 .

^ a b Haidt, J. (2000).

"The positive emotion of elevation" .

Prevention and Treatment .

3 .

doi : 10.1037/1522-3736.3.1.33c . Archived from the original on 2000-12-13.

^ a b Landau, M. J.; Sullivan, D.; Solomon, S. (2010). "On graves and graven images: A terror management analysis of the psychological functions of art".

European Review of Social Psychology .

21 : 114– 154.

doi : 10.1080/10463283.2010.513266 .

S2CID 144890110 .

^ Leitner, L. M.; Pfenninger, D. T. (1994). "Sociality and optimal functioning".

Journal of Constructivist Psychology .

7 (2): 119– 135.

doi : 10.1080/10720539408405073 .

^ a b Thomas, Jill C.; Schlutsmeyer, Mark W. (2004). "A place for the aesthetic in experiential personal construct psychology".

Journal of Constructivist Psychology .

17 (4): 313– 335.

doi : 10.1080/10720530490483239 .

S2CID 145759101 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k Pugmire, David (2006). "The Secular Reception of Religious Music".

Philosophy .

81 (315): 65– 79.

doi : 10.1017/S0031819106000040 .

S2CID 170268208 .

v t e Emotions ( list ) Emotions Acceptance Admiration Adoration Aesthetic Affection Agitation Agony Amusement Anger Angst Anguish Annoyance Anticipation Antipathy Anxiety Apathy Arousal Attraction Awe Belongingness Boredom Calmness Comfort Compassion Confidence Confusion Contempt Contentment Courage Cruelty Curiosity Defeat Depression Desire Disappointment Disgust Distrust Doubt Ecstasy Embarrassment vicarious Emotion work Empathy Emptiness Enthrallment Enthusiasm Envy Euphoria Excitement Faith Fear Flow Frustration Fun Gratification Gratitude Greed Grief Guilt Happiness Joie de vivre Hatred self-hatred Hiraeth Homesickness Hope Horror Hostility Humiliation Hygge Hysteria Ikigai (sense of purpose) Indulgence Infatuation Insecurity Insignificance Inspiration Interest Irritation Isolation Jealousy Joy Kindness Loneliness Love at first sight limerence obsessive parental passionate and companionate Lust Mono no aware Neglect Nostalgia Outrage Panic Passion Pity self-pity Pleasure Pride grandiosity hubris insult vanity Rage Regret Rejection Relaxation Relief Remorse Resentment Revenge Sadness melancholy Saudade Schadenfreude Sehnsucht Sentimentality Shame Shock Shyness Solitude Social connection Sorrow Spite Stress chronic Suffering Surprise Suspense Suspicion Sympathy Trust Wonder sense of wonder Worry Zest Worldviews Cynicism Defeatism Fatalism Misanthropy Nihilism Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Related Affect consciousness in education measures in psychology Affective computing forecasting neuroscience science spectrum Affectivity positive negative Appeal to emotion Amygdala hijack Emotion and art and memory and music and sex and sleep classification circumplex EmojiGrid Lövheim PAD Plutchik evolution expressed functional accounts group homeostatic in animals perception recognition in conversation regulation interpersonal work Emotional aperture bias blackmail competence conflict contagion detachment dysregulation eating exhaustion expression and gender intelligence and bullying Empathy quotient intimacy isolation lability labor lateralization literacy prosody reasoning responsivity security symbiosis thought method well-being Emotionality bounded Emotions and culture history in decision-making in the workplace in virtual communication moral self-conscious social social sharing sociology Feeling Group affective tone Interactions between the emotional and executive brain systems Jealousy in art Mental state Meta-emotion Pathognomy Pathos Social emotional development Stoic passions Theory affect affect as information appraisal Cannon-Bard constructed emotion discrete emotion James-Lange somatic somatic marker two-factor Italics indicate emotion names in foreign languages Category v t e Virtues About virtues Endowment Moral character Nicomachean Ethics Positive psychology Trait theory Virtue ethics Virtue families Bodhipakkhiyā dhammā Brahmavihārās Bushidō Catalogue of Vices and Virtues Emi Omo Eso Epistemic virtues Five virtues Four Cardinal Principles and Eight Virtues Intellectual virtues Moral virtues Nine Noble Virtues Omoluwabi Pāramīs Prussian virtues Scout Law Seven virtues Cardinal Theological Teachings of the Seven Grandfathers Three Treasures Values in Action Inventory of Strengths Yamas Individual virtues Accountability Alertness Altruism Authenticity Calmness Charisma Charity Chastity Chivalry Cleanliness Compassion Conscientiousness Courage Civil Moral Courtesy Diligence Discernment Discipline Duty Empathy Endurance Equanimity Etiquette Faith Faithfulness Fidelity Foresight Forgiveness Frugality Generosity Glory Good faith Gratitude Heroism Honesty Honour Hope Hospitality Humanity Humility Impartiality Innocence Insight Integrity Intelligence Emotional Social Judgement Justice Kindness Love Loyalty Magnanimity Magnificence Meekness Mercy Moderation Modesty Nonattachment Patience Patriotism Perspicacity Philanthropy Piety Filial Pity Politeness Prudence Punctuality Religion Renunciation Resilience Respect Reverence Righteous indignation Righteousness Self-control Self-cultivation Self-transcendence Simplicity Sincerity Solidarity Sportsmanship Sympathy Taste Temperance Tranquillity Trust Wisdom Wit Workmanship Chinese De Jing Li Ren Yi Greek Agape Arete Ataraxia Eutrapelia Philotimo Phronesis Sophia Sophrosyne Indian Adhiṭṭhāna Ahimsa Akrodha Aparigraha Ārjava Asteya Brahmacharya Dāna Dhṛti Hrī Karuṇā Kshama Kshanti Mettā Muditā Nishkama Karma Prajñā Samatva Satya Shaucha Sevā Śraddhā / Saddhā Upekṣā Vīrya Latin Auctoritas Caritas Decorum Dignitas Fides Gravitas Humanitas Pietas Virtus Other Ganbaru Giri Sadaqah Seny Sisu Virtù v t e Aesthetics Areas Ancient Africa India Japanese Mathematics Medieval Music Nature Science Theology Schools Aestheticism Classicism Fascism Feminism Formalism Historicism Marxism Modernism Postmodernism Psychoanalysis Realism Romanticism Symbolism Theosophy more...

Philosophers Abhinavagupta Adorno Alberti Aristotle Aquinas Balázs Balthasar Baudelaire Baudrillard Baumgarten Bell Benjamin Burke Coleridge Collingwood Coomaraswamy Danto Deleuze Dewey Fry Goethe Goodman Greenberg Hanslick Hegel Heidegger Hume Hutcheson Kant Kierkegaard Klee Langer Lipps Liu Lukács Lyotard Man Marcuse Maritain Merleau-Ponty Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Orwell Pater Plato Rancière Rand Richards Ruskin Santayana Schiller Schopenhauer Scruton Tagore Tanizaki Vasari Wilde Winckelmann more...

Concepts Appropriation Art for art's sake Art manifesto Artistic merit Avant-garde Beauty Feminine Masculine Camp Comedy Creativity Cuteness Depiction Disgust Ecstasy Elegance Emotions Entertainment Eroticism Fashion Gaze Harmony Humour Interpretation Judgment Kama Kitsch Life imitating art Magnificence Mimesis Perception Picturesque Quality Rasa Recreation Reverence Style Sublime Taste Tragedy Work of art Works Hippias Major (c. 390 BC) Poetics (c. 335 BC) The Literary Mind and the Carving of Dragons (c. 100) On the Sublime (c. 500) On the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Lectures on Aesthetics (1835) " The Critic as Artist " (1891) In Praise of Shadows (1933) Art as Experience (1934) " The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction " (1935) " Avant-Garde and Kitsch " (1939) Critical Essays (1946) The Aesthetic Dimension (1977) Why Beauty Matters (2009) Related Aestheticization of politics Applied aesthetics Arts criticism Axiology Evolutionary aesthetics Mathematical beauty Neuroesthetics Patterns in nature Philosophy of design Philosophy of film Philosophy of music Psychology of art Theory of art Outline Category Philosophy portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐vcqz6
Cached time: 20250814220630
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.887 seconds
Real time usage: 1.084 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 14788/1000000
Revision size: 18988/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 162399/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6924/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 90940/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.499/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17370189/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  905.693      1 -total
 20.80%  188.413     29 Template:R
 20.77%  188.130      1 Template:Reflist
 19.75%  178.904     29 Template:R/ref
 17.26%  156.313      4 Template:Navbox
 14.54%  131.672     30 Template:R/superscript
 11.51%  104.242      7 Template:Transliteration
 10.50%   95.118      1 Template:Emotion-footer
  8.64%   78.228      1 Template:Cite_web
  8.48%   76.785      5 Template:Page_needed Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:31552371:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220630 and revision id 1292136648. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reverence_(emotion)&oldid=1292136648 " Categories : Concepts in ethics Emotions Honour Psychology of religion Religious practices Ritual Sociology of religion Virtue ethics Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing rewrite from November 2019 All articles needing rewrite Articles containing German-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2023 Articles needing additional references from November 2019 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Welsh-language text Articles containing Danish-language text Articles containing Japanese-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Catalan-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 11:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reverence (emotion) 6 languages Add topic

