Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Ministry of National Education (France) 14 languages العربية Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Italiano עברית 日本語 Occitan Português Русский Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Government ministry of France You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in French .

(February 2024) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing French Wikipedia article at [[:fr:Ministère de l'Éducation nationale (France)]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|fr|Ministère de l'Éducation nationale (France)}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Minister of National Education and Youth Ministre de l'Éducation nationale et de la Jeunesse Incumbent Élisabeth Borne since 23 December 2024 Ministry of National Education Member of Cabinet Reports to President of the Republic Prime Minister Seat Hôtel de Rochechouart, 110 rue de Grenelle, Paris 7e .

Nominator Prime Minister Appointer President of the Republic Term length No fixed term Formation 1 February 1828 Website www .education .gouv .fr This article is part of a series on Politics of France Constitutions Fifth Republic Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen Executive President ( list ) Emmanuel Macron ( RE ) Prime Minister ( list ) François Bayrou ( MoDem ) Government Bayrou Legislature National Assembly : Membership President : Yaël Braun-Pivet Senate President : Gérard Larcher Congress of the French Parliament Judiciary Constitutional Council Council of State Court of Cassation Court of Audit Cour de Justice de la République Administrative divisions Regions Metropolitan regions Auvergne-Rhône-Alpes Bourgogne-Franche-Comté Brittany Centre-Val de Loire Corsica Grand Est Hauts-de-France Île-de-France Normandy Nouvelle-Aquitaine Occitania Pays de la Loire Provence-Alpes-Côte d'Azur Overseas regions French Guiana Guadeloupe Martinique Mayotte Réunion Overseas country French Polynesia Departments Elections Referendums Presidential Legislative Senate Municipal Political parties Foreign relations Africa Americas Asia France and the United Nations Foreign alliances Ministry of Europe and Foreign Affairs Politics of the European Union Related topics Centrism Human rights Political scandals France portal Other countries v t e The Ministry of National Education and Youth , or simply Ministry of National Education , as the title has changed several times in the course of the Fifth Republic , is the cabinet member in the Government of France who oversees the country's public educational system and supervises agreements and authorisations for private teaching organisations.

The ministry's headquarters is located in the 18th century Hôtel de Rochechouart on the Rue de Grenelle in the 7th arrondissement of Paris .

[ 1 ] As education is France's largest employment domain, the ministry directs the work of more than half of the state civil servants . The position is therefore traditionally a strategic one.

On 11 January 2024, with the installation of the Attal government , the ministry changed its name to Ministère de l'Éducation nationale, de la Jeunesse, des Sports et des Jeux Olympiques et Paralympiques (Ministry of National Education, Youth, Sports and the Olympic and Paralympic Games). During the second cabinet reshuffle of February 2024, and owing to a controversy involving Amélie Oudéa-Castéra , the ministry was divided into two: Oudéa-Castéra kept the Ministry of Sports and Olympic and Paralympic Games title, while the Ministry of Education was assigned to Nicole Belloubet . After the 2024 French legislative election , Anne Genetet was appointed Minister of National Education on 21 September 2024. She was succeeded by Élisabeth Borne in December 2024 during the formation of the Bayrou government .

History [ edit ] A governmental position overseeing public education was first created in France in 1802. Following the various regime changes in France in the first decades of the 19th century, the position changed official status and name a number of times before the position of Minister of Public Instruction was created in 1828. For much of its history, the position was combined with that of Minister of Public Worship , who dealt with issues related to the Roman Catholic Church , except in instances where the Minister of Public Instruction was a Protestant .  The position has also occasionally been combined with Minister of Sports and Minister of Youth Affairs .  In 1932, the office's title was changed to Minister of National Education , although it was briefly changed back in 1940–1941, and was renamed Minister of Education during the presidency of Valéry Giscard d'Estaing (1974–1981). In 1975, it created the Comité d'études sur les formations d'ingénieurs which studies the training and job placement of engineers in France.

Gardens of the Hôtel de Rochechouart Office of the Education Minister at the Hôtel de Rochechouart View from the street See also [ edit ] List of education ministers of France Education in France Minister of Higher Education, Research and Innovation (France) References [ edit ] ^ " à propos du site – mentions légales – crédits ". Ministry of National Education. Retrieved on 6 May 2011. "Ministère de l’éducation nationale, de la jeunesse et de la vie associative Secrétariat général – Délégation à la communication 110 rue de Grenelle 75007 Paris" External links [ edit ] France Ministry of National Education – Official website (in French) v t e Government of France Head of government Prime Minister Ministerial portfolios Europe and Foreign Affairs National Education, Youth and Sports Economy and Finance Armed Forces Interior Labour, Employment and Economic Inclusion Ecological Transition Territorial Cohesion and Relations with Local Authorities Justice Culture Overseas Solidarity and Health Sea Higher Education, Research and Innovation Agriculture and Food Public Transformation and Service Gender Equality, Diversity and Equal Opportunities Former portfolios Air Information Navy Police War Portals : Politics France Education Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF National Germany United States Australia Portugal Norway Sweden Israel Catalonia Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ministry_of_National_Education_(France)&oldid=1286096259 " Categories : Ministers of national education of France Education in France Ministries of education Education policy in France Government ministries of France Educational administration Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Government and politics articles needing translation from French Wikipedia Articles containing French-language text Articles with French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 17 April 2025, at 18:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ministry of National Education (France) 14 languages Add topic

