Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Chapters summary 3 Philosophers and scientists cited Toggle Philosophers and scientists cited subsection 3.1 Immanentist 3.2 Russian Machists 4 See also 5 Notes 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Materialism and Empirio-criticism 25 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Кыргызча Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1909 book by Vladimir Lenin Front cover of the first edition of Lenin's Materialism and Empirio-criticism, published in Moscow in 1909 under the pseudonym "Vl. Ilyin." Part of a series on Leninism Schools of thought Bolshevism Bordigism Marxism–Leninism Nkrumaism Right communism Trotskyism Workerism Concepts Anti-imperialism Collective leadership Democratic centralism Dialectical materialism Dual power Labor aristocracy Liquidationism National liberation Proletarian internationalism Revolutionary defeatism Revolutionary situation Self-determination Socialist state Soviet democracy Vanguardism World revolution People Lenin Trotsky Bukharin Kamenev Stalin Zinoviev Rykov Bubnov Sokolnikov Lukács Bordiga Hồ Gramsci Nkrumah Negri Theoretical works The Development of Capitalism in Russia (1899) What Is to Be Done?

(1902) Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1917) The State and Revolution (1917) The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky (1918) "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder (1920) Foundations of Leninism (1924) Leninism: Introduction to the Study of Leninism (1925) History Russian Social Democratic Labour Party 2nd Congress Prague Conference Bolsheviks RSDLP (Bolsheviks) Russian Revolution February Revolution October Revolution History of Soviet Russia RSFSR Collective leadership Civil War Red Army War communism Red Terror National delimitation Anti-religious campaign New Economic Policy Soviet Union Death and funeral of Lenin Comintern Joseph Stalin's rise to power Related topics 26 Baku Commissars Anti-Leninist left De-Leninization Jacobinism Marxism Libertarian Luxemburgism Left communism Mensheviks Orthodox Marxism Proletkult Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Materialism and Empirio-criticism ( Russian : Материализм и эмпириокритицизм, Materializm i empiriokrititsizm ) is a philosophical work by Vladimir Lenin , published in 1909. It was an obligatory subject of study in all institutions of higher education in the Soviet Union , [ 1 ] as a seminal work of dialectical materialism , a part of the curriculum called " Marxist–Leninist Philosophy".

[ 2 ] Lenin argued that human minds are capable of forming representations of the world that portray the world as it is. Thus, Lenin argues, our beliefs about the world can be objectively true; a belief is true when it accurately reflects the facts. According to Lenin, absolute truth is possible, but our theories are often only relatively true. Scientific theories can therefore constitute knowledge of the world.

[ 2 ] Lenin formulates the fundamental philosophical contradiction between idealism and materialism as follows: "Materialism is the recognition of 'objects in themselves' or objects outside the mind; the ideas and sensations are copies or images of these objects. The opposite doctrine (idealism) says: the objects do not exist, outside the mind '; they are 'connections of sensations'." [ 3 ] Background [ edit ] The book, whose full title is Materialism and Empirio-criticism. Critical Comments on a Reactionary Philosophy , was written by Lenin from February through October 1908 while he was in Geneva and London and was published in Moscow in May 1909 by Zveno Publishers. The original manuscript and preparatory materials have been lost.

[ 4 ] Most of the book was written when Lenin was in Geneva, apart from the one month spent in London, where he visited the library of the British Museum to access modern philosophical and natural science material. The index lists in excess of 200 sources for the book.

[ 4 ] In December 1908, Lenin moved from Geneva to Paris , where he worked until April 1909 on correcting the proofs. Some passages were edited to avoid tsarist censorship. It was published in Imperial Russia with great difficulty. Lenin insisted on the rapid distribution of the book and stressed that "not only literary but also serious political obligations" were involved in its publication.

[ 4 ] The book was written as a reaction and criticism to the three-volume work Empiriomonism (1904–1906) by Alexander Bogdanov , his political opponent within the Party . In June 1909, Bogdanov was defeated at a Bolshevik mini-conference in Paris and expelled from the Central Committee, but he still retained a relevant role in the Party's left wing. He participated in the Russian Revolution and in 1919 he was appointed to the praesidium of the Socialist Academy of Social Sciences .

[ 5 ] : 403 Materialism and Empirio-criticism was republished in Russian in 1920 with an introduction attacking Bogdanov by Vladimir Nevsky , the Rector of the Sverdlov Communist University . It subsequently appeared in over 20 languages and acquired canonical status in Marxist–Leninist philosophy.

[ 5 ] : 117 Chapters summary [ edit ] Chapter I The Epistemology of Empiriocriticism and Dialectical Materialism I Lenin then discusses the " solipsism " of Mach and Avenarius .

Chapter II The Epistemology of Empiriocriticism and Dialectical Materialism II Lenin, Chernov and Bazarov confront the views of Ludwig Feuerbach , Joseph Dietzgen and Friedrich Engels and comment on the criterion of practice in epistemology.

Chapter III The Epistemology of Empiriocriticism and Dialectical Materialism III Lenin seeks to define "matter" and "experience" and addresses the questions of causality and necessity in nature as well as "freedom and necessity" and the "principle of the economy of thought".

Chapter IV The Philosophical Idealists as Collaborators and Successors of Empiriocriticism Lenin deals with left and right Kant criticism, with the philosophy of immanence , Bogdanov's empiriomonism, and the critique of Hermann von Helmholtz on the "theory of symbols." Chapter V The Latest Revolution in Science and Philosophical Idealism Lenin deals with the thesis that "the crisis of physics" "has disappeared matter". In this context he speaks of a "physical idealism" and notes (on p. 260): "For the only" property "of matter to whose acknowledgment philosophical materialism is bound is the property of being objective reality, outside of our consciousness." Chapter VI Empiriocriticism and Historical Materialism Lenin discusses authors such as Bogdanov, Suvorov, Ernst Haeckel and Ernst Mach.

In an addition to Chapter IV, Lenin addresses the question: "From what side did N. G. Chernyshevsky criticize Kantianism?" Philosophers and scientists cited [ edit ] Lenin cites a broad range of philosophers, including: Immanentist [ edit ] Richard Avenarius Ernst Mach Richard von Schubert-Soldern Joseph Petzoldt Russian Machists [ edit ] Main article: Russian Machism Jakov Berman Osip Helfond Sergei Suvorov Pavel Yushkevich See also [ edit ] Anti-Dühring Empirio-criticism Vladimir Lenin bibliography Notes [ edit ] ^ Rockmore, Tom; Levine, Norman, eds. (2018).

"Lenin and Stalin: Theory and Politics" .

The Palgrave Handbook of Leninist Political Philosophy . Springer.

ISBN 9781137516503 .

^ a b Bakhurst, David (2018).

"On Lenin's Materialism and Empiriocriticism" (PDF) .

Studies in East European Thought .

70 ( 2– 3, 28 June 2018): 107– 119.

doi : 10.1007/s11212-018-9303-7 .

S2CID 149668554 .

^ W. I. Lenin: Materialism and Empirio-criticism. Critical Remarks about a Reactionary Philosophy . Publisher for Foreign Language Literature, Moscow 1947. p. 14.

^ a b c Prikhodko, Sergey Alexandrovich (2015).

" Materialism and Empirio-Criticism by V.I.Lenin as the Main Russian Language Polemical text of the 1900s" .

Russian Linguistic Bulletin .

3 (3): 9– 11.

: 10 ^ a b White, James D. (2019).

Red Hamlet: the life and ideas of Alexander Bogdanov . Leiden; Boston: Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-26890-6 .

Further reading [ edit ] Robert V. Daniels: A Documentary History of Communism in Russia: From Lenin to Gorbachev , 1993, ISBN 0-87451-616-1 .

External links [ edit ] Materialism and Empirio-criticism by Vladimir Lenin at the Marxists Internet Archive Materialism and Empirio-criticism , a PDF version published by Progress Publishers v t e Vladimir Lenin Vladimir Lenin bibliography List of speeches Bibliography of the Russian Revolution and Civil War The Development of Capitalism in Russia (1899) What Is To Be Done?

(1902) One Step Forward, Two Steps Back (1904) Two Tactics of Social Democracy in the Democratic Revolution (1905) Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) Philosophical Notebooks (1913) The Three Sources and Three Component Parts of Marxism (1913) The Right of Nations to Self-Determination (1914) Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1916) The State and Revolution (1917) The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky (1918) "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder (1920) Testament (1922–1923) v t e Positivism Perspectives Antihumanism Empiricism Rationalism Scientism Declinations Legal positivism Logical positivism Positivist school Postpositivism Sociological positivism Machian positivism (empirio-criticism) Rankean historical positivism Polish positivism Russian Machism Principal concepts Consilience Demarcation Evidence Induction Justification Pseudoscience Critique of metaphysics Unity of science Verificationism Antitheses Antipositivism Confirmation holism Critical theory Falsifiability Geisteswissenschaft Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human science Humanities Metaphysics Methodological dualism Problem of induction Reflectivism Related paradigm shifts in the history of science Non-Euclidean geometry (1830s) Uncertainty principle (1927) Related topics Behavioralism Post-behavioralism Critical rationalism Criticism of science Epistemology anarchism idealism nihilism pluralism realism Holism Instrumentalism Modernism Naturalism in literature Nomothetic–idiographic distinction Objectivity in science Operationalism Phenomenalism Philosophy of science Deductive-nomological model Ramsey sentence Sense-data theory Qualitative research Relationship between religion and science Sociology Social science Philosophy Structural functionalism Structuralism Structuration theory Positivist-related debate Method Methodenstreit (1890s) Werturteilsstreit (1909–1959) Positivismusstreit (1960s) Fourth Great Debate in international relations (1980s) Science wars (1990s) Contributions The Course in Positive Philosophy (1830) A General View of Positivism (1848) Critical History of Philosophy (1869) Idealism and Positivism (1879–1884) The Analysis of Sensations (1886) The Logic of Modern Physics (1927) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) The Two Cultures (1959) The Universe in a Nutshell (2001) Proponents Richard Avenarius A. J. Ayer Alexander Bogdanov Percy Williams Bridgman Auguste Comte Eugen Dühring Émile Durkheim Stephen Hawking Ernst Laas Ernst Mach C. P. Snow Berlin Circle Vienna Circle Criticism Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) History and Class Consciousness (1923) The Logic of Scientific Discovery (1934) The Poverty of Historicism (1936) World Hypotheses (1942) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Truth and Method (1960) The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (1962) Conjectures and Refutations (1963) One-Dimensional Man (1964) Knowledge and Human Interests (1968) The Poverty of Theory (1978) The Scientific Image (1980) The Rhetoric of Economics (1986) Critics Theodor W. Adorno Gaston Bachelard Mario Bunge Wilhelm Dilthey Paul Feyerabend Hans-Georg Gadamer Jürgen Habermas Thomas Kuhn Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Herbert Marcuse Deirdre McCloskey Stephen Pepper Karl Popper Willard Van Orman Quine E. P. Thompson Bas van Fraassen Max Weber Concepts in contention Knowledge Objectivity Phronesis Truth Verstehen Category Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany France BnF data Poland Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Materialism_and_Empirio-criticism&oldid=1304006339 " Categories : 1909 non-fiction books Works by Vladimir Lenin Materialism and Marxism Marxism Academic works about philosophy Epistemology literature Dialectical materialism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 11:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Materialism and Empirio-criticism 25 languages Add topic

