Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 In practice 2 Lenin's conception and practice 3 Implementation by states Toggle Implementation by states subsection 3.1 Soviet Union 3.2 People's Republic of China 3.3 Vietnam 3.4 Laos 4 See also 5 Citations 6 General and cited references 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Democratic centralism 42 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu বাংলা Беларуская Brezhoneg Català Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Кыргызча Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Simple English کوردی Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Organisational principle of socialist/communist states and of communist parties Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Anti-factionalist cartoon by the exiled section of the Romanian Communist Party , December 1931 Democratic centralism is the organisational principle of most communist parties , in which decisions are made by a process of vigorous and open debate amongst party membership, and are subsequently binding upon all members of the party. The concept describes how revolutionaries practice democratic centralism to select leaders and officers, and determine and execute policy.

[ 1 ] Democratic centralism has historically been associated with not only Marxist–Leninist but also Trotskyist parties, [ 2 ] [ 3 ] and has also occasionally been practised by democratic socialist and social democratic parties, such as South Africa's African National Congress .

Scholars dispute whether and to what extent democratic centralism was implemented in practice in places where they were nominally in force, such as the Soviet Union and the People's Republic of China , pointing to violent power struggles, backhanded political maneuvering, historical antagonisms and the politics of personal prestige.

[ 4 ] Various socialist states have made democratic centralism the organisational principle of the state in their statutes, with the political power principle being unitary power .

In practice [ edit ] This section relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this section by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "Democratic centralism" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Democratic centralism is a form of organisation that party members are supposed to abide by, both after having seized the government, but also while trying to seize it. Most communist parties have a democratic centralist structure.

In party meetings, a motion (new policy or amendment, goal, plan or any other kind of political question) is moved (proposed). After a period of debate, a vote is taken. If one vote clearly wins (gaining a share of 60% or above among two options, for example) all party members are expected to follow that decision, and not continue debating it. The goal is to avoid decisions being undermined by participants whose views are in the minority. In the development of socialism in the Soviet Union and China, it was implemented in response to rapid political developments, which required faster mechanisms of decision-making.

Before an issue has been voted on and carried out, discussion and criticism is permitted in all forms. Once a resolution is being carried out, discussion and criticism which may disrupt unity in performing the action is forbidden, to ensure that the action is not derailed.

[ 5 ] In several socialist states, related practices were also adopted to ensure freedom of discussion, such as Mao's "Don't Blame the Speaker".

[ 6 ] Some Trotskyist and orthodox Marxist perspectives describe "deficient" forms of democratic centralism as " bureaucratic centralism ," often those espoused by Marxist–Leninists. According to these Trotskyists, bureaucratic centralism de-prioritises democracy, and thus fails to serve the interests of the proletariat.

Lenin's conception and practice [ edit ] Part of a series on Leninism Schools of thought Bolshevism Bordigism Marxism–Leninism Nkrumaism Right communism Trotskyism Workerism Concepts Anti-imperialism Collective leadership Democratic centralism Dialectical materialism Dual power Labor aristocracy Liquidationism National liberation Proletarian internationalism Revolutionary defeatism Revolutionary situation Self-determination Socialist state Soviet democracy Vanguardism World revolution People Lenin Trotsky Bukharin Kamenev Stalin Zinoviev Rykov Bubnov Sokolnikov Lukács Bordiga Hồ Gramsci Nkrumah Negri Theoretical works The Development of Capitalism in Russia (1899) What Is to Be Done?

(1902) Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1917) The State and Revolution (1917) The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky (1918) "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder (1920) Foundations of Leninism (1924) Leninism: Introduction to the Study of Leninism (1925) History Russian Social Democratic Labour Party 2nd Congress Prague Conference Bolsheviks RSDLP (Bolsheviks) Russian Revolution February Revolution October Revolution History of Soviet Russia RSFSR Collective leadership Civil War Red Army War communism Red Terror National delimitation Anti-religious campaign New Economic Policy Soviet Union Death and funeral of Lenin Comintern Joseph Stalin's rise to power Related topics 26 Baku Commissars Anti-Leninist left De-Leninization Jacobinism Marxism Libertarian Luxemburgism Left communism Mensheviks Orthodox Marxism Proletkult Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Vladimir Lenin 's text What Is to Be Done?

from 1902 is popularly seen as the founding text of democratic centralism. At this time, democratic centralism was generally viewed as a set of principles for the organizing of a revolutionary workers' party. However, Vladimir Lenin's model for such a party, which he repeatedly discussed as being "democratic centralist", was the still extant German Social Democratic Party , inspired by remarks made by the social democrat Jean Baptista von Schweitzer . Lenin described democratic centralism as consisting of "freedom of discussion, unity of action".

[ 1 ] The interpretation of the principal of democratic centralism, in relation to who should be counted as a party member, served as one of the sources of the split between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks . The Mensheviks supported membership for people not involved in the party, a looser party discipline within the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party in 1903 as did Leon Trotsky , in Our Political Tasks , [ 7 ] although Trotsky later changed his views and joined ranks with the Bolsheviks in 1917.

The Sixth Party Congress of the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks) held at Petrograd between 26 July and 3 August 1917 defined democratic centralism as follows: That all directing bodies of the Party, from top to bottom, shall be elected.

That Party bodies shall give periodical accounts of their activities to their respective Party organization.

That there shall be strict Party discipline and the subordination of the minority to the majority.

That all decisions of higher bodies shall be absolutely binding on lower bodies and on all Party members.

[ 8 ] After the successful consolidation of power by the Communist Party following the October Revolution and the Russian Civil War , the Bolshevik leadership, including Lenin, instituted a ban on factions in the party as Resolution No. 12 of the 10th Party Congress in 1921. It was passed in the morning session on 16 March 1921.

[ 9 ] Trotskyists sometimes claim that this ban was intended to be temporary, but there is no language in the discussion at the 10th Party Congress suggesting such.

[ 10 ] The Group of Democratic Centralism was a group in the Soviet Communist Party which developed in the early 1920, which criticised the leadership of the Communist Party for excessive centralisation of political power in the party, removal of local party initiative, and rigid control from above within the industry, Party and local administration. They felt that the democratic element of democratic centralism had been weakened.

In On Party Unity , Lenin argued that democratic centralism prevents factionalism. He argued that factionalism leads to less friendly relations among members and that it can be exploited by enemies of the party. Lenin wrote of democratic centralism that it "implies universal and full freedom to criticise, so long as this does not disturb the unity of a definite action; it rules out all criticism which disrupts or makes difficult the unity of an action decided on by the Party." [ 11 ] By the Brezhnev period , democratic centralism was described in the 1977 Soviet Constitution as a principle for organizing the state: "The Soviet state is organized and functions on the principle of democratic centralism, namely the electiveness of all bodies of state authority from the lowest to the highest, their accountability to the people, and the obligation of lower bodies to observe the decisions of higher ones." Implementation by states [ edit ] Soviet Union [ edit ] Further information: Ban on factions in the Communist Party of the Soviet Union For much of the time between the era of Joseph Stalin and the 1980s, the principle of democratic centralism meant that the Supreme Soviet , while nominally vested with great lawmaking powers, did little more than approve decisions already made at the highest levels of the Communist Party. When the Supreme Soviet was not in session, the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet performed its ordinary functions. It also had the power to issue decrees in lieu of law. Nominally, if such decrees were not ratified at the Supreme Soviet's next session, they were considered revoked. However, ratification was usually a mere formality, and occasionally even this formality was not observed.

[ 12 ] Thus, decisions made by the Party's top leaders de facto had the force of law.

The democratic centralist principle extended to elections in the Soviet Union . All socialist countries were—either de jure or de facto — one-party states . In most cases, the voters were presented with a single list of unopposed candidates, which usually won 90 percent or more of the vote.

[ 13 ] The Third International , in contrast with the First and the Second Internationals, held the Soviet Union in a central position and functioned as one big body instead of many independent communist parties in different countries.

[ 14 ] People's Republic of China [ edit ] Politics of China Leadership Leadership generations Succession of power Hu–Wen Administration (2002–2012) Xi–Li Administration (2012–2017) Xi's general secretaryship (since 2012) 4th Leadership Core : Xi Jinping 20th Party Politburo : Xi Jinping 14th State Council : Li Qiang Current state leaders Current provincial leaders Party and state leaders Orders of precedence Paramount leader : Xi Jinping First lady : Peng Liyuan Communist Party leader : Xi Jinping State representative : Xi Jinping Head of government : Li Qiang Congress Chairman : Zhao Leji Conference Chairman : Wang Huning Commander-in-chief : Xi Jinping Politburo Standing Committee longest-serving members Related systems Unified power Democratic centralism Collective leadership Organization Department Elections Civil service Constitution Law Constitution Previous constitutions 1954 1975 1978 "People's democratic dictatorship" (Article 1) Democratic centralism (Article 3) Constitutional oath of office (Article 27) Protection of human rights (Article 33) Freedom of religion (Article 36) Highest state organ of power (Article 57) Chinese legal system Civil law tradition Socialist law tradition Laws Legislation Law List of statutes General Principles of the Civil Law (to 2020) Civil Code (from 2021) Marriage Law Labour law Labour Law Labour Contract Law Property law Property Law Intellectual property law Patent law Administrative law Administrative Procedure Law Criminal law Capital punishment Capital offences Death sentence with reprieve Communist Party History Principal leaders Constitution and ideology Admission Oath (Article 6) Socialism with Chinese characteristics Communism Marxism–Leninism Mao Zedong Thought Deng Xiaoping Theory Primary stage of socialism Four Cardinal Principles Three Represents Scientific Outlook on Development Harmonious Socialist Society Xi Jinping Thought Chinese Dream Democracy Whole-process people's democracy Organization National Party Congress ( 20th ) Central Committee ( 20th ) General Secretary ( list ) Xi Jinping Central Politburo ( 20th ) Standing Committee ( 20th ) Central Secretariat ( 20th ) First-ranked secretary: Cai Qi Central Military Commission Chairman : Xi Jinping Vice Chairmen : Zhang Youxia , He Weidong National Security Commission Chairman: Xi Jinping Vice-Chairman: Li Qiang , Zhao Leji , Cai Qi Office Chief: Cai Qi Comprehensively Deepening Reforms Commission Director: Xi Jinping Deputy Directors: Li Qiang , Wang Huning , Cai Qi Secretary-General: Wang Huning Financial & Economic Affairs Commission Director: Xi Jinping Deputy Director: Li Qiang Office Chief: He Lifeng General Office Director : Cai Qi Office of the General Secretary Director: Han Shiming Central Guard Bureau Central Guard Unit Office of the Central Secrecy Commission Organization Department Head : Shi Taifeng Central Commission for Discipline Inspection ( 20th ) Standing Committee ( 20th ) Secretary : Li Xi Commission for Discipline Inspection of the Central Military Commission Secretary: Zhang Shengmin Central Leading Group for Inspection Work Leader: Li Xi Provincial committee Standing committee Secretary Deputy secretaries Party group National People's Congress ( 14th ) Elections Democracy System of people's congress Standing Committee ( 14th ) Council of Chairpersons Chairman : Zhao Leji Vice-Chairpersons Top-ranked: Li Hongzhong Secretary-General : Liu Qi Special Committees Ethnic Affairs Constitution and Law Supervisory and Judicial Affairs Financial and Economic Affairs Education, Science, Culture and Public Health Foreign Affairs Overseas Chinese Affairs Environmental Protection and Resources Conservation Agriculture and Rural Affairs Social Development Affairs Presidium State representative President ( list ): Xi Jinping Presidential Office Chief: Han Shiming Vice President : Han Zheng Executive organ State Council (Central People's Government) Li Qiang Cabinet Premier ( list ): Li Qiang Vice-Premiers ( list ) Ding Xuexiang He Lifeng Zhang Guoqing Liu Guozhong State Councilors Wang Xiaohong Wu Zhenglong Shen Yiqin Secretary-General : Wu Zhenglong Cabinet-level departments National Development & Reform Commission Central bank National Audit Office General Office Secretary-General Deputy Secretaries-General State-owned Assets Supervision & Administration Commission most Central Enterprises Military organ Central Military Commission (CMC) Chairman ( supreme commander ): Xi Jinping Vice Chairmen : Zhang Youxia He Weidong Members: Liu Zhenli Miao Hua Zhang Shengmin Departments: General Office Director: Zhong Shaojun Joint Staff Dept.

Chief : Liu Zhenli Political Work Dept.

Director: Miao Hua Logistic Support Dept.

Director: Zhang Lin Equipment Development Dept.

Director: Xu Xueqiang Training and Administration Dept.

Director: Wang Peng National Defense Mobilization Dept.

Director: Liu Faqing Discipline Inspection Commission Secretary: Zhang Shengmin Politics and Legal Affairs Commission Science and Technology Commission Strategic Planning Office Reform & Organizational Structure Office Int'l Military Cooperation Office Audit Office Offices Administration Agency National armed forces: People's Liberation Army Theater commands People's Armed Police 1st Mobile Contingent 2nd Mobile Contingent China Coast Guard Militia State Council National Defense Mobilization Commission Chairman : Li Qiang Ministry of National Defense Minister : Dong Jun Ministry of Veterans Affairs State Administration for Sci., Tech. & Industry for National Defense Military history Armed conflicts Military modernization Military reform since 2015 CMC Leading Group for Military Reform Leader: Xi Jinping Supervisory organ National Supervisory Commission Director : Liu Jinguo Corruption in China Anti-corruption campaign since 2012 Independent Commission Against Corruption (Hong Kong) Commission Against Corruption (Macau) Judicial organs Supreme People's Court President : Zhang Jun People's Courts Judicial Police Supreme People's Procuratorate Procurator-General : Ying Yong People's Procuratorates Judicial Police Judiciary of Hong Kong Court of Final Appeal Department of Justice Prosecutions Division Law enforcement in Hong Kong Disciplined Services Security Bureau Hong Kong Police Force Judiciary of Macau Court of Final Appeal Public Prosecutions Office Secretariat for Security Macau Security Force Unitary Police Services [ zh ] Public Security Police Judiciary Police [ zh ] United front System of multi-party cooperation and political consultation Political Consultative Conference National Committee ( 14th ) Chairman : Wang Huning Vice-Chairpersons Top-ranked: Shi Taifeng Secretary-General : Wang Dongfeng Political parties : CCP (ruling) United Front Work Department Head : Li Ganjie Democratic parties RCCK CDL CNDCA CAPD CPWDP CZGP JS TDSL Historical parties: KMT CDSP YCP Federation of Industry and Commerce People's organizations Law enforcement CCP Central Politics and Law Commission Secretary : Chen Wenqing Enforced disappearance Ministry of Public Security Minister : Wang Xiaohong Public Security Organs People's Police State Immigration Administration Local public security bureaus Ministry of State Security Minister : Chen Yixin State Security Organs People's Police Ministry of Justice Minister : He Rong Judicial Administrative Organs People's Police People's Armed Police 1st Mobile Contingent 2nd Mobile Contingent China Coast Guard Bureau of Prison Administration [ zh ] Office for Safeguarding National Security Urban Management (chengguan) Propaganda Central Leading Group for Propaganda, Ideology and Culture Leader: Cai Qi Deputy Leaders: Li Shulei , Shen Yiqin Central Guidance Commission on Building Spiritual Civilization Director: Cai Qi Deputy Director: Li Shulei Publicity Department of the Chinese Communist Party Head : Li Shulei General Administration of Press and Publication China Film Administration State Council Information Office China Daily Ministry of Culture and Tourism National Radio and Television Administration China Media Group China Central Television China Global Television Network China National Radio China Radio International Xinhua News Agency Reference News China News Service People's Daily Global Times China Today Censorship in China Great Cannon Great Firewall Overseas censorship Radio jamming Media of China Internal media International communication centers Publishing industry in China Internet in China Internet censorship Central Cyberspace Affairs Commission Director: Cai Qi Cyberspace Administration of China Director: Zhuang Rongwen Hong Kong Macau Central Leading Group on Hong Kong and Macau Affairs Leader: Ding Xuexiang HK & Macau Affairs Office Director: Xia Baolong Hong Kong Liaison Office Macau Liaison Office One country, two systems Special administrative regions Hong Kong Basic Law Chief Executive : John Lee Ka-chiu Hong Kong SAR Government Politics of Hong Kong Pro-Beijing camp Pro-democracy camp Independence movement Mainland & HK CEPA Macao Basic Law Chief Executive : Ho Iat-seng Macau SAR Government Politics of Macau Mainland & Macau CEPA Cross-strait relations Cross-strait relations Chinese Civil War One China Political status of Taiwan Republic of China on Taiwan Taiwan Area "Taiwan Province", PRC Taiwan independence movement Anti-Secession Law Economic Cooperation Framework Agreement Cross-Strait Service Trade Agreement Chinese unification Central Leading Group for Taiwan Affairs Leader: Xi Jinping Deputy Leader: Wang Huning Taiwan Affairs Office Director: Song Tao Association for Relations Across the Taiwan Straits Foreign relations Central Foreign Affairs Commission Director: Xi Jinping Deputy Director: Li Qiang Secretary-General: Wang Yi Ministry of Foreign Affairs Minister : Wang Yi Spokespersons Diplomatic missions Diplomatic missions of China / in China Foreign aid from China / to China International Development Cooperation Agency Ministry of Commerce Exim Bank of China China Development Bank Belt and Road Initiative Silk Road Fund Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank BRICS New Development Bank Ministry of National Defense International Military Cooperation Office NPC Foreign Affairs Committee CCP International Department State Administration of Foreign Experts Affairs Overseas Chinese Affairs Office Chinese nationality law Chinese passports ( Hong Kong ; Macau ) Visa requirements for Chinese citizens ( Hong Kong , Macau ) Visa policy of China ( Hong Kong ; Macau ) National Immigration Administration Five Principles of Peaceful Coexistence Panda diplomacy Beijing Consensus Community of Common Destiny China and the United Nations China and the World Trade Organization Shanghai Cooperation Organisation China–Africa relations China–Arab relations China–Caribbean relations China–European Union relations China–Latin America relations China–Pacific relations China–Russia relations China–United States relations Related topics Administrative divisions Chinese information operations Ethnic minorities Family planning Hukou system Human rights in China Chinese intelligence activity abroad China portal Other countries v t e The Leninist practice of democratic centralism was introduced during the Republic of China era to the Kuomintang in 1923. It was allied with the Chinese Communist Party during the Warlord Era and received support from the Soviet Union. The organizational structures of the Kuomintang would remain in place until the democratization on Taiwan in the 1990s and would serve as a structural basis of several Taiwanese political parties such as the Democratic Progressive Party .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Since 1945, the Chinese Communist Party's constitution has defined the party's view of democratic centralism.

[ 18 ] : 23 Democratic centralism is also stated in Article 3 of the current constitution of the People's Republic of China : Article 3. The state organs of the People's Republic of China apply the principle of democratic centralism. The National People's Congress and the local people's congresses at different levels are instituted through democratic election. They are responsible to the people and subject to their supervision. All administrative, judicial, and procuratorial organs of the state are created by the people's congresses to which they are responsible and under whose supervision they operate. The division of functions and powers between the central and local state organs is guided by the principle of giving full play to the initiative and enthusiasm of the local authorities under the unified leadership of the central authorities.

[ 19 ] Vietnam [ edit ] The Communist Party of Vietnam is organized according to the Leninist principle of democratic centralism. According to the regulations of the Party, democratic centralism is performed following these rules: [ 20 ] Party leadership bodies at all level are chosen by voting. Practicing the collective leadership with individual responsibility.

Highest Party leadership body is the National Congress . Regional leadership bodies are the corresponding representative assembly. Between the two congress events, the executive leadership body is the Central Committee , regional executing leadership bodies are the Party Committees.

A regional committee has to report to and take responsibility before the Party assembly at the same level and the committees at the below and above level. It has to periodically report its situation to the relevant Party bodies and perform criticism and self-criticism.

Party members and bodies have to obey the Party Resolutions. Minority has to obey majority, bodies at lower level has to obey the ones at higher level, individual has to obey the whole team, the Party bodies have to obey the National Congress and Central Committee.

The draft Resolution can only be passed when over half of the corresponding assembly members approve. Before voting, all assembly members have the rights to debate and express their own opinions. Members of the minority groups have the right to reserve their own opinions, but they have to fully obey the Party Resolution and are not allowed to sabotage the Resolution. The authoritative Party bodies should conduct a research about the minority opinions and are not allowed to discriminate against the "minority" members.

The Party bodies are allowed to make decisions within their assigned authority, however the decisions are not allowed to violate the general principles and policies of the Party, the state's laws, the Resolution of the Party bodies at the higher levels.

Laos [ edit ] Article 5 of the Constitution of Laos maintains that the state and its organizations "function in accordance with the principle of democratic centralism".

[ 21 ] The Lao People's Revolutionary Party's centralised and hierarchical organisational structure is based on Lenin's democratic centralism, [ 22 ] [ 23 ] which entails that lower party organs obey the decisions of the higher ones, such as the LPRP Central Committee .

[ 23 ] It also entails a ban on internal party factions.

[ 23 ] In the end, every decision-making organ has to be guided by the principle of collective leadership , a process that emphasises collegial decision-making, in contrast to one-person dominance.

[ 23 ] LPRP General Secretary Kaysone Phomvihane , in a speech to the 5th National Congress in 1991, stated "that our Party's democracy is a centralised one. Therefore, we must strictly implement the principle according to which the minority must yield to the majority; the lower leading organisation execute the upper leading organisation's orders. The whole Party follows the Central Committee." [ 24 ] See also [ edit ] Authoritarian socialism Ban on factions in the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Blanquism Cabinet collective responsibility Democratic centralism (Kuomintang) Disagree and commit Dominant-party system Eastern Bloc politics Hastert Rule One-party state Organic centralism Pluralism (political philosophy) Revolutionary spontaneity Twenty-one Conditions Citations [ edit ] ^ a b Lenin, Vladimir (1906).

"Report on the Unity Congress of the R.S.D.L.P." "VIII. The Congress Summed Up" . Marxists Internet Archive. Retrieved 14 February 2020.

^ Lih, Lars (2005).

Lenin Rediscovered: What Is to Be Done? in Context . Brill Academic Publishers.

ISBN 978-90-04-13120-0 .

^ Sunkara, Bhaskar (15 January 2020).

"The Long Shot of Democratic Socialism Is Our Only Shot" .

Jacobin . Retrieved 14 February 2020.

^ Torigian, Joseph (2022).

Prestige, Manipulation, and Coercion: Elite Power Struggles in the Soviet Union and China after Stalin and Mao . Yale University Press.

^ "Lenin: Freedom to Criticise and Unity of Action" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 28 March 2023 .

^ Mao Tse Tung (1944).

"Mao Tse Tung Quotations from Mao Tse Tung 15. Democracy in the Three Main Fields" . Retrieved 9 August 2002 .

^ Trotsky, Leon (1904).

"Our Political Tasks" . Retrieved 3 March 2020 .

^ History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) (1939). New York City: International Publishers. p. 198.

^ Protokoly (1933). ed. 585–7; 1963 ed. 571–573.

^ Protokoly (1933) ed. 523–548.

^ Boer, Roland (2023).

Socialism in Power On the History and Theory of Socialist Governance . Springer. p. 78.

^ Armstrong, John Alexander (1986).

Ideology, Politics, and Government in the Soviet Union: An Introduction .

University Press of America .

ISBN 0819154059 .

^ Smith, Hedrick (1976).

The Russians .

Quadrangle / New York Times Book Company . pp.

261, 286–287 .

ISBN 978-0-8129-0521-2 .

^ Gokay, Bulent (2018).

"Communist Party of Turkey and Soviet Foreign Policy" .

Journal of Global Faultlines .

4 (2): 138– 149.

doi : 10.13169/jglobfaul.4.2.0138 .

ISSN 2397-7825 .

JSTOR 10.13169/jglobfaul.4.2.0138 .

^ De Francis, John (1952).

"The Government and Politics of China. Ch'ien Tuan-Sheng" .

The Journal of Modern History .

24 : 89.

doi : 10.1086/237490 .

^ Rigger, Shelley (2001). "The Democratic Progressive Party in 2000: Obstacles and Opportunities".

The China Quarterly .

168 . Cambridge University Press (CUP): 944– 959.

doi : 10.1017/s0009443901000559 .

S2CID 154393722 .

^ Roctus, Jasper (2020).

Democratization of Leninist Parties: Causes for the Chinese Communist Party and Chinese Nationalist Party's Divergence of Reform Outcomes during the Late 20th Century (MA thesis). Universiteit Gent.

^ Cabestan, Jean-Pierre (2024). "Organisation and (Lack of) Democracy in the Chinese Communist Party: A Critical Reading of the Successive Iterations of the Party Constitution". In Doyon, Jérôme; Froissart, Chloé (eds.).

The Chinese Communist Party: A 100-Year Trajectory . Canberra: ANU Press .

ISBN 9781760466244 .

^ English language text of Constitution of the People's Republic of China Archived 2020-06-09 at the Wayback Machine Adopted 4 December 1982. Chapter 1. Article 3. Retrieved 29 December 2014.

^ Communist Party regulation, passed at the XI Congress ^ Pholsena, Vatthana (2006).

Post-war Laos The Politics of Culture, History and Identity . Institute of Southeast Asian Studies. p. 5.

^ Creak & Sayalath 2017 , p. 181.

^ a b c d Punya 2019 , p. 58.

^ Meng 1993 , pp. 187–8.

General and cited references [ edit ] Creak, S.; Sayalath, S. (2017).

"Regime Renewal in Laos: The Tenth Congress of the Lao People's Revolutionary Party" (PDF) .

Southeast Asian Affairs : 177– 200.

doi : 10.1355/9789814762878-014 .

S2CID 157560697 .

Meng, Ng Shui (1993). "LAOS 1992: At the Crossroads".

Southeast Asian Affairs .

1993 .

ISEAS–Yusof Ishak Institute : 185– 200.

JSTOR 27912075 .

Punya, Supitcha (January 2019).

Restructuring Domestic Institutions: Democratization and Development in Laos (PDF) (Thesis).

Humboldt University of Berlin .

External links [ edit ] On Party Unity . Vladimir Lenin.

On Democratic-Centralism & The Regime . Leon Trotsky.

Notes on democratic centralism . Tony Cliff. June 1968.

Bolshevism, Fraudulent Practice of Democratic Centralism . Albert Weisbord. 1976.

On Democratic Centralism (archived; link is to download the page to view offline).

PL Magazine . 1982.

On democratic centralism . Mick Armstrong. 2000.

Democratic Centralism .

Our view of democratic centralism must change by Paul and Malcolm Saba .

v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy Authority control databases National United States Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐nkq74
Cached time: 20250817052003
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.742 seconds
Real time usage: 0.976 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4873/1000000
Revision size: 22158/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 326965/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 18146/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 170081/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.384/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 13371508/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  663.162      1 -total
 30.18%  200.122      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 23.91%  158.569      1 Template:Reflist
 16.22%  107.553      1 Template:Marxism_sidebar
  9.63%   63.839      1 Template:Politics_of_China
  8.46%   56.105      1 Template:Short_description
  7.98%   52.905      1 Template:Sidebar
  7.76%   51.463      6 Template:Cite_book
  7.27%   48.244      1 Template:Primary_source
  6.80%   45.102      1 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:43356485:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817052003 and revision id 1298781591. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Democratic_centralism&oldid=1298781591 " Categories : Communist terminology Dictatorship of the proletariat Ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Leninism Marxism–Leninism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2023 Articles lacking reliable references from March 2023 All articles lacking reliable references This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 17:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Democratic centralism 42 languages Add topic

