Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Notable Work Toggle Notable Work subsection 2.1 Book on Logic 2.2 Commentary on Avicenna's Medical Poem 3 References Toggle the table of contents Ibn Tumlus 5 languages العربية Català Español Français مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Valencian scholar (1164-1223) Sculpture of Ibn Ṭumlūs in Alzira Ibn Ṭumlūs ( Arabic : ابن طملوس ) (1164-1223) was a Valencian scholar whose interests ranged over medicine, philosophy, grammar and poetry. He is mainly known today for his work in logic. Ibn Ṭumlūs is known by his biographers under the name of Abū al-Ḥajjāj or Abū Isḥāq Yūsuf ibn Muhammed ibn Ṭumlūs . In Latin sources, he is known as Alhagiag Bin Thalmus .

Biography [ edit ] He was born in Alzira , near Valencia , sometime between 1150 and 1165. He studied philosophy, medicine and perhaps jurisprudence with Averroes (Ibn Rushd), and his achievements in medicine were such that he succeeded Averroes as doctor of the Almohad caliph, Mohammad al-Nāṣir , from 1199 to 1213. He died at Alzira in 1223.

[ 1 ] Notable Work [ edit ] Not one of the works of Ibn Ṭumlūs known of today is mentioned by his biographers. Conversely, not one of the works mentioned by his biographers is available today. Ibn Abbar stated that Ibn Ṭumlūs authored some works on the sciences of the Arabic language, but these do not seem to be extant. In addition, Ibn Ṭumlūs’s biographers transmitted to us some poems made by him, which have been transcribed in Fouad Ben Ahmed's definitive biobibliography.

[ 2 ] There are only two major works that are known to have survived, his Book on Logic and his commentary on Avicenna's Medical Poem.

Book on Logic [ edit ] Ṭumlūs’ Book on Logic ( Kitāb fī Mantiq ) survives in just a single manuscript.

[ 3 ] The manuscript is undated and untitled. Some scholars have proposed dates, but these remain speculative. Although parts of the treatise have been edited under the title Introduction to the Art of Logic, in fact neither Ibn Ṭumlūs nor his copyist gave a title to the work. The text covers all the parts of Aristotle's Organon , including a Book of Rhetoric and Book of Poetics. Indeed, his advocacy of this expanded Organon is one of the significant features of the work. The treatise begins with a long introduction ( Ṣadr ) to the text in which Ibn Ṭumlūs addresses several controversies concerning his education in logic and the attitudes of the scholars of his time towards logic (namely, the jurists and the students of the prophetic tradition). He considers also the value of al-Ghazālī ’s and al-Fārābī ’s logical works, both from a philosophical and a religious point of view. Yet although both of these figures are influential on Ibn Ṭumlūs, recent scholarship has shown that his principal influence is his teacher, Averroes.

[ 4 ] Excerpts from the Book on Logic have been edited and translated by various scholars: part of the introduction into French [ 5 ] the introduction and first three sections into Spanish [ 6 ] excerpts from the section on poetics into French [ 7 ] the section on rhetoric into French [ 8 ] A critical Arabic edition of the sections on dialectic and sophistical topics has recently been made by Fouad Ben Ahmed, [ 9 ] who is at work on an Arabic edition of the remainder of the work. At present, no English translations are available.

Commentary on Avicenna's Medical Poem [ edit ] Ibn Ṭumlūs' other major surviving work is his commentary on Avicenna 's Medical Poem ( Šarḥ al-Urǧūza ). Although there are eight known manuscripts containing this work, with more probably yet to be identified, no complete edition of the work has been made. A colophon at the end of one manuscript dates Ibn Ṭumlūs' final revisions of the work to Marrakesh in 1209.

[ 4 ] Scholarship on this work is, at this point, extremely limited.

[ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ Vernet, J. (1971).

"Ibn Ṭumlūs" . In Lewis, B.

; Ménage, V. L.

; Pellat, Ch.

& Schacht, J.

(eds.).

The Encyclopaedia of Islam, Second Edition .

Volume III: H–Iram . Leiden: E. J. Brill. p. 960.

OCLC 495469525 .

^ Fouad Ben Ahmed, Ibn Ṭumlūs (620 H/ 1223): Sīrat Biblyographiyya (Beirut: Manšurāt Ḍifāf, 2017) [in Arabic, with English summary] ^ MS Escorial, árabe 649 , fol. 1 v-172r ^ a b Fouad Ben Ahmed, Ibn Ṭumlūs ^ Miguel Asín Palacios, "La logique d’Ibn Toumlous d’Alcira," Revue Tunisienne (1908) 474–79 ^ Introducción al arte de la lógica por Abentomlús de Alcira, texto árabe y trad. española por Miguel Asín Palacios (Madrid: Centro de Estudios Históricos, 1916) ^ Maroun Aouad, "Le syllogisme poétique selon le Livre de la poétique d’Ibn Ṭumlūs," in R. Arnzen and J. Thielmann (eds.), Words, Texts and Concepts Cruising the Mediterranean Sea (Leuven: Peeters, 2004) 259-270 ^ Le Livre de la Rhétorique du philosophe et du médecin Ibn Ṭumlūs (Alhagiag bin Thalmus), Introduction générale, édition critique du texte arabe, traduction française et tables par M. Aouad (Paris: Vrin, 2006) ^ Ibn Ṭumlūs, Kitāb fī Mantiq (Treatise on Logic), Kitāb al-Ǧadal (Book of Dialectic), and Kitāb al-Amkina al-Muġalliṭa (Book of Sophistical Topics), ed. Fouad Ben Ahmed (Difaf Publishing, 2016) [in Arabic, with English introduction] http://www.neelwafurat.com/itempage.aspx?id=lbb258184-241120&search=books ^ Mahmud Aroua, "Réflexions sur le commentaire au poème de la médecine d’Ibn Sīnā par Ibn Ṭumlūs," in A. Hasnawi (ed.), Sciences et philosophies arabes: méthodes, problèmes et cas (Carthago, 2000) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Sweden Vatican Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ibn_Tumlus&oldid=1253904575 " Categories : 1223 deaths 13th-century writers from al-Andalus Physicians from al-Andalus Scholars from al-Andalus Philosophers from al-Andalus 1164 births 13th-century Spanish philosophers Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Arabic-language text This page was last edited on 28 October 2024, at 14:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ibn Tumlus 5 languages Add topic

