Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Works 2 Narayaneeyam 3 See also 4 References 5 Additional reading Toggle the table of contents Acyuta Piṣāraṭi 7 languages Deutsch हिन्दी Kreyòl ayisyen മലയാളം Русский தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Achyuta Pisharati ) Indian scholar (1550–1621) Acyuta Piṣāraṭi (c. 1550 at Thrikkandiyur (aka Kundapura), Tirur , Kerala , India – 7 July 1621 in Kerala), also known as Achyuta Pisharati or Achyutha Pisharadi , was a Sanskrit grammarian , astrologer , astronomer and mathematician who studied under Jyeṣṭhadeva and was a member of Madhava of Sangamagrama 's Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics .

[ 1 ] Works [ edit ] He discovered the techniques of 'the reduction of the ecliptic '. He authored Sphuta-nirnaya , Raasi-gola-sphuta-neeti ( raasi meaning zodiac , gola meaning sphere and neeti roughly meaning rule ), Karanottama (1593) and a four- chapter treatise Uparagakriyakrama on lunar and solar eclipses .

[ 1 ] Praveśaka : An introduction to Sanskrit grammar.

Karaṇottama : Astronomical work dealing with the computation of the mean and true longitudes of the planets, with eclipses, and with the vyatipātas of the sun and moon.

Uparāgakriyākrama (1593): Treatise on lunar and solar eclipses.

Sphuṭanirṇaya : Astronomical text.

Chāyāṣṭaka : Astronomical text.

Uparāgaviṃśati : Manual on the computation of eclipses.

Rāśigolasphuṭānīti : Work concerned with the reduction of the moon’s true longitude in its own orbit to the ecliptic.

Veṇvārohavyākhyā : Malayalam commentary on the Veṇvāroha of Mādhava of Saṅgamagrāma (ca. 1340–1425) written at the request of the Azhvanchery Thambrakkal .

Horāsāroccaya: An adaptation of the Jātakapaddhati of Śrīpati .

Narayaneeyam [ edit ] Pisharati is known to have scolded and provoked an errant Narayana to take up the Brahmin's duties of prayer and religious practices. He accepted Narayana as his student. Later when Pisharati was struck with paralysis (or rheumatism by another account), Narayana, unable to bear the pain of his dear guru, by way of Gurudakshina took the disease upon himself. As a result, Pisharati is said to have been cured, but no medicine could cure Narayana. As a last resort, Narayana went to Guruvayur and requested Thunchaththu Ramanujan Ezhuthachan , a great devotee of Guruvayoorappan , to suggest a remedy for his disease. Ramajunan Ezhuthachan advised him to compose a poetical work on the Avatars (incarnations) of Lord Vishnu beginning with that of Matsya (Fish). Narayana composed beautiful slokas in praise of Lord Guruvayurappan and recited them before the deity. He was soon cured of his disease.

[ 2 ] The book of slokas written by Narayana were named Narayaneeyam . The day on which Narayana dedicated his Narayaneeyam to Sri Guruvayurappan is celebrated as "Narayaneeyam Dinam" every year at Guruvayur .

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri Narayaneeyam Indian mathematics List of astronomers and mathematicians of the Kerala school References [ edit ] ^ a b K. V. Sarma (1972).

A History of the Kerala School of Hindu Astronomy . Vishveshvaranand Institute of Sanskrit and Indological Studies, Panjab University, Hoshiarpur. p. 64 . Retrieved 28 January 2023 .

^ Eck, Diana L. (27 March 2012).

India: A Sacred Geography . Harmony/Rodale. p. 388.

ISBN 978-0-385-53191-7 .

^ "Narayaneeyam Day: Its history and significance" .

indicsense.medium.com . Medium . Retrieved 4 September 2024 .

Additional reading [ edit ] David Pingree . " Acyuta Piṣāraṭi ".

Dictionary of Scientific Biography .

S. Venkitasubramonia Iyer. "Acyuta Piṣāroṭi; His Date and Works" in JOR Madras' , 22 (1952–1953), 40–46.

K. V. Sarma (2008), "Acyuta Pisarati", Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures (2nd edition) edited by Helaine Selin , p. 19, Springer, ISBN 978-1-4020-4559-2 .

K. Kunjunni Raja.

The Contribution of Kerala to  Sanskrit Literature (Madras, 1958), pp. 122–125.

"Astronomy and Mathematics in Kerala" in Brahmavidyā , 27 (1963), 158–162.

v t e Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Astronomers and mathematicians (Complete list) Acyuta Piṣāraṭi Azhvāñceri Taṃprākkaḷ Citrabhānu Dāmodara of Vațaśreņi Devācārya Govinda Bhattathiri Govindasvāmin Haridatta Jyeṣṭhadeva Kochukrishnan Asan Madhava of Sangamagrama Mazhamaṅgalaṃ Nārāyaṇan Naṃpūtiri Nīlakaņțha Sōmayāji Nīlakaṇṭha II Parameśvara of Vațaśśeri Śaṅkaranārāyaṇa Śaṅkara of Mahiṣamaṅgalam Putumana Somayāji Śankara Vāriyar Śaṅkara Varma of Kaṭattanāṭ Udayadivākara Vararuci I Vidyamadhava Treatises Aryabhatiya-bhashya ( Nīlakaņțha Sōmayāji ) Candrachayaganita Dasādhyāyi Drigganita Dṛkkaraṇa Gaṇitayuktayah Golavada Golasara Grahacāraṇinibandhana Jātaka-sāara-saṃgraha Jyotirmimamsa Jyotiśśāstra-saṃgraha Kanakkusāraṃ Karaṇapaddhati Kriyakramakari Laghuvivṛti (commentary on Tantrasamgraha ) Madhyamanayanaprakara Mahābhāskarīya Bhāshya Pañcabodha Sadratnamālā Sidhhantadarpana Spuṭanirṇaya Tantrasamgraha Venvaroha Yuktibhāṣā Concepts/Topics Chandravakyas Drigganita system Kaṭapayādi system Madhava's correction terms Madhava series Madhava's sine table Parahita system Places associated with members of the school Athavanad (Azhvanchery Thamprakkal) Alathiyur (Govinda Bhattathiri, etc) Kadathanadu (Sankara Varman) Mahodayapuram (Kodungallur) (Sankaranarayana) Kudallur (Madhava of Sangamagrama) Peruvanam (Mahishamangalam Sankaran Namputhiri) Thrikkandiyur (Nilakantha Somayaji, etc) Sivapuram (Thrissur) (Putumana Somayaji, etc) Tirunavaya (Haridatta) v t e Indian mathematics Mathematicians Ancient Apastamba Baudhayana Katyayana Manava Pāṇini Pingala Yajnavalkya Classical Āryabhaṭa I Āryabhaṭa II Bhāskara I Bhāskara II Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri Brahmadeva Brahmagupta Govindasvāmi Halayudha Jyeṣṭhadeva Kamalakara Mādhava of Saṅgamagrāma Mahāvīra Mahendra Sūri Munishvara Narayana Parameshvara Achyuta Pisharati Jagannatha Samrat Nilakantha Somayaji Śrīpati Sridhara Gangesha Upadhyaya Varāhamihira Sankara Variar Virasena Modern Srinivasa Ramanujan Satyendra Nath Bose P.C. Mahalanobis Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar C.R. Rao Veeravalli S. Varadarajan S. R. Srinivasa Varadhan K. R. Parthasarathy (probabilist) M. S. Narasimhan C. S. Seshadri Harish-Chandra Subbayya Sivasankaranarayana Pillai Tilak Raj Prabhakar Manjul Bhargava Akshay Venkatesh Ravi Vakil Kannan Soundararajan Shanti Swarup Bhatnagar Prize recipients in Mathematical Science Treatises Aryabhatiya Bakhshali manuscript Bijaganita Brāhmasphuṭasiddhānta Ganita Kaumudi Grahalaghava Kanakkusaram Karanapaddhati Līlāvatī Lokavibhaga Pātīgaṇita Paulisa Siddhanta Paitamaha Siddhanta Romaka Siddhanta Sadratnamala Siddhānta Shiromani Śulba Sūtras Surya Siddhanta Tantrasamgraha Vasishtha Siddhanta Veṇvāroha Yuktibhāṣā Yavanajataka Pioneering innovations Brahmi numerals Hindu–Arabic numeral system Symbol for zero (0) Infinite series expansions for the trigonometric functions Centres Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics Jantar Mantar ( Jaipur , New Delhi , Ujjain , Varanasi ) Historians of mathematics Bapudeva Sastri (1821–1900) Shankar Balakrishna Dikshit (1853–1898) Sudhakara Dvivedi (1855–1910) M. Rangacarya (1861–1916) P. C. Sengupta (1876–1962) B. B. Datta (1888–1958) T. Hayashi A. A. Krishnaswamy Ayyangar (1892– 1953) A. N. Singh (1901–1954) C. T. Rajagopal (1903–1978) T. A. Saraswati Amma (1918–2000) S. N. Sen (1918–1992) K. S. Shukla (1918–2007) K. V. Sarma (1919–2005) Translators Walter Eugene Clark Henry Thomas Colebrooke David Pingree Other regions Babylon China Greece Islamic mathematics Europe Modern institutions Indian Statistical Institute Bhaskaracharya Pratishthana Chennai Mathematical Institute Institute of Mathematical Sciences Indian Institute of Science Harish-Chandra Research Institute Homi Bhabha Centre for Science Education Ramanujan Institute for Advanced Study in Mathematics TIFR v t e Scientific Research in Kerala Pre 19th Century Achyuta Pisharati Candravakyas Citrabhanu Damodara Ganita-yukti-bhasa Govinda Bhattathiri Haridatta Jyā, koti-jyā and utkrama-jyā Jyeṣṭhadeva Jyotirmimamsa Karanapaddhati Katapayadi system Kriyakramakari Madhava of Sangamagrama Madhava series Madhava's sine table Melpathur Narayana Bhattathiri Nilakantha Somayaji Parameshvara Sadratnamala Śaṅkaranārāyaṇa Tantrasamgraha Organizations C-DAC Thiruvananthapuram Centre for Development Studies Centre for Earth Science Studies Centre for Mathematical Sciences (Kerala) Centre for Rural Management Centre of Science and Technology for Rural Development Cyberpark Kerala Mathematical Association Kerala Science and Technology Museum Kerala Science Congress Kerala Soil Museum Kerala State Council for Science, Technology and Environment Krishi Vigyan Kendra Kannur Liquid Propulsion Systems Centre Rajiv Gandhi Centre for Biotechnology Regional Agricultural Research Station, Pattambi Rice Research Station, Moncombu Vikram Sarabhai Space Centre Institutions Agricultural Research Station, Anakkayam Agricultural Research Station, Mannuthy Agronomic Research Station, Chalakudy Amrita Institute of Medical Sciences and Research Centre Aromatic and Medicinal Plants Research Station, Odakkali Banana Research Station, Kannara Cashew Research Station, Madakkathara Central Institute of Fisheries Technology Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute Central Tuber Crops Research Institute Centre for Marine Living Resources & Ecology College of Horticulture Crocodile Rehabilitation and Research Centre Institute of Handloom and Textile Technology Indian Institute of Science Education and Research, Thiruvananthapuram Indian Institute of Space Science and Technology Indian Institute of Spices Research Jubilee Mission Medical College and Research Institute Kerala Forest Research Institute Kerala School of Mathematics, Kozhikode Mar Athanasios College for Advanced Studies, Tiruvalla National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology National Institute of Speech and Hearing National Research Institute for Panchakarma Naval Physical and Oceanographic Laboratory Oriental Research Institute & Manuscripts Library Sree Chitra Tirunal Institute for Medical Sciences and Technology Srinivasa Ramanujan Institute of Basic Sciences St. Ephrem Ecumenical Research Institute Tropical Botanical Garden and Research Institute Vadakke Madham Brahmaswam Vedic Research Centre Scientists Ajit Varki C. V. Subramanian Dileep George E. C. George Sudarshan G. Madhavan Nair George Varghese K. R. Ramanathan K. Radhakrishnan M. G. K. Menon Matthew Pothen Thekaekara P. N. Vinayachandran Pisharoth Rama Pisharoty Pulickel Ajayan R. S. Krishnan Sainudeen Pattazhy T. A. Venkitasubramanian Thanu Padmanabhan Thomas Zacharia Vainu Bappu Varghese Mathai Vinod Scaria Assorted articles A Passage to Infinity FORV Sagar Sampada Swatantra 2014 Techno-lodge Technology Business Incubator TBI-NITC A History of the Kerala School of Hindu Astronomy Templates Category WikiProject India portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany France BnF data Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Acyuta_Piṣāraṭi&oldid=1303642713 " Categories : 1550s births 1621 deaths Scholars from Kerala Kerala school of astronomy and mathematics 16th-century Indian astronomers 17th-century Indian astronomers 16th-century Indian mathematicians 17th-century Indian mathematicians Scientists from Kerala People from Malappuram district 16th-century Indian linguists Writers from Kerala Sanskrit writers 17th-century Indian linguists People from Guruvayur Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2024 This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 05:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Acyuta Piṣāraṭi 7 languages Add topic

