Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Work 3 Metaphysics Toggle Metaphysics subsection 3.1 Realism 3.2 Univocity of being 3.3 Individuation 3.4 Formal distinction 4 Theology Toggle Theology subsection 4.1 Voluntarism 4.2 Metaphysical argument for the existence of God 4.3 Illuminationism 4.4 Immaculate Conception 5 Veneration 6 Later reputation and influence Toggle Later reputation and influence subsection 6.1 Later medieval period 6.2 Sixteenth to nineteenth centuries 6.3 Twentieth century 7 In popular media 8 Bibliography 9 See also 10 Notes 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Duns Scotus 65 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Kiswahili Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Malagasy മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Picard Polski Português Română Русский Scots Shqip Sicilianu Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scottish Franciscan friar and philosopher (c. 1265/66–1308) Not to be confused with John Scotus Eriugena .

Blessed John Duns Scotus OFM Portrait by Justus van Gent , c.

1476 -1478 Born c.

1265/66 Duns , Berwickshire , Scotland Died 8 November 1308 (1308-11-08) (aged 41–42) Cologne , Holy Roman Empire Venerated in Catholic Church Beatified 20 March 1993, Vatican City by Pope John Paul II Major shrine Franciscan Church , Cologne , Germany Feast 8 November Attributes Books, a vision of the Blessed Virgin Mary, the moon on the chest of a Franciscan friar Patronage Academics, Cologne , Germany , apologies, scholars, student, theologians and philosophers Education Education University of Oxford [ 1 ] [ 2 ] University of Paris Doctoral advisor William of Ware Philosophical work Era Medieval philosophy Region Western philosophy School Scholasticism Scotism Aristotelianism [ 3 ] Theological voluntarism [ 4 ] Philosophical realism Medieval realism ( Scotistic realism ) Institutions University of Oxford Doctoral students William of Ockham Main interests Metaphysics , theology , logic , epistemology , ethics Notable ideas Univocity of being Formal distinction Theological voluntarism Haecceity as a principle of individuation Scotistic realism Immaculate Conception of the Virgin Mary John Duns Scotus OFM ( / ˈ s k oʊ t ə s / SKOH -təs ; Ecclesiastical Latin : [duns ˈskɔtus] , "Duns the Scot"; c.

1265/66 – 8 November 1308) [ 9 ] was a Scottish Catholic priest and Franciscan friar , university professor, philosopher and theologian. He is considered one of the four most important Christian philosopher-theologians of Western Europe in the High Middle Ages , together with Thomas Aquinas , Bonaventure and William of Ockham .

[ 10 ] Duns Scotus has had considerable influence on both Catholic and secular thought. The doctrines for which he is best known are the " univocity of being ", that existence is the most abstract concept we have, applicable to everything that exists; the formal distinction , a way of distinguishing between different formalities of the same thing; and the idea of haecceity , the property supposed to be in each individual thing that makes it an individual (i.e. a certain “thisness”). Duns Scotus also developed a complex argument for the existence of God, and argued for the Immaculate Conception of Mary . The intellectual tradition derived from Scotus' work is called Scotism .

Duns Scotus was given the scholastic accolade Doctor Subtilis ("the subtle doctor") for his penetrating and subtle manner of thought. He was beatified by Pope John Paul II in 1993.

Life [ edit ] Plaque commemorating Duns Scotus in the University Church, Oxford Little is known of Duns Scotus apart from his work. His date of birth is believed to have been sometime between 23 December 1265 and 17 March 1266. He was born into a leading family of the region. The reputed site of his birth, in front of the Pavilion Lodge, near the North Lodge of Duns Castle in Scotland, is now marked by a cairn which was erected in 1966 by the Franciscan friars of the United Kingdom to mark the 700th anniversary of his birth. Duns Scotus received the religious habit of the Order of Friars Minor at Dumfries , where his uncle, Elias Duns, was guardian .

[ 11 ] Duns Scotus's age is based on the first certain date for his life, that of his ordination to the priesthood at St Andrew's , Northampton , England, on 17 March 1291. The minimum canonical age for receiving holy orders is 25 and it is generally assumed that he would have been ordained as soon as it was permitted.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] That his contemporaries called him Johannes Duns , after the medieval practice of calling people by their Christian name followed by their place of origin, suggests that he came from Duns , in Berwickshire, Scotland.

[ 14 ] According to tradition, Duns Scotus was educated at a Franciscan studium generale (a medieval university ), a house behind St Ebbe's Church, Oxford , in a triangular area enclosed by Pennyfarthing Street and running from St Aldate's to the castle, the bailey and the old wall, [ 15 ] where the Friars Minor had moved when the University of Paris was dispersed in 1229–30. At that time there would have been about 270 people living there, of whom about 80 would have been friars.

[ 16 ] Duns Scotus appears to have been in Oxford by 1300, as he is listed among a group of friars for whom the provincial superior of the English ecclesiastical province (which included Scotland) requested faculties from the Bishop of Lincoln for the hearing of confessions .

[ 17 ] He took part in a disputation under the regent master, Philip of Bridlington in 1300–01.

[ 18 ] He began lecturing on Peter Lombard 's Sentences at the prestigious University of Paris towards the end of 1302. Later in that academic year, however, he was expelled from the University of Paris for siding with Pope Boniface VIII in his feud with King Philip IV of France over the taxation of church property.

Duns Scotus was back in Paris before the end of 1304, probably returning in May. He continued lecturing there until, for reasons that are still mysterious, he was dispatched to the Franciscan studium at Cologne , probably in October 1307. According to the 15th-century writer William Vorilong , his departure was sudden and unexpected. He was relaxing or talking with students in the Prato clericorum or Pré-aux-Clercs – an open area of the Rive Gauche used by scholars for recreation – when orders arrived from the Franciscan Minister General ; Scotus left immediately, taking few or no personal belongings.

[ 19 ] Duns Scotus died unexpectedly in Cologne in November 1308; the date of his death is traditionally given as 8 November. He is buried in the Church of the Friars Minor there. His sarcophagus bears the Latin poem: Scotia me genuit.

Anglia me suscepit.

Gallia me docuit.

Colonia me tenet.

(Scotland brought me forth.

England sustained me.

France taught me.

Cologne holds me.) The story about Duns Scotus being buried alive , in the absence of his servant who alone knew of his susceptibility to coma, is probably a myth.

[ 20 ] The first known attestation of this theme dates from around 1400.

[ 21 ] Among many authors, Francis Bacon reported it in his Historia vitae et mortis .

[ 22 ] The colophon of Codex 66 of Merton College, Oxford , says that Scotus was also at Cambridge .

Work [ edit ] Scotus's great work is his commentary on the Sentences of Peter Lombard , which contains nearly all the philosophical views and arguments for which he is well known, including the univocity of being , the formal distinction , less than numerical unity, individual nature or "thisness" ( haecceity ), his critique of illuminationism and his renowned argument for the existence of God. His commentary exists in several versions. The standard version is the Ordinatio (also known as the Opus oxoniense ), a revised version of lectures he gave as a bachelor at Oxford. The initial revision was probably begun in the summer of 1300 – see the remarks in the Prologue, question 2, alluding to the Battle of Wadi al-Khazandar in 1299, news of which probably reached Oxford in the summer of 1300. It was still incomplete when Scotus left for Paris in 1302.

The two other versions of the work are Scotus's notes for the Oxford lectures, recently transcribed and published as the Lectura , [ 23 ] the first book of which was probably written in Oxford in the late 1290s, [ 24 ] and the Reportatio parisiensis (or Opus parisiense ), consisting of transcriptions of the lectures on the Sentences given by Scotus when he was in Paris. A reportatio is a student report or transcription of the original lecture of a master. A version that has been checked by the master himself is known as a reportatio examinata .

By the time of Scotus, these 'commentaries' on the Sentences were no longer literal commentaries. Instead, Peter Lombard 's original text was used as a starting point for highly original discussions on topics of theological or philosophical interest.

[ 25 ] For example, Book II Distinction 2, about the location of angels, is a starting point for a complex discussion about continuous motion, and whether the same thing can be in two different places at the same time ( bilocation ). In the same book, Distinction 3, he uses the question of how angels can be different from one another, given that they have no material bodies, to investigate the difficult question of individuation in general.

Colophon from the edition of Scotus's Sentences commentary edited by Thomas Penketh (died 1487) and Bartolomeo Bellati (died 1479), printed by Johannes de Colonia and Johannes Manthen, Venice in 1477. It reads Explicit Scriptum super Primum Sententiarum: editum a fratre Johanne Duns: ordinis fratrum minorum Printed versions of scholastic manuscripts became popular in the late fifteenth century.

Scotus wrote purely philosophical and logical works at an early stage of his career, consisting of commentaries on Aristotle's Organon . These are the Questions on Porphyry 's Isagoge and Aristotle's Categories , Peri hermeneias , and De sophisticis elenchis , probably dating to around 1295.

[ 26 ] His commentary on Aristotle's Metaphysics was probably written in stages, the first version having started around 1297, [ 24 ] with significant additions and amendments possibly after the completion of the main body of the Ordinatio .

[ 27 ] His Expositio on the Metaphysics was lost for centuries but was recently rediscovered and edited by Giorgio Pini.

[ 28 ] In addition, there are 46 short disputations called Collationes , probably dating from 1300 to 1305; a work in natural theology ( De primo principio ); and his Quaestiones Quodlibetales , a record of a quodlibetal disputation probably dating to Advent 1306 or Lent 1307.

A number of works once believed to have been written by Scotus are now known to have been misattributed. There were already concerns about this within two centuries of his death, when the 16th-century logician Jacobus Naveros noted inconsistencies between these texts and his commentary on the Sentences , leading him to doubt whether he had written any logical works at all.

[ 29 ] The Questions on the Prior Analytics ( In Librum Priorum Analyticorum Aristotelis Quaestiones ) were also discovered to be mistakenly attributed.

[ citation needed ] In 1922, Grabmann showed that the logical work De modis significandi was actually by Thomas of Erfurt , a 14th-century logician of the modist school . Thus the claim that Martin Heidegger wrote his habilitation thesis on Scotus [ 30 ] is only half true, as the second part is actually based on the work by Erfurt.

[ 31 ] Metaphysics [ edit ] Realism [ edit ] Scotus' view of universals is known as Scotistic realism . Scotus is generally considered to be a realist (as opposed to a nominalist ) in that he treated universals as real, but he held that they exist both in particular things and as concepts in the mind (as opposed to a Platonic "third realm").

[ 32 ] He attacks a position close to that later defended by Ockham , arguing that things have a common nature – for example the humanity common to Socrates , Plato , and Plutarch .

Univocity of being [ edit ] He followed Aristotle in asserting that the subject matter of metaphysics is "being qua being" ( ens inquantum ens ). Being in general ( ens in communi ), as a univocal notion, was for him the first object of the intellect.

[ 33 ] The doctrine of the univocity of being implies the denial of any real distinction between essence and existence .

Aquinas had argued that in all finite being (i.e. all except God) the essence of a thing is distinct from its existence. Scotus rejected the distinction. Scotus argued that we cannot conceive of what it is to be something, without conceiving it as existing. We should not make any distinction between whether a thing exists ( si est ) and what it is ( quid est ) for we never know whether something exists unless we have some concept of what we know to exist.

[ 34 ] Individuation [ edit ] Scotus elaborates a distinct view on hylomorphism , with three important strong theses that differentiate him. He held: 1) that there exists matter that has no form whatsoever, or prime matter, as the stuff underlying all change, against Aquinas (cf. his Quaestiones in Metaphysicam 7, q. 5; Lectura 2, d. 12, q. un.), 2) that not all created substances are composites of form and matter (cf.

Lectura 2, d. 12, q. un., n. 55), that is, that purely spiritual substances do exist, and 3) that one and the same substance can have more than one substantial form – for instance, humans have at least two substantial forms, the soul and the form of the body ( forma corporeitas ) (cf.

Ordinatio 4, d. 11, q. 3, n. 54). He argued for an original principle of individuation (cf.

Ordinatio 2, d. 3, pars 1, qq. 1–6), the " haecceity " as the ultimate unity of a unique individual ( haecceitas , an entity's 'thisness'), as opposed to the common nature ( natura communis ) feature existing in any number of individuals. For Scotus, the axiom stating that only the individual exists is a dominating principle of the understanding of reality. For the apprehension of individuals, an intuitive cognition is required, which gives us the present existence or the non-existence of an individual, as opposed to abstract cognition. Thus the human soul, in its separated state from the body, will be capable of knowing the spiritual intuitively.

Formal distinction [ edit ] Like other realist philosophers of the period (such as Aquinas and Henry of Ghent ) Scotus recognised the need for an intermediate distinction that was not merely conceptual but not fully real or mind-dependent either. Scotus argued for a formal distinction ( distinctio formalis a parte rei ), which holds between entities which are inseparable and indistinct in reality but whose definitions are not identical. For example, the personal properties of the Trinity are formally distinct from the Divine essence. Similarly, the distinction between the 'thisness' or haecceity of a thing is intermediate between a real and a conceptual distinction.

[ 35 ] There is also a formal distinction between the divine attributes and the powers of the soul.

Theology [ edit ] Part of a series on Catholic philosophy Aquinas , Scotus and Ockham Ethics Cardinal virtues Just price Just war Principle of Double Effect Casuistry Probabilism Natural law Personalism Social teaching Liberation theology Christian humanism Virtue ethics Works of mercy Metaphysics Conceptualism Realism Moderate realism Nominalism Quiddity ( essence / nature ) Haecceity Quinque Viae Predestination Theological determinism Compatibilism Divine Attributes Schools Augustinianism Victorines Lullism Cartesianism Christian Neoplatonism Friends of God Molinism Ressourcement Occamism Scholasticism Second scholasticism Neo Scotism Thomism Analytic Salamanca Philosophers Ancient Ambrose Athenagoras Athanasius Augustine Benedict Boethius Clement Cyprian Cyril Gregory (of Nazianzus) Gregory (of Nyssa) Irenaeus Jerome Cassian Chrysostom Climacus John of Damascus Justin Maximus Dionysius Origen Paul Tertullian Medieval Abelard Albert Alcuin Alexander Anselm Autrecourt Aquinas Bacon Bede Berengar Bernard Bonaventure Buridan Catherine Cusa Eckhart Eriugena Giles Gregory I Grosseteste Gundissalinus Hildegard Hugh Isidore Llull Lombard Martin Ockham Oresme Paschasius Roscellinus Scotus Siger Symeon Thierry Modern Arnauld Ávila Azpilcueta Bellarmine Bonald Bossuet Brentano Botero Cajetan Chateaubriand Cortés Descartes Erasmus Fénelon Gracián Kołłątaj Krasicki La Mennais Liguori Maistre Malebranche Mariana Meinong Mercado Molina More Newman Pascal Rosmini Sales Soto Suárez Vico Vitoria Caramuel Contemporary Adler Anscombe Balthasar Barron Benedict XVI Blondel Chesterton Congar Copleston Finnis Garrigou-Lagrange Geach Gilson Girard Gutiérrez Dávila Guardini Haldane Hildebrand John Paul II Lonergan Lubac MacIntyre Marcel Marion Maritain McLuhan Mounier Pieper Rahner Stein Taylor Catholic Church portal Philosophy portal v t e Voluntarism [ edit ] Scotus was an Augustinian-Franciscan theologian.

[ 36 ] He is usually associated with theological voluntarism , the tendency to emphasize God's will and human freedom in all philosophical issues. The main difference between Aquinas 's rational theology and that of Scotus is that Scotus believed certain predicates may be applied univocally, with exactly the same meaning, to God and creatures, whereas Aquinas insisted that this is impossible and that only analogical predication can be employed, in which a word as applied to God has a meaning different from, although related to, the meaning of that same word as applied to creatures. Duns struggled throughout his works in demonstrating his univocity theory against Aquinas's analogy doctrine.

Scotus gave the lecture, Lectura I 39, during 1297–1299 to refute the view that everything is necessary and immutable. He claims that the aim of this lecture has two points ( Lectura I 39, §31): first, to consider the contingency in what is ( de contingentia in entibus ); second, to consider how God's certain knowledge is compatible with the contingency of things. Scotus tries to defend the validity of Christian theology against the attack of ancient philosophers. The main argument is unpacked in Lectura I 39, §§49–53. Scotus argues that a necessary being (God) is able to have contingent knowledge, and that although this knowledge is contingent, it is not necessarily mutable and temporal by that very fact. In Lectura I 39 §1, Scotus asks, "whether God has determinate knowledge of things according to every aspect of their existence, as according to being in the future." He presents a counterview which claims that God cannot have determinate knowledge of the future. To support this counterview, he uses Aristotle's De Interpretatione IX. In the following arguments, Scotus does not attempt to contradict Aristotle. He does not affirm or reject the ideas of Aristotle. The only issue he argues against is the proposition that God cannot have determinate knowledge of the future. Scotus appears to try to fully demonstrate that Aristotle's text is not contradictory to the Christian doctrine of God. Scotus argues that God wills with one single volition ( unica volitione ) whatever he wills. God has one volition ad intra , but this one volition can be related to many opposite things ad extra . God can simultaneously will one thing at time 1 and the opposite thing at time 2. There are various possible interpretations of Aristotle's De Interpretatione IX. For example, John Buridan (ca. 1300–1362) thought the Scotistic contingency theory was an Aristotelian view . Buridan's judgment is all the more possible because of at least four reasons: (1) Aristotle's De Interpretatione IX, 19a23-25 can be interpreted like the Scotistic contingency theory; (2) Scotus himself does not refute Aristotle's De Interpretatione IX in Lectura I 39 §§49–53; (3) Scotus, rather, tries to formulate his contingency theory with the help of other works of Aristotle in Lectura I 39 §§51, 54; (4) Scotus introduces the diachronic feature of God's volition to his contingency theory as well as the synchronic feature.

[ 37 ] Metaphysical argument for the existence of God [ edit ] Duns Scotus argued that it is better to construct a metaphysical argument for the existence of God, rather than the more common physical argument from motion [ 38 ] favoured by Aquinas, [ 39 ] following Aristotle.

[ 40 ] Though the version in De Primo Principio is the most complete and final version, the Ordinatio proof is usually offered. However, the De Primo version gives a wider understanding of the argument as well as Scotus's metaphysical underpinnings for his argument for God's existence, but the Ordinatio version will be followed here. Briefly, Scotus begins his proof by explaining that there are two angles we must take in arguing for the existence of an actually infinite being. First from the view of the Relative Properties of God and second from the Absolute Properties of God. Relative properties are those which are predicable of God in relation to creation; absolute properties are those which belong to God whether or not He chose to create. Under the first heading of Relative Properties, Scotus argues for a triple primacy of efficiency, finality and pre-eminence. From there he shows that one primacy implies the others, and finally there can only be one nature that is the First Efficient Cause, Ultimate End, and the Most Perfect Nature. From there the Subtle Doctor discusses the Absolute Properties of God. The First Being is intellectual and volitional, and the intellect and will are identical with the essence of this supreme nature. The First Being is also infinite being. While discussing the infinity of God, Scotus resurrects Anselm's argument and responds to the criticism that Anselm makes an illicit leap from concept to reality. Finally, he gives a definite answer of "yes" to the question of whether there exists an actually infinite being. The very next question of the Ordinatio deals with the unicity of the nature thus proved to exist. However, the De Primo Principio version concludes with this argument.

The proof for the conclusion that "some efficient cause is simply first such that neither can it be an effect nor can it, by virtue of something other than itself, cause an effect" Ordinatio I.2.43 [ 41 ] runs like this: Something can be produced.

It is produced either by itself, nothing, or another.

Not by nothing, for nothing causes nothing.

Not by itself, for an effect never causes itself.

Therefore, by another; call it A .

If A is first, then we have reached the conclusion.

If A is not first, but also an effect, we return to 2).

A is produced either by itself, nothing, or another.

From 3) and 4), we say another, B . The ascending series will either continue infinitely or we finally reach something which has nothing prior to it.

An infinite ascending series is impossible.

Therefore, etc.

Scotus acknowledges two objections and deals with them accordingly. First is that he begs the question in assuming a first in the series. Here he argues that while many admit an infinite regress in an accidentally ordered series of causes, no philosopher admits infinite regress in an essentially ordered series. Scotus explains the differences between the two and offers proofs for the conclusion that an infinity of essentially ordered causes in a series is impossible.

[ 42 ] Second, it is objected that his proof is not really a demonstration since it begins with a contingent premise. That something is produced is contingent and not necessary. Therefore, the proof proceeds from a contingent and not a necessary premise. Scotus says that while that is true, it is utterly manifest that things are produced or effected. But in order to respond, Scotus makes a modal move and reworks the argument. Now he argues from the possibility of production. "It is possible that something can be produced" is a necessary proposition. From there he is able to conclude that it is possible that the first efficient cause exists, and if it is possible that it exists, then it does exist. He asserts that the last claim will be proved later in the argument.

[ 43 ] In the Lectura proof, Scotus argues the following way: Although beings different from God are actually contingent with respect to their factual existence, nevertheless, they are not with respect to their possible existence. Hence, those entities which are called contingent with respect to their factual existence are necessary with respect to their possible existence – for instance, although "There exists a man" is contingent, nevertheless "It is possible that he exists" is necessary, because his existence does not include any contradiction. Therefore, "Something – different from God – is possible" is necessary, because being is divided into the contingent and the necessary. Just as necessity belongs to a necessary being in virtue of its condition or its quiddity, so possibility belongs to a possible being in virtue of its quiddity. If the first argument is alternatively qualified with the notion of ontological possibility, then we have necessary propositions as follows: It is possible that there is something different from God – it is not of itself (because then it would not be the case that it were possible), nor from nothing. Therefore, it is possible that it is from something else. Either it is possible that the other agent acts by virtue of itself – and not by virtue of something else, not being from something else – or it is not possible. If so, then it is possible that there is a first agent, and if it [is] possible that it exists, then it exists, just as we have proved before. If not and if there is no infinite regress, then the argument at once comes to a standstill.

For more on this argument, see especially "Authors/Duns Scotus/Ordinatio/Ordinatio I/D2/Q2B".

[ 44 ] Illuminationism [ edit ] Scotus argued against the version of illuminationism that had been defended earlier in the century by Henry of Ghent . In his Ordinatio (I.3.1.4) he argued against the sceptical consequences that Henry claimed would follow from abandoning divine illumination. Scotus argued that if our thinking were fallible in the way Henry had believed, such illumination could not, even in principle, ensure "certain and pure knowledge".

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] Immaculate Conception [ edit ] Perhaps the most influential point of Duns Scotus's theology was his defense of the Immaculate Conception of Mary (i.e., that Mary herself was conceived without sin). At the time, there was a great deal of argument about the subject. The general opinion was that it was appropriately deferential to the Mother of God , but it could not be seen how to resolve the problem that only with Christ 's death would the stain of original sin be removed. The great philosophers and theologians of the West were divided on the subject (indeed, even Thomas Aquinas sided with those who denied the doctrine). The feast day had existed in the East (though in the East, the feast is just of the Conception of Mary) since the seventh century and had been introduced in several dioceses in the West as well, even though the philosophical basis was lacking. Citing Anselm of Canterbury 's principle, " potuit, decuit, ergo fecit " (He [i.e., God] could do it, it was appropriate, therefore He did it), Duns Scotus devised the following argument: Mary was in need of redemption like all other human beings, but through the merits of Jesus' crucifixion , given in advance, she was conceived without the stain of original sin. God could have brought it about (1) that she was never in original sin, (2) she was in sin only for an instant, (3) she was in sin for a period of time, being purged at the last instant. Whichever of these options was most excellent should probably be attributed to Mary.

[ 47 ] This apparently careful statement provoked a storm of opposition at Paris, and suggested the line 'fired France for Mary without spot' in the famous poem "Duns Scotus's Oxford," by Gerard Manley Hopkins .

Scotus's argument appears in Pope Pius IX 's 1854 declaration of the dogma of the Immaculate Conception, "at the first moment of Her conception, Mary was preserved free from the stain of original sin, in view of the merits of Jesus Christ." [ 48 ] Scotus's position was hailed as "a correct expression of the faith of the Apostles." [ 48 ] Another of Scotus's positions also gained official approval of the Catholic Church: his doctrine on the universal primacy of Christ became the underlying rationale for the feast of Christ the King instituted in 1925.

[ 48 ] Scotus disagreed with Augustine on forced conversion of the Jews, declaring that a small number should be left unmolested on an island to serve as the remnant .

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] During his pontificate, Pope John XXIII recommended the reading of Duns Scotus's theology to modern theology students.

Veneration [ edit ] Duns Scotus was long honored as a Blessed by the Order of Friars Minor, as well as in the Archdioceses of Edinburgh and Cologne . In the 19th century, the process was started seeking his recognition as such by the Holy See , on the basis of a cultus immemorabilis , i.e., one of ancient standing.

[ 17 ] On 27 July 1920, a committee of theologians was convened to evaluate his spiritual writings for orthodoxy.

[ 51 ] He was declared Venerable by Pope John Paul II in 1991, who officially recognized his liturgical cult, effectively beatifying him on 20 March 1993.

[ 52 ] Later reputation and influence [ edit ] Later medieval period [ edit ] Owing to Scotus's early and unexpected death, he left behind a large body of work in an unfinished or unedited condition. His students and disciples extensively edited his papers, often confusing them with works by other writers, in many cases leading to misattribution and confused transmission. Most 13th-century Franciscans followed Bonaventura , but the influence of Scotus (as well as that of his arch-rival William of Ockham ) spread in the fourteenth century. Franciscan theologians in the late Middle Ages were thus divided between so-called Scotists and Ockhamists. Fourteenth century followers included Francis of Mayrone (died 1325), Antonius Andreas (died 1320), William of Alnwick (died 1333), and John of Bassolis (died 1347), supposedly Scotus's favourite student.

[ 53 ] Sixteenth to nineteenth centuries [ edit ] His reputation suffered during the English reformation , probably due to its association with the Franciscans. In a letter to Thomas Cromwell about his visit to Oxford in 1535, Richard Layton described how he saw the court of New College full of pages from Scotus's work, "the wind blowing them into every corner." [ 54 ] John Leland described the Oxford Greyfriar's library in 1538 (just prior to its dissolution) as an accumulation of "cobwebs, moths and bookworms." [ 55 ] Critics of Scotus' work described his followers as " dunces "; the "dunce cap" was later used as a form of punishment in schools and the word "dunce" has come to be used as a term to describe someone dull-witted. When in the sixteenth century the Scotists argued against Renaissance humanism , the term duns or dunce became, in the mouths of humanists and reformers, a term of abuse and a synonym for one incapable of scholarship .

[ 56 ] Despite this, Scotism grew in Catholic Europe. Scotus's works were collected into many editions, particularly in the late fifteenth century with the advent of printing . His school was probably at the height of its popularity at the beginning of the seventeenth century; during the sixteenth and the seventeenth centuries there were special Scotist chairs, e.g. at Paris, Rome, Coimbra, Salamanca, Alcalá, Padua, and Pavia. New ideas were included pseudographically in later editions of his work, such as the principle of explosion , now attributed to Pseudo-Scotus . Scotism flourished well into the seventeenth century, and its influence can be seen in such writers as Descartes and Bramhall . Interest dwindled in the eighteenth century, and the revival of scholastic philosophy, known as neo-Scholasticism , was essentially a revival of Thomistic thinking.

Gerard Manley Hopkins was able to reconcile his religious calling and his vocation as a poet thanks to his reading of Duns Scotus. His poem As Kingfishers Catch Fire expresses Duns Scotus's ideas on "haecceity".

Twentieth century [ edit ] The twentieth century saw a resurgence of interest in Scotus, with a range of assessments of his thought.

For one thing, Scotus has received interest from secular philosophers such as Peter King, Gyula Klima, Paul Vincent Spade, and others.

For some today, Scotus is one of the most important Franciscan theologians and the founder of Scotism , a special form of Scholasticism . He came out of the Old Franciscan School, to which Haymo of Faversham (died 1244), Alexander of Hales (died 1245), John of Rupella (died 1245), William of Melitona (died 1260), St.

Bonaventure (died 1274), Cardinal Matthew of Aquasparta (died 1289), John Peckham , Archbishop of Canterbury (died 1292), Richard of Middletown (died c. 1300) and others belonged. He was known as "Doctor Subtilis" because of the subtle distinctions and nuances of his thinking.

Later philosophers in the sixteenth century were less complimentary about his work and accused him of sophistry . This led to the word " dunce ," which developed from the name "Dunse" given to his followers in the 1500s, becoming used for "somebody who is incapable of scholarship ." [ citation needed ] Critics of Scotus' work described his followers as "dunces". The 'dunce cap' was used as a form of punishment in schools and the word 'dunce' has come to be used as a term to describe someone dull-witted.

[ 57 ] An important question since the 1960s has revolved over whether Scotus's thought heralded a change in thinking on the nature of 'being,' a change which marked a shift from Aquinas and other previous thinkers; this question has been particularly significant in recent years because it has come to be seen as a debate over the origins of 'modernity.' This line of argument first emerged in the 1960s among popular French philosophers who, in passing, singled out Duns Scotus as the figure whose theory of univocal being changed an earlier approach which Aquinas had shared with his predecessors.

[ 58 ] Then, in 1990, the historian of philosophy Jean-Francois Courtine argued that, between the time of Aquinas in the mid-thirteenth century and Francisco Suárez at the turn of the seventeenth, a fundamentally new approach to being was developed, with Scotus taking a major part in its development.

[ 59 ] During the 1990s, various scholars extended this argument to locate Scotus as the first thinker who succumbed to what Heidegger termed 'onto-theology'.

In recent years, this criticism of Scotus has become disseminated in particular through the writings of the 'Radical Orthodox' group of theologians, drawing on John Milbank and Catherine Pickstock . The Radical Orthodox model has been questioned by Daniel Horan [ 60 ] and Thomas Williams, [ 61 ] both of whom claim that Scotus's doctrine of the univocity of being is a semantic, rather than an ontological theory. Both thinkers cite Ord. 1, d. 3, pars 1, q. 3, n. 163, in which Scotus claims that "This [univocally] is how all the authoritative passages one might find on this topic in the Metaphysics or Physics should be interpreted: in terms of the ontological diversity of those things to which the concept is attributed, which is compatible with there being one concept that can be abstracted from them". Such a quotation seems to refer to epistemology, with abstracted concepts, rather than with ontology, which Scotus admits can be diverse.

In popular media [ edit ] In 2012 Fernando Muraca directed for TVCO and the Franciscan Friars of the Immaculate the biopic Blessed Duns Scotus: Defender of the Immaculate Conception in Italian.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] It centers on the debate at the Paris University with glimpses of his infancy and Franciscan vocation. Adriano Braidotti played the adult Scotus and Emanuele Maria Gamboni played Scotus as a  child.

[ 64 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Works in rough chronological order Before 1295: Parva logicalia Quaestiones super Porphyrii Isagogem Quaestiones in librum Praedicamentorum Quaestiones in I et II librum Perihermeneias Octo quaestiones in duos libros Perihermeneias Quaestiones in libros Elenchorum Quaestiones super libros De anima (1295–1298?) Quaestiones super libros Metaphysicorum Aristotelis (1298–1300?; revised later) Notabilia Scoti super Metaphysicam (a set of notes concerning books II–X and XII of Aristotle's Metaphysics , discovered only in 1996 [ 65 ] ) Lectura (Early Oxford Lectures on the four books of the Sentences of Peter Lombard) Books 1 and 2 (1300–1301) Book 3 (probably written in Paris, 1303–04) Book 4 (not extant) Ordinatio or Opus Oxoniense (Oxford Lectures: a revision of the lectures given at Oxford, books 1 and 2 summer 1300–1302, books 3 and 4, 1303–1304) Collationes oxonienses (1303–04 or 1305–08) Collationes parisienses (1302–07) Reportatio parisiensis (Paris Lectures, 1302–07) Quaestiones Quodlibetales (edited by Felix Alluntis in Obras del Doctor Sutil, Juan Duns Escoto , Madrid, Biblioteca de Autores Cristianos, 1963) Tractatus de Primo Principio (Treatise on the First Principle) English Translation Theoremata (uncertain date) Dubious works Theoremata Spurious works De Rerum Principio (Of the Beginning of Things). An inauthentic work once attributed to Scotus.

Latin editions OPERA OMNIA. ( Wadding Edition , so-called after its editor Luke Wadding ) Lyon, 1639; reprinted Hildesheim: Georg Olms Verlagsbuchhandlung, 1968. [Despite the title, this edition does not represent all the works of Scotus. Certain works printed in it are no longer attributed to Scotus; certain works by Scotus are omitted (including his early Lectura on the Sentences of Peter Lombard); what the book presents as Book I of Scotus's late Reportatio is in fact an entirely separate work whose authenticity and authority are vigorously disputed.] OPERA OMNIA. ( Vatican Edition = VE) Civitas Vaticana: Typis Polyglottis Vaticanis, 1950–.

ORDINATIO (complete critical edition) I, De Ordinatione Ioannis Duns Scoti disquisitio historico critica. Prologus totius operis, 1950.

II, Ordinatio. Liber Primus. Distinctiones 1–2, 1950.

III, Ordinatio. Liber Primus. Distinctio 3, 1954.

IV, Ordinatio. Liber Primus. Distinctiones 4–10, 1956.

V, Ordinatio. Liber Primus. Distinctiones 11–25, 1959.

VI, Ordinatio. Liber Primus. Distinctiones 26–48, 1963.

VII, Ordinatio. Liber Secundus. Distinctiones 1–3, 1973.

VIII, Ordinatio. Liber Secundus. Distinctiones 4–44, 2001.

IX, Ordinatio. Liber Tertius. Distinctiones 1–17, 2006.

X, Ordinatio. Liber Tertius. Distinctiones 26–40, 2007.

XI, Ordinatio. Liber Quartus. Distinctiones 1–7, 2008.

XII, Ordinatio. Liber Quartus. Distinctiones 8–13, 2010.

XIII, Ordinatio. Liber Quartus, Distinctiones 14–42, 2011.

XIV, Ordinatio. Liber Quartus, Distinctiones 43–49, 2013.

LECTURA XVI, Lectura in Librum Primum Sententiarum. Prologus et Distinctiones 1–7, 1960.

XVII, Lectura in Librum Primum Sententiarum. Distinctiones 8–45, 1966.

XVIII, Lectura in Librum Secundum Sententiarum. Distinctiones 1–6, 1982.

XIX, Lectura in Librum Secundum Sententiarum. Distinctiones 7–44, 1993.

XX, Lectura in Librum Tertium Sententiarum. Distinctiones 1–17, 2003.

XXI, Lectura in Librum Tertium Sententiarum. Distinctiones 18–40, 2004.

OPERA PHILOSOPHICA (= OP). St. Bonaventure, NY: The Franciscan Institute:, 1997–2006: Vol. I: Quaestiones super Porphyrius Isagoge et Aristoteles Categoriae, Franciscan Institute Publications, 1999.

ISBN 978-1-57659-121-5 Vol. II: Quaestiones super Peri hermeneias et Sophistici Elenchis (along with) Theoremata, Franciscan Institute Publications, 2004, ISBN 978-1-57659-122-2 .

Vol. III-IV: Quaestiones super libros Metaphysicorum Aristotelis Franciscan Institute Publications, 2004.

ISBN 978-1-57659-124-6 .

Vol. V: Quaestiones super Secundum et Tertium de Anima. Franciscan Institute Publications, 2006.

ISBN 978-0-8132-1422-1 .

The Examined Report of the Paris Lecture, Reportatio I-A, Volume 1, edited and translated by Allan B. Wolter, OFM and Oleg Bychkov. Franciscan Institute Publications, 2004 ISBN 978-1-57659-193-2 The Examined Report of the Paris Lecture, Reportatio I-A, Volume 2, edited and translated by Allan B. Wolter, OFM and Oleg Bychkov. Franciscan Institute Publications, 2008.

ISBN 978-1-57659-150-5 English translations John Duns Scotus, A Treatise on God as First Principle . Chicago: Franciscan Herald Press 1982. A Latin text and English translation of the De Primo Principio. Second edition, revised, with a commentary by Allan Wolter, (First edition 1966).

John Duns Scotus, God and Creatures. The Quodlibetal Questions , Translated by Wolter, Allan B., OFM, and Felix Alluntis, Washington, D.C.: The Catholic University of America Press, 1975.

Duns Scotus on the Will and Morality , Translated by Wolter, Allan B., OFM, Washington, DC: The Catholic University of America Press, 1986.

Duns Scotus: Philosophical Writings , Translated by Wolter, Allan B., OFM, Indianapolis: Hackett Publishing Company, 1987.

Duns Scotus' Parisian Proof for the Existence of God , edited By Allan B. Wolter and Marilyn McCord Adams, Franciscan Studies 42, 1982, pp. 248–321. (Latin text and English translation).

John Duns Scotus, Contingency and Freedom. Lectura I 39 , translation, commentary and introduction by A. Vos Jaczn, H. Veldhuis, A.H. Looman-Graaskamp, E. Dekker and N.W. den Bok. The New Synthese Historical Library 4. Dordrecht/Boston/London: Kluwer, 1994.

Questions on the Metaphysics of Aristotle by John Duns Scotus , Translated by Etzkorn, Girard J., and Allan B. Wolter, OFM, St. Bonaventure, NY: The Franciscan Institute, 1997–1998.

John Duns Scotus. Four Questions on Mary , Introduction with Latin text and English translation and notes by Allan B. Wolter, OFM, Franciscan Institute Publications, 2000.

John Duns Scotus. A Treatise on Potency and Act. Questions on the Metaphysics of Aristotle Book IX , Introduction with Latin text and English translation and notes by Allan B. Wolter, OFM, Franciscan Institute Publications, 2000.

John Duns Scotus. Political and Economic Philosophy , Introduction with Latin text and English translation and notes by Allan B. Wolter, OFM, Franciscan Institute Publications, 2001.

Duns Scotus on Divine Love: Texts and Commentary on Goodness and Freedom, God and Humans , translated by A. Vos, H. Veldhuis, E. Dekker, N.W. den Bok and A.J. Beck (ed.). Aldershot: Ashgate 2003.

John Duns Scotus.

Early Oxford Lecture on Individuation , Introduction with Latin text and English translation and notes by Allan B. Wolter, OFM, Franciscan Institute Publications, 2005.

John Duns Scotus.

Questions on Aristotle's Categories , Translated by Lloyd A. Newton, Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2014.

Duns Scotus on Time and Existence: The Questions on Aristotle's "De interpretatione" , Translated with Introduction and Commentary by Edward Buckner and Jack Zupko, Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press, 2014.

See also [ edit ] Oxford Franciscan school Virgin and Child with Saint Anne – Early depictions of the Immaculate Conception in three generations Notes [ edit ] ^ Williams, Thomas (ed.).

The Cambridge Companion to Duns Scotus . Cambridge University Press, 2002, p. 2.

^ He has long been claimed as a Merton alumnus, but there is no contemporary evidence to support this claim and as a Franciscan, he would have been ineligible for fellowships at Merton (see Martin, G. H. & Highfield, J. R. L. (1997).

A History of Merton College . Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 53).

^ Cross, Richard (2014).

Duns Scotus's Theory of Cognition . Oxford University Press. p. 18.

ISBN 9780199684885 .

Scotus is a good Aristotelian, in the sense that he believes that cognition always has an empirical starting point ^ Walker, L. (1912).

Voluntarism . In The Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company. Retrieved 27 September 2019 from New Advent .

^ The Sheed & Ward Anthology of Catholic Philosophy . Rowman & Littlefield. 2005.

ISBN 9780742531987 .

^ "Anselm of Canterbury (1033–1109)" , Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy , 2006 , retrieved 10 November 2017 ^ Anthony Kenny , Wyclif in His Times , Oxford UP, 1986, p. 35 n. 13.

^ Harjeet Singh Gill, Signification in language and culture , Indian Institute of Advanced Study, 2002, p. 109.

^ Williams, Thomas (2019), "John Duns Scotus" , The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ^ Spade, Paul Vincent (2018), "Medieval Philosophy" , The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Histories of medieval philosophy often treat Thomas Aquinas (1224/25–74), John Duns Scotus (c. 1265–1308) and William of Ockham (c. 1287–1347) as the "big three" figures in the later medieval period; a few add Bonaventure (1221–74) as a fourth.

^ "People of Note: John Duns Scotus" .

Duns, Scotland . Archived from the original on 27 September 2007 . Retrieved 18 January 2007 .

^ Williams 2002, p. 2 ^ Brampton, C. K. (1964). "Duns Scotus at Oxford, 1288–1301".

Franciscan Studies .

24 (Annual II): 5– 20.

^ Although Vos (2006, p. 23) contends that 'Duns' was actually his family name, as someone from Duns would have been known as 'de Duns'.

^ Vos 2006, p. 27. See also Roest, Bert (2000).

A history of Franciscan education (c. 1210–1517) . Brill. pp.

21 –24.

ISBN 978-90-04-11739-6 .

^ Vos 2006, p. 27 ^ a b "John Duns Scotus" .

Catholic Encyclopedia .

^ Williams, Thomas (ed.).

The Cambridge Companion to Duns Scotus . Cambridge University Press, 2002, p. 3.

^ Narratur de Doctori Subtili qui in Prato clericorum, visa Generalis Ministri obedentia, dum actu Regens esse in scholis Parisiensibus, aut pauca aut nulla de rebus habita dispositione, Parisis exivit ut Coloniam iret, secundum ministri sententiam . William Vorilong, Opus super IV libros Sententiarum II, d. 44, q. 1 f. 161va.

^ Butler, Alban (1866). "St. Bonaventure, Cardinal, Bishop, and Doctor of the Church".

The Lives of the Fathers, Martyrs, and Other Principal Saints . Vol. VII. Dublin: James Duffy. note 15 . Retrieved 29 May 2014 .

^ K. J. Heilig, “Zum Tode des Johannes Duns Scot”, Historisches Jahrbuch , t. 49, 1929, pp. 641–645. For a discussion of this article, see Abate, Giuseppe, “La tomba del ven. Giovanni Duns Scoto (…)”, Miscellanea francescana, Rome, 45 (1945), pp. 29–79, which refers to Collectanea Franciscana, t. 1, 1931, p. 121.

^ Bacon, Francis (1638).

Historia Vitae et Mortis .

^ See the Bibliography under The Examined Report of the Paris Lecture, Reportatio I-A ^ a b Pini, Giorgio (2005).

"Univocity in Scotus's Quaestiones super Metaphysicam: The Solution to a Riddle" (PDF) .

Medioevo .

30 : 69– 110. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 December 2014 . Retrieved 26 November 2014 .

^ See e.g. Wolter 1995, p. 76 and passim ^ See the introduction to the critical edition: Duns Scoti Quaestiones in librum Porphyrii Isagoge et Quaestiones super Praedicamenta Aristotelis ( Opera philosophica , I), xxix–xxxiv, xli–xlii.

^ Pini, Giorgio (2005).

"Univocity in Scotus's Quaestiones super Metaphysicam: The Solution to a Riddle" (PDF) .

Medioevo .

30 : 69– 110. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 December 2014 . Retrieved 26 November 2014 .

, although this is speculative ^ Thomas Williams (2009).

"John Duns Scotus" , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (online).

^ Ashworth 1987 [ citation needed ] ^ Die Kategorien- und Bedeutungslehre des Duns Scotus ( Duns Scotus's Doctrine of Categories and Meaning , 1916.

^ "Thomas of Erfurt" entry  by Jack Zupko in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ^ "Scotus, John Duns | Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

^ "John Duns Scotus Philosophical Writings" . 6 September 1308 – via the Internet Archive.

^ Opus Oxoniense I iii 1–2, quoted in Grenz 2005, p. 55 ^ Honderich p. 209 ^ "Blessed John Duns Scotus" .

Franciscan Media . Archived from the original on 30 July 2020 . Retrieved 2 April 2020 .

^ Woo, B. Hoon (2016).

"The Difference between Scotus and Turretin in Their Formulation of the Doctrine of Freedom" .

Westminster Theological Journal .

78 : 258– 62.

^ Lectura I, d. 2, q. 2, 40 Now efficiency can be considered either as a metaphysical or as a physical property. The metaphysical property is more extensive than the physical for "to give existence to another" is of broader scope than "to give existence by way of movement or change." And even if all existence were given in the latter fashion, the notion of the one is still not that of the other. It is not efficiency as a physical attribute, however, but efficiency as the metaphysician considers it that provides a more effective way of proving God's existence, for there are more attributes in metaphysics than in physics whereby the existence of God can be established. It can be shown, for example, from "composition and simplicity," from "act and potency," from "one and many," from those features which are properties of being. Wherefore, if you find one extreme of the disjunction imperfectly realized in a creature, you conclude that the alternate, the perfect extreme exists in God.
Averroës, therefore, in attacking Avicenna at the end of Bk. I of the Physics, 14 is incorrect when he claims that to prove that God exists is the job of the physicist alone, because this can be established only by way of motion, and in no other way – as if metaphysics began with a conclusion which was not evident in itself, but needed to be proved in physics (For Averroës asserts this falsehood at the end of the first book of the Physics). In point of fact, however, [God's existence] can be shown more truly and in a greater variety of ways by means of those metaphysical attributes which characterize being. The proof lies in this that the first efficient cause imparts not merely this fluid existence [called motion] but existence in an unqualified sense, which is still more perfect and widespread.

^ Summa Contra Gentiles, I, 13 http://dhspriory.org/thomas/ContraGentiles1.htm#13 Archived 20 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ "We shall first set forth the arguments by which Aristotle proceeds to prove that God exists." SCG I, 13.2 http://dhspriory.org/thomas/ContraGentiles1.htm#13 Archived 20 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine ^ Duns Scotus – Ordinatio I/D2/Q2B logicmuseum.com ^ See paragraphs 46–55 at Duns Scotus – Ordinatio I/D2/Q2B logicmuseum.com ^ Duns Scotus – Ordinatio I/D2/Q2B (See paragraph 56) logicmuseum.com ^ Authors/Duns Scotus/Ordinatio/Ordinatio I/D2/Q2B – The Logic Museum .

^ Pasnau, Robert (2011).

"Divine Illumination" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ When one of those that come together is incompatible with certainty, then certainty cannot be achieved. For just as from one premise that is necessary and one that is contingent nothing follows but a contingent conclusion, so from something certain and something uncertain, coming together in some cognition, no cognition that is certain follows ( Ordinatio I.3.1.4 n.221).

^ Ordinatio III, d.3, q.1 ^ a b c "The Life of Blessed John Duns Scotus" . EWTN.

^ Simonsohn, Shlomo (1991).

The Apostolic See and the Jews - History . p. 29.

ISBN 0-888441096 .

^ Rist, Rebecca (2016).

Popes and Jews, 1095-1291 . Oxford University Press. p. 6.

ISBN 9780198717980 .

^ Index ac status causarum beatificationis servorum dei et canonizationis beatorum (in Latin). Typis polyglottis vaticanis. January 1953. p. 116.

^ "Ceremonia de Reconocimiento del Culto Litúrgico a Duns Escoto y Beatificación de Dina Bélanger" .

Vatican News Service . 20 March 1993.

(in Spanish) ^ Courtenay, William (January 2012).

"Early Scotists at Paris: A Reconsideration" .

Franciscan Studies .

69 (1): 175– 229.

doi : 10.1353/frc.2012.0009 .

S2CID 162137015 .

^ R. W. Dixon, History of the Church of England from the Abolition of the Roman Jurisdiction , 1:303 ^ Catto, Jeremy, "Franciscan Learning in England, 1450–1540", in The Religious Orders in Pre-Reformation England , ed. Clarke 2002 ^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Dunce" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 8 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 671.

^ "The Duns philosopher who was the original 'dunce' " .

ITV.com . 2016.

^ Jacques Derrida , L'Écriture et la différence , (Paris, 1967), p. 216; Gilles Deleuze , Différence et répétition, (Paris, 1968), pp. 52–8, cited in John Marenbon, "Aquinas, Radical Orthodoxy, and the Importance of Truth", in Wayne J. Hankey and Douglas Hedley, eds, Deconstructing Radical Orthodoxy: Postmodern Theology, Rhetoric and Truth (Ashgate, 2005), p. 56.

^ John Marenbon, "Aquinas, Radical Orthodoxy, and the Importance of Truth", in Wayne J. Hankey and Douglas Hedley, eds, Deconstructing Radical Orthodoxy: Postmodern Theology, Rhetoric and Truth (Ashgate, 2005), p. 56.

^ Horan, Daniel (2014).

Postmodernity and Univocity: A Critical Account of Radical Orthodoxy and John Duns Scotus . Fortress Press.

ISBN 9781451465723 .

^ Williams, Thomas (2005). "The Doctrine of Univocity is True and Salutary".

Modern Theology .

21 (4): 575– 585.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0025.2005.00298.x .

^ Duns Scotus at IMDb ^ "Duns Scoto" .

TVCO . Retrieved 10 April 2020 .

^ "FiNews – FIs Producing John Duns Scotus Film" .

AirMaria.com .

Franciscan Friars of the Immaculate . 15 March 2010 . Retrieved 10 April 2020 .

^ Giorgio Pini, "Duns Scotus' Literal Commentary on the "Metaphysics" and the "Notabilia Scoti super Metaphysicam" (Milan, Biblioteca Ambrosiana, C 62 Sup, ff. 51r–98r)", Bulletin de philosophie médiévale , 38 (1996), 141–142.

Further reading [ edit ] Bos, Egbert P. (1998).

John Duns Scotus: Renewal of Philosophy. Acts of the Third Symposium organized by the Dutch Society for Medieval Philosophy Medium Aevum . Amsterdam: Rodopi.

ISBN 978-90-420-0081-0 .

Cross, Richard (ed.), The Opera Theologica of John Duns Scotus. Proceedings of "The Quadruple Congress" on John Duns Scotus , Part 2. Archa Verbi. Subsidia 4, Franciscan Institute Publications, 2012, ISBN 978-3-402-10214-5 .

Cross, Richard (2014).

Duns Scotus's Theory of Cognition . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-968488-5 .

Frank, William A.; Wolter, Allan B. (1995).

Duns Scotus, Metaphysician . West Lafayette: Purdue University Press.

ISBN 978-1-55753-072-1 .

Gracia, Jorge J. E.

; Noone, Timothy B. (2003).

A Companion to Philosophy in the Middle Ages . Cambridge: Blackwell Pub.

ISBN 978-0-631-21672-8 .

Grenz, Stanley (2005).

The Named God and the Question of Being: A Trinitarian Theo-ontology . Louisville: Westminster John Knox Press.

ISBN 978-0-664-22204-8 .

Honderich, Ted (1995). "Duns Scotus".

The Oxford Companion to Philosophy . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-866132-0 .

Honnefelder Ludger, Möhle Hannes, Speer Andreas, Kobusch Theo, Bullido del Barrio Susana (eds.), Johannes Duns Scotus 1308-2008: Die philosophischen Perspektiven seines Werkes/Investigations into his Philosophy. Proceedings of "The Quadruple Congress" on John Duns Scotus , Part 3. Archa Verbi. Subsidia 5, Franciscan Institute Publications, 2011, ISBN 978-3-402-10215-2 .

Horan, Daniel P. OFM, Postmodernity and Univocity - A Critical Account of Radical Orthodoxy and John Duns Scotus , Fortress press, 2014.

Ingham, Mary Beth CSJ, and Bychkof, OLef (eds.), John Duns Scotus, Philosopher. Proceedings of "The Quadruple Congress" on John Duns Scotus , Part 1. Archa Verbi. Subsidia 3, Franciscan Institute Publications, 2010, ISBN 978-3-402-10213-8 .

Ingham, Mary Beth CSJ, Scotus for Dunces: An Introduction to the Subtle Doctor , Franciscan Institute Publications, 2003.

Ingham, Mary Beth CSJ, The Harmony of Goodness: Mutuality and Moral Living According to John Duns Scotus , Franciscan Institute Publications, 1997.

Kretzmann, Norman ; Kenny, Anthony ; Pinborg, Jan ; Stump, Eleonore (1982).

The Cambridge History of Later Medieval Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-36933-6 .

Shannon, Thomas The Ethical Theory of John Duns Scotus , Franciscan Institute Publications, 1995.

Vos, Antonie (2006).

The Philosophy of John Duns Scotus . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.

ISBN 978-0-7486-2462-1 .

Williams, Thomas (2002).

The Cambridge Companion to Duns Scotus . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-63563-9 .

Wolter, Allan B. OFM, The Philosophical Theology of John Duns Scotus , IUthaca, Cornell University Press, 1990.

Wolter, Allan B. OFM and O'Neil, Blane OFM, John Duns Scotus: Mary's Architect , Franciscan Institute Publications, 1993.

Wolter, Allan B. OFM, Scotus and Ockham: Selected Essays , Franciscan Institute Publications, 2003.

Woo, B. Hoon (2016).

"The Difference between Scotus and Turretin in Their Formulation of the Doctrine of Freedom" .

Westminster Theological Journal .

78 : 249– 69.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to John Duns Scotus .

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Author:John Duns Scotus Wikiquote has quotations related to Duns Scotus .

John Duns Scotus (1266–1308) entry by Jeffrey Hause in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Scotus: Knowledge of God entry by Alexander Hall in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Williams, Thomas.

"John Duns Scotus" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Site of the International Scotistic Commission (Rome, Italy) Bibliography on Duns Scotus from 1950 Archived 17 February 2023 at the Wayback Machine by Tobias Hoffmann Catholic Encyclopedia article on John Duns Scotus Site about Duns Scotus of the Research Group John Duns Scotus (Utrecht, NL) Thomas Williams's pages on Scotus The Realist Ontology of John Duns Scotus with an annotated bibliography Article by Parthenius Minges on Scotists and Scotism at the Jacques Maritain Center Local history site of Blessed John Duns Scotus's birthplace, Duns, Berwickshire, Scotland Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries High resolution images of works by Duns Scotus in .jpg and .tiff format.

v t e History of Catholic theology Key figures General History of the Catholic Church Timeline History of the papacy Papal primacy Ecumenical councils Catholic Bible Vulgate Biblical canon History of Christian theology Early Church Paul Clement of Rome First Epistle of Clement Didache Ignatius of Antioch Polycarp Epistle of Barnabas The Shepherd of Hermas Aristides of Athens Justin Martyr Epistle to Diognetus Irenaeus Montanism Tertullian Origen Antipope Novatian Cyprian Constantine to Pope Gregory I Eusebius Athanasius of Alexandria Arianism Pelagianism Nestorianism Monophysitism Ephrem the Syrian Hilary of Poitiers Cyril of Jerusalem Basil of Caesarea Gregory of Nazianzus Gregory of Nyssa Ambrose John Chrysostom Jerome Augustine of Hippo John Cassian Orosius Cyril of Alexandria Peter Chrysologus Pope Leo I Boethius Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Pope Gregory I Early Middle Ages Isidore of Seville John Climacus Maximus the Confessor Monothelitism Ecthesis Bede John of Damascus Iconoclasm Transubstantiation dispute Predestination disputes Paulinus II of Aquileia Alcuin Benedict of Aniane Rabanus Maurus Paschasius Radbertus John Scotus Eriugena High Middle Ages Roscellinus Gregory of Narek Berengar of Tours Peter Damian Anselm of Canterbury Joachim of Fiore Peter Abelard Decretum Gratiani Bernard of Clairvaux Peter Lombard Anselm of Laon Hildegard of Bingen Hugh of Saint Victor Dominic de Guzmán Robert Grosseteste Francis of Assisi Anthony of Padua Beatrice of Nazareth Bonaventure Albertus Magnus Boetius of Dacia Henry of Ghent Thomas Aquinas Siger of Brabant Thomism Roger Bacon Mysticism and reforms Ramon Llull Duns Scotus Dante Alighieri William of Ockham Richard Rolle John of Ruusbroec Catherine of Siena Bridget of Sweden Meister Eckhart Johannes Tauler Walter Hilton The Cloud of Unknowing Heinrich Seuse Geert Groote Devotio Moderna Julian of Norwich Thomas à Kempis Nicholas of Cusa Marsilio Ficino Girolamo Savonarola Giovanni Pico della Mirandola Reformation Counter-Reformation Erasmus Thomas Cajetan Thomas More John Fisher Johann Eck Francisco de Vitoria Thomas of Villanova Ignatius of Loyola Francisco de Osuna John of Ávila Francis Xavier Teresa of Ávila Luis de León John of the Cross Peter Canisius Luis de Molina ( Molinism ) Robert Bellarmine Francisco Suárez Lawrence of Brindisi Francis de Sales Baroque period to French Revolution Tommaso Campanella Pierre de Bérulle Pierre Gassendi René Descartes Mary of Jesus of Ágreda António Vieira Jean-Jacques Olier Louis Thomassin Jacques-Bénigne Bossuet François Fénelon Cornelius Jansen ( Jansenism ) Blaise Pascal Nicolas Malebranche Giambattista Vico Alphonsus Liguori Louis de Montfort Maria Gaetana Agnesi Alfonso Muzzarelli Johann Michael Sailer Clement Mary Hofbauer Bruno Lanteri 19th century Joseph Görres Félicité de La Mennais Luigi Taparelli Antonio Rosmini Ignaz von Döllinger John Henry Newman Henri Lacordaire Jaime Balmes Gaetano Sanseverino Giovanni Maria Cornoldi Wilhelm Emmanuel Freiherr von Ketteler Giuseppe Pecci Joseph Hergenröther Tommaso Maria Zigliara Matthias Joseph Scheeben Émile Boutroux Modernism Neo-scholasticism Léon Bloy Désiré-Joseph Mercier Friedrich von Hügel Vladimir Solovyov Marie-Joseph Lagrange George Tyrrell Maurice Blondel Thérèse of Lisieux 20th century G. K. Chesterton Reginald Garrigou-Lagrange Joseph Maréchal Pierre Teilhard de Chardin Jacques Maritain Étienne Gilson Ronald Knox Georges Bernanos Dietrich von Hildebrand Gabriel Marcel Marie-Dominique Chenu Romano Guardini Edith Stein Fulton Sheen Henri de Lubac Dorothy Day Henri Daniel-Rops Jean Guitton Josemaría Escrivá Nouvelle théologie Karl Rahner Yves Congar Bernard Lonergan Emmanuel Mounier Jean Daniélou Hans Urs von Balthasar Marcel Lefebvre Frederick Copleston Alfred Delp Edward Schillebeeckx Thomas Merton René Girard Hans Küng Johann Baptist Metz Jean Vanier Henri Nouwen 21st century Pope John Paul II Alice von Hildebrand Carlo Maria Martini Pope Benedict XVI Gustavo Gutiérrez Alasdair MacIntyre Walter Kasper Raniero Cantalamessa Michał Heller Peter Kreeft Jean-Luc Marion Tomáš Halík Aidan Nichols Scott Hahn Catholicism portal v t e Catholic philosophy Ethics Cardinal virtues Divine command Just price Just war Probabilism Natural law Personalism Seven virtues Social teaching Option for the poor Social mortgage Theological virtues Virtue ethics Schools Medieval Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Modern Salamanca Christian humanism Cartesianism Molinism Neo-scholasticism Analytical Thomism Universals Augustinian realism Nominalism Conceptualism Moderate realism Scotistic realism Other Theological intellectualism Theological voluntarism Foundationalism Philosophers Abelard Adler Albertus Alcuin Anscombe Anselm Aquinas Augustine Bacon Boethius Bonaventure Chateaubriand Chesterton Clement Cusa Descartes Dionysius Erasmus Eriugena Ficino Gassendi Isidore Krasicki Llull Lombard MacIntyre Maistre Malebranche Maritain Montaigne More Newman Occam Pascal Pico Rahner Ratzinger Scheler Scotus Stein Suárez Wojtyła Concepts Actus Essendi Actus primus Actus purus Aevum Augustinian values Cardinal virtues Cartesian dualism Cogito, ergo sum Dehellenization Differentia Disputation Divine illumination Double truth Evil demon Formal distinction Guardian angel Haecceity Head of a pin Homo unius libri Infused righteousness Memento mori Occam's razor Ontological argument Pascal's wager Peripatetic axiom Principle of double effect Quiddity Quinque viae Rota Fortunae Seven deadly sins Theodicy Augustinian Irenaean Trademark argument Univocity Utopia Related Catholic theology Platonism Aristotelianism Neoplatonism Islamic philosophy Doctor of the Church Renaissance Rationalism Empiricism Phenomenology Catholicism portal Philosophy portal v t e Medieval philosophers Christian Early " Church Fathers " Augustine of Hippo Boethius Cassiodorus Pseudo-Dionysius the Areopagite Isidore of Seville John Scotus Eriugena Alcuin 11–12th century " Scholasticism " Anselm of Canterbury Peter Abelard Anselm of Laon Hugh of Saint Victor Richard of Saint Victor Roscelin Peter Lombard Alexander of Hales Bernard of Chartres Dominicus Gundissalinus Gilbert de la Porrée Alain de Lille 13–14th century Robert Grosseteste Michael Scot Albertus Magnus Henry of Ghent Roger Bacon Bonaventure Thomas Aquinas Vitello John Peckham Ramon Llull Siger of Brabant Boetius of Dacia Petrus Peregrinus de Maricourt Meister Eckhart Giles of Rome Godfrey of Fontaines Duns Scotus Durandus Petrus Aureolus William of Ockham Late Jean Buridan Marsilius of Inghen Nicole Oresme Albert of Saxony Francesc Eiximenis Nicholas of Cusa Vincent Ferrer Paul of Venice Lambertus de Monte John Hennon Jewish Medieval Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Saadia Gaon Solomon ibn Gabirol Judah Halevi Abraham ibn Daud Maimonides Nachmanides Gersonides Hasdai Crescas Joseph Albo Islamic Early Jabir ibn Hayyan (Geber) al-Nazzam Al-Kindi (Alkindus) Abu Bakr al-Razi (Rhazes) Ikhwan al-Safa' (Brethren of Purity) Matta ibn Yunus Al-Farabi (Alpharabius) Abu Ya'qub al-Sijistani Ibn Masarra Abd al-Jabbar Al-Amiri Abu Sulayman al-Sijistani Miskawayh Ibn al-Haytham (Alhazen) al-Biruni al-Kirmani High Ibn Sina (Avicenna) Ibn Hazm Al-Ghazali (Algazel) Abu l-Barakat al-Baghdadi Ibn Bajjah (Avempace) Ayn al-Quzat Hamadani Ibn Tufayl Ibn Rushd (Averroes) Late Ibn Sab'in Shahab al-Din Yahya ibn Habash Suhrawardi Fakhr al-Din al-Razi Rashid al-Din Ibn Arabi al-Qazwini Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Athir al-Din al-Abhari Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Ibn al-Nafis Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Ibn Taymiyya Ibn Khaldun See also Renaissance philosophy v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain 2 3 Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐gxhgz
Cached time: 20250817051747
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.437 seconds
Real time usage: 1.734 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 8760/1000000
Revision size: 68319/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 336500/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 17604/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 285027/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.862/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20035583/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 2/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1393.539      1 -total
 26.04%  362.863      1 Template:Reflist
 12.69%  176.869      3 Template:Infobox
 12.31%  171.520      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.20%  156.089      1 Template:Infobox_saint
  9.78%  136.336     11 Template:Navbox
  9.16%  127.611     18 Template:Cite_book
  8.17%  113.855      1 Template:Catholic_philosophy
  7.85%  109.364      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
  7.83%  109.083      1 Template:IPA Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:34293405:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817051747 and revision id 1299360582. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Duns_Scotus&oldid=1299360582 " Categories : 1260s births 1308 deaths 13th-century philosophers 13th-century Roman Catholic theologians 13th-century Scottish Roman Catholic priests 13th-century venerated Christians 13th-century writers in Latin 14th-century philosophers 14th-century Scottish Roman Catholic priests 14th-century venerated Christians 14th-century writers in Latin Academic staff of the University of Paris Alumni of the University of Oxford Aristotelian philosophers Augustinian philosophers Beatifications by Pope John Paul II British critics of atheism Catholic philosophers Franciscan beatified people Franciscan theologians Latin commentators on Aristotle Medieval Scottish theologians People from Duns, Scottish Borders Philosophers of language Premature burials Scholastic philosophers Scottish beatified people Scottish Friars Minor Scottish logicians Scottish philosophers Scottish Roman Catholic writers Scottish scholars and academics Scottish writers in Latin University of Paris alumni Venerated Catholics by Pope John Paul II Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Articles with Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy links Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Latin-language sources (la) Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Pages using IMDb title with no id set Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2024 Use British English from April 2014 Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Pages using Template:Post-nominals with customized linking Pages with Ecclesiastical Latin IPA Articles with unsourced statements from September 2019 Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 July 2025, at 23:41 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Duns Scotus 65 languages Add topic

