Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin and development 2 Opposing views 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Inductionism 4 languages العربية فارسی Polski Slovenčina Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Inductionism is the scientific philosophy where laws are " induced " from sets of data.  As an example, one might measure the strength of electrical forces at varying distances from charges and induce the inverse square law of electrostatics . This concept is considered one of the two pillars of the old view of the philosophy of science , together with verifiability .

[ 1 ] An application of inductionism can show how experimental evidence can confirm or inductively justify the belief in generalization and the laws of nature.

[ 2 ] Origin and development [ edit ] Some aspects of induction has been credited to Aristotle. For example, in Prior Analytics , he proposed an inductive syllogism , which served to establish the primary and immediate proposition.

[ 3 ] For scholars, this constitutes the principle of demonstrative science.

[ 3 ] The Greek philosopher, however, did not develop a detailed theory of induction.

[ 4 ] Some sources even state that the Aristotelian conceptualization of induction is different from its modern mainstream interpretations due to its position that inductive arguments are deductively valid.

[ 5 ] The early form of modern inductionism is associated with the philosophies of thinkers such as Francis Bacon .

[ 6 ] This can be demonstrated in the way Bacon favored the steady and incremental collection of empirical evidence using a method that derives general principles from the senses and particulars, gradually leading to the most general principles.

[ 5 ] Inductionism is also said to be based on Newtonian physics .

[ 1 ] This is evident in Isaac Newton 's Rule of Reasoning in Philosophy , which articulated his belief that it is imperative to cover the unobservably small features of the world through a methodology that has a strong empirical base.

[ 7 ] Here, the speculative hypothesis was replaced by induction from premises obtained through observation and experiment.

[ 7 ] Opposing views [ edit ] It is noted that no law of science can be considered mere inductive generalization of facts because each law does not exist in isolation.

[ 8 ] This is for, instance, demonstrated by thinkers such as John Stuart Mill , who maintained that inductionism is the initial act in the formulation of a general law using the deductive approaches to science.

[ 9 ] There are thinkers who propose a model that is considered anti-inductionism. These include Karl Popper , who argued that science could progress without making any use of induction [ 10 ] and that there is a fundamental asymmetry between induction and deduction.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Inductive reasoning References [ edit ] ^ a b Hsieh, Ching-Yao; Ye, Meng-Hua (2016-09-16).

Economics, Philosophy and Physics . Routledge.

ISBN 9781315489230 .

^ Nola, Robert; Irzik, Gurol (2005).

Philosophy, Science, Education and Culture . Dordrecht: Springer Science & Business Media. pp.

215 .

ISBN 1402037694 .

^ a b Biondi, Paolo C. (2004).

Aristotle, Posterior Analytics II.19: Introduction, Greek Text, Translation and Commentary Accompanied by a Critical Analysis . Saint-Nicolas, Quebec: Presses Université Laval. p. 195.

ISBN 2763780814 .

^ Hoffe, Otfried (2003).

Aristotle: The Rise of For-Profit Universities . Translated by Salazar, Christine. Albany, NY: SUNY Press. p. 58.

ISBN 0791456331 .

^ a b Groarke, Louis (2009).

An Aristotelian Account of Induction: Creating Something from Nothing . Montreal & Kingston: McGill-Queen's Press - MQUP. p. 138.

ISBN 9780773535954 .

^ White, James (2005).

Advancing Family Theories . Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications. p. 21.

ISBN 0761929053 .

^ a b Butts, Robert (1986).

Kant's Philosophy of Physical Science . Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publishing Company. p. 273.

ISBN 9027723095 .

^ Kwasnicki, Witold (1996).

Knowledge, Innovation and Economy: An Evolutionary Exploration . Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publishing. p. 6.

ISBN 1858983495 .

^ Miller, Robert Lee; Brewer, John D. (2003).

The A-Z of Social Research: A Dictionary of Key Social Science Research Concepts . Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Pyblications. pp.

68 .

ISBN 0-7619-7133-5 .

^ Schurz, Gerhard (2013).

Philosophy of Science: A Unified Approach . Oxon: Routledge. p. 8.

ISBN 978-1-134-10115-3 .

^ Hsieh, Ching-Yao; Ye, Meng-Hua (2016).

Economics, Philosophy and Physics . Oxon: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-315-48923-0 .

v t e Philosophy of science Concepts Analysis Analytic–synthetic distinction A priori and a posteriori Causality Mill's Methods Commensurability Consilience Construct Correlation function Creative synthesis Demarcation problem Empirical evidence Experiment design Explanatory power Fact Falsifiability Feminist method Functional contextualism Hypothesis alternative null Ignoramus et ignorabimus Inductive reasoning Intertheoretic reduction Inquiry Measurement Nature Objectivity Observation Paradigm Problem of induction Scientific evidence Evidence-based practice Scientific law Scientific method Scientific pluralism Scientific Revolution Testability Theory choice ladenness scientific Underdetermination Unity of science Variable control dependent and independent Theories Coherentism Confirmation holism Constructive empiricism Constructive realism Constructivist epistemology Contextualism Conventionalism Deductive-nomological model Epistemological anarchism Evolutionism Fallibilism Foundationalism Hypothetico-deductive model Inductionism Instrumentalism Model-dependent realism Naturalism Physicalism Positivism / Reductionism / Determinism Pragmatism Rationalism / Empiricism Received view / Semantic view of theories Scientific essentialism Scientific formalism Scientific realism / Anti-realism Scientific skepticism Scientism Structuralism Uniformitarianism Verificationism Vitalism Philosophy of...

Biology Chemistry Physics Space and time Social science Archaeology Economics Geography History Linguistics Psychology Related topics Criticism of science Descriptive science Epistemology Exact sciences Faith and rationality Hard and soft science History and philosophy of science Non-science Pseudoscience Normative science Protoscience Questionable cause Relationship between religion and science Rhetoric of science Science studies Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of scientific knowledge Philosophers of science Precursors Roger Bacon Francis Bacon Galileo Galilei Isaac Newton David Hume Auguste Comte Henri Poincaré Pierre Duhem Rudolf Steiner Karl Pearson Charles Sanders Peirce Wilhelm Windelband Alfred North Whitehead Bertrand Russell Otto Neurath C. D. Broad Michael Polanyi Hans Reichenbach Rudolf Carnap Karl Popper Carl Gustav Hempel W. V. O. Quine Thomas Kuhn Imre Lakatos Paul Feyerabend Ian Hacking Bas van Fraassen Larry Laudan Category Philosophy portal Science portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Inductionism&oldid=1296235856 " Categories : Metatheory of science Inductive reasoning This page was last edited on 18 June 2025, at 19:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Inductionism 4 languages Add topic

