Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Academic career 3 Personal life 4 Selected works 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Emma Dench 3 languages Deutsch Español Igbo Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English ancient historian, classicist, and academic administrator Emma Dench Born 1963 (age 61–62) York , England Title McLean Professor of Ancient and Modern History Spouse Jonathan Bowker Children 1 Parent Jeffery Dench (father) Relatives Judi Dench (aunt) Finty Williams (cousin) Academic background Education Wadham College, Oxford ( MA ) St Hugh's College, Oxford ( DPhil ) Thesis Peoples of the Central Appennines in Roman Ideology to c. 80 B.C.

(1993) Academic work Discipline Classics and Ancient History Sub-discipline History of Rome Roman Empire Roman imperialism Identity in classical antiquity Institutions Hobart and William Smith Colleges Birkbeck College , University of London Harvard University Emma Dench (born 1963) is an English ancient historian , classicist , and academic administrator . She has been McLean Professor of Ancient and Modern History at Harvard University since 2014, and Dean of its Graduate School of Arts and Sciences since 2018. Her previous positions include Professor of Ancient History at Birkbeck, University of London , and Professor of Classics and of History at Harvard.

Early life and education [ edit ] Dench was born in 1963 in York , Yorkshire , England, and grew up near Stratford-upon-Avon , Warwickshire .

[ 1 ] Her father was Jeffery Dench , a Shakespearean actor, and her mother, Betty, was a speech therapist . Her paternal aunt is Judi Dench , an award-winning film actress.

[ 2 ] Emma appeared in the 1968 film version of A Midsummer Night's Dream as Peaseblossom alongside her aunt, who played Titania .

[ 2 ] Dench studied classics at Wadham College, Oxford : [ 1 ] she achieved a first in Honour Moderations in 1984, and graduated from the University of Oxford with a double first class Bachelor of Arts (BA) degree in 1987.

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] As per tradition, her BA was promoted to a Master of Arts (MA Oxon) degree in 1989.

[ 3 ] She then undertook postgraduate research in ancient history at St Hugh's College, Oxford .

[ 1 ] She held the Craven Fellowship at Oxford from 1989 to 1991, and was Rome Scholar at the British School at Rome from 1991 to 1992.

[ 3 ] She completed her Doctor of Philosophy (DPhil) degree in 1993; [ 1 ] her thesis was titled Peoples of the Central Appennines in Roman Ideology to c. 80 B.C.

.

[ 4 ] Academic career [ edit ] Dench began her academic career with just an undergraduate degree. From 1987 to 1988, between graduating with her bachelor's degree and starting her doctorate, she taught classics at Hobart and William Smith Colleges in New York, United States.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] In 1992, Dench joined the faculty of Birkbeck College , University of London .

[ 2 ] She was a lecturer in ancient history between 1992 and 1998, and then, having been promoted, was a senior lecturer between 1998 and 2004.

[ 3 ] In 2002/2003 academic year, she was a member of the School of Historical Studies at the Institute for Advanced Study , Princeton, New Jersey .

[ 1 ] She was appointed a Reader in 2004, and Professor of Ancient History in 2005.

[ 3 ] In the 2005/2006 academic year, she was a visiting professor of the classics and of history at Harvard University .

[ 1 ] From 2007 to 2009, she maintained a link with Birkbeck as a research professor .

[ 3 ] On 1 January 2007, Dench moved to the United States to join the faculty of Harvard University .

[ 3 ] From 2007 to 2015, she was Professor of Classics and of History.

[ 3 ] She was also a Harvard College Professor between 2010 and 2015; it is a title of honour awarded for "outstanding contributions to undergraduate teaching, mentoring and advising".

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] For the 2015/2016 academic year, she was a visiting professor of business administration at Harvard Business School .

[ 6 ] In November 2015, she was appointed McLean Professor of Ancient and Modern History .

[ 7 ] In 2017, she was named Interim Dean of the Graduate School of Arts and Sciences (GSAS) for the 2017/2018 academic year, and was appointed GSAS Dean on 1 July 2018 (since 2023, the GSAS is known as Kenneth C. Griffin Graduate School of Arts and Sciences).

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Dench holds a number of appointments outside of her university faculty positions. She is on the executive committee for Harvard University of the Center for Hellenic Studies in Washington, D.C.

[ 10 ] She held a Loeb Classical Library Foundation Fellowship between 2011 and 2012.

[ 1 ] From 2013 to 2015, she was a member of the Program Committee of the American Philological Association .

[ 3 ] She delivered the Grey Lectures, titled "Agreeing to differ: consensus, culture and politics in the Roman empire", at the University of Cambridge in May 2016.

[ 1 ] [ 11 ] Personal life [ edit ] Dench is a British citizen and a permanent resident of the United States.

[ 3 ] Dench is married to Jonathan Bowker, an artist. Together they have a son, Jacob.

[ 2 ] Selected works [ edit ] Dench, Emma (1995).

From Barbarians to New Men: Greek, Roman, and Modern Perceptions of Peoples from the Central Apennines . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 978-0198150213 .

Dench, Emma (2005).

Romulus' Asylum: Roman Identities from the Age of Alexander to the Age of Hadrian . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0198150510 .

Dench, Emma (2018).

Empire and Political Cultures in the Roman World . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521810722 .

References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j "Emma Dench" .

Scholars at Harvard . Harvard University . Retrieved 27 December 2015 .

^ a b c d e "Emma Dench" .

Harvard Magazine . March 2010 . Retrieved 27 December 2015 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k "Emma DENCH" (PDF) .

Harvard University . Retrieved 26 December 2015 .

^ Dench, Emma (1993).

"Peoples of the central Appennines in Roman ideology to c.80 B.C." Search Oxford Libraries Online . Bodleian Libraries . Retrieved 27 December 2015 .

^ Rayman, Noah S.; Spitzer, Elyssa A. L. (12 May 2010).

"Faculty Awarded Teaching Prizes" .

The Harvard Crimson . Retrieved 27 December 2015 .

^ "Emma Dench" .

Harvard Business School . Archived from the original on 28 November 2015 . Retrieved 27 December 2015 .

^ "Emma Dench receives named chair!" .

Department of the Classics . Harvard University. 19 November 2015 . Retrieved 26 December 2015 .

^ "Emma Dench" .

Department of the Classics . Harvard University . Retrieved 22 December 2017 .

^ Dooher, Kathleen (8 March 2018).

"Dench named dean of Graduate School of Arts and Sciences" .

Harvard Gazette . Retrieved 16 June 2018 .

^ "Personnel" .

The Center for Hellenic Studies . Retrieved 2 January 2024 .

^ "Video & Audio: "Agreeing to differ: consensus, culture and politics in the Roman empire (Prof. Emma Dench)" " .

University of Cambridge . Retrieved 2 January 2024 .

Academic offices Preceded by Steven Ozment McLean Professor of Ancient and Modern History Harvard University 2015 to present Incumbent v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX External links [ edit ] Emma Dench on Harvard History Department Page Emma Dench on Personal Profile at Harvard Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Emma_Dench&oldid=1282238849 " Categories : 1963 births Living people Academics from York Academics of Birkbeck, University of London Alumni of St Hugh's College, Oxford Alumni of Wadham College, Oxford British academic administrators English classical scholars British expatriate academics in the United States Dench family Harvard University Department of History faculty Historians of ancient Rome Institute for Advanced Study visiting scholars British women classical scholars Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2017 Use British English from January 2017 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 25 March 2025, at 05:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Emma Dench 3 languages Add topic

