Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Islands and archipelagoes Toggle Islands and archipelagoes subsection 1.1 Gimnesias 1.2 Pitiusas 2 Extent 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Balearic Sea 66 languages Afrikaans العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Чӑвашла Čeština Corsu Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Македонски मराठी მარგალური مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Shqip کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 40°0′N 1°30′E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.000°N 1.500°E ﻿ / 40.000; 1.500 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of the Mediterranean Sea near the Balearic Islands Balearic Sea Location of the Balearic Sea Location Mediterranean Sea Coordinates 40°00′N 1°30′E ﻿ / ﻿ 40°N 1.5°E ﻿ / 40; 1.5 Limits of the Balearic Sea The Balearic Sea ( endotoponym : Mar Balear in Catalan and Spanish ) also known as Iberian Sea , [ 1 ] is a body of water in the Mediterranean Sea between the Balearic Islands and mainland Spain .

[ 2 ] The Ebro River flows into this small sea.

Islands and archipelagoes [ edit ] The Balearic islands are divided into two groups: Gimnesias in the northeast, and Pitiusas in the southwest.

[ 3 ] Gimnesias [ edit ] Menorca Mallorca Cabrera Pitiusas [ edit ] Ibiza Formentera Es Vedrà ( Sant Josep de sa Talaia , Ibiza ) Extent [ edit ] The International Hydrographic Organization defines the limits of the Balearic Sea as follows: [ 4 ] Between the Islas Baleares and the coast of Spain, bounded: On the Southwest.

A line from Cape Sant Antoni , Valencian Community ( 38°50′N 0°12′E ﻿ / ﻿ 38.833°N 0.200°E ﻿ / 38.833; 0.200 ) to Cape Berberia, the Southwest extreme of Formentera ( Balearic Islands ).

On the Southeast.

The South Coast of Formentera, thence a line from Punta Rotja, its Eastern extreme, to the Southern extreme of Cabrera, Balearic Islands ( 39°07′N 2°54′E ﻿ / ﻿ 39.117°N 2.900°E ﻿ / 39.117; 2.900 ) and to Illa de l'Aire , off the Southern extreme of Menorca .

On the Northeast.

The East coast of Menorca up to Cap Favaritx ( 40°00′N 4°14′E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.000°N 4.233°E ﻿ / 40.000; 4.233 ) thence a line to Cape Sant Sebastià Catalonia ( 41°54′N 3°10′E ﻿ / ﻿ 41.900°N 3.167°E ﻿ / 41.900; 3.167 ).

See also [ edit ] Gulf of Cádiz Gulf of Lion References [ edit ] ^ "Balearic Sea" .

WorldAtlas . 2021-03-21 . Retrieved 2023-07-30 .

^ C.Michael Hogan. 2011.

Balearic Sea . Encyclopedia of Earth. Eds. P.Saundry & C.J.Cleveland. National Council for Science and the Environment. Washington DC ^ "Balearic Islands Map balearic islands sea islands - Worldatlas.com" .

www.worldatlas.com . Retrieved 2017-11-09 .

^ "Limits of Oceans and Seas, 3rd edition" (PDF) . International Hydrographic Organization. 1953 . Retrieved 6 May 2020 .

v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category v t e Marginal seas of the Atlantic Ocean Basins Foxe Basin Bays Baffin Bay Bay of Biscay Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Bothnian Bay Hudson Bay James Bay Pottles Bay Channels English Channel Gulfs Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Seas Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea Greenland Sea Icarian Sea Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea Kattegat Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Skagerrak Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Oceans portal Authority control databases International VIAF Geographic Pleiades 40°0′N 1°30′E ﻿ / ﻿ 40.000°N 1.500°E ﻿ / 40.000; 1.500 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Balearic_Sea&oldid=1299584474 " Categories : Balearic Sea Marginal seas of the Mediterranean Landforms of the Balearic Islands Seas of Spain European seas Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles using infobox body of water without alt Articles using infobox body of water without pushpin map Articles using infobox body of water without alt bathymetry Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 07:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Balearic Sea 66 languages Add topic

