Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geographic differences 2 Roots of the movement 3 Measures to protect animals 4 Anti-hunting organizations 5 Opinion polls 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Opposition to hunting 7 languages বাংলা فارسی Français Lëtzebuergesch தமிழ் Türkçe Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Movement against hunting The examples and perspective in this article may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( July 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Anti-hunting protest, New York City Part of a series on Animal rights Overview Animal welfare Around the world History Timeline Animal cruelty Veganism Vegetarianism Primate rights in research Movement Advocates Vegans Vegetarians Groups Animal abuse Animal–industrial complex Killing Mutilation Wild animals Consumption Dogs Horses Cats Cattle Eating live seafood Bloodsports Bullfighting Hunting Fishing Animal testing Cosmetic Captivity Zoos Circuses Oceanariums Chick culling Fur farming Goldfish swallowing Companion animals Puppy mills Abandonment Ideas Animal ethics Abolitionism Animal protectionism Bambi effect Carnism Personism Sentientism Speciesism Related topics Cultured meat Environmentalism Radical Deep ecology Humanism Welfarism Animals portal v t e Opposition to hunting is espoused by people or groups who object to the practice of hunting , often seeking anti-hunting legislation and sometimes taking on acts of civil disobedience , such as hunt sabotage . Anti-hunting laws, such as the English Hunting Act 2004 , are generally distinguishable from conservation legislation like the American Marine Mammal Protection Act by whether they seek to reduce or prevent hunting for perceived cruelty -related reasons or to regulate hunting for conservation , although the boundaries of distinction are sometimes blurred in specific laws, for example when endangered animals are hunted.

Animal rights activists argue that hunting for sport is cruel, unnecessary, and unethical.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The term anti-hunting is used to describe opponents of hunting; while it does not appear to be pejorative , it is widely used as such by pro-hunting people.

Geographic differences [ edit ] It is difficult to compare strength of anti-hunting sentiment in different countries, for example because the word hunting carries different meanings in the UK and United States. Nonetheless, it is more possible to compare the strength of the anti-hunting movement in different countries, with some having stronger organization, such as in the UK, and some being nearly without it, such as New Zealand. Opinions can vary widely on different surveys even within the same country, and as in all market research , consideration must be given to recent events that made the news and the wording of the questions, both of which can influence results.

[ 3 ] Roots of the movement [ edit ] The Burns Inquiry analysis of the opposition to hunting in the UK included social class , sometimes proposed as a differentiating factor between hunting in the UK and hunting in the United States, [ 4 ] as one among many anti-hunting concerns. Furthermore, they showed the UK's anti-hunting movement was itself only part of a wider, grassroots opposition to hunting in the UK. The Burns Inquiry reported: There are those who have a moral objection to hunting and who are fundamentally opposed to the idea of people gaining pleasure from what they regard as the causing of unnecessary suffering. There are also those who perceive hunting as representing a divisive social class system. Others, as we note below, resent the hunt trespassing on their land, especially when they have been told they are not welcome. They worry about the welfare of the pets and animals and the difficulty of moving around the roads where they live on hunt days. Finally there are those who are concerned about damage to the countryside and other animals, particularly badgers and otters.

[ 5 ] Opposition to hunting is not new.

Victorian era dramatist W. S. Gilbert remarked, " Deer-stalking would be a very fine sport if only the deer had guns." [ 6 ] The UK government's response to the call for bans on hunting, notably rabbit and hare coursing , has historically been to show its support for the interests of farmers, according to political historian Michael Tichelar.

[ 7 ] As recently as 2005, one anti-hare coursing organisation referred to coursing supporters as being made up of "10% Nobs and 90% Yobs".

[ 8 ] An element of class is absent from the hunting debate in the United States where there are not many obvious class differences in hunting habits. Instead the differences in anti-hunting sentiment relates to urban sprawl and increasing population density.

[ 9 ] Because of the abundance of public land in the United States, as high as 75% of the land in some states, one need not be wealthy to have access to huntable land in less densely populated areas.

The democratic perspective on hunting in the United States started as a result of the reaction against English laws restricting game to the crown.

[ 10 ] This is one of the aspects of American culture which formed as a result of that nation's original high number of enclosure refugees from the UK and Ireland . A further distinction between the context of debate on hunting in the UK and US is that US hunting is generally licensed by government agencies, providing licence fee revenue. In contrast to this, hunting in the UK has broadly required only the permission of the landowner or the owner of sporting rights over the land.

Measures to protect animals [ edit ] Some organizations advocate protecting animals from hunters by  spreading deer repellent or human hair (from barber shops) near hunting areas.

[ 1 ] Anti-hunting organizations [ edit ] There are various organizations advocating for anti-hunting legislation and protection of wildlife. These include organizations such as PETA , Humane Society of the United States (HSUS), Center for Biological Diversity , Defenders of Wildlife , etc.

[ 11 ] Though all of them are generally supporting the same idea, they achieve their goal in different ways. PETA, for instance, one of the most prominent organizations of this sort, primarily endorses the idea that we are not allowed to hunt down, exploit or utilize animals for any purposes, whether it is to eat them, wear them or abuse them for entertainment, and that humans as a species are not superior to animals and do not own them.

[ 12 ] PETA uses various methods of spreading their message and targeting specific audiences such as policymakers or businesses that use animals in their production.

[ 13 ] Organizations such as HSUS may also help the endangered animals around the globe directly. For example, " Black Beauty Ranch ", which was founded in 1979 by the HSUS is a sanctuary for endangered exotic animals . The animals living there were saved from various sites around the world where they were being exploited, experimented on or jeopardized in other ways.

[ 14 ] The HSUS is also working with the US government and policymakers to ban activities such as trophy hunting [ 15 ] and cosmetic animal testing .

[ 16 ] Some organizations such as Center for Biological Diversity go as far as to launch a lawsuit to ban damaging hunting practices which jeopardize endangered wildlife .

[ 17 ] Opinion polls [ edit ] Country Polling firm Question Date of polling Source Pro hunting Anti hunting Don't know/ no opinion United Kingdom MORI for League Against Cruel Sports (n=2,032) Do you think fox hunting should be made legal again?

5–11 September 2008 [1] 16 75 9 United Kingdom MORI for BBC (n=2,234) To what extent do you support or oppose a ban on hunting with dogs?

Feb 2005 [2] 26% 47% 27% United Kingdom MORI for RSPCA / IFAW (n=1,983) Do you support the ban [on hunting with dogs] staying in place / being scrapped?

2–8 February 2007 [3] 17 58 24 United States Responsive Management Do you approve or disapprove of legal hunting?

September 2006 [4] 78 16 6 Northern Ireland Millward Brown Is fox hunting cruel?

20–27 March 2006 [5] [ permanent dead link ] 11 79 10 United States Responsive Management Do you approve or disapprove of legal hunting?

1995 [6] 73 22 5 In both 2004 and 2014, voters in Maine, US, rejected a proposed ban on the use of dogs, bait, and traps while hunting black bears .  Polls preceding the 2014 vote had predicted the measure would be rejected.

[ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Animal welfare Bambi effect Class struggle Conservation biology Hunting law Speciesism Hunt Saboteurs Association List of animal rights groups References [ edit ] ^ a b "Why Sport Hunting Is Cruel and Unnecessary" .

PETA . 2003-12-15 . Retrieved 2020-03-20 .

^ "Hunting" .

Animal Ethics . Retrieved 2020-03-20 .

^ Moon, N. (1999).

Opinion polls: History, theory and practice . Manchester University Press.

^ Could Deer Hunting Be Banned In England?

Archived 2010-12-27 at the Wayback Machine , January 2005, The Hunting Report ^ Burns Inquiry report, para 4.12 ^ Grossmith, George in The Daily Telegraph , 7 June 1911 ^ Tichelar, M. (2006) ‘Putting Animals into Politics’: The Labour Party and Hunting in the First Half of the Twentieth Century, Rural History , 17: 213-234 (the reason) "...private members bills introduced in 1949 designed to prohibit hunting and coursing...were defeated was the strong desire of the Government to preserve its relationship with the farmers and the wider rural community ^ "FAACE comment on hare coursing" . Archived from the original on 2007-02-08 . Retrieved 2007-04-18 .

^ "The Elusive Hunter" .

Newsweek . 2006-12-04. Archived from the original on 2006-11-27 . Retrieved January 10, 2007 .

^ "The Elusive Hunter" .

Newsweek . 2006-12-04. p. 3. Archived from the original on 2007-05-24 . Retrieved January 10, 2007 .

^ Robb, Bob (July 19, 2019).

"10 Anti-Hunting Organizations" .

Grand View Outdoors . Retrieved May 29, 2022 .

^ "All About PETA" .

PETA . 2010-07-02 . Retrieved 2022-05-29 .

^ "What Is PETA?" .

The Balance Small Business . Retrieved 2022-05-29 .

^ "Black Beauty Ranch" .

The Humane Society of the United States . Retrieved 2022-05-29 .

^ "Banning Trophy Hunting" .

The Humane Society of the United States . Retrieved 2022-05-29 .

^ "Ending Cosmetics Animal Testing" .

The Humane Society of the United States . Retrieved 2022-05-29 .

^ "Lawsuit Launched to Stop Damaging Hunting Practices From Killing Endangered Wildlife on Refuges" .

Center for Biological Diversity . Retrieved 2022-05-29 .

^ "Poll: A majority of Mainers oppose ban on bear-baiting" . 26 October 2014.

External links [ edit ] The Science and Sociology of Hunting: Shifting Practices and Perceptions in the United States and Great Britain from The State of the Animals II: 2003 ISBN 0-9658942-7-4 American Hunt Saboteurs Association Bath and Bristol Hunt Sabs League Against Cruel Sports, anti-hunting page The Hunt Saboteurs Association v t e Animal rights Topics (overviews, concepts, issues, cases) Overviews Movement History ( Ancient world ) Timeline Europe United States By country or territory Argentina Australia Austria Azerbaijan Brazil Canada China Denmark Ethiopia France Germany Hong Kong India Indonesia Iran Israel Italy Japan Malaysia Mexico Netherlands Russia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland United Kingdom United States Anarchism Punk subculture Religion Christianity Indian religions Islam Women Concepts Abolitionism Ahimsa Animal cognition Animal consciousness Animal–industrial complex Animal law Animal machine Animal protectionism Animal trial Animal welfare Animal-free agriculture Anthropocentrism Argument from marginal cases Cambridge Declaration on Consciousness New York Declaration on Animal Consciousness Carnism Equal consideration of interests Emotion in animals Ethics of eating meat Ethics of uncertain sentience Holocaust analogy Insects in ethics Intrinsic value Meat paradox Mentophobia Moral circle expansion Nonviolence Nonkilling Open rescue Opposition to hunting Painism Personism Replaceability argument Sentientism Speciesism Total liberation Veganism Vegaphobia Vegetarianism Issues Animal husbandry Animal product Animal husbandry Battery cage Bile bear Chick culling Crocodiles CAFOs Cow-calf separation Feedback Fish Foam depopulation Fur Fur trade Insects Intensive Pigs Livestock Live export Poultry Wildlife Slaughter Slaughterhouse Ventilation shutdown Blood sport Badger-baiting Bear-baiting Boar-baiting Bull-baiting Donkey-baiting Duck-baiting Hog-baiting Human-baiting Hyena-baiting Lion-baiting Monkey-baiting Rat-baiting Wolf-baiting Cruelty Pest control ( Varmint hunting ) Sacrifice Working animal Animal testing History Alternatives Regulations Countries banning non-human ape experimentation Non-human primates Cosmetics Model organism Vivisection ( Anti-vivisection movement ) Organizations Huntingdon Life Sciences Nafovanny Green Scare ( Operation Backfire ) Animal welfare Abandoned pets Captivity Euthanasia ( insects ) Farmed insects Killing of animals Live food Pain Amphibians Cephalopods Crustaceans Fish Invertebrates Laboratory animals Sports Fishing Bait Commercial Farming Recreational Wild animals Culling Farming Hunting Techniques Coursing Spotlighting Trail hunting Trapping Treeing Trophy hunting Upland hunting Animals Alligators Bats Bears Birds Bison Boar Raccoons Deer Dolphins Foxes Hares Jackals Lions Mink Petrels Quail Rabbit Rooks Seals Squirrels Tigers Turtles Waterfowl Wild birds Whales Wolves Management Predation problem Suffering Trade Primates Ivory Welfare Cases Brown Dog affair Cambridge University primates McLibel case Monkey selfie copyright dispute Pit of despair SHAC Silver Spring monkeys University of California, Riverside 1985 laboratory raid Unnecessary Fuss War of the currents Studies Animal ethics Anthrozoology Critical animal studies Ethology Vegan studies Methodologies Direct Action Everywhere Hunt sabotage Observances World Animal Day World Day for Farmed Animals World Day for the End of Speciesism World Day for Laboratory Animals World Day for the End of Fishing World Vegan Day World Vegetarian Day Advocates (academics, writers, activists) Academics and writers Contemporary Carol J. Adams Aysha Akhtar Kristin Andrews Marc Bekoff Steven Best Paola Cavalieri Stephen R. L. Clark Alasdair Cochrane J. M. Coetzee Alice Crary David DeGrazia Daniel Dombrowski Sue Donaldson Josephine Donovan Joan Dunayer Mylan Engel Catia Faria Lawrence Finsen Michael W. Fox Gary L. Francione Robert Garner Valéry Giroux Lori Gruen John Hadley Oscar Horta Christine Korsgaard Dale Jamieson Kyle Johannsen Melanie Joy Hilda Kean Will Kymlicka Renan Larue Thomas Lepeltier Andrew Linzey Clair Linzey Dan Lyons David Nibert Martha Nussbaum Clare Palmer Charles Patterson David Pearce Jessica Pierce Evelyn Pluhar Mark Rowlands Richard D. Ryder Steve F. Sapontzis Jeff Sebo Jérôme Segal Peter Singer Gary Steiner Cass Sunstein David Sztybel Michael Tye Tatjana Višak Paul Waldau Corey Lee Wrenn Historical Tom Beauchamp Jeremy Bentham David Renaud Boullier Stephen St. C. Bostock Brigid Brophy Peter Buchan Mona Caird Priscilla Cohn Sherry Colb Henry Crowe Herman Daggett Richard Dean Wilhelm Dietler William Hamilton Drummond Edward Payson Evans T. Forster John Galsworthy Thomas G. Gentry V. A. Holmes-Gore Arthur Helps John Hildrop John Zephaniah Holwell Francis Hutcheson Soame Jenyns Marie Jungius Karl Christian Friedrich Krause John Lawrence Charles R. Magel Jean Meslier Mary Midgley J. Howard Moore José Ferrater Mora Robert Morris Leonard Nelson Edward Nicholson Siobhan O'Sullivan John Oswald Rod Preece Humphrey Primatt James Rachels Tom Regan Joseph Ritson Nathaniel Peabody Rogers Bernard Rollin Henry Stephens Salt Arthur Schopenhauer Laurids Smith John Styles Thomas Tryon Gary Varner Johann Friedrich Ludwig Volckmann Mary Anne Warren Adam Gottlieb Weigen Johann Heinrich Winckler Steven M. Wise Jon Wynne-Tyson Voltaire Thomas Young Activists Contemporary James Aspey Greg Avery Matt Ball Martin Balluch Carole Baskin Barbi Twins Brigitte Bardot Gene Baur Yves Bonnardel Joey Carbstrong Aymeric Caron Jake Conroy Rod Coronado Karen Dawn Chris DeRose John Feldmann Bruce Friedrich Juliet Gellatley Tal Gilboa Antoine Goetschel Mark Gold Brigitte Gothière Alex Hershaft Wayne Hsiung Charlotte Laws Ronnie Lee Howard Lyman Evanna Lynch Bill Maher Keith Mann Jim Mason Dan Mathews Joaquin Phoenix Jo-Anne McArthur Luísa Mell Virginia McKenna Morrissey Ingrid Newkirk Heather Nicholson Jack Norris Ric O'Barry David Olivier Alex Pacheco Craig Rosebraugh Jasmin Singer Kim Stallwood Lynda Stoner Marianne Thieme Darren Thurston Christine Townend Wendy Turner-Webster Jerry Vlasak Louise Wallis Ed Winters Gary Yourofsky That Vegan Teacher Historical Cleveland Amory Henry B. Amos Bob Barker Ernest Bell William Brown Edith Carrington Joseph Collinson Frances Power Cobbe Joan Court Karen Davis Royal Dixon Muriel Dowding Elizabeth Farians Emarel Freshel André Géraud Lewis Gompertz James Granger Barry Horne Marie Huot Lizzy Lind af Hageby Jessie Mackay Alfred Mansfield Mitchell J. Isaac Pengelly Norm Phelps Jill Phipps Maud Ingersoll Probasco Hans Ruesch Magnus Schwantje Nell Shipman Henry Spira Joseph Stratton Andrew Tyler Gretchen Wyler Movement (groups, parties) Groups Contemporary American Anti-Vivisection Society Animal Aid Animal Ethics Animal Justice Animal Justice Project Animal Legal Defense Fund Animal Liberation Animal Liberation Front Animal Liberation Press Office Animal Liberation Victoria Animal Rights Militia Animal Rising AnimaNaturalis Anti-Vivisection Coalition Anonymous for the Voiceless Beauty Without Cruelty Born Free Foundation Centre for Animals and Social Justice Chinese Animal Protection Network Cruelty Free International Direct Action Everywhere Doctors Against Animal Experiments Equanimal Every Animal Farm Animal Rights Movement Faunalytics Great Ape Project Hunt Saboteurs Association In Defense of Animals Korea Animal Rights Advocates L214 Last Chance for Animals Massachusetts Animal Rights Coalition Mercy for Animals Oxford Centre for Animal Ethics People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Revolutionary Cells – Animal Liberation Brigade Rise for Animals Sentience Politics Uncaged Campaigns United Activists for Animal Rights United Poultry Concerns UPF-Centre for Animal Ethics Viva!

Voice for Animals Humane Society Voiceless Historical Canadian Anti-Vivisection Society Humanitarian League (1891–1919) Millennium Guild Order of the Golden Age Oxford Group Parties Animal Justice Party (Australia) Animal Politics EU (Europe) Animal Protection Party of Canada (Canada) Animal Justice Party of Finland (Finland) Animals' Party (Sweden) Animalist Movement (Italy) Animalist Party with the Environment (Spain) DierAnimal (Belgium) Human Environment Animal Protection Party (Germany) Italian Animalist Party (Italy) Party for the Animals (Netherlands) People Animals Nature (Portugal) V-Partei³ (Germany) Activism Animal Rights National Conference Media (books, films, periodicals, albums) Books On Abstinence from Eating Animals (3rd century) A Reasonable Plea for the Animal Creation (1746) A System of Moral Philosophy, in Three Books (1755) The Cry of Nature (1791) An Essay on Humanity to Animals (1798) An Essay on Abstinence from Animal Food, as a Moral Duty (1802) Moral Inquiries on the Situation of Man and of Brutes (1824) The Rights of Animals (1838) The Ethics of Diet (1883) A Plea for Vegetarianism and Other Essays (1886) Animals' Rights: Considered in Relation to Social Progress (1892) Evolutional Ethics and Animal Psychology (1897) Better-World Philosophy (1899) The Logic of Vegetarianism (1899) The Universal Kinship (1906) The New Ethics (1907) Animals, Men and Morals (1971) Animal Liberation (1975) The Case for Animal Rights (1983) Morals, Reason, and Animals (1987) Zoos and Animal Rights (1993) Animals, Property, and the Law (1995) The Lives of Animals (1999) Eternal Treblinka (2001) Do Animals Have Rights?

(2005) Striking at the Roots (2008) An American Trilogy (2009) An Introduction to Animals and Political Theory (2010) Animal Rights Without Liberation (2012) Political Animals and Animal Politics (2014) Animal (De)liberation (2016) Beating Hearts: Abortion and Animal Rights (2016) Sentientist Politics (2018) Wild Animal Ethics (2020) Animal Ethics in the Wild (2022) Making a Stand for Animals (2022) Animal Rights Law (2023) The Moral Circle (2025) Films The Animals Film (1981) A Cow at My Table (1998) Shores of Silence (2000) The Witness (2000) Meet Your Meat (2002) Legally Blonde 2 (2003) The Meatrix (2003) Peaceable Kingdom (2004) Earthlings (2005) Behind the Mask (2006) Your Mommy Kills Animals (2007) Food, Inc.

(2009) The Cove (2009) Peaceable Kingdom: The Journey Home (2009) Forks Over Knives (2011) Vegucated (2011) An Apology to Elephants (2013) Speciesism: The Movie (2013) The Ghosts in Our Machine (2013) Unlocking the Cage (2016) Land of Hope and Glory (2017) Carnage (2017) Okja (2017) Dominion (2018) Seaspiracy (2021) Periodicals Journals Animal Sentience Between the Species Cahiers antispécistes Etica & Animali Journal of Animal Ethics Relations. Beyond Anthropocentrism The Animals' Defender Magazines Arkangel Bite Back Muutoksen kevät No Compromise Satya Albums Animal Liberation (1987) Tame Yourself (1991) Manifesto (2008) Salvation of Innocents (2014) Onward to Freedom (2014) Fairs and exhibitions Holocaust on your Plate (2003) Category ( 138 ) v t e Hunting topics History Ancient Egypt Hunter-gatherer Medieval hunting Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty North American hunting technologies Forms Bat-fowling Beagling Bowhunting Big-game hunting Coursing Game stalkering Gigging Green hunting Falconry Eagles Field sports Fowling Handgun hunting Internet hunting Layout hunting Montería Muttonbirding Persistence hunting Pest control Plume hunting Spotlighting Trophy hunting Trapping Trail hunting Treeing Upland hunting Varmint hunting Venatio Waterfowl hunting Equipment Camouflage Game call Duck call Ghillie suit Hunting bag Hunting weapon Air gun Assegai Bow and arrow Bear spear Boar spear Boomerang Blowgun Crossbow Pistol Punt gun Rifle Spear-thrower Shotgun Sword Throwing stick Silencer Shooting brake Shooting sticks Game Alligator Bear Big five Bison Boar Raccoon Deer Stalking Fox Hare Human Headhunting Jackal Mink Plains game Rabbit Rook Tiger Turkey Turtle Lion Quail Wolf With dogs Seal Squirrel Poaching Whale Aboriginal Dolphin drive hunting Subsistence hunting of the bowhead whale Infrastructure Buffalo jump Buffalo pound Chase (land) Deer park (England) Deer forest Desert kite Game larder Game reserve Game farm Guest ranch Hunting blind Bird hide Salter Sporting lodge Jagdschloss Wolf trap By location Australia Dugong Kangaroo Azerbaijan Tiger Cambodia Chad Elephant Greenland Reindeer India Tiger poaching Rhino poaching in Assam Kenya Elephant New Zealand Helicopter-based hunting in Fiordland Pakistan Trophy hunting Russia Romania Spain Switzerland Federal hunting reserves Tonga Pigeon United States Alaska United Kingdom Driven grouse shooting Regulation and conservation Bag Bag limits Conservation officer Deer management Game Act 1831 Game law Game preservation Hunting license Hunting Act 2004 Hunting season Poaching Sustainable hunting Culture Bambi effect Blooding Canned hunt Car hawking Duck ague Falconry training and technique Fair chase Field dressing Gamekeepers in the United Kingdom Gillie Hunting dog Gun dog Hunting magic List of hunting deities List of big-game hunters Opposition to hunting Parahawking Professional hunter Killing of Cecil the lion Raptor persecution Safety orange Safari Take Tracking Wild Hunt White hunter Organizations Boone and Crockett Club Countryside Alliance Ducks Unlimited Federation of Associations for Hunting and Conservation of the EU Finnish Hunters' Association Hunt Saboteurs Association Humane Society of the United States League Against Cruel Sports North American Falconers Association People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals Safari Club International Other Bowfishing Bounty hunter Blood sport Drag hunting Field trial Fur trade Ghost hunting Hunting hypothesis Hunting strategy Honey hunting Insect collecting Mushroom hunting Orchid hunting Overview of gun laws by nation Pearl hunting Spearfishing Wildlife farming Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Opposition_to_hunting&oldid=1296055446 " Categories : Anti-hunting movement Gun politics Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from July 2020 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 17 June 2025, at 14:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Opposition to hunting 7 languages Add topic

