Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Stages of interphase 2 Interphase within sequences of cellular processes Toggle Interphase within sequences of cellular processes subsection 2.1 Interphase and the cell cycle 2.2 Interphase and other cellular processes 3 See also 4 Interphase (Materials) 5 References Toggle the table of contents Interphase 40 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Български Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Galego Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Македонски 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia G1, S and G2 phases of the cell cycle Not to be confused with Interface (chemistry) .

This article is about the phase in the cell cycle. For the video game, see Interphase (video game) .

An illustration of interphase. The chromatin has not yet condensed, and the cell is undergoing its normal functions.

An image of the nucleus of a cell ( HT1080 ) currently in interphase (likely G1).  Note: Cytoplasm of this cell or the neighboring cell is not visible (top-left), which is currently in the telophase of mitosis . Image taken using an optical microscope and DAPI staining of DNA.

Interphase is the active portion of the cell cycle that includes the G1 , S , and G2 phases, where the cell grows , replicates its DNA , and prepares for mitosis , respectively. Interphase was formerly called the " resting phase ," but the cell in interphase is not simply dormant . Calling it so would be misleading since a cell in interphase is very busy synthesizing proteins , transcribing DNA into RNA , engulfing extracellular material , and processing signals , to name just a few activities. The cell is quiescent only in G0 . Interphase is the phase of the cell cycle in which a typical cell spends 90% of its life. Interphase is the "daily living" or metabolic phase of the cell, in which the cell obtains nutrients and metabolizes them, grows, replicates its DNA in preparation for mitosis , and conducts other "normal" cell functions.

[ 1 ] A common misconception is that interphase is the first stage of mitosis , but since mitosis is the division of the nucleus , prophase is actually the first stage.

[ 2 ] In interphase, the cell gets itself ready for mitosis or meiosis .

Somatic cells , or normal diploid cells of the body, go through mitosis in order to reproduce themselves through cell division, whereas diploid germ cells (i.e., primary spermatocytes and primary oocytes ) go through meiosis in order to create haploid gametes (i.e., sperm and ova ) for the purpose of sexual reproduction.

Stages of interphase [ edit ] There are three stages of cellular interphase, with each phase ending when a cellular checkpoint checks the accuracy of the stage's completion before proceeding to the next. The stages of interphase are: G 1 (Gap 1), in this phase the cell grows and functions normally. During this time, a high amount of protein synthesis occurs and the cell grows (to about double its original size) – more organelles are produced and the volume of the cytoplasm increases. If the cell is not to divide again, it will enter G 0 .

[ 3 ] Synthesis (S), in this phase the cell synthesizes its DNA and the amount of DNA is doubled but the number of chromosomes remains constant (via semiconservative replication ).

G 2 (Gap 2), in this phase the cell resumes its growth in preparation for division. The cell continues to grow until mitosis begins. In plants, chloroplasts divide during G2.

In addition, some cells that do not divide often or ever, enter a stage called G 0 (Gap zero), which is either a stage separate from interphase or an extended G 1 .

The duration of time spent in interphase and in each stage of interphase is variable and depends on both the type of cell and the species of organism it belongs to. Most cells of adult mammals spend about 24 hours in interphase; this accounts for about 90%-96% of the total time involved in cell division.

[ 4 ] Interphase includes G1, S, and G2 phases.

Mitosis and cytokinesis , however, are separate from interphase.

DNA double-strand breaks can be repaired during interphase by two principal processes.

[ 5 ] The first process, non-homologous end joining (NHEJ), can join the two broken ends of DNA in the G1 , S and G2 phases of interphase. The second process, homologous recombinational repair (HRR), is more accurate than NHEJ in repairing double-strand breaks. However HRR is only active during the S and G2 phases of interphase when DNA replication is either partially or fully accomplished, since HRR requires two adjacent homologous chromosomes .

Interphase within sequences of cellular processes [ edit ] Interphase and the cell cycle [ edit ] When G 2 is completed, the cell enters a relatively brief period of nuclear and cellular division, composed of mitosis and cytokinesis, respectively. After the successful completion of mitosis and cytokinesis, both resulting daughter cells re-enter G 1 of interphase.

In the cell cycle , interphase is preceded by telophase and cytokinesis of the M phase . In alternative fashion, interphase is sometimes interrupted by G 0 phase , which, in some circumstances, may then end and be followed by the remaining stages of interphase. After the successful completion of the G 2 checkpoint , the final checkpoint in interphase, the cell proceeds to prophase , or in plants to preprophase , which is the first stage of mitosis.

G 0 phase is viewed as either an extended G 1 phase where the cell is neither dividing nor preparing to divide, or as a distinct quiescent stage which occurs outside of the cell cycle.

[ 6 ] Interphase and other cellular processes [ edit ] In gamete production, interphase is succeeded by meiosis . In programmed cell death , interphase is followed or preempted by apoptosis .

See also [ edit ] Prophase Prometaphase Metaphase Anaphase Telophase Cytokinesis Cytoskeleton Interphase (Materials) [ edit ] The transition region between two materials. For example between the fibre and matrix of a composite material .

References [ edit ] ^ Marieb E (2000).

Essentials of human anatomy and physiology . San Francisco: Benjamin Cummings.

ISBN 978-0805349405 .

^ "The Cell Cycle & Mitosis Tutorial" .

The Biology Project – Cell Biology . University of Arizona.

^ Cummings MR (2014).

Human Heredity: Principles and Issues (10th ed.). Belmont, CA: Brooks/Cole. pp.

28– 29.

^ Mader SS (2007).

Biology (9th ed.). Boston, MA, USA: McGraw Hill Higher Education.

ISBN 978-0-07-325839-3 .

^ Shibata A.  Regulation of repair pathway choice at two-ended DNA double-strand breaks.  Mutat Res. 2017 Oct;803-805:51-55. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2017.07.011. Epub 2017 Jul 29. Review. PMID 28781144 ^ Cram E.

"Re: Are the cells in the G0 (g zero) phase of mitosis really suspended?" .

MadScience Network . Molecular and Cellular Biology, University of California, Berkeley. 1999.

v t e Cell cycle proteins Cyclin A ( A1 , A2 ) B ( B1 , B2 , B3) D ( D1 , D2 , D3 ) E ( E1 , E2 ) CDK 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11A 11B 12 13 14 CDK-activating kinase CDK inhibitor INK4a/ARF ( p14arf / p16 , p15 , p18 , p19 ) cip/kip ( p21 , p27 , p57 ) P53 p63 p73 family p53 p63 p73 Other Cdc2 Cdc25 Cdc42 Cellular apoptosis susceptibility protein E2F Maturation promoting factor Wee Cullin ( CUL7 ) Phases and checkpoints Interphase G 1 phase S phase G 2 phase M phase Mitosis ( Preprophase Prophase Prometaphase Metaphase Anaphase Telophase ) Cytokinesis Cell cycle checkpoints Restriction point Spindle checkpoint Postreplication checkpoint Other cellular phases Apoptosis G 0 phase Meiosis Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Interphase&oldid=1306175273 " Categories : Mitosis Cell biology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 09:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Interphase 40 languages Add topic

