Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Education 2 Career 3 Awards 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Melvin Hochster 7 languages العربية Deutsch Français Kreyòl ayisyen مصرى Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American mathematician (born 1943) This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Melvin Hochster" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Melvin Hochster Born ( 1943-08-02 ) August 2, 1943 (age 82) New York City , New York , United States Nationality American Alma mater Princeton University (Ph.D.) Harvard University (B.A.) Awards Guggenheim Fellowship (1981) Cole Prize (1980) Putnam Fellow (1960) Scientific career Fields Mathematics Institutions University of Michigan Thesis Prime Ideal Structure in Commutative Rings (1967) Doctoral advisor Goro Shimura Doctoral students Karen E. Smith Emily E. Witt Melvin Hochster (born August 2, 1943) is an American mathematician working in commutative algebra .  He is currently the Jack E. McLaughlin Distinguished University Professor Emeritus of Mathematics at the University of Michigan .

Education [ edit ] Hochster attended Stuyvesant High School , [ 1 ] where he was captain of the Math Team, and received a B.A.

from Harvard University .  While at Harvard, he was a Putnam Fellow in 1960.

[ 2 ] He earned his Ph.D.

in 1967 from Princeton University , where he wrote a dissertation under Goro Shimura characterizing the prime spectra of commutative rings .

[ 3 ] Career [ edit ] He held positions at the University of Minnesota and Purdue University before joining the faculty at Michigan in 1977.

Hochster's work is primarily in commutative algebra , especially the study of modules over local rings .  He has established classic theorems concerning Cohen–Macaulay rings , invariant theory and homological algebra .  For example, the Hochster–Roberts theorem states that the invariant ring of a linearly reductive group acting on a regular ring is Cohen–Macaulay.  His best-known work is on the homological conjectures , many of which he established for local rings containing a field, thanks to his proof of the existence of big Cohen–Macaulay modules and his technique of reduction to prime characteristic .  His most recent work on tight closure , introduced in 1986 with Craig Huneke , has found unexpected applications throughout commutative algebra and algebraic geometry .

He has had more than 40 doctoral students, and the Association for Women in Mathematics has pointed out his outstanding role in mentoring women students pursuing a career in mathematics. He served as the chair of the department of Mathematics at the University of Michigan from 2008 to 2017.

Awards [ edit ] Hochster shared the 1980 Cole Prize with Michael Aschbacher , received a Guggenheim Fellowship in 1981, and has been a member of both the National Academy of Sciences and the American Academy of Arts and Sciences since 1992. In 2008, on the occasion of his 65th birthday, he was honored with a conference in Ann Arbor and with a special volume of the Michigan Mathematical Journal .

See also [ edit ] Monomial conjecture References [ edit ] Hochster, Melvin (1975).

Topics in the homological theory of modules over commutative rings . Providence: American Mathematical Society.

ISBN 0-8218-1674-8 .

Hochster, Melvin; Huneke, Craig (1993).

Phantom homology . Providence: American Mathematical Society.

ISBN 0-8218-2556-9 .

Huneke, Craig (2008), Mathematical biography of Melvin Hochster , vol. 57, Michigan Mathematical Journal ^ "Stuyvesant Math Team, Spring 1960" . Archived from the original on 2011-05-29 . Retrieved 2007-10-31 .

^ "Putnam Competition Individual and Team Winners" .

Mathematical Association of America . Retrieved December 12, 2021 .

^ Melvin Hochster at the Mathematics Genealogy Project External links [ edit ] Scholia has a profile for Melvin Hochster (Q263909) .

Melvin Hochster at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Hochster's home page at Michigan Some expository papers by Mel Hochster Hochster's blurb at the National Academies The University Record (October 8, 2004) Men and the AWM Page of the conference in honor of Mel Hochster (2008) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Norway Israel Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Melvin_Hochster&oldid=1277567896 " Categories : Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences 20th-century American mathematicians 21st-century American mathematicians American algebraists Stuyvesant High School alumni Harvard University alumni Princeton University alumni University of Michigan faculty Purdue University faculty University of Minnesota faculty Putnam Fellows Living people 1943 births Scientists from New York City Mathematicians from New York (state) Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata BLP articles lacking sources from February 2013 All BLP articles lacking sources Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 25 February 2025, at 12:12 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Melvin Hochster 7 languages Add topic

