Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Reforms Toggle Reforms subsection 1.1 Excerpt of some regulations from the Reform document 2 Praise poem of Urukagina 3 Lament about the fall of Lagash to Umma 4 See also 5 Notes 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Urukagina 36 languages አማርኛ العربية Беларуская Bosanski Català Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ქართული Lietuvių Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 24th century BC Mesopotamian King Urukagina 𒌷𒅗𒄀𒈾 Fragment of an inscription of Urukagina; it reads as follows: "He [Uruinimgina] dug (…) the canal to the town-of-NINA. At its beginning, he built the Eninnu; at its ending, he built the Esiraran." Musée du Louvre .

[ 1 ] King of Lagash Reign c. 2378 – c. 2372 BC Predecessor Lugalanda Successor Possibly Meszi Died c. 2370 BC Dynasty 1st Dynasty of Lagash Religion Sumerian religion Lagash class=notpageimage| Location of Lagash Title "Urakagina king of Girsu" ( 𒌷𒅗𒄀𒈾 𒈗 𒄈𒋢𒆠 ), Urukagina lugal Girsu-ki ), in the "Lamentation for the destruction of Umma".

[ 2 ] Uru-ka-gina , Uru-inim-gina , or Iri-ka-gina ( Sumerian : 𒌷𒅗𒄀𒈾 URU - KA -gi.na ; died c.

2370 BC) was King of the city-states of Lagash and Girsu in Mesopotamia , and the last ruler of the 1st Dynasty of Lagash.

[ 3 ] He assumed the title of king , claiming to have been divinely appointed, upon the downfall of his corrupt predecessor, Lugalanda .

He is best known for his reforms to combat corruption, which are sometimes cited as the first example of a legal code in recorded history . Although the actual text has not been discovered, much of its content may be surmised from other references to it that have been found. In it, he exempted widows and orphans from taxes; compelled the city to pay funeral expenses (including the ritual food and drink libations for the journey of the dead into the lower world); and decreed that the rich must use silver when purchasing from the poor, and if the poor does not wish to sell, the powerful man (the rich man or the priest) cannot force him to do so.

[ 4 ] He also participated in several conflicts, notably a losing border conflict with Uruk . In the seventh year of his reign, Uruk fell under the leadership of Lugal-zage-si , énsi of Umma , who ultimately annexed most of the territory of Lagash and established the first reliably documented kingdom to encompass all of Sumer. The destruction of Lagash was described in a lament (possibly the earliest recorded example of what would become a prolific Sumerian literary genre), which stressed that "the men of Umma ... committed a sin against Ningirsu . ... Offence there was none in Urukagina, king of Girsu, but as for Lugal-Zage-Si, governor of Umma, may his goddess Nisaba make him carry his sin upon his neck".

[ 5 ] Lugal-Zage-Si himself was soon defeated and his kingdom was annexed by Sargon of Akkad .

Reforms [ edit ] Urukagina's code has been widely hailed as the first recorded example of government reform, seeking to achieve a higher level of freedom and equality .

[ 6 ] It limited the power of the priesthood and large property owners, and took measures against usury , burdensome controls, hunger, theft, murder, and seizure (of people's property and persons); as he states, "The widow and the orphan were no longer at the mercy of the powerful man". Here, the word "freedom" (" ama-gi "), appears for the first time in recorded history.

[ 7 ] Despite these apparent attempts to curb the excesses of the elite class, it seems elite or royal women enjoyed even greater influence and prestige in his reign than previously. Urukagina greatly expanded the royal "Household of Women" from about 50 persons to about 1,500 persons, renamed it the "Household of goddess Bau ", gave it ownership of vast amounts of land confiscated from the former priesthood, and placed it under the supervision of his wife, Shasha (or Shagshag).

[ 8 ] In his second year of reign, Shasha presided over the lavish funeral of his predecessor's queen, Baranamtarra , who had been an important personage in her own right.

In addition to such changes, two of his other surviving decrees, first published and translated by Samuel Kramer in 1964, have attracted controversy in recent decades. First, he seems to have abolished the former custom of polyandry in his country, on pain of the woman taking multiple husbands being stoned with rocks upon which her crime is written.

[ 9 ] Second is a statute stating that "if a woman says [text illegible...] to a man, her mouth is crushed with burnt bricks." No comparable laws from Urukagina addressing penalties for adultery by men have survived. The discovery of these fragments has led some modern critics to assert that they provide "the first written evidence of the degradation of women".

[ 10 ] Some historians assert that the reforms of Urukagina were inspired or copied a reform that was enacted by Entemena : "[...] Because of the wheat, he sent an envoy to him( Ur-Lumma ), and made him say 'You must send my wheat to here!', but Ur-Lumma showed aggressive actions toward this. He said, 'Antasura is mine! It is my border area!' He conscripted the Umma people, and selected (mercenaries) from various countries. On the 'Ugigga' field, which is loved by Ningirsu , the army of Umma was almost annihilated. When the Umma king, Ur-Lumma, retreated, on the basin of the Lumagir-nunta canal, he met 'him'. His donkeys, 60 groups, were left behind, and their individual bones were left on the field." [ 11 ] [ 12 ] — RIME 1.09.09.03, ex. 01 (P222610), column 4, row 1-30 As Enmetena was the Lagash king who fough Ur-Lumma, and the details of the reform are written on the same plaque, historians including Kim San-hae has claimed this.

Excerpt of some regulations from the Reform document [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) "Reforms" cone of Urukagina Cone of Urukagina, Louvre Museum AO 3278 [ 13 ] Cone of Urukagina (transcription). Here Urukagina appears as "King of Lagash " From the border territory of Ningirsu to the sea, no person shall serve as officers.

For a corpse being brought to the grave, his beer shall be 3 jugs and his bread 80 loaves. One bed and one lead goat shall the undertaker take away, and 3 ban [about 18 liters] of barley shall the person(s) take away.

When to the reeds of Enki a person has been brought, his beer will be 4 jugs, and his bread 420 loaves. One barig [about 36 liters] of barley shall the undertaker take away, and 3 ban [about 18 L] of barley shall the persons of ... take away. One woman's headband, and one sila [about 1 L] of princely fragrance shall the eresh-dingir [ clarification needed ] priestess take away. 420 loaves of bread that have sat are the bread duty, 40 loaves of hot bread are for eating, and 10 loaves of hot bread are the bread of the table. 5 loaves of bread are for the persons of the levy, 2 mud vessels and 1 sadug [ clarification needed ] vessel of beer are for the lamentation singers of Girsu. 490 loaves of bread, 2 mud vessels and 1 sadug vessel of beer are for the lamentation singers of Lagash. 406 loaves of bread, 2 mud vessels, and 1 sadug vessel of beer are for the other lamentation singers. 250 loaves of bread and one mud vessel of beer are for the old wailing women. 180 loaves of bread and 1 mud vessel of beer are for the men of Nigin.

The blind one who stands in ..., his bread for eating is one loaf, 5 loaves of bread are his at midnight, one loaf is his bread at midday, and 6 loaves are his bread in the evening.

60 loaves of bread, 1 mud vessel of beer, and 3 ban of barley are for the person who is to perform as the sagbur [ clarification needed ] priest, king, or god.

Cone fragment inscribed with part of the text of the reforms of Uruinimgina (Urukagina) - Oriental Institute Museum, University of Chicago Reform cone of Urukagina Louvre Museum AO 3149 [ 14 ] Transcription of cone AO3149. Urkagina appears as "King of Lagash".

The Reforms of Urukagina . 20th century reconstitution.

Reform text of Urukagina, king of Lagash. From Girsu, Iraq. 24th century BC. Ancient Orient Museum, Istanbul .

Praise poem of Urukagina [ edit ] An account of barley rations issued monthly to adults and children written in Cuneiform on clay tablet, written in year 4 of King Urukagina (c. 2350 BC). From Girsu, Iraq.

British Museum , London.

[ 15 ] Some insight into Sumerian values can be gained from praise poems written for kings. While the kings may not always live up to this praise they show the type of achievements that they wished to be remembered by. Extracts below praise Urukagina who appears as a social reformer, getting rid of gross abuses of power that had taken hold in Lagash.

Since time immemorial, since life began, in those days, the head boatman appropriated boats, the livestock official appropriated asses, the livestock official appropriated sheep, and the fisheries inspector appropriated.... The shepherds of wool sheep paid a duty in silver on account of white sheep, and the surveyor, chief lamentation-singer, supervisor, brewer and foremen paid a duty in silver on account of young lambs. . . These were the conventions of former times!

When Ningirsu, warrior of Enlil, granted the kingship of Lagash to Urukagina, selecting him from among the myriad people, he replaced the customs of former times, carrying out the command that Ningirsu, his master, had given him.

He removed the head boatman from control over the boats, he removed the livestock official from control over asses and sheep, he removed the fisheries inspector from control....

He removed the silo supervisor from control over the grain taxes of the guda -priests, he removed the bureaucrat responsible for the paying of duties in silver on account of white sheep and young lambs, and he removed the bureaucrat responsible for the delivery of duties by the temple administrators to the palace.

The... administrators no longer plunder the orchards of the poor. When a high quality ass is born to a shublugal , and his foreman says to him, "I want to buy it from you"; whether he lets him buy it from him and says to him "Pay me the price I want!," or whether he does not let him buy it from him, the foreman must not strike at him in anger.

When the house of an aristocrat adjoins the house of a shublugal , and the aristocrat says to him, "I want to buy it from you"; whether he lets him buy it from him, having said to him, "Pay me the price I want! My house is a large container—fill it with barley for me!," or whether he does not let him buy it from him, that aristocrat must not strike at him in anger.

He cleared and cancelled obligations for those indentured families, citizens of Lagash living as debtors because of grain taxes, barley payments, theft or murder.

Urukagina solemnly promised Ningirsu that he would never subjugate the waif and the widow to the powerful.

[ 16 ] Lament about the fall of Lagash to Umma [ edit ] Lamentation about the fall of Lagash Lamentation about the fall of Lagash to Lugalzagesi , Urukagina period, c. 2350 BC Tello, ancient Girsu [ 17 ] Transcription of the lamentation about the fall of Lagash: "The man of Umma set fire to the Ekisurra...".

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Here Urukagina appears as "King of Girsu " [ 20 ] Urukagina participated in several conflicts, notably a losing border conflict with Uruk . In the seventh year of his reign, Uruk fell under the leadership of Lugal-Zage-Si , énsi of Umma , who ultimately annexed most of the territory of Lagash and established the first reliably documented kingdom to encompass all of Sumer. The destruction of Lagash was described in a lament (possibly the earliest recorded example of what would become a prolific Sumerian literary genre), which stressed that: "the man of Umma (Lugalzagesi) ... committed a sin against Ningirsu . ... Offence there was none in Urukagina, king of Girsu, but as for Lugal-Zage-Si , governor of Umma, may his goddess Nisaba make him carry his sin upon his neck" (alternatively – "may she carry his sin upon her neck").

[ 21 ] Lugal-Zage-Si himself was soon defeated and his kingdom was annexed by Sargon of Akkad .

See also [ edit ] List of ancient legal codes Notes [ edit ] ^ "Site officiel du musée du Louvre" .

cartelfr.louvre.fr .

^ THUREAU-DANGIN, F. (1904). "La Ruine de Shirpourla (Lagash): Sous le Règne d'Ouroukagina".

Revue d'Assyriologie et d'archéologie orientale .

6 (1): 26– 32.

ISSN 0373-6032 .

JSTOR 23275695 .

^ Finegan, Jack (2019).

Archaeological History Of The Ancient Middle East . Routledge. p. 46.

ISBN 978-0-429-72638-5 .

^ "The Reforms of Urukagina" . History-world.org. Archived from the original on 2018-11-17 . Retrieved 2019-12-03 .

^ "Site officiel du musée du Louvre" .

cartelfr.louvre.fr .

^ "Social Reform in Mesopotamia", Benjamin R. Foster, in Social Justice in the Ancient World , K. Irani and M. Silver eds., 1995, p. 169.

^ Finegan, Jack (2019).

Archaeological History Of The Ancient Middle East . Routledge. p. 46.

ISBN 978-0-429-72638-5 .

^ Katherine I. Wright, Archaeology and Women , 2007, p. 206.

^ The Powers p. 40 by Walter Wink, 1992 ^ Marilyn French, From Eve to Dawn: A History of Women , 2008, p. 100.

^ Kim, San-hae.

최초의 역사 수메르 . Humanist Books.

ISBN 9791160807684 .

^ "RIME 1.09.09.03, ex. 01 (P222610)" .

^ "Site officiel du musée du Louvre" .

cartelfr.louvre.fr .

^ "Site officiel du musée du Louvre" .

cartelfr.louvre.fr .

^ Transliteration: "CDLI-Archival View" .

cdli.ucla.edu .

^ Praise of Urukagina [ permanent dead link ] ^ "Site officiel du musée du Louvre" .

cartelfr.louvre.fr .

^ THUREAU-DANGIN, F. (1904). "La Ruine de Shirpourla (Lagash): Sous le Règne d'Ouroukagina".

Revue d'Assyriologie et d'archéologie orientale .

6 (1): 26– 32.

ISSN 0373-6032 .

JSTOR 23275695 .

^ Kramer, Samuel Noah (1971).

The Sumerians: Their History, Culture, and Character . University of Chicago Press. p. 322.

ISBN 978-0-226-45238-8 .

^ "Site officiel du musée du Louvre" .

cartelfr.louvre.fr .

^ "Site officiel du musée du Louvre" .

cartelfr.louvre.fr .

External links [ edit ] Reforms of Urukagina – 2015 composite Sumerian text with translation, together with editions of individual cones Urukagina's "reform document" (in Sumerian) A , B , C A partial translation in English at the Wayback Machine (archived November 17, 2018) "Inscriptions from the Ancient Near East" – includes a complete translation of the reform document and the lament in Italian "The Law Reforms of King Uru-inimgina of Lagash", pp. 8–10 in Women, Crime and Punishment in Ancient Law and Society by Elizabeth Meier Tetlow, 2004 – a comprehensive examination of all the ways Uruinimga's reforms both positively and adversely affected the status of women in Lagash.

Urukagina, the reformist king. A complete description of the reign of Urukagina and his social reforms.

Regnal titles Preceded by Lugalanda King of Lagash c. 2378 - c. 2372 BC Succeeded by Possibly Meszi v t e Rulers of the ancient Near East Territories/ dates [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Egypt Canaan Ebla Mari Kish / Assur Akshak / Akkad Uruk Adab Umma Lagash Ur Elam 4000–3200 BCE Naqada I Naqada II Egypt–Mesopotamia relations Pre-Dynastic period (4000–2900 BCE) Susa I Uruk period (4000–3100 BCE) ( Anu Ziggurat , 4000 BCE) (Anonymous "King-priests") Susa II (Uruk influence or control) 3200–3100 BCE Proto-Dynastic period ( Naqada III ) Early or legendary kings: Upper Egypt Finger Snail Fish Pen-Abu Animal Stork Canide Bull Scorpion I Shendjw Iry-Hor Ka Scorpion II Narmer / Menes Lower Egypt Hedju Hor Ny-Hor Hsekiu Khayu Tiu Thesh Neheb Wazner Nat-Hor Mekh Double Falcon Wash 3100–2900 BCE Early Dynastic Period First Dynasty of Egypt Narmer Palette Narmer Menes Neithhotep ♀ (regent) Hor-Aha Djer Djet Merneith ♀ (regent) Den Anedjib Semerkhet Qa'a Sneferka Horus Bird Canaanites Jemdet Nasr period (3100–2900 BCE) Proto-Elamite period ( Susa III ) (3100–2700 BCE) 2900 BCE Second Dynasty of Egypt Hotepsekhemwy Nebra/Raneb Nynetjer Ba Nubnefer Horus Sa Weneg-Nebty Wadjenes Senedj Seth-Peribsen Sekhemib-Perenmaat Neferkara I Neferkasokar Hudjefa I Khasekhemwy Early Dynastic Period I (2900–2700 BCE) First Eblaite Kingdom First kingdom of Mari Kish I dynasty Jushur , Kullassina-bel Nangishlishma , En-tarah-ana Babum , Puannum , Kalibum 2800 BCE Kalumum Zuqaqip Atab Mashda Arwium Etana Balih En-me-nuna Melem-Kish Barsal-nuna Uruk I dynasty Meshkiangasher Enmerkar ("conqueror of Aratta ") 2700 BCE Early Dynastic Period II (2700–2600 BCE) Zamug , Tizqar , Ilku Iltasadum Lugalbanda Dumuzid, the Fisherman Enmebaragesi ("made the land of Elam submit") [ 6 ] Aga of Kish Gilgamesh Old Elamite period (2700–1500 BCE) Indo-Mesopotamia relations 2600 BCE Third Dynasty of Egypt Djoser (First Egyptian pyramids ) Sekhemkhet Sanakht Nebka Khaba Qahedjet Huni Early Dynastic Period III (2600–2340 BCE) Sagisu Abur-lim Agur-lim Ibbi-Damu Baba-Damu Kish II dynasty (5 kings) Uhub Mesilim Ur-Nungal Udulkalama Labashum Lagash En-hegal Lugal- shaengur Ur A-Imdugud Ur-Pabilsag Meskalamdug (Queen Puabi ) Akalamdug Enun-dara-anna Mesh-he Melem-ana Lugal-kitun Adab Nin-kisalsi Me-durba Lugal-dalu 2575 BCE Old Kingdom of Egypt Fourth Dynasty of Egypt Snefru Khufu Djedefre Khafre Bikheris Menkaure Shepseskaf Thamphthis Ur I dynasty Mesannepada "King of Ur and Kish", victorious over Uruk 2500 BCE Phoenicia (2500–539 BCE) Second kingdom of Mari Ikun-Shamash Iku-Shamagan Ansud Sa'umu Ishtup-Ishar Ikun-Mari Iblul-Il Nizi Enna-Dagan Kish III dynasty Ku-Baba ♀ Akshak dynasty Unzi Undalulu Uruk II dynasty Ensha- kushanna Mug-si Umma I dynasty Pabilgagaltuku Lagash I dynasty Ur-Nanshe Akurgal A'annepada Meskiagnun Elulu Balulu Awan dynasty Peli Tata Ukkutahesh Hishur 2450 BCE Fifth Dynasty of Egypt Userkaf Sahure Neferirkare Kakai Neferefre Shepseskare Nyuserre Ini Menkauhor Kaiu Djedkare Isesi Unas Enar-Damu Ishar-Malik Ush Enakalle Elamite invasions (3 kings) [ 6 ] Shushun-Tarana Napi-Ilhush 2425 BCE Kun-Damu Eannatum (King of Lagash, Sumer, Akkad, conqueror of Elam) 2400 BCE Adub-Damu Igrish-Halam Irkab-Damu Kish IV dynasty Puzur-Suen Ur-Zababa Urur Lugal-kinishe-dudu Lugal-kisalsi E-iginimpa'e Meskigal Ur-Lumma Il Gishakidu (Queen Bara-irnun ) Enannatum Entemena Enannatum II Enentarzi Ur II dynasty Nanni Mesh-ki-ang-Nanna II Kikku-Siwe-Temti 2380 BCE Sixth Dynasty of Egypt Teti Userkare Pepi I Merenre Nemtyemsaf I Pepi II Merenre Nemtyemsaf II Netjerkare Siptah Adab dynasty Lugal-Anne-Mundu "King of the four quarters of the world" 2370 BCE Isar-Damu Enna-Dagan Ikun-Ishar Ishqi-Mari Invasion by Mari Anbu, Anba, Bazi, Zizi of Mari, Limer, Sharrum-iter [ 6 ] Ukush Lugalanda Urukagina Luh-ishan 2350 BCE Puzur-Nirah Ishu-Il Shu-Sin Uruk III dynasty Lugal-zage-si (Governor of Umma, King of all Sumer) 2340 BCE Akkadian Period (2340–2150 BCE) Akkadian Empire Sargon of Akkad Rimush Manishtushu Akkadian Governors: Eshpum Ilshu-rabi Epirmupi Ili-ishmani 2250 BCE Naram-Sin Lugal-ushumgal (vassal of the Akkadians) 2200 BCE First Intermediate Period Seventh Dynasty of Egypt Eighth Dynasty of Egypt Menkare Neferkare II Neferkare Neby Djedkare Shemai Neferkare Khendu Merenhor Neferkamin Nikare Neferkare Tereru Neferkahor Neferkare Pepiseneb Neferkamin Anu Qakare Ibi Neferkaure Neferkauhor Neferirkare Second Eblaite Kingdom Third kingdom of Mari ( Shakkanakku dynasty) Ididish Shu-Dagan Ishma-Dagan (vassals of the Akkadians) Shar-Kali-Sharri Igigi , Imi , Nanum , Ilulu (3 years) Dudu Shu-turul Uruk IV dynasty Ur-nigin Ur-gigir Lagash II dynasty Puzer-Mama Ur-Ningirsu I Pirig-me Lu-Baba Lu-gula Ka-ku Hishep-ratep Helu Khita Puzur-Inshushinak 2150 BCE Ninth Dynasty of Egypt Meryibre Khety Neferkare VII Nebkaure Khety Setut Ur III period (2150–2000 BCE) Nûr-Mêr Ishtup-Ilum Ishgum-Addu Apil-kin Gutian dynasty (21 kings) La-erabum Si'um Kuda (Uruk) Puzur-ili Ur-Utu Umma II dynasty Lugalannatum (vassal of the Gutians) Ur-Baba Gudea Ur-Ningirsu Ur-gar Nam-mahani Tirigan 2125 BCE Tenth Dynasty of Egypt Meryhathor Neferkare VIII Wahkare Khety Merikare Uruk V dynasty Utu-hengal 2100 BCE (Vassals of UR III) Iddi-ilum Ili-Ishar Tura-Dagan Puzur-Ishtar (vassals of Ur III) [ 7 ] Ur III dynasty "Kings of Ur, Sumer and Akkad" Ur-Nammu Shulgi Amar-Sin Shu-Sin 2025–1763 BCE Amorite invasions Ibbi-Sin Elamite invasions Kindattu ( Shimashki Dynasty ) Middle Kingdom of Egypt Eleventh Dynasty of Egypt Mentuhotep I Intef I Intef II Intef III Mentuhotep II Mentuhotep III Mentuhotep IV Third Eblaite Kingdom ( Amorites ) Ibbit-Lim Immeya Indilimma ( Amorite Shakkanakkus ) Hitial-Erra Hanun-Dagan (...) Lim Dynasty of Mari ( Amorites ) Yaggid-Lim Yahdun-Lim Yasmah-Adad Zimri-Lim (Queen Shibtu ) Old Assyria Puzur-Ashur I Shalim-ahum Ilu-shuma Erishum I Ikunum Sargon I Puzur-Ashur II Naram-Sin Erishum II Isin-Larsa period ( Amorites ) Dynasty of Isin : Ishbi-Erra Shu-Ilishu Iddin-Dagan Ishme-Dagan Lipit-Ishtar Ur-Ninurta Bur-Suen Lipit-Enlil Erra-imitti Enlil-bani Zambiya Iter-pisha Ur-du-kuga Suen-magir Damiq-ilishu Dynasty of Larsa : Naplanum Emisum Samium Zabaia Gungunum Abisare Sumuel Nur-Adad Sin-Iddinam Sin-Eribam Sin-Iqisham Silli-Adad Warad-Sin Rim-Sin I (...) Rim-Sin II Uruk VI dynasty : Alila-hadum Sumu-binasa Naram-Sin of Uruk Sîn-kāšid Sîn-iribam Sîn-gāmil Ilum-gamil An-am Irdanene Rîm-Anum Nabi-ilišu Sukkalmah dynasty Siwe-Palar-Khuppak Twelfth Dynasty of Egypt Amenemhat I Senusret I Amenemhat II Senusret II Senusret III Amenemhat III Amenemhat IV Sobekneferu ♀ 1800–1595 BCE Thirteenth Dynasty of Egypt Fourteenth Dynasty of Egypt Abraham ( Biblical ) Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Yamhad ( Yamhad dynasty ) (Amorites) Old Assyria ( Shamshi-Adad dynasty 1808–1736 BCE) (Amorites) Shamshi-Adad I Ishme-Dagan I Mut-Ashkur Rimush Asinum Ashur-dugul Ashur-apla-idi Nasir-Sin Sin-namir Ipqi-Ishtar Adad-salulu Adasi (Non-dynastic usurpers 1735–1701 BCE) Puzur-Sin Ashur-dugul Ashur-apla-idi Nasir-Sin Sin-namir Ipqi-Ishtar Adad-salulu Adasi ( Adaside dynasty 1700–722 BCE) Bel-bani Libaya Sharma-Adad I Iptar-Sin Bazaya Lullaya Shu-Ninua Sharma-Adad II Erishum III Shamshi-Adad II Ishme-Dagan II Shamshi-Adad III Ashur-nirari I Puzur-Ashur III Enlil-nasir I Nur-ili Ashur-shaduni Ashur-rabi I Ashur-nadin-ahhe I Enlil-Nasir II Ashur-nirari II Ashur-bel-nisheshu Ashur-rim-nisheshu Ashur-nadin-ahhe II First Babylonian dynasty ("Old Babylonian Period") ( Amorites ) Sumu-abum Sumu-la-El Sabium Apil-Sin Sin-Muballit Hammurabi Samsu-iluna Abi-Eshuh Ammi-Ditana Ammi-Saduqa Samsu-Ditana Early Kassite rulers Second Babylonian dynasty (" Sealand Dynasty ") Ilum-ma-ili Itti-ili-nibi Damqi-ilishu Ishkibal Shushushi Gulkishar m DIŠ+U-EN Peshgaldaramesh Ayadaragalama Akurduana Melamkurkurra Ea-gamil Second Intermediate Period Sixteenth Dynasty of Egypt Abydos Dynasty Seventeenth Dynasty of Egypt Fifteenth Dynasty of Egypt (" Hyksos ") Pharaoh Ahmose I slaying a Hyksos Semqen 'Aper-'Anati Sakir-Har Khyan Apepi Khamudi Mitanni (1600–1260 BCE) Kirta Shuttarna I Baratarna 1531–1155 BCE Tutankhamun New Kingdom of Egypt Eighteenth Dynasty of Egypt Ahmose I Amenhotep I Third Babylonian dynasty ( Kassites ) Agum-Kakrime Burnaburiash I Kashtiliash III Ulamburiash Agum III Karaindash Kadashman-Harbe I Kurigalzu I Kadashman-Enlil I Burna-Buriash II Kara-hardash Nazi-Bugash Kurigalzu II Nazi-Maruttash Kadashman-Turgu Kadashman-Enlil II Kudur-Enlil Shagarakti-Shuriash Kashtiliash IV Enlil-nadin-shumi Kadashman-Harbe II Adad-shuma-iddina Adad-shuma-usur Meli-Shipak II Marduk-apla-iddina I Zababa-shuma-iddin Enlil-nadin-ahi Middle Elamite period (1500–1100 BCE) Kidinuid dynasty Igehalkid dynasty Untash-Napirisha Thutmose I Thutmose II Hatshepsut ♀ Thutmose III Amenhotep II Thutmose IV Amenhotep III Akhenaten Smenkhkare Neferneferuaten ♀ Tutankhamun Ay Horemheb Hittite Empire (1450–1180 BCE) Suppiluliuma I Mursili II Muwatalli II Mursili III Hattusili III Tudhaliya IV Suppiluliuma II Ugarit (vassal of Hittites) Nineteenth Dynasty of Egypt Ramesses I Seti I Ramesses II Merneptah Amenmesses Seti II Siptah Tausret ♀ Elamite Empire Shutrukid dynasty Shutruk-Nakhunte 1155–1025 BCE Twentieth Dynasty of Egypt Setnakhte Ramesses III Ramesses IV Ramesses V Ramesses VI Ramesses VII Ramesses VIII Ramesses IX Ramesses X Ramesses XI Third Intermediate Period Twenty-first Dynasty of Egypt Smendes Amenemnisu Psusennes I Amenemope Osorkon the Elder Siamun Psusennes II Phoenicia Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Kingdom of Israel Saul Ish-bosheth David Solomon Syro-Hittite states Carchemish Tabal Middle Assyria Eriba-Adad I Ashur-uballit I Enlil-nirari Arik-den-ili Adad-nirari I Shalmaneser I Tukulti-Ninurta I Ashur-nadin-apli Ashur-nirari III Enlil-kudurri-usur Ninurta-apal-Ekur Ashur-dan I Ninurta-tukulti-Ashur Mutakkil-Nusku Ashur-resh-ishi I Tiglath-Pileser I Asharid-apal-Ekur Ashur-bel-kala Eriba-Adad II Shamshi-Adad IV Ashurnasirpal I Shalmaneser II Ashur-nirari IV Ashur-rabi II Ashur-resh-ishi II Tiglath-Pileser II Ashur-dan II Fourth Babylonian dynasty (" Second Dynasty of Isin ") Marduk-kabit-ahheshu Itti-Marduk-balatu Ninurta-nadin-shumi Nebuchadnezzar I Enlil-nadin-apli Marduk-nadin-ahhe Marduk-shapik-zeri Adad-apla-iddina Marduk-ahhe-eriba Marduk-zer-X Nabu-shum-libur Neo-Elamite period (1100–540 BCE) 1025–934 BCE Fifth, Sixth, Seventh, Babylonian dynasties ("Period of Chaos") Simbar-shipak Ea-mukin-zeri Kashshu-nadin-ahi Eulmash-shakin-shumi Ninurta-kudurri-usur I Shirikti-shuqamuna Mar-biti-apla-usur Nabû-mukin-apli 911–745 BCE Twenty-second Dynasty of Egypt Shoshenq I Osorkon I Shoshenq II Takelot I Osorkon II Shoshenq III Shoshenq IV Pami Shoshenq V Pedubast II Osorkon IV Twenty-third Dynasty of Egypt Harsiese A Takelot II Pedubast I Shoshenq VI Osorkon III Takelot III Rudamun Menkheperre Ini Twenty-fourth Dynasty of Egypt Tefnakht Bakenranef Kingdom of Samaria Kingdom of Judah Neo-Assyrian Empire Adad-nirari II Tukulti-Ninurta II Ashurnasirpal II Shalmaneser III Shamshi-Adad V Shammuramat ♀ (regent) Adad-nirari III Shalmaneser IV Ashur-Dan III Ashur-nirari V Eight Babylonian Dynasty Ninurta-kudurri-usur II Mar-biti-ahhe-iddina Shamash-mudammiq Nabu-shuma-ukin I Nabu-apla-iddina Marduk-zakir-shumi I Marduk-balassu-iqbi Baba-aha-iddina (five kings) Ninurta-apla-X Marduk-bel-zeri Marduk-apla-usur Eriba-Marduk Nabu-shuma-ishkun Nabonassar Nabu-nadin-zeri Nabu-shuma-ukin II Nabu-mukin-zeri Humban-Tahrid dynasty Urtak Teumman Ummanigash Tammaritu I Indabibi Humban-haltash III 745–609 BCE Twenty-fifth Dynasty of Egypt Taharqa (" Black Pharaohs ") Piye Shebitku Shabaka Taharqa Tanutamun Neo-Assyrian Empire ( Sargonid dynasty ) Tiglath-Pileser † Shalmaneser † Marduk-apla-iddina II Sargon † Sennacherib † Marduk-zakir-shumi II Marduk-apla-iddina II Bel-ibni Ashur-nadin-shumi † Nergal-ushezib Mushezib-Marduk Esarhaddon † Ashurbanipal Ashur-etil-ilani Sinsharishkun Sin-shumu-lishir Ashur-uballit II Assyrian conquest of Egypt Assyrian conquest of Elam 626–539 BCE Late Period Twenty-sixth Dynasty of Egypt Necho I Psamtik I Necho II Psamtik II Wahibre Ahmose II Psamtik III Neo-Babylonian Empire Nabopolassar Nebuchadnezzar II Amel-Marduk Neriglissar Labashi-Marduk Nabonidus Median Empire Deioces Phraortes Madyes Cyaxares Astyages 539–331 BCE Twenty-seventh Dynasty of Egypt ( First Achaemenid conquest of Egypt ) Kings of Byblos Kings of Tyre Kings of Sidon Achaemenid Empire Cyrus Cambyses Darius I Xerxes Artaxerxes I Darius II Artaxerxes II Artaxerxes III Artaxerxes IV Darius III Twenty-eighth Dynasty of Egypt Twenty-ninth Dynasty of Egypt Thirtieth Dynasty of Egypt Thirty-first Dynasty of Egypt 331–141 BCE Argead dynasty and Ptolemaic Egypt Ptolemy I Soter Ptolemy Ceraunus Ptolemy II Philadelphus Arsinoe II ♀ Ptolemy III Euergetes Berenice II Euergetis ♀ Ptolemy IV Philopator Arsinoe III Philopator ♀ Ptolemy V Epiphanes Cleopatra I Syra ♀ Ptolemy VI Philometor Ptolemy VII Neos Philopator Cleopatra II Philometor Soteira ♀ Ptolemy VIII Physcon Cleopatra III ♀ Ptolemy IX Lathyros Cleopatra IV ♀ Ptolemy X Alexander Berenice III ♀ Ptolemy XI Alexander Ptolemy XII Auletes Cleopatra V ♀ Cleopatra VI Tryphaena ♀ Berenice IV Epiphanea ♀ Ptolemy XIII Ptolemy XIV Cleopatra VII Philopator ♀ Ptolemy XV Caesarion Arsinoe IV ♀ Hellenistic Period Seleukos I Nikator Tetradrachm from Babylon Argead dynasty : Alexander III Philip III Alexander IV Antigonid dynasty : Antigonus I Seleucid Empire : Seleucus I Antiochus I Antiochus II Seleucus II Seleucus III Antiochus III Seleucus IV Antiochus IV Antiochus V Demetrius I Alexander III Demetrius II Antiochus VI Dionysus Diodotus Tryphon Antiochus VII Sidetes 141–30 BCE Kingdom of Judea Simon Thassi John Hyrcanus Aristobulus I Alexander Jannaeus Salome Alexandra ♀ Hyrcanus II Aristobulus II Antigonus II Mattathias Alexander II Zabinas Seleucus V Philometor Antiochus VIII Grypus Antiochus IX Cyzicenus Seleucus VI Epiphanes Antiochus X Eusebes Antiochus XI Epiphanes Demetrius III Eucaerus Philip I Philadelphus Antiochus XII Dionysus Antiochus XIII Asiaticus Philip II Philoromaeus Parthian Empire Mithridates I Phraates Hyspaosines Artabanus Mithridates II Gotarzes Mithridates III Orodes I Sinatruces Phraates III Mithridates IV Orodes II Phraates IV Tiridates II Musa Phraates V Orodes III Vonones I Artabanus II Tiridates III Artabanus II Vardanes I Gotarzes II Meherdates Vonones II Vologases I Vardanes II Pacorus II Vologases II Artabanus III Osroes I 30 BCE–116 CE Roman Empire ( Roman conquest of Egypt ) Province of Egypt Judaea Syria 116–117 CE Province of Mesopotamia under Trajan Parthamaspates of Parthia 117–224 CE Syria Palaestina Province of Mesopotamia Sinatruces II Mithridates V Vologases IV Osroes II Vologases V Vologases VI Artabanus IV 224–270 CE Sasanian Empire Province of Asoristan Coin of Ardashir I, Hamadan mint.

Ardashir I Shapur I Hormizd I Bahram I Bahram II Bahram III Narseh Hormizd II Adur Narseh Shapur II Ardashir II Shapur III Bahram IV Yazdegerd I Shapur IV Khosrow Bahram V Yazdegerd II Hormizd III Peroz I Balash Kavad I Jamasp Kavad I Khosrow I Hormizd IV Khosrow II Bahram VI Chobin Vistahm 270–273 CE Palmyrene Empire Vaballathus Zenobia ♀ Antiochus 273–395 CE Roman Empire Province of Egypt Syria Palaestina Syria Province of Mesopotamia 395–618 CE Byzantine Empire Byzantine Egypt Palaestina Prima , Palaestina Secunda Byzantine Syria Byzantine Mesopotamia 618–628 CE ( Sasanian conquest of Egypt ) Province of Egypt Shahrbaraz Shahralanyozan Shahrbaraz Sasanian Empire Province of Asoristan Khosrow II Kavad II 628–641 CE Byzantine Empire Ardashir III Shahrbaraz Khosrow III Boran ♀ Shapur-i Shahrvaraz Azarmidokht ♀ Farrukh Hormizd Hormizd VI Khosrow IV Boran Yazdegerd III Peroz III Narsieh Byzantine Egypt Palaestina Prima , Palaestina Secunda Byzantine Syria Byzantine Mesopotamia 639–651 CE Muslim conquest of Egypt Muslim conquest of the Levant Muslim conquest of Mesopotamia and Persia Chronology of the Neolithic period Rulers of ancient Central Asia ^ Rulers with names in italics are considered fictional.

^ Hallo, William W.

; Simpson, William Kelly (1971).

The Ancient Near East: A History . New York: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. pp.

48– 49.

ISBN 978-0-15-502755-8 .

^ "Rulers of Mesopotamia" .

CDLI:wiki . Cuneiform Digital Library Initiative.

^ Thomas, Ariane; Potts, Timothy , eds. (2020).

Mesopotamia: Civilization Begins . Los Angeles: The J. Paul Getty Museum. p. 14.

ISBN 978-1-60606-649-2 .

^ Roux, Georges (1992).

Ancient Iraq . London: Penguin Books Limited. pp. 532–534 (Chronological Tables).

ISBN 978-0-14-193825-7 .

^ a b c Per the Sumerian King List .

^ Unger, Merrill F.

(2014).

Israel and the Aramaeans of Damascus: A Study in Archaeological Illumination of Bible History . Eugene, Oregon: Wipf and Stock. p. 5.

ISBN 978-1-62564-606-4 .

Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany United States Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐4fjrf
Cached time: 20250817083222
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.900 seconds
Real time usage: 1.171 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4633/1000000
Revision size: 20410/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 114578/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6105/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 9/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 104293/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.468/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22259433/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  845.752      1 -total
 26.72%  226.018      2 Template:Reflist
 15.22%  128.690      1 Template:Rulers_of_Sumer
 13.87%  117.282     11 Template:Cite_web
 13.04%  110.248      1 Template:Langx
  8.97%   75.890      1 Template:Navbox_top
  7.93%   67.096      1 Template:Short_description
  7.77%   65.736      1 Template:Infobox_royalty
  7.03%   59.436      1 Template:Succession_box
  6.87%   58.111      8 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:287990:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817083222 and revision id 1306352450. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Urukagina&oldid=1306352450 " Categories : 24th-century BC Sumerian kings Kings of Lagash Ancient legislators 3rd-millennium BC births 24th-century BC deaths Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Sumerian-language text Articles needing additional references from June 2023 All articles needing additional references Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2023 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 08:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Urukagina 36 languages Add topic

