Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Factor 4 3 Goals 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Factor 10 3 languages العربية Eesti Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Socio-economic policy program For the coagulation cascade factor, see factor X .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Factor 10" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Factor Ten is a social and economic policy program developed by the Factor Ten institute with the stated goal of "provid[ing] practical support for achieving significant advances in sustainable value creation, in particular through increases in resource productivity throughout the economy.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Friedrich Schmidt-Bleek, from the Wuppertal Institute for Climate, Environment and Energy , first proposed the Factor 10 and dematerialization concepts in the early 1990s. He concluded in his studies that 80% of the world's resources are distributed among First World nations, which contribute 20% of the global population, so those nations are promoting an unsustainable system of development. The goal of Factor 10 is to assure that nations do not exceed the planet's carrying capacity but leave sufficient resources for future generations.

[ 2 ] Factor 4 [ edit ] Factor 10 evolved from the less dramatic Factor 4 was originally proposed by L. Hunter Lovins and Amory Lovins of the Rocky Mountain Institute and Ernst von Weizsäcker , the founder of the Wuppertal Institute for Climate, Environment & Energy. Their book Factor 4 explains how simple it is for nations to achieve Factor 4 results with existing technologies. The concept attempts to reduce resource and energy use by 75% by doubling output and halving input of production.

Goals [ edit ] Factor 10 requires the creation of new technologies, policies, and manufacturing processes along with sociocultural change to create a global economy that is sustainable for a long period of time. The long-term goal of Factor 10, many governments and firms aspiring toward short term relief have difficulty achieving the massive reductions proposed by factor 10. The lack of existing incentives and policies for a sufficient resource-efficient economy requires an adjustment of economic and fiscal framework.

[ 3 ] Eco-efficiency , environmental purchasing design for environment, policies and environmental taxes have already been used by business and governments implementing the Factor 10 theory.

[ 4 ] Factor 10 goes farther as a response to the United Nations Environment Programme call for a tenfold reduction in resource consumption in industrialized countries as a necessary long-term target if adequate resources are to be released for the needs of the developing countries .

[ 5 ] With the predicted rise in population and economic growth to maintain the level of pollution we have today, we need to be able to produce the same output for 10% of the impact.

Factor 10 concept is the direct way of using metric and various activities that can reduce the throughput of resources and energy in the given process. The essential question is by what factor certain flows can or should be reduced. It is a useful tool to monitor the performance of business in terms of dematerialization .

[ 6 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Factor 10 Institute" . Factor 10 Institute . Retrieved 2020-06-10 .

^ "Factor 10 : Dictionary of Sustainable Management" . Sustainabilitydictionary.com. 1999-02-22 . Retrieved 2014-06-21 .

^ Schmidt-Bleek, Friedrich (2008).

"Factor 10: The Future of Stuff" .

Sustainability: Science, Practice and Policy .

4 (1).

Bibcode : 2008SSPP....4....1S .

doi : 10.1080/15487733.2008.11908009 .

^ "Sustainability Concepts: Factor 10" . Gdrc.org . Retrieved 2014-06-21 .

^ UNEP , Global Environmental Outlook 2000, 1999.

^ Robert, K.H., Schmidt-Bleek, B., et al. (2002). "Strategic sustainable development, selection, design and synergies of applied tools." Journal of Cleaner Production .

Further reading [ edit ] Schmidt-Bleek, F. (2008).

"Factor 10: The future of stuff" .

Sustainability: Science, Practice, & Policy .

4 (1): 1– 4.

Bibcode : 2008SSPP....4....1S .

doi : 10.1080/15487733.2008.11908009 .

v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Factor_10&oldid=1242304183 " Categories : Sustainability Environmental social science concepts Science and technology studies Environmental policy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from October 2016 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 26 August 2024, at 03:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Factor 10 3 languages Add topic

