Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Academic career 3 Nazi Party involvement 4 After World War II 5 Publications Toggle Publications subsection 5.1 The Dictatorship 5.2 Political Theology 5.3 The Concept of the Political 5.3.1 Dialogue with Leo Strauss 5.4 Political Romanticism 5.5 The Leviathan in the State Theory of Thomas Hobbes 5.6 The Nomos of the Earth 5.7 Hamlet or Hecuba 5.8 Theory of the Partisan 6 Personal life 7 Influence Toggle Influence subsection 7.1 Law of emergency powers 7.2 China 7.3 Other countries 8 Works 9 See also 10 References Toggle References subsection 10.1 Notes 10.2 Citations 10.3 Bibliography 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Carl Schmitt 50 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 文言 Yorùbá 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German jurist and political theorist (1888–1985) This article is about the German jurist and political theorist. For the American artist, see Carl Schmitt (artist) . For New Zealand violinist and composer, see Carl Schmitt (composer) . For people with a similar name, see Carl Schmidt .

Carl Schmitt Schmitt in 1932 Born ( 1888-07-11 ) 11 July 1888 Plettenberg , Prussia , German Empire Died 7 April 1985 (1985-04-07) (aged 96) Plettenberg, North Rhine-Westphalia , West Germany Spouse(s) Pavla Dorotić (1916–?) Duška Todorović (1926–1950, her death) Children 1 Education Education University of Berlin University of Munich University of Strasbourg ( Dr. jur.

, 1910; Dr. habil.

, 1916) Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy Conservative Revolution [ 1 ] Decisionism [ 2 ] IR realism [ 3 ] Institutions University of Greifswald (1921) University of Bonn (1921) Technical University of Munich (1928) University of Cologne (1933) University of Berlin (1933–1945) Main interests Politics Jurisprudence Constitutional law Political theology Philosophy of religion Notable ideas State of exception Friend–Enemy distinction Sovereignty as a "borderline concept" Legality – legitimacy distinction Carl Schmitt [ a ] (11 July 1888 – 7 April 1985) was a German jurist , author , and political theorist .

Schmitt wrote extensively about the effective wielding of political power. An authoritarian conservative theorist, [ 4 ] he was noted as a critic of parliamentary democracy , liberalism , and cosmopolitanism .

[ 5 ] His works covered political theory, legal theory, continental philosophy, and political theology . However, they are controversial, mainly due to his intellectual support for, and active involvement with, Nazism .

[ 6 ] In 1933, Schmitt joined the Nazi Party and utilized his legal and political theories to provide ideological justification for the regime. However, he later lost favour among senior Nazi officials and was ultimately removed from his official positions within the party.

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy writes that "Schmitt was an acute observer and analyst of the weaknesses of liberal constitutionalism and liberal cosmopolitanism. But there can be little doubt that his preferred cure turned out to be infinitely worse than the disease." [ 7 ] His ideas remain highly influential, with many scholars arguing he has influenced modern governance in China and Russia .

Early life [ edit ] Schmitt was born in Plettenberg , Westphalia , German Empire . His parents were Roman Catholics from the German Eifel region, who had settled in Plettenberg. His father was a minor businessman. Schmitt studied law at the Universities of Berlin , Munich , and Strasbourg , and took his graduation and state examinations in then-German Strasbourg in 1915.

[ 8 ] His 1910 doctoral thesis was titled Über Schuld und Schuldarten ( On Guilt and Types of Guilt ).

[ 9 ] Schmitt volunteered for the army in 1916.

[ 8 ] In the same year, he earned his habilitation at Strasbourg with a thesis entitled Der Wert des Staates und die Bedeutung des Einzelnen (The Value of the State and the Significance of the Individual). He then taught at various business schools and universities, namely the University of Greifswald (1921), the University of Bonn (1921), the Technical University of Munich (1928), the University of Cologne (1933), and the University of Berlin (1933–1945).

As a young man, Schmitt was "a devoted Catholic until his break with the church in the mid twenties".

[ 10 ] From around the end of the First World War, he began to describe his Catholicism as "displaced" and "de-totalised".

[ 11 ] N.S. Lyons claimed that something in Schmitt’s interior life seems to have begun to shift around 1914, when his diary entries started to hint at a crisis of faith. According to Lyons' claims, it was his troubled relationships with women that estranged him from the Faith.

[ 12 ] While in Munich, Carl Schmitt attended Max Weber's lectures, " Politics as a Vocation ", " Science as a Vocation ", and the General Economic History .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] In 1923, he contributed to the second volume of Melchior Palyi 's Erinnerungsgabe für Max Weber [ 14 ] Academic career [ edit ] In 1921, Schmitt became a professor at the University of Greifswald , where he published his essay Die Diktatur ( On Dictatorship ).

[ 15 ] In 1922, he published Politische Theologie ( Political Theology ) while working as a professor at the University of Bonn . Schmitt changed universities in 1926, when he became professor of law at the Handelshochschule in Berlin , and again in 1932, when he accepted a position in Cologne . His most famous paper, "Der Begriff des Politischen" (" The Concept of the Political "), was based on lectures at the Deutsche Hochschule für Politik in Berlin.

[ 16 ] In 1932, Schmitt was counsel for the Reich government in the case Preussen contra Reich (Prussia vs. Reich), in which the SPD -controlled government of the state of Prussia disputed its dismissal by the right-wing Reich government of Franz von Papen . Papen was motivated by the fact that Prussia, by far the largest state in Germany , served as a powerful base for the political left and provided it with institutional power, particularly in the form of the Prussian police. Schmitt, Carl Bilfinger, and Erwin Jacobi represented the Reich, [ 17 ] and one of the counsel for the Prussian government was Hermann Heller . In October 1932, the court ruled that the Prussian government had been suspended unlawfully but that the Reich had the right to install a commissar.

[ 17 ] In German history, the struggle that resulted in the de facto destruction of federalism in the Weimar Republic is known as the Preußenschlag .

[ citation needed ] Nazi Party involvement [ edit ] Main article: Adolf Hitler's rise to power § Seizure of control (1931–1933) On 31 January 1933, Schmitt remarked that with Adolf Hitler 's appointment as Chancellor, "one can say that ' Hegel died.

' " [ 18 ] Richard Wolin observes: [ 1 ] [I]t is Hegel qua philosopher of the "bureaucratic class" or Beamtenstaat that has been definitely surpassed with Hitler's triumph ... this class of civil servants—which Hegel in the Rechtsphilosophie deems the "universal class"—represents an impermissible drag on the sovereignty of executive authority. For Schmitt ... the very essence of the bureaucratic conduct of business is reverence for the norm, a standpoint that could not but exist in great tension with the doctrines of Carl Schmitt ... Hegel had set an ignominious precedent by according this putative universal class a position of preeminence in his political thought, insofar as the primacy of the bureaucracy tends to diminish or supplant the prerogative of sovereign authority.

The Nazis engineered the passage of the Enabling Act of 1933 in March, which changed the Weimar Constitution to allow the "present government" to rule by decree, bypassing both the President, Paul von Hindenburg , and the Reichstag .

[ citation needed ] Alfred Hugenberg , the leader of the German National People's Party , one of the Nazis' partners in the coalition government that was being squeezed out of existence, hoped to slow the Nazi takeover of the country by threatening to quit his cabinet position. Hugenberg reasoned that by doing so, the government would be changed, and the Enabling Act would no longer apply, as the "present government" would no longer exist. A legal opinion by Schmitt prevented this manoeuvre from succeeding. Well known at the time as a constitutional theorist, Schmitt declared that "present government" did not refer to the cabinet's makeup when the act was passed, but to the "completely different kind of government"—that is, different from the democracy of the Weimar Republic —that the Hitler cabinet had brought into existence.

[ 19 ] Schmitt was the presiding legal expert at meetings during the early stages of the Third Reich that resulted in a formal decision to bypass the process of formulating a new constitution.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] An approach that would nominally maintain the former constitution was adopted, even though the Führerprinzip (Leader Principle) was promoted to a transcendent supra-legal status.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Schmitt claimed that the adoption of the Leader Principle in place of a legal constitution was legitimized by the presumed " Volkisch " or racial composition of the German people, and their identification with Adolf Hitler .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Part of a series on Fascism Principles Actual idealism Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-materialism Anti-pacifism Authoritarianism Chauvinism Class collaboration Corporatism Proprietary Corporation Counter-Enlightenment Cult of personality Dictatorship Direct action Dirigisme Eugenics Heroic capitalism Heroic realism Heroism Imperialism Economic Social Irrationalism Machismo Masculinity Militarism National syndicalism Nationalism Integral Palingenetic Ultra New Man One-party state Perpetual war Populism Proletarian nation Propaganda Racism Reactionary modernism Social Darwinism Social order Spazio vitale State capitalism Statolatry Supercapitalism Syncretism Third Position Totalitarianism Topics Definitions Economics Ideology Martyrs Movements Mysticism Symbolism Politicians al-Gaylani Arcand Araki Balbo Bandera Bose Böszörmény Bottai Blythe Bucard Ciano Codreanu Darnand Déat Degrelle Déroulède Doriot Engdahl Federzoni Flores Franco Frashëri Goga Hitler Hlinka Hoornaert Ljotić de Man von Marées Monshizadeh Mosley Mussolini Nakano O'Duffy Quisling Pavelić Pavolini Pelley Preto Primo de Rivera Rodzaevsky Saadeh Salgado Sima Starace Starhemberg Strasser (Gregor) Strasser (Otto) Szálasi Tiso Türkeş Vallat Valois Van Severen Wilson Intellectuals Ahimeir Arthuys Bardèche Béraud Brăileanu Brasillach Céline Chamberlain Chesterton Civinini Cogni Collins Corradini Crainic Croce Cupcea D'Annunzio Dilling Drieu La Rochelle Evola Gentile Giani Gini de Gobineau Herseni Ionescu Kita Krannhals de Lapouge Lewis Malaparte Manuilă Marinetti Maxence Michels Mosley Ojetti Ōkawa Olivetti Orano Panero Panunzio Pirandello Pitt-Rivers Pound Ramos Rebatet Reghini Rosenberg Sadoveanu-Evan Saint-Loup Savarkar Scaligero Schmitt Schwarz Soffici Sorel Spirito Streel Thomson Ungaretti Valois Literature Triumph of Death (1894) The Flame (1900) The Will to Power (1901) Reflections on Violence (1908) Fascio Rivoluzionario d'Azione Internazionalista (1914) Prussianism and Socialism (1919) " Futurist Manifesto " (1919) Fascist Manifesto (1919) Das Dritte Reich (1923) Mein Kampf (1925) Manifesto of the Fascist Intellectuals (1925) Frederick the Second (1927) My Autobiography (1928) The Myth of the Twentieth Century (1930) The Outlaws (1930) " The Doctrine of Fascism " (1932) Twenty-Six Point Program of the Falange (1934) Man, the Unknown (1935) For My Legionaries (1936) Guide to Kulchur (1938) A Warning to the Hindus (1939) Gilles (1939) Organizations Arrow Cross Party Blackshirts Blueshirts Brazilian Integralist Action British Democratic Party (2013) British National Party British Union of Fascists Stewards Canadian Union of Fascists Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Fasci Italiani di Combattimento Fatherland Front FE de las JONS FET y de las JONS French Popular Party Futurist Political Party IKL Iron Guard Kataeb Party Kokumin Dōmei Lapua Movement Mouvement Franciste Nasjonal Samling National Christian Party National Fascist Party Nazi Party Gestapo Hitler Youth RAD SA SS National Radical Camp National Social Movement New Party Opera Nazionale Balilla Patriotic People's Movement Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh Ratniks Republican Fascist Party Revolutionary Mexicanist Action Revolutionary Union Rexist Party Russian Fascist Party Silver Legion of America Squadrismo School of Fascist Mysticism Slovak People's Party Taisei Yokusankai Tōhōkai UR Group Ustaše Ustaše Youth Verdinaso VFO Vlajka VNV Media Action Ajan Suunta The American Review Der Angriff Arriba The Blackshirt Buna Vestire Critica fascista Fashist Gândirea Gringoire Il Popolo d'Italia Je suis partout La Conquista del Estado Le Pays Réel L'Idea Nazionale Lidel Nash Put' Nástup Neues Volk Nippon Fujin NS-Frauen-Warte Das Schwarze Korps Volk en Staat Völkischer Beobachter History March on Rome Beer Hall Putsch Gentile Reform Aventine Secession Second Italo-Senussi War Mukden Incident German election of 1932 Enabling Act Austrian Civil War Exhibition of the Fascist Revolution 1934 Montreux Fascist conference Second Italo-Ethiopian War 1935 Revolution Day Zócalo Battle Spanish Civil War Unification Decree Battle of Cable Street Second Sino-Japanese War Marco Polo Bridge Incident Japanese war crimes Anti-Comintern Pact Kristallnacht Italian invasion of Albania Pact of Steel Peasant March World War II The Holocaust Downfall in Italy Downfall in Germany Surrender of Japan Nuremberg trials International Military Tribunal for the Far East Variants Albanian Arab Argentine Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Austrian Brazilian British Christian Christian Identity Clerical Crypto- Croatian socialism Eco- Falangism Francoism French Doriotism Pétainism Valoisism Hindutva Hungarism Hutu Ibañism Ilminism Irish Islamic Qutbism Khomeinism Italian Intransigent Japanese Emperor-system Reform bureaucratism Statism Restoration Ultra- Jewish/Israeli Kahanism Revisionist Maximalism Nazism Austrian Esoteric Hitlerism Strasserism Swedish Neo- Finnish Legionarism Pan-Turkic Rexism Romanian Legionarism National Legionary State Neo- Romanianism/Stelism Russian Syndicalist Syrian Social Nationalism Techno- Third Position National-anarchism National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism Ukrainian Banderism National Shevchenkoism Uruguayan Marzism Revisionism Sosism By continent Asia Europe Bulgaria Netherlands Russia North America Canada United States South America Peru Uruguay Related topics Anti-fascism Axis powers Criticism of fascism Donald Trump and fascism Extremism of the centre F-scale Fascist as an insult Feudal fascism Futurism Glossary of Fascist Italy Lebensphilosophie Mediterraneanism Para-fascism Paramilitary Post-fascism Proto-fascism Red fascism Social fascism Politics portal v t e Schmitt joined the Nazi Party on 1 May 1933.

[ 22 ] Within days, he rejoiced in the burning of "un-German" and "anti-German" writings of Jewish authors, and called for a much more extensive purge, to include works by authors influenced by "Jewish" ideas.

[ 23 ] From June 1933, he was in the leadership council of Hans Frank 's Academy for German Law and served as chairman of the Committee for State and Administrative Law.

[ 24 ] In July, Hermann Göring appointed him to the Prussian State Council , and in November he became the president of the Association of National Socialist German Jurists . He also replaced Heller as a professor at the University of Berlin , [ 25 ] a position he held until the end of World War II . He presented his theories as an ideological foundation of the Nazi dictatorship and a justification of the Führer state concerning legal philosophy, particularly through the concept of auctoritas .

In June 1934, Schmitt was appointed editor-in-chief of the Nazi newspaper for lawyers, the Deutsche Juristen-Zeitung [ de ] ("German Jurists' Journal").

[ 26 ] In July he published in it "The Leader Protects the Law ( Der Führer schützt das Recht )", a justification of the political murders of the Night of the Long Knives with Hitler's authority as the "highest form of administrative justice ( höchste Form administrativer Justiz )".

[ 27 ] Schmitt presented himself as a radical antisemite and was the chairman of an October 1936 law teachers' convention in Berlin [ 28 ] at which he demanded that German law be cleansed of the "Jewish spirit ( jüdischem Geist )" and that all Jewish scientists' publications be marked with a small symbol.

[ 29 ] Nevertheless, in December 1936, the Schutzstaffel (SS) publication Das Schwarze Korps accused Schmitt of being an opportunist, a Hegelian state thinker, and a Catholic, and called his antisemitism a mere pretense, citing earlier statements in which he criticized the Nazis' racial theories.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] After this, Schmitt resigned as Reichsfachgruppenleiter (Reich Professional Group Leader) but retained his professorship in Berlin and his title "Prussian State Councillor". Schmitt continued to be investigated in 1937, but Göring stopped further reprisals.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] During the German occupation of Paris , a "round-table" of French and German intellectuals met at the Georges V Hotel , including Schmitt, the writers Ernst Jünger , Paul Morand , Jean Cocteau , and Henry de Montherlant , and the publisher Gaston Gallimard .

[ 35 ] After World War II [ edit ] "San Casciano", home of Carl Schmitt in Plettenberg-Pasel from 1971 until 1985 In 1945, American forces captured Schmitt and, after spending more than a year in an internment camp, he returned to his hometown of Plettenberg and, later, to the residence of his housekeeper Anni Stand in Plettenberg-Pasel. He remained unrepentant for his role in the creation of the Nazi state and, by refusing every attempt at denazification , he was barred from academic jobs.

[ 5 ] Despite being isolated from the mainstream of the scholarly and political community, from the 1950s on, he continued his studies, especially of international law , and frequently received visitors, both colleagues and younger intellectuals, well into his old age. Among the visitors were Ernst Jünger , Jacob Taubes , and Alexandre Kojève .

[ citation needed ] In 1962, Schmitt gave lectures in Francoist Spain , two of which resulted in the publication, the next year, of Theory of the Partisan , in which he characterized the Spanish Civil War as a "war of national liberation" against "international Communism". Schmitt regarded the partisan as a specific and significant phenomenon which, during the latter half of the 20th century, indicated the emergence of a new theory of warfare.

[ citation needed ] Schmitt and Todorović had a daughter, Anima, who, in 1957, married Alfonso Otero Varela (1925–2001), a Spanish law professor at the University of Santiago de Compostela and a member of the ruling FET y de las JONS party in Francoist Spain . She translated several of her father's works into Spanish. Letters from Schmitt to his son-in-law have been published. Schmitt died on 7 April 1985 and is buried in Plettenberg .

[ 36 ] Publications [ edit ] Schmitt contended that political representation in a liberal democracy was formulaic, and that the mystical nature and personalist ideal of the Catholic sovereign was essential.

[ 37 ] : 516 The Dictatorship [ edit ] In his essay Die Diktatur ("The Dictatorship"), he discussed the foundations of the newly established Weimar Republic , emphasising the office of the President of Germany . In this essay, Schmitt compared and contrasted what he saw as the effective and ineffective elements of the new constitution of his country. He saw the office of the president as a comparatively effective element, because of the power granted to the president to declare a state of exception ( Ausnahmezustand ). This power, which Schmitt discussed and implicitly praised as dictatorial, [ 27 ] was more in line with the underlying mentality of executive power than the comparatively slow and ineffective processes of legislative power reached through parliamentary discussion and compromise.

[ citation needed ] Schmitt was at pains to remove what he saw as a taboo surrounding the concept of "dictatorship" and to show that the concept is implicit whenever power is wielded by means other than the slow processes of parliamentary politics and the bureaucracy: [ 38 ] If the constitution of a state is democratic, then every exceptional negation of democratic principles, every exercise of state power independent of the approval of the majority, can be called dictatorship.

For Schmitt, every government capable of decisive action must include a dictatorial element within its constitution. Although the German concept of Ausnahmezustand is best translated as "state of emergency", it literally means " state of exception " which, according to Schmitt, frees the executive from any legal restraints to its power that would normally apply. The use of the term "exceptional" has to be underlined here: Schmitt defines sovereignty as the power to decide to initiate a state of exception , as Giorgio Agamben has noted. According to Agamben, [ 39 ] Schmitt's conceptualization of the "state of exception" as belonging to the core-concept of sovereignty was a response to Walter Benjamin 's concept of a "pure" or "revolutionary" violence, which did not enter into any relationship whatsoever with right. Through the state of exception, Schmitt included all types of violence under right, in the case of the authority of Hitler, leading to the formulation "The leader defends the law" (" Der Führer schützt das Recht ").

[ 27 ] Schmitt opposed what he termed "commissarial dictatorship", or the declaration of a state of emergency to save the legal order (a temporary suspension of law, defined itself by moral or legal right): the state of emergency is limited (even if a posteriori , by law) to "sovereign dictatorship", in which law was suspended, as in the classical state of exception, not to "save the Constitution ", but rather to create another constitution. This is how he theorized Adolf Hitler 's continual suspension of the legal constitutional order during the Third Reich (the Weimar Republic 's Constitution was never abrogated, emphasized Giorgio Agamben; [ 40 ] rather, it was "suspended" for four years, first with the 28 February 1933 Reichstag Fire Decree , with the suspension renewed every four years, implying a continual state of emergency).

[ citation needed ] Political Theology [ edit ] On Dictatorship was followed by another essay in 1922, titled Politische Theologie ( political theology ); in it, Schmitt gives further substance to his authoritarian theories with the now notorious definition: "The sovereign is he who decides on the exception." By "exception", Schmitt means stepping outside the rule of law under the state of exception ( Ausnahmezustand ) doctrine he first introduced in On Dictatorship for the purpose of managing some crisis, which Schmitt defines loosely as "a case of extreme peril, a danger to the existence of the state, or the like." For this reason, the "exception" is understood as a "borderline concept" for Schmitt because it is not within the purview of the normal legal order. Schmitt opposes this definition of sovereignty to those offered by contemporary theorists on the issue, particularly Hans Kelsen , whose work is criticized at several points in the essay. The state of exception is a critique of "normativism", a positivist concept of law developed by Kelsen of law as the expression of norms that are abstract and generally applicable, in all circumstances.

[ 41 ] A year later, Schmitt supported the emergence of totalitarian power structures in his paper " Die geistesgeschichtliche Lage des heutigen Parlamentarismus " (roughly: "The Intellectual-Historical Situation of Today's Parliamentarianism", translated as The Crisis of Parliamentary Democracy by Ellen Kennedy). Schmitt criticized the institutional practices of liberal politics, arguing that they are justified by a faith in rational discussion and openness that is at odds with actual parliamentary party politics , in which outcomes are hammered out in smoke-filled rooms by party leaders. Schmitt also posits an essential division between the liberal doctrine of separation of powers and what he holds to be the nature of democracy itself, the identity of the rulers and the ruled. Although many critics of Schmitt today, such as Stephen Holmes in his The Anatomy of Anti-Liberalism , take exception to his fundamentally authoritarian outlook, the idea of incompatibility between liberalism and democracy is one reason for the continued interest in his political philosophy .

[ 42 ] In chapter 4 of his State of Exception (2005), Italian philosopher Giorgio Agamben argued that Schmitt's Political Theology ought to be read as a response to Walter Benjamin 's influential essay Towards the Critique of Violence .

[ 43 ] The book's title derives from Schmitt's assertion (in chapter 3) that "all significant concepts of the modern theory of the state are secularized theological concepts"—in other words, that political theory addresses the state (and sovereignty) in much the same manner as theology does God.

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] The Concept of the Political [ edit ] Main article: The Concept of the Political For Schmitt, "the political" is not equal to any other domain, such as the economic (which distinguishes between profitable and not profitable), but instead is the most essential to identity. While churches are predominant in religion or society is predominant in economics, and the state is usually predominant in politics. Yet, for Schmitt, the political was not autonomous or equivalent to the other domains, but rather the existential basis that would determine any other domain should it reach the point of politics (e.g. religion ceases to be merely theological when it makes a clear distinction between the "friend" and the "enemy").

[ citation needed ] He views political concepts and images as inherently contestable. Hegemonic powers seek to control and direct how political concepts are applied for a purpose and to effect an outcome such as making the enemy knowable and, in all cases, intended to manifest the inclusive and exclusive aspects of the social order represented by the political words and symbolism: [ 46 ] All political concepts, images, and terms have a polemical meaning. They are focused on a specific conflict and are bound to a concrete situation; the result (which manifests itself in war or revolution) is a friend–enemy grouping, and they turn into empty and ghostlike abstractions when this situation disappears. Words such as state, republic, society, class, as well as sovereignty, constitutional state, absolutism, dictatorship, economic planning, neutral or total state, and so on, are incomprehensible if one does not know exactly who is to be affected, combated, refuted, or negated by such a term.

Schmitt, in perhaps his best-known formulation, bases his conceptual realm of state sovereignty and autonomy upon the distinction between friend and enemy . Schmitt writes: [ 47 ] The political enemy need not be morally evil or aesthetically ugly… But he is, nevertheless, the other, the stranger ...

This distinction is to be determined "existentially", which is to say that the enemy is whoever is "in a specially intense way, existentially something different and alien, so that in the extreme case conflicts with him are possible".

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] Such an enemy need not even be based on nationality: so long as the conflict is potentially intense enough to become a violent one between political entities, the actual substance of enmity may be anything.

[ 50 ] In this work, Schmitt makes the distinction between several different types of enemies one may make, stating that political enemies ought to be made out of a legitimate concern for the safety of the state rather than moral intuitions.

[ 51 ] The collectivization of friendship and enmity is, for Schmitt, the essence of politics. This theory of politics was influential in the Third Reich where the recognition and eradication of the enemy became a necessary component of the collective national identity. Similar views were shared by other Nazi legal theorists like Werner Best .

[ 52 ] Although there have been divergent interpretations concerning this work, there is broad agreement that The Concept of the Political is an attempt to achieve state unity by defining the content of politics as opposition to the "enemy". Additionally, the prominence of the state stands as an arbitrary force dominating potentially fractious civil society, whose various antagonisms must not be allowed to affect politics, lest civil war result.

[ citation needed ] Dialogue with Leo Strauss [ edit ] According to Heinrich Meier , Schmitt provided a positive reference for Leo Strauss , and approved his work, which was instrumental in winning Strauss the scholarship funding that allowed him to leave Germany.

[ 53 ] In turn, Strauss's critique and clarifications of The Concept of the Political led Schmitt to make significant emendations in its second edition. Writing to Schmitt during 1932, Strauss summarized Schmitt's political theology thus: "[B]ecause man is by nature evil, he therefore needs dominion . But dominion can be established, that is, men can be unified only in a unity against—against other men. Every association of men is necessarily a separation from other men… the political, thus understood, is not the constitutive principle of the state, of order, but a condition of the state." [ 54 ] However, Robert Howse has argued that this interpretation of Heinrich Meier is exaggerated and unfounded, and that there is no proper basis for the idea that Strauss's critique had a major influence on Schmitt.

[ 55 ] In his analysis of Schmitt's thought, philosopher Karl Löwith interprets the changes that occurred between the second and third editions of The Concept of the Political as unrelated to the influence of Leo Strauss. Rather, he sees these revisions as being made in response to the demands of the time, and as the result of Schmitt's opportunistic adjustment of his position to accommodate the Nazi regime.

[ 56 ] [ 55 ] Political Romanticism [ edit ] Schmitt's Political Romanticism (1926) contains Schmitt's critique of Romantic conservatism , which he considers unrealistic for the political arena of the modern era as it only seeks a restoration of the ancien régime , which Schmitt considers unfeasible. Distancing himself from the tradition of legitimist "restorative conservatives" such as Adam Müller or Joseph de Maistre , Schmitt instead champions the thought of the 19th century Spanish reactionary thinker Juan Donoso Cortés , who advocated for a dictatorship.

[ 57 ] According to György Lukács , this text is both the starting point of Schmitt's advocacy for a politics of realism and his extreme anti-humanism. Lukács quotes Schmitt's comment that Cortes's 'great theoretical significance for the history of counter-revolutionary theory lies in [that] his contempt for human beings knew no bounds; their blind understanding, their feeble wills, the derisory elan of their carnal desires seem so pitiful to him that all the vocabulary of all human languages is not sufficient to express the full baseness of these creatures,' and Lukács writes: [ 58 ] Here we clearly perceive Schmitt's association with all anti-human tendencies, past and present, along with the reason for it in socio-human terms: he is an enemy of the masses grown blind with hatred, a fanatic in the campaign against Vermassung or mass feeling.

The Leviathan in the State Theory of Thomas Hobbes [ edit ] The Leviathan in the State Theory of Thomas Hobbes , with the subtitle "Meaning and Failure of a Political Symbol", is a 1938 work by Schmitt that revisits one of his most critical theoretical inspirations: Thomas Hobbes . Schmitt's work can be described as both a critique and an appraisal of the controversial political theorist. This work also contains some of Schmitt's more anti-Semitic language. As contemporary writers on Schmitt have noted, his anti-Semitism may be read as more a kind of "anti-Judaism" as, unlike his Nazi allies, he did not attribute the dangers of Judaism to "biological" reasons but strictly religious ones. This work by Schmitt is also one of the most intimately involved by him with the concept of myth in a political setting.

[ citation needed ] The text itself begins with an overview of the religious history of the mythical character " Leviathan ". Schmitt traces this character as a unique subject of conflicting interpretations in Abrahamic doctrines, whereby the Leviathan, understood most pointedly as a "big fish," is occasionally interchangeable with that of a dragon or serpent, which Schmitt remarks have been "protective and benevolent deities" [ 59 ] in the history of non-Jewish peoples. But, as Schmitt makes clear, Hobbes' Leviathan is very different from these interpretations, being illustrated firstly in his work Leviathan as a "huge man". The Leviathan as a "huge man" is used throughout Hobbes' work as a symbol of the sovereign person. Although the Leviathan is not the only allegory made by Hobbes of the sovereign, which gravitates throughout his work as "a huge man, a huge leviathan, an artificial being, an animal artificiale , an automaton , or a machina ".

[ 60 ] Hobbes' concern was mainly to convey the sovereign person as a frightening creature that could instill fear into those chaotic elements of man that belong to his interpretation of the state of nature .

[ citation needed ] Schmitt's critique of Hobbes begins with Hobbes' understanding of the state as a "machine" which is set into motion by the sovereign. That, according to Schmitt, is actually a continuation of René Descartes 's concept of mind–body dualism . For Hobbes to conceptualize the state as a machine whose soul is the sovereign renders it really as just a mechanic structure, carrying over the cartesian dualism into political theory: "As a totality, the state is body and soul, a homo artificialis , and, as such, a machine. It is a manmade product... the soul thereby becomes a mere component of a machine artificially manufactured by man." [ 61 ] Schmitt adds that this technical conception of the state is essential in the modern interpretation of government as a widespread administrative organ.

[ b ] Therefore, Schmitt attributes Hobbes' mechanistic and often also a legally positivist interpretation of the state (what is legitimate = what is legal) with the process of political neutralization. This is consistent with Schmitt's larger attitude toward attempts to apply technical principles to political matters.

[ citation needed ] Also, Schmitt critiques Hobbes' insistence that belief in miracles must only be outwardly consistent with the position of the state and can, privately, deviate into one's own opinion as to the validity of such "miracles".

[ 63 ] The belief in miracles was a relevant point in Hobbes' century, for kings would regularly "bestow miracles" by touching the hands of those of ill health, supposedly healing them—obviously a consequence of the medieval belief that kings had a divine character. Hobbes' position was that "private reason" may disagree with what the state claims to be a miracle, but the "public reason" must, by necessity, agree to its position in order to avoid chaos. Schmitt's critique of Hobbes here is twofold. Firstly, Hobbes opens the crack toward a liberal understanding of individual rights (such as the right to "private reason") which Schmitt was a tireless critic of and, secondly, Hobbes guts the state of any "substantive truth" (such as the genuine belief of the individual, even in private, of the kings divine right ) and renders the state into now simply a "justifiable external power".

[ 63 ] This opens up the elementary basis of liberal society, which, for Schmitt, was pluralism . Such a pluralist society lacked ideological homogeneity and nationally bound group identity, both of which were fundamental premises of a democratic society to Schmitt.

[ 64 ] Despite his critiques, Schmitt, nonetheless, finishes the book with a celebration of Hobbes as a truly magnificent thinker, ranking him along with other theorists he values greatly like Niccolò Machiavelli and Giambattista Vico .

[ 65 ] The Nomos of the Earth [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The Nomos of the Earth is Schmitt's most historical and geopolitical work. Published in 1950, it was also one of his final texts. It describes the origin of the Eurocentric global order, which Schmitt dates from the discovery of the New World , discusses its specific character and its contribution to civilization, analyses the reasons for its decline at the end of the 19th century, and concludes with prospects for a new world order. It defends European achievements, not only in creating the first truly global order of international law , but also in limiting war to conflicts among sovereign states, which, in effect, civilized war. In Schmitt's view, the European sovereign state was the greatest achievement of Occidental rationalism; in becoming the principal agency of secularization, the European state created the modern age.

Notable in Schmitt's discussion of the European epoch of world history is the role played by the New World , which ultimately replaced the Old World as the centre of the Earth and became the arbiter in European and world politics. According to Schmitt, the United States ' internal conflicts between economic presence and political absence, between isolationism and interventionism, are global problems, which today continue to hamper the creation of a new world order. However critical Schmitt is of American actions at the end of the 19th century and after World War I, he considered the United States to be the only political entity capable of resolving the crisis of global order. Since 1942, Schmitt envisaged the nomos of the New World installing itself “upon the ruins" of the Old.

[ 66 ] Hamlet or Hecuba [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( December 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Published in 1956, Hamlet or Hecuba: The Intrusion of the Time into the Play was Schmitt's most extended piece of literary criticism. In it, Schmitt focuses his attention on Shakespeare 's Hamlet and argues that the significance of the work hinges on its ability to integrate history in the form of the taboo of the queen and the deformation of the figure of the avenger. Schmitt uses this interpretation to develop a theory of myth and politics that serves as a cultural foundation for his concept of political representation. Beyond literary criticism or historical analysis, Schmitt's book also reveals a comprehensive theory of the relationship between aesthetics and politics that responds to alternative ideas developed by Walter Benjamin and Theodor W. Adorno .

Theory of the Partisan [ edit ] Main article: Theory of the Partisan Schmitt's Theory of the Partisan originated in two lectures delivered during 1962, [ 67 ] and has been seen as a rethinking of The Concept of the Political .

[ 68 ] It addressed the transformation of war in the post-European age, analysing a specific and significant phenomenon that ushered in a new theory of war and enmity. It contains an implicit theory of the terrorist, which during the 21st century has resulted in yet another new theory of war and enmity. In the lectures, Schmitt directly tackles the issues surrounding "the problem of the Partisan" figure: the guerrilla or revolutionary who "fights irregularly" (p. 3).

[ 69 ] Both because of its scope, with extended discussions on historical figures like Napoleon , Vladimir Lenin , and Mao Zedong , as well as the events marking the beginning of the 20th century, Schmitt's text has had a resurgence of popularity.

Jacques Derrida , in his Politics of Friendship remarked: [ 70 ] Despite certain signs of ironic distrust in the areas of metaphysics and ontology, The Concept of the Political was, as we have seen, a philosophical type of essay to 'frame' the topic of a concept unable to constitute itself on philosophical ground. But in Theory of the Partisan , it is in the same areas that the topic of this concept is both radicalized and properly uprooted, where Schmitt wished to regrasp in history the event or node of events that engaged this uprooting radicalization, and it is precisely there that the philosophical as such intervenes again.

Schmitt concludes Theory of the Partisan with the statement: "The theory of the partisan flows into the question of the concept of the political, into the question of the real enemy and of a new nomos of the earth." [ 71 ] Schmitt's work on the Partisan has since spurred comparisons with the post-9/11 'terrorist' in recent scholarship.

[ 72 ] The Italian philosopher Domenico Losurdo comments: [ 73 ] Thus, for Schmitt, the colonized peoples' struggle for national independence, although embracing ever larger sections of the population, becomes synonymous with terrorism, while the actions of the occupying army, foreign and hated by the citizens of the occupied country, are characterized as "counter-terrorist". Of course, the "retaliations" can be very harsh, but - Schmitt observes, referring to Algeria and Vietnam - we must take into account the "irresistible logic of the old rule according to which insurgents can only be dealt with by insurgent methods." As we see, the main difference between terrorism and counter-terrorism is not a specific behavior (ie. the impact on, or participation of, citizens). It coincides with the border between barbarism and civilization, between East and West. The power that determines who the barbarians are every time also determines who the terrorists are.

Personal life [ edit ] In 1916, Schmitt married his first wife, Pavla Dorotić, [ 74 ] a Croatian woman who pretended to be a countess. They divorced, but an annulment was not granted by a Catholic tribunal , so his 1926 marriage to Duška Todorović (1903–1950), a Serbian woman, was not deemed valid under Catholic law .

[ 74 ] He reportedly had an affair with English teacher Kathleen Murray while his divorce from Dorotić was still pending.

[ 75 ] According to biographers such as Reinhard Mehring , [ 76 ] Schmitt's private life was deeply troubled and distressed by extreme anti-semitism , self-destructive and compulsive sexuality , and a deep resentment toward bourgeois life. And this is said to have had a profound impact on his real-life activities.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] Influence [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Germany Ideologies Agrarian Christian democracy Liberal Ordo Ritter School Monarchism Nationalist Neue Rechte Völkisch Paternalistic Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Romanticism Right-Hegelianism Historical School Value Principles Authority Christian values Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Federalism Gemeinschaft Geopolitik Germanisation Heimat Imperialism In Treue fest Kultur Medievalism Monarchism Organicism Patriotism Political theology Prussian virtues Sittlichkeit Social market economy Sonderweg Subsidiarity Volk Volksgeist History Holy Roman Empire The Junkers German Confederation Carlsbad Decrees Anti-Socialist Laws German Reich German Empire State Socialism Völkisch movement George-Kreis Leipzig school Freikorps Monarchism in Bavaria after 1918 Perceived Weimar decadence Conservative Revolution Oster conspiracy 20 July plot Historikerstreit Heidelberg Manifesto German reunification Erklärung 2018 Intellectuals Fichte Freyer Gadamer von Galen George Gehlen Gogarten Görres Hamann Hartmann Heidegger Hegel Herder Hielscher von Hildebrand Hoppe Jünger (Ernst) Jünger (Friedrich) Kantorowicz Klages Kommerell Koselleck Langbehn von Lilienfeld Lorenz Löwith Lübbe Mann (early) Maschke Moeller van den Bruck Müller Nolte Novalis Otto Pieper Plessner von Ranke Reck-Malleczewen Ritter (Gerhard) Ritter (Joachim) Röpke Rüstow von Salomon Scheler Schelsky Schlegel Schmitt Sieferle Sloterdijk Sombart Spaemann Spengler Steinbuch von Treitschke Voegelin Weber Literature Addresses to the German Nation (1806) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) The National System (1837) Degeneration (1892) Ressentiment (1912) Reflections of a Nonpolitical Man (1918) The Decline of the West (1918, 1922) Ideology and Utopia (1929) Man and Technics (1931) The Concept of the Political (1932) On the Marble Cliffs (1939) Man (1940) Diary of a Man in Despair (1947) Man in the Age of Technology (1949) The Questionnaire (1951) Fascism in Its Epoch (1963) Envy (1966) Moral und Hypermoral (1969) Germany Abolishes Itself (2010) Finis Germania (2017) Commentators Anrich Aust Bolz Broder Deschner Thomas Fasbender Herman Höhler Hoven Joffe Krause Landt Kuby Hermann Löns Löwenthal Mann (Golo) Maurer Nagel Nebel Noelle-Neumann Otte Pirinçci Röhl Safranski Sarrazin von Schrenck-Notzing Schwilk Stein Strauss (Botho) Stürmer Tichy Weißmann Zehrer Zitelmann Politicians Adenauer Ancillon Barschel von Bismarck von Bose Brüning Fehrenbach Filbinger von Gerlach Goerdeler Held von Hindenburg Hugenberg Jongen Jung Kapp Kohl Krah Lengsfeld Maaßen von Merkatz Merz Michaelis von Papen Petry von Radowitz Rauschning Ritter von Kahr von Roon Schäffer Schäffler von Schleicher Stresemann vom Stein Stoecker von Storch Strauss Wagener Weidel von Westarp Wilhelm II Winnig Jurists Böckenförde von Gierke Möser Quabbe von Savigny Schmitt Stahl Wackenroder Wagener Activists Kohlmann Kubitschek Seibt Billy Six von Stauffenberg Stürzenberger von Thurn und Taxis (Elisabeth) von Thurn und Taxis (Gloria) Parties Active Alternative for Germany (AfD) Bavaria Party (BP) Bündnis Deutschland (BD) Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU) Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU) Centre Party Ecological Democratic Party (ÖDP) Family Party of Germany The Republicans (REP) Values Union (WU) We Citizens (WB) Defunct Bavarian People's Party (BVP) Conservative Party Free Conservative Party (FKP) German Conservative Party (DkP) German Freedom Party German National People's Party (DNVP) German Party (DP) German People's Party (DVP) Organizations Aufbau Vereinigung Bibliothek des Konservatismus Desiderius-Erasmus-Stiftung Die Deutschen Konservativen Forum of German Catholics Gerhard Löwenthal Prize German Burschenschaft German Taxpayers Federation Citizens' Movement Pax Europa Hanns Seidel Foundation Hans Filbinger Foundation Identitäre Aktion Institut für Staatspolitik Konrad Adenauer Foundation PEGIDA Studienzentrum Weikersheim Tradition und Leben Defunct Der Stahlhelm, Bund der Frontsoldaten Germany Foundation Queen Louise League Media Die Achse des Guten Antaios (Defunct) Bild Cato Cicero COMPACT Deutsche Rundschau Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung Junge Freiheit Kreuzzeitung (Defunct) Politically Incorrect Preußische Allgemeine Zeitung Süddeutsche Monatshefte Der Türmer Verlag Antaios Die Welt Welt am Sonntag Related topics Alternative Mitte Bavarian nationalism Böckenförde dilemma European New Right Conservatism in Austria Conservatism in Switzerland Criticism of multiculturalism Cultural pessimism Freischwebende Intelligenz Immigration to Germany Criminality Remigration Metapolitics Politics of Germany Liberalism Stahlhelm-Fraktion Conservatism portal Germany portal v t e Through Walter Benjamin , Giorgio Agamben , Andrew Arato , Chantal Mouffe and other writers, Schmitt has become a common reference in recent writings of the intellectual left as well as the right.

[ 79 ] These discussions concern not only the interpretation of Schmitt's own positions, but also matters relevant to contemporary politics: the idea that laws of the state cannot strictly limit actions of its sovereign , the problem of a " state of exception " (later expanded upon by Agamben).

[ 80 ] Schmitt's argument that political concepts are secularized theological concepts has also recently been seen as consequential for those interested in contemporary political theology . The German-Jewish philosopher Jacob Taubes , for example, engaged Schmitt widely in his study of Saint Paul , The Political Theology of Paul (Stanford Univ. Press, 2004). Taubes' understanding of political theology is, however, very different from Schmitt's, and emphasizes the political aspect of theological claims, rather than the religious derivation of political claims.

[ citation needed ] Schmitt is described as a "classic of political thought" by Herfried Münkler , while in the same article Münkler speaks of his post-war writings as reflecting an "embittered, jealous, occasionally malicious man" ("verbitterten, eifersüchtigen, gelegentlich bösartigen Mann"). Schmitt was termed the "Crown Jurist of the Third Reich " ("Kronjurist des Dritten Reiches") by Waldemar Gurian .

[ 81 ] According to historian Renato Cristi in the writing of the 1980 Constitution of Chile , Pinochet collaborator Jaime Guzmán based his work on the pouvoir constituant concept used by Schmitt (as well as drawing inspiration in the ideas of market society of Friedrich Hayek ). This way Guzmán would have enabled a framework for a dictatorial state combined with a free market economic system.

[ 82 ] Schmitt's anti-parliamentarian political theory received renewed attention as a historical reference with immediate contemporary relevance during the electoral cycles and administrations of the U.S. President Donald Trump .

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 86 ] Law of emergency powers [ edit ] Schmitt's "state of exception" doctrine has enjoyed a revival in the 21st century. Formulated 10 years before the 1933 Nazi takeover of Germany, Schmitt claimed that urgency justified the following: [ 87 ] Special executive powers Suspension of the Rule of Law Derogation of legal and constitutional rights Schmitt's doctrine helped clear the way for Hitler's rise to power by providing the theoretical legal foundation of the Nazi regime .

[ 87 ] China [ edit ] Part of a series on Neoauthoritarianism in China Ideologies Capitalism Party-state Confucianism New Conservatism Authoritarian Cultural Social Ultra Legalism Nationalist Han Neo Ultra Principles Authority Authoritarianism Bureaucracy Chinese culture PRC Chinese Dream Democratic centralism Developmentalism Duty Eight Honors and Eight Shames Elitism Four Cardinal Principles Four Modernizations Imperialism Irredentism Law and order Market economy Dirigisme Meritocracy One country, one system (factions) One country, two systems (factions) Patriotism Post-communism Revisionism (Marxism) Social order Statism Syncretic politics Technocracy Three Stricts and Three Honests Unification One China principle " United front " Unified power Unitary state Whole-process people's democracy Zhonghua minzu History 1989 Tiananmen Square massacre 1992 Consensus 2020 Hong Kong national security law Anti-corruption campaign under Xi Jinping Anti-Secession Law Belt and Road Initiative Boluan Fanzheng Campaign against spiritual pollution Hong Kong Basic Law Article 23 Macau national security law Persecution of Falun Gong Persecution of Uyghurs in China Property Law Reform and opening up Sinicization of Tibet Social Credit System Strike Hard Against Crime Campaign Territorial disputes of the PRC Wolf warrior diplomacy Intellectuals Bell Chen Deng Gan Hu (Xijin) Jiang (Qing) Jiang (Shigong) Jin Li Liu Tam Tan Wang Wu Xiao Yan Zhang Zheng Politicians Mainland China Chen (Kuiyuan) Chen (Yun) Deng Hu Huang Jiang Li (Peng) Li (Xiannian) Peng Wang (Huning) Wang (Qishan) Wu Xi Yang Zhou Zhu Hong Kong (pro-Beijing) Chan (Gary) Chan (Joephy) Chow Fok Ho Ip (Kwok-him) Ip (Regina) Kwok Lam Lee (Dominic) Lee (John) Lee (Starry) Leung Liao Quat Tsang (Donald) Tsang (Yok-sing) Tung Yung Macau (pro-Beijing) Chui Ho (Edmund) Ho (Iat Seng) Sam Republic of China (Taiwan, pro-Beijing) Chang Chou Chiu Hung Extant parties Mainland China Chinese Communist Party (factions) Hong Kong (pro-Beijing) Business and Professionals Alliance Civil Force Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress Federation of Public Housing Estates Hong Kong Federation of Education Workers Hong Kong Federation of Trade Unions Kowloon West New Dynamic Liberal Party New Century Forum New People's Party New Prospect New Territories Association of Societies Politihk Social Strategic Roundtable Silent Majority Macau (pro-Beijing) Alliance for Change Macau-Guangdong Union New Macau Development Union United Citizens Association Union for Development Women's Association Republic of China (Taiwan, pro-Beijing) Chinese Unification Promotion Party For Public Good Party Labor Party Patriot Alliance Association Historical parties Hong Kong (pro-Beijing) Federation for the Stability Hong Kong Alliance of Chinese and Expatriates Hong Kong Progressive Alliance Liberal Democratic Federation New Hong Kong Alliance Professional Forum Progressive Hong Kong Society Alliances Pro-Beijing camp Hong Kong Macau United front Hong Kong Taiwan Literature America Against America The China Wave Farewell to Revolution Organisations Confucius Institute Group of 89 Triad § Chinese government connections Media Mainland China Beijing Daily Economic Daily Global Times Guancha Hong Kong (pro-Beijing) Headline Daily Hong Kong Economic Times Oriental Daily News Sing Tao Daily The Standard By region Hong Kong Taiwan (Republic of China) Related ideologies Authoritarian capitalism Authoritarian socialism Conservative socialism Fascism Market socialism Carl Schmitt Thought Social imperialism Neocolonialism Socialism with Chinese characteristics Deng Xiaoping Theory Three Represents Scientific Outlook on Development Xi Jinping Thought Related topics Anti-national sentiments American Japanese Taiwanese Tibetan " Capitalist roader " Economy of China Hong Kong Macau New Economic Policy Penal system in China People's democratic dictatorship Politics of China Liberalism New Left Taiwan, PRC (claimed) Transnational repression by China Xi Jinping faction Conservatism portal People's Republic of China portal v t e See also: Neoauthoritarianism (China) Some have argued that Schmitt has become an important influence on Chinese political theory in the 21st century, particularly since Xi Jinping became General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party in 2012.

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] [ 90 ] Leading Chinese Schmittians include the theologian Liu Xiaofeng , the public policy scholar Wang Shaoguang , [ 91 ] and the legal theorist and government adviser Jiang Shigong .

[ 92 ] Schmitt's ideas have proved popular and useful instruments in justifying the legitimacy of Chinese Communist Party rule.

[ 89 ] [ 93 ] The first important wave of Schmitt's reception in China started with Liu's writings at the end of the 1990s.

[ 94 ] In the context of a transition period, Schmitt was used both by liberal, nationalist and conservative intellectuals to find answers to contemporary issues. In the 21st century, most of them are still concerned with state power and to what extent a strong state is required to tackle China's modernization. Some authors consider Schmitt's works as a weapon against liberalism.

[ 95 ] Others think that his theories are helpful for China's development.

[ 91 ] A critical reception of his use in a Chinese context also exists.

[ 96 ] [ 97 ] [ 95 ] These differences go together with different interpretations of Schmitt's relation with fascism. While some scholars regard him as a faithful follower of fascism, others, such as Liu Xiaofeng, consider his support for the Nazi regime only as instrumental and attempt to separate his works from their historical context.

[ 94 ] According to them, his real goal is to pave a different and unique way for the modernization of Germany—precisely what makes him interesting for China. Generally speaking, the Chinese reception is ambivalent: quite diverse and dynamic, but also highly ideological.

[ 91 ] [ 98 ] Other scholars are cautious when it comes to Schmitt's arguments for state power, considering the danger of totalitarianism, they assume at the same time that state power is necessary for the current transition and that a "dogmatic faith" in liberalism is unsuitable for China.

[ 97 ] By emphasizing the danger of social chaos, many of them agree with Schmitt—beyond their differences—on the necessity of a strong state.

[ 91 ] Other countries [ edit ] Among other things, his work is considered to have influenced neoconservatism in the United States.

[ 99 ] Most notably the legal opinions offered by Alberto Gonzales , John Yoo et al. by invoking the unitary executive theory to justify the Bush administration 's legally controversial decisions during the War on terror (such as introducing unlawful combatant status which purportedly would eliminate protection by the Geneva Conventions , [ 100 ] the Abu Ghraib torture and prisoner abuse , the National Security Agency 's electronic surveillance program and various excesses of the Patriot Act ) mimic his writings.

[ 99 ] Professor David Luban points out that the American legal database Lexis.com has five references to Schmitt in the period between 1980 and 1990, 114 between 1990 and 2000, and 420 between 2000 and 2010, with almost twice as many in the last five years of the 2000s decade as the first five.

[ 101 ] Several scholars have noted the influence of Carl Schmitt on Vladimir Putin and Russia, specifically in defence of illiberal norms and exercising power, such as in disputes with Ukraine.

[ 102 ] [ 103 ] [ 104 ] [ 105 ] [ 106 ] Timothy Snyder has asserted that Schmitt's work has greatly influenced Eurasianist philosophy in Russia by revealing a counter to the liberal order.

[ 107 ] Nomma Zarubina, who was accused [ 108 ] by the FBI of being a secret operative of Russia’s Federal Security Service (FSB) , said in an interview that her father named her "Nomma" after Schmitt's work The Nomos of the Earth .

[ 109 ] Works [ edit ] Main article: Carl Schmitt bibliography Some of Schmitt's major works are: Political Theology: Four Chapters on the Concept of Sovereignty (1922) The Crisis of Parliamentary Democracy (1923) The Concept of the Political (1932) Die Wendung zum diskriminierenden Kriegsbegriff [ de ] (1938) Land and Sea: A World-Historical Meditation (1942) Ex Captivitate Salus (1950) The Nomos of the Earth (1950) Hamlet or Hecuba: The Intrusion of the Time into the Play (1956) Theory of the Partisan: Intermediate Commentary on the Concept of the Political (1963) Political Theology 2 (1970) See also [ edit ] Streitbare Demokratie German nationalism References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ / ʃ m ɪ t / ; German: [ʃmɪt] ^ The concept of the "administrative state" is elaborated by Schmitt in his other works such as Legality and Legitimacy as a technical interpretation of state activity that is excessively bureaucratic and wherein all disputes of the state can be settled through "more proper" or "more perfect" management.

[ 62 ] Citations [ edit ] ^ a b Wolin, Richard (1992). "Carl Schmitt: The Conservative Revolutionary Habitus and the Aesthetics of Horror".

Political Theory .

20 (3): 424– 25.

doi : 10.1177/0090591792020003003 .

S2CID 143762314 .

^ Oliver W. Lembcke, Claudia Ritzi, Gary S. Schaal (eds.): Zeitgenössische Demokratietheorien: Band 1: Normative Demokratietheorien , Springer, 2014, p. 331.

^ Hooker, William (12 November 2009).

Carl Schmitt's International Thought: Order and Orientation . Cambridge University Press. p. 204.

ISBN 978-1-13948184-7 . Retrieved 5 September 2014 .

^ Hoffman, John (2015).

Introduction to Political Theory . Routledge. p. 114.

ISBN 9781317556602 .

Martin, James (2008).

Piero Gobetti and the Politics of Liberal Revolution . Springer. p. 142.

ISBN 978-0-230-61686-8 .

^ a b Vinx 2019 .

^ Caldwell, Peter C. (June 2005). "Controversies over Carl Schmitt: A Review of Recent Literature".

The Journal of Modern History .

77 (2): 357– 387.

doi : 10.1086/431819 .

ISSN 0022-2801 .

^ Vinx 2019 , ch. 5 "Liberal Cosmopolitanism and ..." .

^ a b Koonz 2003 , p. 56 ^ "Cover of Carl Schmitt's dissertation from 1910" .

Archived from the original on 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 16 October 2018 .

^ McCormick, John P.

Carl Schmitt's Critique of Liberalism: Against Politics as Technology . 1st paperback ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999:86–87.

^ Müller, Jan-Werner.

A Dangerous Mind: Carl Schmitt in Post-War European Thought . New Haven: Yale University Press, 2003:xxix.

^ Lyons, N.S. (14 February 2023).

"The Temptations of Carl Schmitt" .

The Upheaval . Substack.

Archived from the original on 12 July 2025 . Retrieved 26 July 2025 .

^ Mehring, Reinhard (2009).

Carl Schmitt: Aufstieg und Fall (Second ed.). Verlag C.H.Beck. p. 118.

doi : 10.17104/9783406785658 .

ISBN 978-3-406-78563-4 .

JSTOR jj.1231848 .

^ a b Treiber, Hubert (2024). "What Connects Max Weber, Carl Schmitt, and Josef Redlich?".

Telos .

2024 (208): 118– 120.

doi : 10.3817/0924208117 .

ISSN 0090-6514 .

S2CID 273474071 .

^ "Carl Schmitt" .

www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org . Retrieved 21 May 2025 .

^ Gottfried, Paul (1990).

Carl Schmitt . Claridge Press. p. 20.

ISBN 978-1-870626-46-0 .

^ a b Balakrishnan 2000 , pp. 168–169 ^ Balakrishnan 2000 , p. 187.

^ Evans, Richard J.

(2003) The Coming of the Third Reich New York: Penguin Press . p. 371 ISBN 0-14-303469-3 ^ a b c Schmitt, Carl (2003). "Public Law in a New Context". In Mosse, George L. (ed.).

Nazi culture: intellectual, cultural and social life in the Third Reich . George L. Mosse series in modern European cultural and intellectual history. Madison, Wis.: University of Wisconsin Press.

ISBN 978-0-299-19304-1 .

^ a b c Schmitt, Carl (1933).

Staat, Bewegung, Volk; die Dreigliederung der politischen Einheit [ State, movement, people : the triadic structure of the political unity ] (in German) (1st ed.). Hamburg.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Koonz 2003 , p. 58.

^ Koonz 2003 , p. 59.

^ Klee, Ernst (2007).

Das Personenlexikon zum Dritten Reich. Wer war was vor und nach 1945 . Frankfurt-am-Main: Fischer-Taschenbuch-Verlag. p. 549.

ISBN 978-3-596-16048-8 .

^ Balakrishnan 2000 , pp. 183–184.

^ Deutsche Juristen-Zeitung (PDF) (in German), Flechsig, archived (PDF) from the original on 20 January 2010 , retrieved 20 July 2009 .

^ a b c Deutsche Juristen-Zeitung , 38, 1934; trans. as "The Führer Protects Justice" in Detlev Vagts, Carl Schmitt's Ultimate Emergency: The Night of the Long Knives (2012) 87(2) The Germanic Review 203.

^ Koonz 2003 , p. 207.

^ "Carl Schmitt" .

www.jewishvirtuallibrary.org . Retrieved 12 July 2025 .

^ Lind, Michael (23 April 2015).

"Carl Schmitt's War on Liberalism" .

The National Interest .

Archived from the original on 31 October 2018 . Retrieved 31 October 2018 .

^ "Carl Schmitt in China" .

The China story .

AU .

Archived from the original on 5 October 2018 . Retrieved 31 October 2018 .

^ Schmitt 2008a , p. xx.

^ Bendersky, Joseph, W., Theorist For The Reich , 1983, Princeton, New Jersey ^ Noack, Paul, Carl Schmitt – Eine Biographie, 1996, Frankfurt ^ Jünger, Ernst (2019).

A German Officer in Occupied Paris . New York: Columbia University Press. p. xvi.

ISBN 978-0-23112740-0 .

^ "Carl Schmitt-Erinnerungsorte in Plettenberg" (PDF) .

carl-schmitt.de . 2021 . Retrieved 1 October 2024 .

^ Tu, Hang (24 February 2022). "Long Live Chairman Mao! Death, Resurrection, and the (Un)Making of a Revolutionary Relic".

The Journal of Asian Studies .

81 (3): 507– 522.

doi : 10.1017/s0021911821002321 .

ISSN 0021-9118 .

^ Die Diktatur Archived 2013-01-24 at the Wayback Machine § XV p. 11.

^ Agamben 2005 , pp. 52–55.

^ Agamben 1998 , p. 168. On February 28, 1933, decree of the Ausnahmezustand (state of exception), Agamben notes that this very term was conspicuously absent: "The decree remained de facto in force until the end of the Third Reich... The state of exception thus ceases to be referred to as an external and provisional state of factual danger and comes to be confused with juridical rule itself." ^ Head, Michael.

Emergency Powers in Theory and Practice: The Long Shadow Carl Schmitt . Ashgate. p. 16.

^ William E. Scheuerman, "Survey Article: Emergency Powers and the Rule of Law after 9/11", The Journal of Political Philosophy , vol. 14, no. 1, 2006, pp. 61–84.

^ Agamben, Giorgio (2001). "Gigantomachia Concerning a Void".

State of Exception . University of Chicago (published 2003). pp.

52– 65.

^ Schmitt, Carl (2005).

Political Theology . University of Chicago (published 1922). pp.

36– 37.

^ Wang, Ban (2013). "In the Beginning is the Word: Popular Democracy and Mao's Little Red Book". In Cook, Alexander C. (ed.).

Mao's Little Red Book: A Global History . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press . p. 269.

ISBN 978-1-107-05722-7 .

^ Thaler, Mathias (2018).

Naming Violence: A Critical Theory of Genocide, Torture, and Terrorism . New York: Columbia University Press. p. 4.

^ Schmitt 2008a , p. 27.

^ Schmitt, Carl (1 December 2008).

The Concept of the Political (expanded ed.). University of Chicago Press. p. 27.

ISBN 978-0-226-73884-0 .

^ For a good discussion of Schmitt's ideas on this topic, see Frye, Charles E. (November 1966). "Carl Schmitt's Concept of the Political".

The Journal of Politics .

28 (4). Cambridge University Press: 818– 830.

doi : 10.2307/2127676 .

JSTOR 2127676 .

^ Benabdallah, Amine (2007).

Une réception de Carl Schmitt dans l'extrême-gauche: La théologie politique de Giorgio Agamben (Master's thesis) (in French). Sciences Po, Paris.

doi : 10.13140/RG.2.1.2065.4965/1 .

^ Schmitt 2008a , p. 28.

^ Bartov, Omer (2000).

Mirrors of Destruction: War, Genocide and Modern Identity . p. 143.

^ Carl Schmitt and Leo Strauss: the hidden dialogue , Heinrich Meier , University of Chicago Press 1995, 123 ^ Carl Schmitt and Leo Strauss: the hidden dialogue , Heinrich Meier, University of Chicago Press 1995, 125 ^ a b Howse, Robert. (2003). The use and abuse of Leo Strauss in the Schmitt revival on the German right—The case of Heinrich Meier. University of Michigan Law School.

^ Löwith, Karl. (1995). “The Occasional Decisionism of Carl Schmitt.” in K. Löwith, Martin Heidegger and European Nihilism, R. Wolin (ed.) and G. Steiner (trans.), New York: Columbia University Press, pp. 37–69.

^ Lukács, György (1980) [1952].

"German Sociology of the Imperialist Period" (PDF) .

The Destruction of Reason . Translated by Palmer, Peter R. London: Merlin Press.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 April 2023 . Retrieved 3 December 2023 .

^ Lukács, György (1980) [1952].

"Epilogue" (PDF) .

The Destruction of Reason . Translated by Palmer, Peter R. London: Merlin Press.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 6 April 2023 . Retrieved 3 December 2023 .

^ Schmitt 2008b , p. 9.

^ Schmitt 2008b , p. 19.

^ Schmitt 2008b , p. 34.

^ Schmitt 2008b , pp. 5–6.

^ a b Schmitt 2008b , p. 56.

^ Schmitt, Carl.

The Crisis of Parliamentary Democracy . The MIT Press.

^ Schmitt 2008b , pp. 83–86.

^ Steinmetz, George (2013).

Sociology and Empire: The Imperial Entanglements of a Discipline . (Duke University Press), p 33, https://api.pageplace.de/preview/DT0400.9780822395409_A35619783/preview-9780822395409_A35619783.pdf ^ Schmitt 2004 , p. 11.

^ Hoelzl, Michael; Ward, Graham (2008).

Editors' introduction to Political Theology II .

Polity . p. 4.

ISBN 978-0-7456-4254-3 .

^ "Telos Press" .

Archived from the original on 12 February 2022 . Retrieved 19 March 2022 .

[ failed verification ] ^ Derrida, Jacques (1997).

The Politics of Friendship . Verso. p. 146.

ISBN 978-1-84467-054-3 .

^ Schmitt 2004 , p. 78.

^ Fairhead, Edward (2018). "Carl Schmitt's politics in the age of drone strikes: Examining the Schmittian texture of Obama's enemy".

Journal for Cultural Research .

22 : 39– 54.

doi : 10.1080/14797585.2017.1410991 .

S2CID 148618541 .

^ Losurdo, Domenico (2007).

"Terrorismo" .

Il linguaggio dell'Impero. Lessico dell'ideologia americana . Bari: Edizioni Laterza.

^ a b Koonz 2003 , p. 57 ^ Gottfried, Paul (16 October 2015).

"The Concept of Carl Schmitt" .

The American Conservative . Retrieved 11 July 2025 .

^ Mehring, Reinhard. (2014). Carl Schmitt: A Biography. Cambridge:Polity Press ^ Balint, Benjamin (Summer 2015).

"The Nazi Jurist: A review of Carl Schmitt: A Biography by Reinhard Mehring" .

Claremont Review of Books .

Archived from the original on 26 April 2025 . Retrieved 25 May 2025 .

^ Gottfried, Paul (16 October 2015).

"The Concept of Carl Schmitt: What made the controversial philosopher's work so compelling?" .

The American Conservative .

Archived from the original on 16 July 2024 . Retrieved 25 May 2025 .

^ See for example Lebovic, Nitzan (2008), "The Jerusalem School: The Theo-Political Hour", New German Critique (103), 97–120.

^ Amine Benabdallah (June 2007).

"Ine réception de Carl Schmitt dans l'extrême-gauche: La théologie politique de Giorgio Agamben" (in French). Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 14 April 2015 .

^ Herfried Münkler , Erkenntnis wächst an den Rändern – Der Denker Carl Schmitt beschäftigt auch 20 Jahre nach seinem Tod Rechte wie Linke, in Die Welt Archived 18 January 2012 at the Wayback Machine , 7 April 2005 ^ El pensamiento político de Jaime Guzmán (2nd ed.).

LOM Ediciones . Archived from the original on 14 July 2014 . Retrieved 10 July 2014 .

^ Szalai, Jennifer (13 July 2024).

"The Nazi Jurist Who Haunts Our Broken Politics" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 26 January 2025 .

^ Sheurman, William (2019). "Donald Trump Meets Carl Schmitt".

Philosophy and Social Criticism .

45 (9): 116– 132.

doi : 10.1177/0191453719872285 .

S2CID 210538644 .

^ Adams, Roberta A. (2024).

Trumpism, Carl Schmitt, and the Threat of Anti-Liberalism in the United States: The Political Thought of Donald Trump and Trumpism . Roberta Adams. Lanham, Maryland: Lexington Books.

ISBN 978-1-6669-5225-4 .

OCLC 1478244845 .

^ Mohamed, Feisal G. (2018), Torres, Angel Jaramillo; Sable, Marc Benjamin (eds.), " 'I Alone Can Solve': Carl Schmitt on Sovereignty and Nationhood Under Trump", Trump and Political Philosophy: Leadership, Statesmanship, and Tyranny , Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan, pp.

293– 309, doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-74445-2_17 , ISBN 978-3-319-74445-2 , OCLC 1110613443 , S2CID 158793211 ^ a b Head, Michael.

Emergency Powers in Theory and Practice: The Long Shadow Carl Schmitt . Ashgate. p. 14.

^ Marchal, Kai, ed. (22 February 2017).

Carl Schmitt and Leo Strauss in the Chinese-Speaking World: Reorienting the Political . Lanham, MD: Lexington Books.

ISBN 978-1498536264 .

OCLC 963359976 .

^ a b Che, Chang (1 December 2020).

"The Nazi Inspiring China's Communists" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 1 December 2020 . Retrieved 1 December 2020 .

^ Buckley, Chris (2 August 2020).

" 'Clean Up This Mess': The Chinese Thinkers Behind Xi's Hard Line" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on 2 August 2020 . Retrieved 1 December 2020 .

^ a b c d Sapio, Flora (7 October 2015).

"Carl Schmitt in China" .

The China Story . Archived from the original on 29 July 2019 . Retrieved 29 July 2019 .

^ Xu, Jilin (2018) [2004–2015].

Rethinking China's Rise: A Liberal Critique . Translated by Ownby, David. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 27.

ISBN 978-1108470759 .

^ Libin, Xie; Patapan, Haig (21 May 2020).

"Schmitt Fever: The use and abuse of Carl Schmitt in contemporary China" .

International Journal of Constitutional Law .

18 (1): 130– 146.

doi : 10.1093/icon/moaa015 .

hdl : 10072/396618 .

ISSN 1474-2640 .

^ a b Liu, Xiaofeng (1998). "Carl Schmitt and the Predicament of Liberal Constitutionalism".

Twenty-First Century .

47 .

^ a b Guo, Jian (2006). "For the Sake of Fighting the Common Enemy: Schmitt and his Allies".

Twenty-First Century .

94 .

^ Xu, Ben (2006). "China Has No Need of Such 'Politics' and 'Decisionism': The Cult of Carl Schmitt and Nationalism".

Twenty-First Century .

94 .

^ a b Gao, Quanxi (2006). "The Issues of Carl Schmitt in the Context of the Chinese Society".

Twenty-First Century .

95 .

^ Qi, Zheng (2012). "Carl Schmitt in China".

Telos .

2012 (160): 29– 52.

doi : 10.3817/0912160029 .

S2CID 219190612 .

^ a b Legal justification Thinking out loud about John Yoo (and about Carl Schmitt) Archived 27 September 2011 at the Wayback Machine by Sandy Levinson , Balkinization, April 12, 2008 The Bush Regime from Elections to Detentions: A Moral Economy of Carl Schmitt and Human Rights by Abraham, David, University of Miami – School of Law, University of Miami Legal Studies Research Paper No. 2007 – 20 May 2007 Torture, Necessity and Existential Politics by Kutz, Christopher L., University of California , Berkeley – School of Law (Boalt Hall), UC Berkeley Public Law Research Paper No. 870602, December 2005 The Return of Carl Schmitt Archived 9 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine Scott Horton, Balkinization, 7 November 2005 Deconstructing John Yoo Archived 23 April 2008 at the Wayback Machine by Scott Horton, Harpers, 23 January 2008 The will to undemocratic power Archived 13 May 2008 at the Wayback Machine By Philip S Golub, Le Monde Diplomatique , September 2006 The Leo-conservatives Archived 10 December 2008 at the Wayback Machine by GERHARD SPÖRL, Der Spiegel , 4 August 2003 ^ War crimes warning Memos Reveal War Crimes Warnings Archived 30 July 2017 at the Wayback Machine By Michael Isikoff, Newsweek , 19 May 2004 Torture and Accountability Archived 24 July 2018 at the Wayback Machine by Elizabeth Holtzman, The Nation , 28 June 2005 US Lawyers Warn Bush on War Crimes Archived 20 October 2017 at the Wayback Machine By Grant McCool, Lawyers Against the War, Global Policy Forum , 28 January 2003 ^ David Luban, "Carl Schmitt and the Critique of Lawfare", Georgetown Public Law and Legal Theory Research Paper No. 11-33 Archived 1 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine , s. 10 ^ "David Lewis on Carl Schmitt and Russian conservatism" .

illiberalism.org .

Archived from the original on 12 February 2022 . Retrieved 12 February 2022 .

^ Auer, Stefan (September 2015). "Carl Schmitt in the Kremlin: the Ukraine crisis and the return of geopolitics".

International Affairs .

91 (5): 953– 968.

doi : 10.1111/1468-2346.12392 .

^ "Vital Questions on the Ukraine Crisis" Archived 27 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine by Vladimir Milov and Michael Benhamou, Wilfried Martens Centre for European Studies , 23 February 2022 ^ "A Schmittian reading of Russian thinking" Archived 19 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine by Andrew Wilson , UCL European Institute, 28 February 2022 ^ Piccoli, Erik (23 January 2024).

"Carl Schmitt and the Putin Regime" .

Illiberalism Studies Program .

^ Snyder, Timothy (20 March 2014).

"Fascism, Russia, and Ukraine" .

The New York Review of Books .

61 (5).

Archived from the original on 27 January 2016 . Retrieved 5 September 2014 .

^ Rohrlich, Justin (4 December 2024).

"Accused Russian operative says she has always been 'honest' to the FBI except for the two times she wasn't" .

The Independent . London.

Archived from the original on 10 December 2024 . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

^ Венедиктов, Алексей (4 December 2024).

"Интервью с Номмой Зарубиной, обвинённой в США в сотрудничестве с российскими спецслужбами" .

ECHO . Berlin.

Archived from the original on 10 December 2024 . Retrieved 10 December 2024 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Agamben, Giorgio (1998).

Homo Sacer: Sovereign Power and Bare Life . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 0-8047-3218-3 .

Agamben, Giorgio (2005).

State of Exception . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-00924-6 .

Balakrishnan, Gopal (2000).

The Enemy – An Intellectual Portrait of Carl Schmitt . Verso.

ISBN 1-85984-760-9 .

Reviewed here.

Koonz, Claudia (2003).

The Nazi Conscience . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0-674-01172-4 .

Schmitt, Carl (2004). "Theory of the Partisan: Intermediate Commentary on the Concept of the Political (1963)".

Telos (127): 11.

Schmitt, Carl (2008a).

The Concept of the Political (expanded ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-22-6738840 .

Schmitt, Carl (2008b).

The Leviathan in the State Theory of Thomas Hobbes . The University of Chicago Press.

Vinx, Lars (29 August 2019).

"Carl Schmitt" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Further reading [ edit ] Giacomo Maria Arrigo, Islamist Terrorism in Carl Schmitt's Reading , In Circolo 4 (2017).

Jeffrey Andrew Barash, Politiques de l'histoire. L'historicisme comme promesse et comme mythe (2004) Eckard Bolsinger, The Autonomy of the Political: Carl Schmitt's and Lenin's Political Realism (2001) Brunila, Tuukka (2022).

The Autonomy of the Political and the Authority of the State: Carl Schmitt and the de-politicisation of the economy (Ph.D. thesis). University of Helsinki.

ISBN 978-951-51-7089-7 .

Caldwell, Peter C. "Controversies over Carl Schmitt: a review of recent literature".

The Journal of Modern History (2005), vol. 77, no. 2, pp. 357–387.

Renato Cristi, Carl Schmitt and Authoritarian Liberalism (1998) Mariano Croce, Andrea Salvatore, The Legal Theory of Carl Schmitt (Abingdon: Routledge, 2012) ISBN 978-0-415-68349-4 .

Jacques Derrida , "Force of Law: The 'Mystical Foundation of Authority'", in Acts of Religion (2002).

Carlo Galli [ it ] , " Hamlet : Representation and the Concrete" (translated from Italian by Adam Sitze and Amanda Minervini) in Points of Departure: Political Theology on the Scenes of Early Modernity , ed.

Julia Reinhard Lupton and Graham Hammill, University of Chicago Press, 2011 Garrard, Graeme, "Joseph de Maistre and Carl Schmitt" in Joseph de Maistre's Life, Thought, and Influence: Selected Studies , ed. R. A. Lebrun (McGill-Queen's University Press, 2001).

ISBN 978-0-7735-2288-6 Gross, Raphael. Carl Schmitt and the Jews. The "Jewish Question," the Holocaust, and German Legal Theory. Translated by Joel Golb. Foreword by Peter C. Caldwell. Madison, University of Wisconsin Press, 2007.

ISBN 978-0-299-22240-6 Paul Gottfried , Carl Schmitt: Politics and Theory (New York: Greenwood Press, 1990) ISBN 0-313-27209-3 Michael Hardt & Antonio Negri , Empire (2000).

Julia Hell, "Katechon: Carl Schmitt's Imperial Theology and the Ruins of the Future", The Germanic Review 84:4 (2009): 283–326.

Herrero, Montserrat. 2015.

The political discourse of Carl Schmitt.

Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield.

William Hooker, Carl Schmitt's International Thought: Order and Orientation (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2009) ISBN 978-0-521-11542-1 Jeutner, Valentin (2019).

"Pirates in Suits: Carl Schmitt, 'Ordinary Businessmen' and Crimes of Aggression" .

Nordic Journal of International Law .

88 (3): 459– 487.

doi : 10.1163/15718107-08803004 .

S2CID 150536319 .

Lena Lindgren, Review of Carl Schmitt The Concept of the Political (Review of the Swedish edition Det politiska som begrepp , Sociologisk Forskning 2011:3, pp. 114–116; translated into English) Michael Marder , " Groundless Existence: The Political Ontology of Carl Schmitt " (London & New York: Continuum, 2010).

Reinhard Mehring : Carl Schmitt – Aufstieg und Fall. Eine Biographie . München: Verlag C.H. Beck, 2009.

ISBN 978-3-406-59224-9 .

Heinrich Meier : The Lesson of Carl Schmitt: Four Chapters on the Distinction between Political Theology and Political Philosophy . University of Chicago Press, 2011.

ISBN 978-0-226-51886-2 .

Jens Meierhenrich and Oliver Simons, eds.

The Oxford Handbook of Carl Schmitt .

Oxford University Press, 2017.

ISBN 978-0-199-91693-1 Ojakangas Mika, A Philosophy of Concrete Life: Carl Schmitt and the political thought of late modernity (2nd ed Peter Lang, 2006), ISBN 3-03910-963-4 Mitchell, Ryan Martinez (May 2020).

"Chinese Receptions of Carl Schmitt Since 1929" .

Penn State Journal of Law & International Affairs .

8 (1).

Mouffe, Chntal (1999).

The Challenge of Carl Schmitt . Phronesis (Londyn). London; New York: Verso. pp. VI, 212.

ISBN 9781859847046 .

OCLC 864875284 .

Müller, Ingo (1991).

Hitler's Justice: The Courts of the Third Reich . Translated by Deborah Lucas Schneider.  Cambridge (Mass.): Harvard University Press.

ISBN 0-674-40419-X Reinhardt, Jackson T. (2020).

"Totalitarian Friendship: Carl Schmitt in Contemporary China" .

Inquiries .

12 (7): 1.

Gabriella Slomp, Carl Schmitt and the Politics of Hostility, Violence and Terror (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009) ISBN 978-0-230-00251-7 Nicolaus Sombart , Die deutschen Männer und ihre Feinde: Carl Schmitt, ein deutsches Schicksal zwischen Männerbund und Matriarchatsmythos , Munich: Hanser, 1991.

ISBN 3-446-15881-2 (2nd ed Fischer TB, Frankfurt, 1997, ISBN 3-596-11341-5 ).

Telos 72, "Carl Schmitt: Enemy or Foe?" New York: Telos Press, Summer 1987.

Telos 109, "Carl Schmitt Now". New York: Telos Press, Fall 1996.

Telos 125, "Carl Schmitt and Donoso Cortés". New York: Telos Press, Fall 2002.

Telos 132, "Special edition on Carl Schmitt". New York: Telos Press, Fall 2005.

Telos 142, "Culture and Politics in Carl Schmitt". New York: Telos Press, Spring 2008.

Telos 147, "Carl Schmitt and the Event". New York: Telos Press, Summer 2009.

Telos 153, "Special issue on Carl Schmitt's Hamlet or Hecuba ". New York: Telos Press, Winter 2010.

Ola Tunander , The Dual State and the Sovereign: A Schmittian Approach to Western Politics , Challenge Second Annual Report to the European Commission 2006 (7.3.3 Work package 3 – Deliverable No. 32), Challenge, Brussels Johannes, Türk. "The Intrusion: Carl Schmitt's Non-Mimetic Logic of Art".

Telos 142 (2008): 73–89.

Francesco Tigani. "Fra immaginazione e realtà: dalla critica del Romanticismo alla teologia politica negli scritti di Thomas Ernest Hulme e Carl Schmitt", Información Filosófica , XIII (2016), pp. 91–110.

Francesco Tigani.

Le ceneri del politico in due capitoli: il teologo e l'erostrato (Milano: Meltemi, 2019).

EAN 9788855190589 Arthur Versluis , "Carl Schmitt, the Inquisition, and Totalitarianism" , in: Arthur Versluis, The New Inquisitions: Heretic-Hunting and the Intellectual Origins of Modern Totalitarianism , Oxford University Press, 2006.

Ignaz Zangerle, "Zur Situation der Kirche", Der Brenner 14 (1933/34): 52 ff.

"Indagini su Epimeteo tra Ivan Illich, Konrad Weiss e Carl Schmitt" (PDF) (in Italian).

Il Covile . 2008 . Retrieved 28 February 2013 .

Wolin, Richard . “Carl Schmitt, Political Existentialism, and the Total State.” Theory and Society 19, no. 4 (1990): 389–416.

Carl Schmitt, Political Existentialism, and the Total State .

Wolin, Richard. “Carl Schmitt: The Conservative Revolutionary Habitus and the Aesthetics of Horror.” Political Theory 20, no. 3 (1992): 424–47.

Carl Schmitt: The Conservative Revolutionary Habitus and the Aesthetics of Horror .

Howse, Robert. (2003). The use and abuse of Leo Strauss in the Schmitt revival on the German right—The case of Heinrich Meier. University of Michigan Law School.

Löwith, Karl. (1995). “The Occasional Decisionism of Carl Schmitt.” in K. Löwith, Martin Heidegger and European Nihilism, R. Wolin (ed.) and G. Steiner (trans.), New York: Columbia University Press, pp. 37–69.

External links [ edit ] Carl Schmitt at Wikipedia's sister projects Media from Commons Quotations from Wikiquote Textbooks from Wikibooks Library resources about Carl Schmitt Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Carl Schmitt Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Carl-Schmitt-Gesellschaft (in German) Carl Schmitt Tagebücher (in German) Telos Press Lars Vinx.

"Carl Schmitt" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Works by or about Carl Schmitt at the Internet Archive Newspaper clippings about Carl Schmitt in the 20th Century Press Archives of the ZBW v t e Carl Schmitt Bibliography Publications The Crisis of Parliamentary Democracy (1923) The Concept of the Political (1932) Land and Sea (1942) Ex Captivitate Salus (1950) Theory of the Partisan (1963) Concepts Decisionism Katechon Political theology State of exception Schools Conservative Revolution German conservatism Works about The Oxford Handbook of Carl Schmitt (2017) The Atlantic Realists (2022) Articles related to Carl Schmitt v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes v t e Continental philosophy Philosophers Adorno Agamben Althusser Arendt Aron Bachelard Badiou Barthes Bataille Baudrillard Bauman Benjamin de Beauvoir Bergson Blanchot Bourdieu Buber Butler Camus Cassirer Castoriadis Cioran Cixous Croce de Man Debord Deleuze Derrida Dilthey Eco Eagleton Engels Fanon Fichte Fisher Foucault Gadamer Gentile Guattari Gramsci Habermas Hegel Heidegger Husserl Ingarden Irigaray Jameson Jaspers Kierkegaard Kojève Koyré Kołakowski Kristeva Lacan Latour Lefebvre Lévi-Strauss Levinas Luhmann Lukács Lyotard Marcel Marcuse Marx Meillassoux Merleau-Ponty Nancy Negri Nietzsche Ortega y Gasset Rancière Ricœur Said Sartre Schelling Schmitt Schopenhauer Serres Sloterdijk Spengler Stein Strauss Weber Weil Williams Žižek Theories Absurdism Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Frankfurt School German idealism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Marxism Western Freudo- Neo-Kantianism Non-philosophy Non-representational theory Phenomenology Philosophical pessimism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Psychoanalysis Psychoanalytic theory Romanticism Speculative realism Structuralism Concepts Alterity Always already Angst Apollonian and Dionysian Authenticity Being in itself Binary oppositions Boredom Class struggle Critique Immanent Ideological Postcritique Dasein Death of God Death drive Différance Difference Existence precedes essence Existential crisis Facticity Gaze Genealogy Habitus Hauntology Historical materialism Ideology Interpellation (philosophy) Intersubjectivity Leap of faith Master–slave dialectic Master–slave morality Oedipus complex Ontic Ontopoetics Other Power Ressentiment Self-deception Totalitarianism Trace Transvaluation of values Wertkritik Will to power Hermeneutics of suspicion Discourse Linguistic theory Linguistic determinism Semantics Semiotics Media studies Film theory Linguistic turn Postcolonialism Philosophy of language Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Conservative Revolution Associated people Benn Blüher Bose Evola Freyer George Heidegger Hielscher Jung E. Jünger F. G. Jünger Klages Kommerell Moeller van den Bruck Niekisch Paetel Quabbe Salomon Schmitt Spengler Stapel Winnig Zehrer Factions George-Kreis National Bolshevism Tatkreis Major publications Books Reflections of a Nonpolitical Man (1918) The Decline of the West (1918, 1922) Prussianism and Socialism (1919) Storm of Steel (1920) The Crisis of Parliamentary Democracy (1923) The Outlaws (1930) The Concept of the Political (1932) Revolt Against the Modern World (1934) On the Marble Cliffs (1939) Periodicals Süddeutsche Monatshefte (1904–1936) Die Tat (1909–1939) Widerstand (1926–1934) Related 20 July plot European New Right German Youth Movement Armin Mohler Non-conformists of the 1930s Reactionary modernism Völkisch movement Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii Scopus Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Portals : Biography Conservatism Law NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐4b2tr
Cached time: 20250817044046
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.222 seconds
Real time usage: 2.679 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 18492/1000000
Revision size: 88363/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 698720/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 143404/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 25/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 432462/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.304/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 23068320/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2023.336      1 -total
 26.29%  531.905      2 Template:Reflist
 10.87%  220.033     35 Template:Cite_book
  9.83%  198.815      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
  8.22%  166.237     19 Template:Cite_journal
  6.85%  138.566      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.61%  133.831      2 Template:Efn
  6.06%  122.672      1 Template:Navboxes
  5.68%  115.001      1 Template:Fascism_sidebar
  5.56%  112.417     21 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:407082:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044046 and revision id 1305510556. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Carl_Schmitt&oldid=1305510556 " Categories : Carl Schmitt 1888 births 1985 deaths 20th-century German philosophers 20th-century German theologians 20th-century German political scientists Academic staff of the Humboldt University of Berlin Academic staff of the Technical University of Munich Academic staff of the University of Bonn Academic staff of the University of Cologne Academic staff of the University of Greifswald Antisemitism in Germany Conservative Revolutionary movement Critics of Freemasonry Far-right politics in Germany Geopoliticians German anti-communists German Army personnel of World War I German fascists German male writers German nationalists German political philosophers Hobbes scholars Jurists from North Rhine-Westphalia Members of the Academy for German Law Members of the Prussian State Council (Nazi Germany) German revolutionaries Nazi Party members People excommunicated by the Catholic Church People from Plettenberg People from the Province of Westphalia German philosophers of law Philosophers of war Political theologians Humboldt University of Berlin alumni Max Weber scholars Fascist writers German Nazi propagandists Hidden categories: Pages with German IPA CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 French-language sources (fr) All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from March 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2023 Pages using infobox person with multiple spouses Articles with hCards Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Articles needing additional references from December 2023 All articles needing additional references CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles with German-language sources (de) Articles with Internet Archive links Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Use Oxford spelling from May 2024 This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 13:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Carl Schmitt 50 languages Add topic

