Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works Toggle Works subsection 2.1 Astrology 2.2 Astronomy 2.3 Pendulum 3 Ibn Yunus's philosophy 4 Narration of Hadith 5 Books 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Ibn Yunus 31 languages العربية বাংলা Български Bosanski Català Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kurdî Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Português Русский Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Egyptian mathematician (c. 950–1009) Ibn Yunus Born Abu al-Hasan 'Ali Abi al-Said ibn 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Ahmad ibn Yunus bin Abd al-'Ala al-Sadafi al-Misri 
( أبو الحسن علي أبي السعيد بن عبد الرحمن بن أحمد بن يونس بن عبد الأعلى الصدفي المصري ) 950 Fustat , Ikhshidid Emirate of Egypt , now Egypt Died 6 June 1009 Cairo , Egyptian Fatimid Caliphate , now Egypt Occupation(s) Astronomer , astrologer , mathematician , philosopher Era Ikhshidid era Abbasid era Fatimid era Notable work Al-Zij al-Kabir al-Hakimi Bulugh al-Umniyya Zij ibn Yunus Ghayat al-Intifah fi Mareafat al-Da'ir min al-Falak min qabl al-Iritifah Abu al-Hasan 'Ali ibn Abi al-Said 'Abd al-Rahman ibn Ahmad ibn Yunus ibn Abd al-'Ala al-Sadafi al-Misri ( Arabic : ابن يونس ; c. 950 – 1009) was an important Egyptian astronomer and mathematician , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] whose works are noted for being ahead of their time, having been based on meticulous calculations and attention to detail. He is one of the famous Muslim astronomers who appeared after Al-Battani and Abu al-Wafa' al-Buzjani , and he was perhaps the greatest astronomer of his time. Because of his brilliance, the Fatimids gave him generous gifts and established an observatory for him on Mount Mokattam near Fustat .

Al-Aziz Billah ordered him to make astronomical tables, which he completed during the reign of Al-Hakim bi-Amr Allah , son of Al-Aziz, and called it al-Zij al-Kabir al-Hakimi.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] The crater Ibn Yunus on the Moon is named after him.

Ibn Yunus' records of the solar eclipses of 993 and 1004 as well as the lunar eclipses of 1001 and 1002.

Life [ edit ] Information regarding his early life and education is uncertain. He was born in Egypt between 950 and 952 and came from a respected family in Fustat . His father was a historian, biographer, and scholar of hadith who wrote two volumes about the history of Egypt—one about the Egyptians and one based on traveller commentary on Egypt.

[ 6 ] A prolific writer, ibn Yunus' father has been described as "Egypt's most celebrated early historian and first known compiler of a biographical dictionary devoted exclusively to Egyptians".

[ 7 ] His grandfather was also one of the scholars who specialized in astronomy, and Ibn Yunus enjoyed great prestige among the Fatimid caliphs, who encouraged him to pursue his astronomical and mathematical research. They built an observatory for him near Fustat (Cairo), and equipped it with all the necessary machinery and tools.

Sarton says of him that he was perhaps the greatest Muslim astronomer. His great-grandfather had been an associate of the noted legal scholar al-Shafi'i .

Early in the life of ibn Yunus, the Fatimid dynasty came to power and the new city of Cairo was founded. In Cairo, he worked as an astronomer for the Fatimid dynasty for twenty-six years, first for the Caliph Al-Aziz Billah and then for al-Hakim . Ibn Yunus dedicated his most famous astronomical work, al-Zij al-Kabir al-Hakimi , to the latter.

As well as for his mathematics, Ibn Yunus was also known as an eccentric and a poet.

[ 8 ] Works [ edit ] One of his greatest astronomical works was that he calculated with great accuracy the inclination of the ecliptic circle, after observing the solar and lunar eclipses.

Ibn Yunus excelled in trigonometry, and he was the first to solve some of the trigonometric equations that are used in astronomy, and he conducted valuable research in it that helped advance trigonometry. He was the first to establish a law for spherical trigonometry, and it was of great importance to scholars of astronomy, before the discovery of logarithms, since by means of that law multiplication operations in trigonometry could be converted into addition operations, it facilitated the solution of many long and complex problems.

Ibn Yunus showed great ingenuity in solving many difficult problems in astronomy.

Ibn Yunus observed the eclipse of the sun and moon in Cairo in 978 AD, and his calculation came closest to what was known, until modern observing machines appeared.

Astrology [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( July 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In astrology , noted for making predictions and having written the Kitab bulugh al-umniyya ("On the Attainment of Desire"), a work concerning the heliacal risings of Sirius , and on predictions concerning what day of the week the Coptic year will start on.

Astronomy [ edit ] Ibn Yunus lunar crater, named after him Ibn Yunus' most famous work in Islamic astronomy , al- Zij al-Kabir al-Hakimi (c. 1000), was a handbook of astronomical tables which contained very accurate observations, many of which may have been obtained with very large astronomical instruments. According to N. M. Swerdlow, the Zij al-Kabir al-Hakimi is "a work of outstanding originality of which just over half survives".

[ 9 ] Yunus expressed the solutions in his zij without mathematical symbols, [ 10 ] but Delambre noted in his 1819 translation of the Hakemite tables that two of Ibn Yunus' methods for determining the time from solar or stellar altitude were equivalent to the trigonometric identity 2 cos ⁡ ⁡ ( a ) cos ⁡ ⁡ ( b ) = cos ⁡ ⁡ ( a + b ) + cos ⁡ ⁡ ( a − − b ) {\displaystyle 2\cos(a)\cos(b)=\cos(a+b)+\cos(a-b)} [ 11 ] identified in Johannes Werner 's 16th-century manuscript on conic sections.  Now recognized as one of Werner's formulas, it was essential for the development of prosthaphaeresis and logarithms decades later.

Ibn Yunus described 40 planetary conjunctions and 30 lunar eclipses . For example, he accurately describes the planetary conjunction that occurred in the year 1000 as follows: A conjunction of Venus and Mercury in Gemini, observed in the western sky: The two planets were in conjunction after sunset on the night [of Sunday 19 May 1000]. The time was approximately eight equinoctial hours after midday on Sunday. Mercury was north of Venus and their latitude difference was a third of a degree.

[ 12 ] Modern knowledge of the positions of the planets confirms that his description and his calculation of the distance being one-third of a degree is exactly correct. Ibn Yunus's observations on conjunctions and eclipses were used in Richard Dunthorne and Simon Newcombs ' respective calculations of the secular acceleration of the Moon .

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Pendulum [ edit ] Recent encyclopaedias [ 14 ] and popular accounts [ 15 ] claim that the tenth century astronomer Ibn Yunus used a pendulum for time measurement, despite the fact that it has been known for nearly a hundred years that this is based on nothing more than an error made in 1684 by the Savilian Professor of Astronomy at Oxford Edward Bernard .

[ 16 ] Ibn Yunus's philosophy [ edit ] The book “ Ghayat al-Intifah fi Mareafat al-Da'ir min al-Falak min qabl al-Iritifah ” by the scholar Abu Al-Hasan Ali Ibn Yunus In his scientific studies, he only believed in what his mind was convinced of, and he did not care what people said about him. His philosophy was summarized in three points: [ 17 ] Adopting the scientific principle based on observation and measurement, and taking the universe and everything in it as a teacher, from which facts are deduced and to which they are returned.

[ 17 ] Strengthening faith by touching the signs of the Creator emanating in the universe.

[ 17 ] Practicing legitimate pleasures. ( Ibn Khallikan mentions about one of the astrologers that he once went with him to Mount Mokattam, and he stopped to observe the planet Venus, so he took off his turban and dress and put on a red shirt and a red mask to cover himself with. He took out a stick and struck it with incense in his hands, and his situation was bizarre).

[ 17 ] Narration of Hadith [ edit ] Ibn Yunus narrated hadiths and reports from his father, Abi al-Sa'id, but the scholars rejected his narration due to his preoccupation with astrology and magic.

[ 18 ] Books [ edit ] Ibn Yunus had many works, and his most important book is Al-Zij Al-Kabir Al-Hakimi , which is the book he began writing, by order of the Fatimid Caliph Al-Aziz in the year 380 AH/990 AD, and completed it in 1007 AD during the reign of Caliph Al-Hakim Ould Al-Aziz, and he called it Al-Zij Al-Hakimi, after the caliph.

The word Zij is a Persian word (Zik), and its meaning in our modern sense is mathematical astronomical tables. He had another book called Zij Ibn Yunus , and the numbers he included in his two zij books are correct up to the seventh decimal number, which indicates unparalleled mathematical accuracy in calculations, and many astronomers have been transmitted from him, especially after his zij moved to the East, and the Egyptians relied on their calendars on Ibn Yunus’ zij for a long period of time.

References [ edit ] ^ David King (12 March 2008). Seling, Helaine (ed.).

Encyclopaedia of the History of Science, Technology, and Medicine in Non-Western Cultures . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 1124.

ISBN 978-1-4020-4559-2 . Retrieved 16 November 2021 .

^ Science & Technology in the Islamic World - Page 77 ^ Science in Medieval Islam: an illustrated introduction by Howard R. Turner - Page 65 ^ "Starry Messenger: Ibn Yunus and Astronomical Tables" .

www.sites.hps.cam.ac.uk . Retrieved 18 February 2024 .

^ "al-Zīj al-kabīr al-Ḥākimī | ISMI" .

ismi.mpiwg-berlin.mpg.de . Retrieved 18 February 2024 .

^ Eternal Egypt.

Ibn Yunus The Historian .

^ Eickelman, Dale F. James Piscatori.

Muslim Travellers: Pilgrimage, Migration, and the Religious Imagination . Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990. p. 58 ^ Berggren, J. L. (2003), Episodes in the Mathematics of Medieval Islam , Springer, p. 148, ISBN 9780387406053 .

^ N. M. Swerdlow (1993), "Montucla's Legacy: The History of the Exact Sciences", Journal of the History of Ideas 54 (2): 299–328 [320].

^ Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography , 2008 ^ David A. King, ' Islamic Math and Science ', Journal for the History of Astronomy, Vol. 9, p.212 ^ a b O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Abu'l-Hasan Ali ibn Abd al-Rahman ibn Yunus" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews ^ Raymond Mercer (1994), 'English Orientalists and Mathematical Astronomy' in The 'Arabick' Interest of the Natural Philosophers in 17th-Century England , p.198 ^ Good, Gregory (1998).

Sciences of the Earth: An Encyclopedia of Events, People, and Phenomena .

Routledge . p. 394.

ISBN 978-0-8153-0062-5 .

"Pendulum" .

Encyclopedia Americana . Vol. 21. The Americana Corp. 1967. p. 502 . Retrieved 20 February 2009 .

Baker, Cyril Clarence Thomas (1961).

Dictionary of Mathematics . G. Newnes. p. 176.

^ Newton, Roger G.

(2004).

Galileo's Pendulum: From the Rhythm of Time to the Making of Matter . US: Harvard University Press . pp.

52 .

ISBN 978-0-674-01331-5 .

^ King, D. A. (1979). "Ibn Yunus and the pendulum: a history of errors".

Archives Internationales d'Histoire des Sciences .

29 (104): 35– 52.

Hall, Bert S. (September 1978). "The scholastic pendulum".

Annals of Science .

35 (5).

Taylor & Francis : 441– 462.

doi : 10.1080/00033797800200371 .

ISSN 0003-3790 .

O'Connor, J. J.; Robertson, E. F. (November 1999).

"Abu'l-Hasan Ali ibn Abd al-Rahman ibn Yunus" .

University of St Andrews . Retrieved 29 May 2007 .

^ a b c d "ابن يونس المصري" .

areq.net (in Arabic) . Retrieved 18 February 2024 .

^ Al-Dhahabi , المغني في الضعفاء , investigation: Dr. Nour al-Din Atar, part 2. p. 448 External links [ edit ] King, David A. (2007).

"Ibn Yūnus: Abū al-Ḥasan ҁʿAlī ibn ʿAbd al-Raḥmān ibn Aḥmad ibn Yūnus al-Ṣadafī" . In Thomas Hockey; et al. (eds.).

The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers . New York: Springer. pp.

573– 4.

ISBN 978-0-387-31022-0 .

( PDF version ) O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Abu'l-Hasan Ali ibn Abd al-Rahman ibn Yunus" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews King, David A. (2008) [1970-80].

"Ibn Yūnus, AbuʿL-Hasan ʿAlī Ibn ʿ Abd Al-Rahmān Ibn Yūnus Al Sadafī" .

Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography .

Encyclopedia.com .

Ibn Yunus Biography v t e Astronomy in the medieval Islamic world Astronomers by century 8th Ahmad Nahavandi Al-Fadl ibn Naubakht Muḥammad ibn Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Ibrāhīm al-Fazārī Mashallah ibn Athari Yaʿqūb ibn Ṭāriq 9th Abu Ali al-Khayyat Abu Ma'shar al-Balkhi Abu Said Gorgani Al-Farghani Al-Kindi Al-Mahani Abu Hanifa Dinawari Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Marwazi Ali ibn Isa al-Asturlabi Banū Mūsā brothers Iranshahri Khalid ibn Abd al‐Malik al‐Marwarrudhi Al-Khwarizmi Sahl ibn Bishr Thābit ibn Qurra Yahya ibn Abi Mansur 10th al-Sufi Ibn Al-Adami al-Khojandi al-Khazin al-Qūhī Abu al-Wafa Ahmad ibn Yusuf al-Battani Al-Qabisi Ibn al-A'lam Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Ibn Yunus Ibrahim ibn Sinan Ma Yize al-Sijzi Al-ʻIjliyyah Nastulus Abolfadl Harawi Haseb-i Tabari al-Majriti Abu al-Hasan al-Ahwazi 11th Abu Nasr Mansur al-Biruni Ali ibn Ridwan Al-Zarqālī Ibn al-Samh Alhazen Avicenna Ibn al-Saffar Kushyar Gilani Said al-Andalusi Ibrahim ibn Said al-Sahli Ibn Mu'adh al-Jayyani Al-Isfizari Ali ibn Khalaf 12th Al-Bitruji Avempace Ibn Tufail Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Abu al-Salt Averroes Ibn al-Kammad Jabir ibn Aflah Omar Khayyam Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi 13th Ibn al-Banna' al-Marrakushi Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Jamal ad-Din Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Najm al‐Din al‐Misri Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Zakariya al-Qazwini al-Urdi al-Abhari Muhammad ibn Abi Bakr al‐Farisi Abu Ali al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Ibn Ishaq al-Tunisi Ibn al‐Raqqam Al-Ashraf Umar II Fakhr al-Din al-Akhlati 14th Ibn al-Shatir Al-Khalili Ibn Shuayb al-Battiwi Abū al‐ʿUqūl Al-Wabkanawi Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri al-Jadiri Sadr al-Shari'a al-Asghar Fathullah Shirazi 15th Ali Kuşçu Abd al‐Wajid Jamshid al-Kashi Kadızade Rumi Ulugh Beg Sibt al-Maridini Ibn al-Majdi al-Wafa'i al-Kubunani 'Abd al-'Aziz al-Wafa'i 16th Al-Birjandi al-Khafri Baha' al-din al-'Amili Piri Reis Takiyüddin 17th Yang Guangxian Ehmedê Xanî Al Achsasi al Mouakket Muhammad al-Rudani Topics Works Arabic star names Islamic calendar Aja'ib al-Makhluqat Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Tabula Rogeriana The Book of Healing The Remaining Signs of Past Centuries Zij Alfonsine tables Huihui Lifa Book of Fixed Stars Toledan Tables Zij-i Ilkhani Zij-i Sultani Sullam al-sama' Instruments Alidade Analog computer Aperture Armillary sphere Astrolabe Astronomical clock Celestial globe Compass Compass rose Dioptra Equatorial ring Equatorium Globe Graph paper Mural instrument Navigational astrolabe Octant Planisphere Quadrant Sextant Shadow square Sundial Schema for horizontal sundials Triquetrum Concepts Almucantar Apogee Astrology Astrophysics Axial tilt Azimuth Celestial mechanics Celestial spheres Circular orbit Deferent and epicycle Earth's rotation Eccentricity Ecliptic Elliptic orbit Equant Galaxy Geocentrism Gravitational energy Gravity Heliocentrism Inertia Islamic cosmology Moonlight Multiverse Muwaqqit Obliquity Parallax Precession Qibla Salah times Specific gravity Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Sunlight Supernova Temporal finitism Trepidation Triangulation Tusi couple Universe Institutions Al-Azhar University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom University of al-Qarawiyyin Observatories Constantinople (Taqi al-Din) Maragheh Samarkand (Ulugh Beg) Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Hellenistic astronomy Indian astronomy Influenced Byzantine science Chinese astronomy Medieval European science Indian astronomy v t e Mathematics in the medieval Islamic world Mathematicians 9th century 'Abd al-Hamīd ibn Turk Sanad ibn Ali al-Jawharī Al-Ḥajjāj ibn Yūsuf Al-Kindi Qusta ibn Luqa Al-Mahani al-Dinawari Banū Mūsā brothers Hunayn ibn Ishaq Al-Khwarizmi Yusuf al-Khuri Ishaq ibn Hunayn Na'im ibn Musa Thābit ibn Qurra al-Marwazi Abu Said Gorgani 10th century Abu al-Wafa al-Khazin Al-Qabisi Abu Kamil Ahmad ibn Yusuf Aṣ-Ṣaidanānī Sinān ibn al-Fatḥ al-Khojandi Al-Nayrizi Al-Saghani Brethren of Purity Ibn Sahl Ibn Yunus al-Uqlidisi Al-Battani Sinan ibn Thabit Ibrahim ibn Sinan Al-Isfahani Nazif ibn Yumn al-Qūhī Abu al-Jud Al-Sijzi Al-Karaji al-Majriti al-Jabali 11th century Abu Nasr Mansur Alhazen Kushyar Gilani Al-Biruni Ibn al-Samh Abu Mansur al-Baghdadi Avicenna al-Jayyānī al-Nasawī al-Zarqālī ibn Hud Al-Isfizari Omar Khayyam Muhammad al-Baghdadi 12th century Jabir ibn Aflah Al-Kharaqī Al-Khazini Al-Samawal al-Maghribi al-Hassar Sharaf al-Din al-Tusi Ibn al-Yasamin 13th century Ibn al‐Ha'im al‐Ishbili Ahmad al-Buni Ibn Munim Alam al-Din al-Hanafi Ibn Adlan al-Urdi Nasir al-Din al-Tusi al-Abhari Muhyi al-Din al-Maghribi al-Hasan al-Marrakushi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Shams al-Din al-Samarqandi Ibn al-Banna' Kamāl al-Dīn al-Fārisī 14th century Nizam al-Din al-Nisapuri Ibn al-Shatir Ibn al-Durayhim Al-Khalili al-Umawi 15th century Ibn al-Majdi al-Rūmī al-Kāshī Ulugh Beg Ali Qushji al-Wafa'i al-Qalaṣādī Sibt al-Maridini Ibn Ghazi al-Miknasi 16th century Al-Birjandi Muhammad Baqir Yazdi Taqi ad-Din Ibn Hamza al-Maghribi Mathematical works The Compendious Book on Calculation by Completion and Balancing De Gradibus Principles of Hindu Reckoning Book of Optics The Book of Healing Book on the Measurement of Plane and Spherical Figures Encyclopedia of the Brethren of Purity Toledan Tables Tabula Rogeriana Zij Concepts Alhazen's problem Islamic geometric patterns Centers Al-Azhar University Al-Mustansiriya University House of Knowledge House of Wisdom Constantinople observatory of Taqi ad-Din Madrasa Maragheh observatory University of al-Qarawiyyin Influences Babylonian mathematics Greek mathematics Indian mathematics Influenced Byzantine mathematics European mathematics Indian mathematics Related Hindu–Arabic numeral system Arabic numerals ( Eastern Arabic numerals , Western Arabic numerals ) Trigonometric functions History of trigonometry History of algebra Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST National Germany United States Israel Academics zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ibn_Yunus&oldid=1304977194 " Categories : 950s births 1009 deaths 10th-century Arab people 11th-century Arab people 10th-century mathematicians 11th-century mathematicians Medieval Egyptian astrologers Medieval Egyptian astronomers Medieval Egyptian mathematicians Egyptian Muslims Medieval Islamic philosophers Scientists who worked on qibla determination 10th-century astronomers 11th-century astronomers 10th-century astrologers 11th-century astrologers Scholars from the Fatimid Caliphate 10th-century Egyptian people 11th-century Egyptian people 10th-century people from the Fatimid Caliphate 11th-century people from the Fatimid Caliphate Hidden categories: CS1 Arabic-language sources (ar) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles with hCards Articles needing additional references from July 2021 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 08:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ibn Yunus 31 languages Add topic

