Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Justifications 2 Historic definitions of children's rights 3 Classification Toggle Classification subsection 3.1 Physical rights 3.2 Intersex rights 3.3 Other issues 3.4 Difference between children's rights and youth rights 3.5 Parents' rights and responsibilities 3.5.1 Limitations of parental powers 4 Movement Toggle Movement subsection 4.1 Opposition 5 International human rights law Toggle International human rights law subsection 5.1 International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights 5.2 Convention on the Rights of the Child 5.3 Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action 5.4 Enforcement 6 National law Toggle National law subsection 6.1 United States law 6.2 German law 7 See also Toggle See also subsection 7.1 Global children's rights 7.2 Issues 7.3 Children's rights organizations 8 References 9 External links Toggle External links subsection 9.1 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Children's rights 66 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca বাংলা Bikol Central Български Català Cymraeg Dagbanli Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Igbo Bahasa Indonesia עברית ಕನ್ನಡ کٲشُر Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча ລາວ Latina Lietuvių Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ မြန်မာဘာသာ नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Papiamentu پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English سنڌي کوردی Српски / srpski Suomi Татарча / tatarça Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Human rights of children Not to be confused with Youth rights or Prenatal rights .

Rights Theoretical distinctions Claim rights and liberty Individual and group Natural rights and legal Negative and positive Human rights Civil and political Economic, social and cultural Three generations Rights by beneficiary Accused Animals Autistic Children Consumers Creditors Deaf Disabled Elders Family Fetus Farmers Humans Indigenous Intersex Kings LGBTQ Transgender Life Men Minorities Parents Fathers Mothers Patients Peasants Plants Prisoners Robots States Students Victims Effective remedy Women Workers Youth Other groups of rights Assembly Association Asylum Civil liberties Clothing Development Digital Education Environment Fair trial Food Free migration Guns Health Housing Linguistic Movement Property Public participation Repair Resist Rest and leisure Revolution Security Sexual and Reproductive Abortion Reproductive Sexuality Self defense Self-determination Speech Water and sanitation v t e Children's rights or the rights of children are a subset of human rights with particular attention to the rights of special protection and care afforded to minors.

[ 1 ] The 1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC) defines a child as "any human being below the age of eighteen years, unless under the law applicable to the child, majority is attained earlier." [ 2 ] Children's rights includes their right to association with both parents , human identity as well as the basic needs for physical protection, food, universal state-paid education, health care, and criminal laws appropriate for the age and development of the child, equal protection of the child's civil rights , and freedom from discrimination on the basis of the child's race , gender , sexual orientation , gender identity , national origin , religion , disability , color , ethnicity , or other characteristics.

Interpretations of children's rights range from allowing children the capacity for autonomous action to the enforcement of children being physically, mentally and emotionally free from abuse , though what constitutes "abuse" is a matter of debate. Other definitions include the rights to care and nurturing.

[ 3 ] There are no definitions of other terms used to describe young people such as " adolescents ", "teenagers", or " youth " in international law , [ 4 ] but the children's rights movement is considered distinct from the youth rights movement. The field of children's rights spans the fields of law , politics , religion , and morality .

Justifications A boy working as a "clock boy" on the streets of Merida, Mexico [There] is a mass of human rights law, both treaty and 'soft law', both general and child-specific, which recognises the distinct status and particular requirements of children. [Children], owing to their particular vulnerability and their significance as the future generation, are entitled to special treatment generally, and, in situations of danger, to priority in the receipt of assistance and protection.

— Jenny Kuper, International Law Concerning Child Civilians in Armed Conflict (1997, Clarendon Press ) As minors by law, children do not have autonomy or the right to make decisions on their own for themselves in any known jurisdiction of the world. Instead their adult caregivers, including parents , social workers , teachers , youth workers , and others, are vested with that authority, depending on the circumstances.

[ 5 ] Some believe that this state of affairs gives children insufficient control over their own lives and causes them to be vulnerable.

[ 6 ] Louis Althusser has gone so far as to describe this legal machinery, as it applies to children, as "repressive state apparatuses".

[ 7 ] Structures such as government policy have been held by some commentators to mask the ways adults abuse and exploit children, resulting in child poverty , lack of educational opportunities , and child labour . On this view, children are to be regarded as a minority group towards whom society needs to reconsider the way it behaves.

[ 8 ] Researchers have identified children as needing to be recognized as participants in society whose rights and responsibilities need to be recognized at all ages .

[ 9 ] Historic definitions of children's rights Pharaoh's daughter having pity on baby Moses in the floating basket. (The Hebrew babies had been ordered killed by her father.) Sir William Blackstone (1765-9) recognized three parental duties to the child: maintenance, protection, and education.

[ 10 ] In modern language, the child has a right to receive these from the parent.

The League of Nations adopted the Geneva Declaration of the Rights of the Child (1924), which enunciated the child's right to receive the requirements for normal development, the right of the hungry child to be fed, the right of the sick child to receive health care, the right of the backward child to be reclaimed, the right of orphans to shelter, and the right to protection from exploitation.

[ 11 ] The United Nations Universal Declaration of Human Rights (1948) in Article 25(2) recognized the need of motherhood and childhood to "special protection and assistance" and the right of all children to "social protection".

[ 12 ] The United Nations General Assembly adopted the United Nations Declaration of the Rights of the Child (1959), which enunciated ten principles for the protection of children's rights, including the universality of rights, the right to special protection, and the right to protection from discrimination, among other rights.

[ 13 ] Consensus on defining children's rights has become clearer in the last fifty years.

[ 14 ] A 1973 publication by Hillary Clinton (then an attorney) stated that children's rights were a "slogan in need of a definition".

[ 15 ] According to some researchers, the notion of children's rights is still not well defined, with at least one proposing that there is no singularly accepted definition or theory of the rights held by children.

[ 16 ] Children's rights law is defined as the point where the law intersects with a child's life. That includes juvenile delinquency , due process for children involved in the criminal justice system, appropriate representation, and effective rehabilitative services; care and protection for children in state care; ensuring education for all children regardless of their race , gender , sexual orientation , gender identity , national origin , religion , disability , color , ethnicity , or other characteristics, and; health care and advocacy.

[ 17 ] Classification Four year old Palestinian girl starved to death, during Gaza Famine Children have two types of human rights under international human rights law . They have the same fundamental general human rights as adults, although some human rights, such as the right to marry , are dormant until they are of age, Secondly, they have special human rights that are necessary to protect them during their minority.

[ 18 ] General rights operative in childhood include the right to security of the person , to freedom from inhuman, cruel, or degrading treatment , and the right to special protection during childhood .

[ 19 ] Particular human rights of children include, among other rights, the right to life , the right to a name , the right to express his views in matters concerning the child , the right to freedom of thought, conscience and religion , the right to health care , the right to protection from economic and sexual exploitation , and the right to education .

[ 2 ] Children's rights are defined in numerous ways, including a wide spectrum of civil, political , economic, social and cultural rights . Rights tend to be of two general types: those advocating for children as autonomous persons under the law and those placing a claim on society for protection from harms perpetrated on children because of their dependency. These have been labeled as the right of empowerment and as the right to protection .

[ 16 ] United Nations educational guides for children classify the rights outlined in the Convention on the Rights of the Child as the "3 Ps": Provision, Protection, and Participation.

[ 20 ] They may be elaborated as follows: Provision: Children have the right to an adequate standard of living , health care , education and services, and to play and recreation . These include a balanced diet , a warm bed to sleep in, and access to schooling .

Protection: Children have the right to protection from abuse , neglect, exploitation and discrimination. This includes the right to safe places for children to play; constructive child rearing behavior, and acknowledgment of the evolving capacities of children.

Participation: Children have the right to participate in communities and have programs and services for themselves. This includes children's involvement in libraries and community programs, youth voice activities, and involving children as decision-makers.

[ 21 ] In a similar fashion, the Child Rights International Network (CRIN) categorizes rights into two groups: [ 22 ] [ 23 ] Economic, social and cultural rights, related to the conditions necessary to meet basic human needs such as food, shelter, education, health care, and gainful employment. Included are rights to education, adequate housing, food, water, the highest attainable standard of health , the right to work and rights at work, as well as the cultural rights of minorities and indigenous peoples.

Environmental, cultural and developmental rights, which are sometimes called " third generation rights ", and including the right to live in safe and healthy environments and that groups of people have the right to cultural, political, and economic development.

Amnesty International openly advocates four particular children's rights, including the end to juvenile incarceration without parole , an end to the recruitment of military use of children , ending the death penalty for people under 21, and raising awareness of human rights in the classroom .

[ 1 ] Human Rights Watch , an international advocacy organization, includes child labour , juvenile justice , orphans and abandoned children, refugees , street children and corporal punishment .

Scholarly study generally focuses children's rights by identifying individual rights. The following rights "allow children to grow up healthy and free": [ according to whom?

] [ 24 ] Freedom of speech Freedom of thought Freedom from fear Freedom of choice and the right to make decisions Ownership over one's body Physical rights A report by the Committee on Social Affairs, Health, and Sustainable Development of the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe identified several areas the Committee was concerned about, including procedures such as "female genital mutilation, the circumcision of young boys for religious reasons, early childhood medical interventions in the case of intersex children and the submission to or coercion of children into piercings, tattoos or plastic surgery".

[ 25 ] The Assembly adopted a non-binding resolution in 2013 that calls on its 47 member-states to take numerous actions to promote the physical integrity of children.

[ 26 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Article 19 of the Convention on the Rights of the Child enjoins parties to "take all appropriate legislative, administrative, social and educational measures to protect the child from all forms of physical or mental violence, injury or abuse, neglect or negligent treatment, maltreatment or exploitation".

[ 27 ] The Committee on the Rights of the Child interprets article 19 as prohibiting corporal punishment, commenting on the "obligation of all States Party to move quickly to prohibit and eliminate all corporal punishment." [ 28 ] The United Nations Human Rights Committee has also interpreted Article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights prohibiting "cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment" to extend to children, including corporal punishment of children.

[ 29 ] [ non-primary source needed ] The Committee on Bioethics of the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) (1997), citing the Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989), asserts that "every child should have the opportunity to grow and develop free from preventable illness or injury." [ 30 ] Intersex rights The standard medical model was medical falsification for intersex children, from textbook 1963.

Main articles: Intersex human rights and Intersex genital mutilation Intersex children are children born or develop, atypical sexual traits . Historically intersex children have been the subject of involuntary surgical assignment and later hormone replacement therapy to a binary sex / gender , which was often concealed from patients; in the US, this system was known as the optimum gender of rearing model , which organizations such as the ISNA heavily criticized.

[ 31 ] [ 32 ] Intersex children often face high levels of mental stress , and stigmatization , as well as isolation for having atypical bodies, or undergoing medical procedures.

[ 31 ] [ 33 ] The World Health Organization standard of care for intersex children is to delay all surgery until the child is old enough to participate in informed consent , unless emergency surgery is needed.

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] Intersex people are likewise more likely to develop gender dysphoria then the general population. Organizations such as InterACT and intersex civil society groups exist to support and advocate for intersex youth, and stop involuntary unnecessary medicalization and shame surrounding intersex subjects.

[ 31 ] [ 36 ] Other issues Other issues affecting children's rights include the military use of children , sale of children , child prostitution and child pornography .

Difference between children's rights and youth rights Main article: Youth rights In the majority of jurisdictions, for instance, children are not allowed to vote, to marry, to buy alcohol, to have sex, or to engage in paid employment.

[ 37 ] Within the youth rights movement , it is believed that the key difference between children's rights and youth rights is that children's rights supporters generally advocate the establishment and enforcement of protection for children and youths, while youth rights (a far smaller movement) generally advocates the expansion of freedom for children and/or youths and of rights such as suffrage .

Parents' rights and responsibilities Parents' rights and Right to family life are connected with Parental responsibilities . Parents are given sufficient powers to fulfill their duties to the child.

[ 10 ] Parents affect the lives of children in a unique way, and as such their role in children's rights has to be distinguished in a particular way. Particular issues in the child-parent relationship include child neglect , child abuse , freedom of choice , corporal punishment and child custody .

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] There have been theories offered that provide parents with rights-based practices that resolve the tension between "commonsense parenting" and children's rights.

[ 40 ] The issue is particularly relevant in legal proceedings that affect the potential emancipation of minors , and in cases where children sue their parents.

[ 41 ] A child's rights to a relationship with both their parents is increasingly recognized as an important factor for determining the best interests of the child in divorce and child custody proceedings.  Some governments have enacted laws creating a rebuttable presumption that shared parenting is in the best interests of children.

[ 42 ] Limitations of parental powers Parents do not have absolute power over their children. Parents are subject to criminal laws against abandonment, abuse, and neglect of children. International human rights law provides that manifestation of one's religion may be limited in the interests of public safety, for the protection of public order, health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and freedoms of others.

[ 19 ] [ 43 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Courts have placed other limits on parental powers and acts. The Supreme Court of the United States , in the case of Prince v. Massachusetts , ruled that a parent's religion does not permit a child to be placed at risk.

[ 44 ] The Lords of Appeal in Ordinary ruled, in the case of Gillick v West Norfolk and Wisbech Area Health Authority and another , that parents' rights diminish with the increasing age and competency of the child, but do not vanish completely until the child reaches majority. Parents' rights are connected to the parent's duties to the child. In the absence of duty, no parents' rights exists.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] The Supreme Court of Canada ruled, in the case of E (Mrs) v Eve , that parents may not grant surrogate consent for non-therapeutic sterilization.

[ 47 ] The Supreme Court of Canada has ruled, in the case of B. (R.) v. Children's Aid Society of Metropolitan Toronto : [ 48 ] While children undeniably benefit from the Charter, most notably in its protection of their rights to life and to the security of their person, they are unable to assert these rights, and our society accordingly presumes that parents will exercise their freedom of choice in a manner that does not offend the rights of their children.

Movement Main article: Children's rights movement See also: Timeline of young people's rights in the United Kingdom and Timeline of young people's rights in the United States The 1796 publication of Thomas Spence 's Rights of Infants is among the earliest English-language assertions of the rights of children. Throughout the 20th century, children's rights activists organized for homeless children's rights and public education . The 1927 publication of The Child's Right to Respect by Janusz Korczak strengthened the literature surrounding the field, and today dozens of international organizations are working around the world to promote children's rights. In the UK the formation of a community of educationalists, teachers, youth justice workers, politicians and cultural contributors called the New Ideals in Education Conferences [ 49 ] (1914–37) stood for the value of 'liberating the child' and helped to define the 'good' primary school in England until the 80s.

[ 50 ] Their conferences inspired the UNESCO organisation, the New Education Fellowship.

A.S. Neill's 1915 book A Dominie's Log (1915), a diary of a headteacher changing his school to one based on the liberation and happiness of the child, can be seen as a cultural product that celebrates the heroes of this movement.

[ citation needed ] Opposition The opposition to children's rights long predates any current trend in society, with recorded statements against the rights of children dating to the 13th century and earlier.

[ 51 ] Opponents to children's rights believe that young people need to be protected from the adultcentric world, including the decisions and responsibilities of that world.

[ 52 ] In a dominantly adult society, childhood is idealized as a time of innocence, a time free of responsibility and conflict, and a time dominated by play.

[ 53 ] The majority of opposition stems from concerns related to national sovereignty , states' rights , the parent-child relationship.

[ 54 ] Financial constraints and the "undercurrent of traditional values in opposition to children's rights" are cited, as well.

[ 55 ] The concept of children's rights has received little attention in the United States.

[ 56 ] International human rights law Further information: International child abduction Main article: Declaration of the Rights of the Child The Universal Declaration of Human Rights is seen as a basis for all international legal standards for children's rights today. There are several conventions and laws that address children's rights around the world. A number of current and historical documents affect those rights, including the Declaration of the Rights of the Child , [ 11 ] drafted by Eglantyne Jebb in 1923, endorsed by the League of Nations in 1924 and reaffirmed in 1934. A slightly expanded version was adopted by the United Nations in 1946, followed by a much expanded version adopted by the General Assembly in 1959. It later served as the basis for the Convention on the Rights of the Child .

International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights The United Nations adopted the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) in 1966. The ICCPR is a multilateral international covenant that has been ratified or acceded to by nearly all nations on Earth. Nations which have become state-parties to the Covenant are required to honor and enforce the rights enunciated by the Covenant. The treaty came into effect on 23 March 1976. The rights codified by the ICCPR are universal, so they apply to everyone without exception and this includes children. Although children have all rights, some rights such as the right to marry and the right to vote come into effect only after the child reaches maturity.

[ 19 ] Some general rights applicable to children include: the right to life the right to security of person the right to freedom from torture the right to freedom from cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment the right to be separated from adults when charged with a crime, the right to speedy adjudication, and the right to be accorded treatment appropriate to their age [ 19 ] Article 24 codifies the right of the child to special protection due to his minority, the right to a name, and the right to a nationality.

[ 19 ] Convention on the Rights of the Child Main article: Convention on the Rights of the Child The United Nations ' 1989 Convention on the Rights of the Child , or CRC, is the first legally binding international instrument to incorporate the full range of human rights—civil, cultural, economic, political and social rights. Its implementation is monitored by the Committee on the Rights of the Child . National governments that ratify it commit themselves to protecting and ensuring children's rights, and agree to hold themselves accountable for this commitment before the international community.

[ 57 ] The CRC is the most widely ratified human rights treaty with 196 ratifications; the United States is the only country not to have ratified it.

[ 58 ] The CRC is based on four core principles: the principle of non-discrimination; the best interests of the child; the right to life, survival and development; and considering the views of the child in decisions that affect them, according to their age and maturity.

[ 59 ] The CRC, along with international criminal accountability mechanisms such as the International Criminal Court , the Yugoslavia and Rwanda Tribunals , and the Special Court for Sierra Leone , is said to have significantly increased the profile of children's rights worldwide.

[ 60 ] Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action The Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action urges, at Section II para 47, all nations to undertake measures to the maximum extent of their available resources, with the support of international cooperation, to achieve the goals in the World Summit Plan of Action. And calls on States to integrate the Convention on the Rights of the Child into their national action plans. By means of these national action plans and through international efforts, particular priority should be placed on reducing infant and maternal mortality rates, reducing malnutrition and illiteracy rates and providing access to safe drinking water and basic education. Whenever so called for, national plans of action should be devised to combat devastating emergencies resulting from natural disasters and armed conflicts and the equally grave problem of children in extreme poverty. Further, para 48 urges all states, with the support of international cooperation, to address the acute problem of children under especially difficult circumstances. Exploitation and abuse of children should be actively combated, including by addressing their root causes. Effective measures are required against female infanticide , harmful child labour , sale of children and organs, child prostitution , child pornography , and other forms of sexual abuse.

[ 61 ] This influenced the adoptions of Optional Protocol on the Involvement of Children in Armed Conflict and Optional Protocol on the Sale of Children, Child Prostitution and Child Pornography .

Enforcement A variety of enforcement organizations and mechanisms exist to ensure children's rights. They include the Child Rights Caucus for the United Nations General Assembly Special Session on Children. It was set up to promote full implementation and compliance with the Convention on the Rights of the Child, and to ensure that child rights were given priority during the UN General Assembly Special Session on Children and its Preparatory process. The United Nations Human Rights Council was created "with the hope that it could be more objective, credible and efficient in denouncing human rights violations worldwide than the highly politicized Commission on Human Rights." The NGO Group for the Convention on the Rights of the Child is a coalition of international non-governmental organizations originally formed in 1983 to facilitate the implementation of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child.

National law Many countries around the world have children's rights ombudspeople or children's commissioners whose official, governmental duty is to represent the interests of the public by investigating and addressing complaints reported by individual citizens regarding children's rights. Children's ombudspeople can also work for a corporation, a newspaper, an NGO, or even for the general public.

United States law Further information: Timeline of young people's rights in the United States , International child abduction in the United States , and Child labor laws in the United States The United States has signed but not ratified the CRC. As a result, children's rights have not been systematically implemented in the U.S.

Children are generally afforded the basic rights embodied by the Constitution, as enshrined by the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution . The Equal Protection Clause of that amendment is to apply to children, born within a marriage or not, but excludes children not yet born.

[ 62 ] This was reinforced by the landmark US Supreme Court decision of In re Gault (1967). In this trial 15-year-old Gerald Gault of Arizona was taken into custody by local police after being accused of making an obscene telephone call. He was detained and committed to the Arizona State Industrial School until he reached the age of 21 for making an obscene phone call to an adult neighbor. In an 8–1 decision, the Court ruled that in hearings which could result in commitment to an institution, people under the age of 18 have the right to notice and counsel, to question witnesses, and to protection against self-incrimination. The Court found that the procedures used in Gault's hearing met none of these requirements.

[ 63 ] The Supreme Court of the United States ruled in the case of Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District (1969) that students in school have Constitutional rights.

[ 64 ] The Supreme Court of the United States has ruled in the case of Roper v. Simmons that persons may not be executed for crimes committed when below the age of eighteen. It ruled that such executions are cruel and unusual punishment , so they are a violation of the Eighth Amendment to the United States Constitution .

[ 65 ] There are other concerns in the United States regarding children's rights. The American Academy of Adoption Attorneys is concerned with children's rights to a safe, supportive and stable family structure. Their position on children's rights in adoption cases states that, "children have a constitutionally based liberty interest in the protection of their established families, rights which are at least equal to, and we believe outweigh, the rights of others who would claim a 'possessory' interest in these children." Other issues raised in American children's rights advocacy include children's rights to inheritance in same-sex marriages and particular rights for youth .

German law A report filed by the President of the INGO Conference of the Council of Europe , Annelise Oeschger finds that children and their parents are subject to United Nations , European Union and UNICEF human rights violations.  Of particular concern is the German (and Austrian) agency, Jugendamt ( German : Youth office) that often unfairly allows for unchecked government control of the parent-child relationship, which have resulted in harm including torture , degrading, cruel treatment and has led to children's death.  The problem is complicated by the nearly "unlimited power" of the Jugendamt officers, with no processes to review or resolve inappropriate or harmful treatment.  By German law, Jugendamt (JA) officers are protected against prosecution.  JA officers span of control is seen in cases that go to family court where experts testimony may be overturned by lesser educated or experienced JA officers; In more than 90% of the cases the JA officer's recommendation is accepted by family court. Officers have also disregarded family court decisions, such as when to return children to their parents, without repercussions. Germany has not recognized related child-welfare decisions made by the European Parliamentary Court that have sought to protect or resolve children and parents' rights violations.

[ 66 ] See also Children's rights education European Convention on Human Rights FGM , Forced circumcision , and Ethics of circumcision International Children's Peace Prize Inter-Agency Guiding Principles on Unaccompanied and Separated Children National Action Plan for Children Parental rights movement Red Hand Day Global children's rights Children's rights in Chile Children's rights in Colombia Children's rights in Iran Children's rights in Japan Children's rights in Mali Children's rights in the United Kingdom Declaration of the Rights of the Child Issues Main article: Index of children's rights articles Further information: Index of youth rights–related articles Children's rights organizations Further information: List of children's rights organizations Further information: Category:Children's rights organizations References ^ a b "Children's Rights" Archived 2008-09-21 at the Wayback Machine , Amnesty International. Retrieved 2/23/08.

^ a b Convention on the Rights of the Child , G.A. res. 44/25, annex, 44 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 49) at 167, U.N. Doc. A/44/49 (1989), entered into force Sept. 2 1990.

^ Bandman, B. (1999) Children's Right to Freedom, Care, and Enlightenment.

Routledge. p 67.

^ "Children and youth" , Human Rights Education Association. Retrieved 2/23/08.

^ Lansdown, G. "Children's welfare and children's rights," in Hendrick, H. (2005) Child Welfare And Social Policy: An Essential Reader.

The Policy Press. p. 117 ^ Lansdown, G. (1994). "Children's rights," in B. Mayall (ed.) Children's childhood: Observed and experienced.

London: The Falmer Press. p 33.

^ Jenks, C. (1996) "Conceptual limitations," Childhood.

New York: Routledge. p 43.

^ Thorne, B (1987). "Re-Visioning Women and Social Change: Where Are the Children?".

Gender & Society .

1 (1): 85– 109.

doi : 10.1177/089124387001001005 .

S2CID 145674085 .

^ Lansdown, G. (1994). "Children's rights," in B. Mayall (ed.) Children's childhood: Observed and experienced.

London: The Falmer Press. p 34.

^ a b Blackstone's Commentaries on the Laws of England , Book One, Chapter Sixteen . (1765-1769).

^ a b Geneva Declaration of the Rights of the Child of 1924 , adopted Sept. 26, 1924, League of Nations O.J. Spec. Supp. 21, at 43 (1924).

^ "Universal Declaration of Human Rights" (PDF) . 10 December 1948 . Retrieved 16 October 2015 .

^ Declaration of the Rights of the Child , G.A. res. 1386 (XIV), 14 U.N. GAOR Supp. (No. 16) at 19, U.N. Doc. A/4354 (1959).

^ Franklin, B. (2001) The new handbook of children's rights: comparative policy and practice.

Routledge. p 19.

^ Rodham, H (1973).

"Children Under the Law" .

Harvard Educational Review .

43 (4): 487– 514.

doi : 10.17763/haer.43.4.e14676283875773k . Archived from the original on 2019-08-19 . Retrieved 2015-10-18 .

^ a b Mangold, S.V. (2002) "Transgressing the Border Between Protection and Empowerment for Domestic Violence Victims and Older Children: Empowerment as Protection in the Foster Care System," New England School of Law. Retrieved 4/3/08.

^ Ahearn, D., Holzer, B. with Andrews, L. (2000, 2007) Children's Rights Law: A Career Guide .

Harvard Law School . Retrieved 18 October 2015.

^ UNICEF, Convention on the Rights of the Child Archived 2019-03-06 at the Wayback Machine , 29 November 2005.

^ a b c d e "International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights" (PDF) . 16 December 1966 . Retrieved 16 October 2015 .

^ Young-Bruehl, Elisabeth (2012).

Childism: Confronting Prejudice Against Children . New Haven, Connecticut: Yale University Press. p. 10.

ISBN 978-0-300-17311-6 .

^ (1997) "Children's rights in the Canadian context", Interchange. 8 (1–2). Springer.

^ "A-Z of Children's Rights" , Children's Rights Information Network. Retrieved 2/23/08.

^ Freeman, M. (2000) "The Future of Children's Rights," Children & Society. 14 (4) p 277-93.

^ Calkins, C.F. (1972) "Reviewed Work: Children's Rights: Toward the Liberation of the Child by Paul Adams", Peabody Journal of Education. 49 (4). p. 327.

^ Committee on Social Affairs, Health and Sustainable Development.

Children's Right to Physical Integrity , Doc. 13297. Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, 6 September 2013.

^ Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe.

Children's Right to Physical Integrity , Resolution 1952., Adopted at Strasbourg, Tuesday, 1 October 2013.

^ UN (2012). 11.

Convention on the Rights of the Child Archived 2014-02-11 at the Wayback Machine . United Nations Treaty Collection. Retrieved 1 May 2012.

^ UN Committee on the Rights of the Child (2006) "General Comment No. 8:" par. 3.

^ UN Human Rights Committee (1992) "General Comment No. 20".

HRI/GEN/1/Rev.4.: p. 108 ^ Committee on Bioethics (1997).

"Religious objections to medical care" (PDF) .

Pediatrics .

99 (2): 279– 281.

doi : 10.1542/peds.99.2.279 .

PMID 9024462 .

reaffirmed May 2009.

^ a b c Alice D. Dreger; April M. Herndon.

" Progress and Politics in the intersex rights movement, Feminist theory in action " (PDF) .

^ "What's the history behind the intersex rights movement? | Intersex Society of North America" .

isna.org .

^ "The Mental Health and Well-being of LGBTQ Youth who are Intersex" (PDF) .

The Trevor Project . 2021.

^ FACT SHEET Intersex ^ World Health Organization (2015).

Sexual health, human rights and the law . Geneva: World Health Organization.

ISBN 9789241564984 .

^ Indig, Gnendy; Serrano, Mariana; Dalke, Katharine B.; Ejiogu, Nwadiogo I.; Grimstad, Frances (September 13, 2021).

"Clinician Advocacy and Intersex Health: A History of Intersex Health Care and the Role of the Clinician Advocate Past, Present, and Future" .

Pediatric Annals .

50 (9): e359 – e365 .

doi : 10.3928/19382359-20210816-01 .

PMID 34542337 .

S2CID 237572670 – via CrossRef.

^ "Children's Rights" , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

Retrieved 2/23/08.

^ Brownlie, J. and Anderson, S. (2006) "'Beyond Anti-Smacking': Rethinking parent–child relations," Childhood. 13 (4) p 479-498.

^ Cutting, E. (1999) "Giving Parents a Voice: A Children's Rights Issue," Rightlines. 2 ERIC ED428855 .

^ Brennan, S. and Noggle, R. (1997) "The Moral Status of Children: Children's Rights, Parent's Rights, and Family Justice," Social Theory and Practice. 23.

^ Kaslow, FW (1990) Children who sue parents: A new form of family homicide?

Journal of Marital and Family Therapy. 16 (2) p 151–163.

^ "What is equal shared parenting?" Fathers Are Capable Too: Parenting Association. Retrieved 2/24/08.

^ European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms as amended by Protocols No. 11 and No. 14 . Adopted at Rome, 4 XL 1950.

^ Prince v. Massachusetts , 321 U.S. 158 (1944).

^ Gillick v West Norfolk and Wisbech Area Health Authority Archived 2005-05-03 at the Wayback Machine [1985] 1 AC 112, [1985] 3 All ER 402, [1985] 3 WLR 830, [1986] 1 FLR 224, [1986] Crim LR 113, 2 BMLR 11.

^ Peter W. Adler.

Is circumcision legal?

16(3) Richmond J. L. & Pub. Int 439-86 (2013).

^ E. (Mrs.) v. Eve , [1986] 2 S.C.R. 388 ^ B. (R.) v. Children's Aid Society of Metropolitan Toronto . [1995] 1 S.C.R.

^ "New Ideals in Education Conferences" .

Facebook .

^ Newman, Michael (2015) Children's Rights in our Schools – the movement to liberate the child, an introduction to the New Ideals in Education Conferences 1914-1937, www.academia.edu ^ Starr, RH (1975) Children's Rights: Countering the Opposition.

Paper presented at the 83rd Annual Meeting of the American Psychological Association in Chicago, Illinois, Aug. 30-Sept. 3, 1975.

ERIC ED121416 .

^ DeLamater, J.D. (2003) Handbook of Social Psychology.

Springer. p 150.

^ Lansdown, G. (1994). "Children's rights," in B. Mayall (ed.) Children's childhood: Observed and experienced.

London: The Falmer Press. (p 33-34).

^ "Frequently Asked Questions about Children's Rights" Archived 2008-12-22 at the Wayback Machine , Amnesty International USA. Retrieved 2/24/08.

^ Covell, K. and Howe, R.B. (2001) The Challenge of Children's Rights for Canada. Wilfrid Laurier University Press. p 158.

^ Mason, M.A. (2005) "The U.S. and the international children's rights crusade: leader or laggard?" Journal of Social History.

Summer.

^ Convention on the Rights of the Child , UNICEF. Retrieved 4/3/08.

^ UN (2018).

"United Nations Treaty Collection" . Retrieved 2018-02-14 .

^ "Convention on the Rights of the Child | UNICEF" .

www.unicef.org .

^ Arts, K, Popvoski, V, et al.

(2006) International Criminal Accountability and the Rights of Children . "From Peace to Justice Series". London: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-90-6704-227-7 .

^ Vienna Declaration and Programme of Action . Section II, para 46 & 47 ^ "Children's Rights" . Retrieved 18 October 2015 .

^ In re Gault , 387 U.S. 1 (1967).

^ Tinker v. Des Moines Independent Community School District , 393 U.S. 503 (1969).

^ Roper v. Simmons , 543 U. S. 551 (2005).

^ League for Children's Rights Archived 2021-10-03 at the Wayback Machine Individual UPR Submission: Germany. February 2009. Submitted by Bündnis RECHTE für KINDER e.V. and supported by President of the INGO Conference of the Council of Europe, Annelise Oeschger. Retrieved December 27, 2011.

External links Children's rights at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity "Rights and Obligations of Parents" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Child Rights Information Network International Bureau of Children's Rights Smile Foundation India "everychild.ca" child rights public awareness Campaign of British Columbia, Canada. Resources include links and publications related to the Convention on the Rights of the Child .

Bibliography "Sri Lankan Army Warns Children can be Targets" .

Implementing Adolescent Reproductive Rights Through the Convention on the Rights of the Child" .

Center for Reproductive Rights .

"Lessons in Terror: Attacks on Education in Afghanistan" . Human Rights Watch.

"Burundi: Former Child Soldiers Languish in Custody" . Human Rights Watch.

"Saudi Arabia: Follow U.N. Call to End Juvenile Death Penalty" . Human Rights Watch.

"United States: Thousands of Children Sentenced to Life without Parole" . Human Rights Watch.

"What Future: Street Children in the Democratic Republic of Congo" . Human Rights Watch.

v t e Children's rights by country Algeria Argentina Azerbaijan Bahrain Benin Bolivia Brazil Central African Republic Chile Colombia Democratic Republic of the Congo Eswatini Ethiopia Federated States of Micronesia Finland Haiti Iran Italy Japan Kazakhstan Liberia Lithuania Malaysia Mali Mongolia Myanmar Namibia New Zealand Norway Oman Paraguay Portugal Romania Russia Sierra Leone Somalia South Sudan Suriname Switzerland Togo Tunisia Tuvalu United Kingdom v t e Infants and their care Health ( pediatrics ) Baby food Birth weight Breast pump Breastfeeding Breastfeeding and medications Breastfeeding and mental health Bottle feeding Colic Cradle cap Esotropia Failure to thrive Immunization Infant and toddler safety Infant bathing Infant feeding Infant food safety Infant formula Infant massage Infant respiratory distress syndrome Infant sleep training Neonatal intensive care unit Newborn care and safety Oral rehydration therapy Pedialyte Preterm birth Shaken baby syndrome Soy formula SIDS Development Attachment parenting Baby-led weaning Baby talk Babbling Birth defect Childbirth Crawling Gestational age Infant visual development Irritant diaper dermatitis Infant cognitive development Infant crying Kangaroo care Mother Nursery rhyme Object permanence Parent Parenting Peekaboo Play Prenatal development Prenatal development table Teething Walking Weaning Socialization and culture Attachment Babysitting Child abuse Child care Child custody Children's rights UN Child rights Circumcision Foster care Grandparent visitation Infant swimming Milk bank Nanny Wet nurse Infant care and equipment Baby bouncer Baby gate Baby monitor / Hidden camera Baby powder Baby shampoo Baby toy Baby walker Bib Baby swing Baby transport Bassinet Car seat safety Child vehicular heat stroke deaths Cloth diaper Cradle board Diaper Diaper bag Baby wipes Haberman Feeder High chair Infant bed (American 'crib' and 'cradle', British 'cot') Infant carrier Infant clothing Pacifier Playpen Stroller Supplemental nursing system Swaddling Swim diaper Teether Travel cot Other topics Baby shower Babywearing Child neglect Closed adoption Cry room Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder Infant ear piercing Open adoption Prenatal cocaine exposure Neonatal withdrawal syndrome Parental child abduction Parental responsibility Parenting plan Paternity Paternity fraud v t e Family rights Elements Prenatal rights Children's rights Matrimonial rights Mothers' rights Youth rights Reproductive rights Right to family life Rights movements Children's Fathers' Mothers' rights Parents' Grandparents See also Family law Parental responsibility Parental liability Related Human rights v t e Human rights Humans Children Intersex people Women Fundamental concepts and philosophies Natural law Positive law Sovereignty Universal jurisdiction Distinctions Claim rights and liberty rights Individual and group rights Natural rights and legal rights Negative and positive rights Aspects Corporal punishment Organizations List of human rights organisations National human rights institutions By continent Africa Middle East Asia Europe North America South America Oceania Human rights abuses Atrocity crime Crime of apartheid Crimes against humanity Cruel, inhuman, or degrading treatment Enforced disappearances Forced migration Genocide Human rights abuses against Palestinians by Israel at Guantánamo Bay detention camp during the Battle of Mosul (2016–2017) during the Gaddafi regime during the Libyan civil war (2011) in Afghanistan in Algeria in Angola in Argentina in Armenia in Australia in Austria in Azad Kashmir in Azerbaijan in Bahrain in Balochistan in Bangladesh in Belarus in Bolivia in Botswana in Brazil in Burkina Faso in Burundi in Cambodia in Canada in Chile in Chile under Augusto Pinochet in China in Cuba in Egypt in El Salvador in Ethiopia in France in Gabon in Ghana in Germany in Guatemala in Hong Kong in Egypt in Haiti in India in Indonesia in Iran in Iraq in Ireland in Israel in Italy in Jammu and Kashmir in Japan in Kashmir in Kazakhstan in Kenya in Kuwait in Kyrgyzstan‎ in Lebanon in Libya in Lithuania in Malawi in Malaysia in Manipur in Mexico in Morocco in Myanmar in Nepal in New Zealand in Nigeria in North Korea in Pakistan in Palestine in Panama in Papua New Guinea in Peru in Poland in Punjab, India in Romania in the Russia in Saudi Arabia in Sierra Leone in Sindh in South Africa in South Korea in Sri Lanka in Sudan in Switzerland in Syria in Taiwan in Thailand in the Democratic Republic of the Congo in the Dominican Republic in the Philippines in the Soviet Union in the United Arab Emirates in the United States in Turkey in Uganda in Ukraine in Uzbekistan in Venezuela in Vietnam in Yemen in Zimbabwe of the Marcos dictatorship of the military dictatorship in Brazil (1964–1985) Incitement to genocide List of human rights abuses by country Murder Persecution Rape Slavery Torture Victims War crimes Related History of human rights List of global issues List of human rights awards Three generations Universal Declaration of Human Rights United Nations Prize in the Field of Human Rights Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐2nzz7
Cached time: 20250816091110
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.703 seconds
Real time usage: 0.917 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4503/1000000
Revision size: 47501/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 141117/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6360/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 227/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 146521/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.410/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7867545/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  738.821      1 -total
 25.55%  188.802      1 Template:Reflist
 20.47%  151.249      1 Template:World_topic
 10.97%   81.029      4 Template:Cite_journal
 10.01%   73.955      1 Template:Rights
  9.82%   72.524      1 Template:Sidebar
  7.56%   55.860      1 Template:Sisterlinks
  6.76%   49.955      1 Template:Short_description
  4.80%   35.438      9 Template:Cite_web
  4.19%   30.985      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:701807:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250816091110 and revision id 1298241805. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Children%27s_rights&oldid=1298241805 " Category : Children's rights Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from January 2016 All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from January 2025 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2017 Pages using Sister project links with default search Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 08:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Children's rights 66 languages Add topic

