Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Philosophy 3 Writings 4 Legacy 5 Works Toggle Works subsection 5.1 Translations 6 See also 7 References 8 Bibliography 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Sextus Empiricus 45 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Latina Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Outlines of Pyrrhonism ) 2nd-century Roman philosopher and physician Sextus Empiricus Born Second century CE Died Late 2nd century or early 3rd century possibly in Alexandria or Rome Philosophical work Era Hellenistic philosophy Region Western philosophy School Pyrrhonism Empiric school Main interests Skepticism Notable works Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Professors Part of a series on Pyrrhonism Pyrrhonists Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus Concepts Ataraxia Acatalepsy Adiaphora Aporia Dogma Epoché Similar philosophies Academic skepticism Modern influence Münchhausen trilemma Benson Mates Robert Fogelin Philosophy portal v t e Sextus Empiricus ( Ancient Greek : Σέξτος Ἐμπειρικός , Sextos Empeirikos ; fl.

mid-late 2nd century CE ) was a Greek Pyrrhonist philosopher and Empiric school physician with Roman citizenship . His philosophical works are the most complete surviving account of ancient Greek and Roman Pyrrhonism , and because of the arguments they contain against the other Hellenistic philosophies , they are also a major source of information about those philosophies.

Life [ edit ] Little is known about Sextus Empiricus. He likely lived in Alexandria , Rome , or Athens .

[ 1 ] His Roman name, Sextus , implies he was a Roman citizen.

[ 2 ] The Suda , a 10th-century Byzantine encyclopedia, states that he was the same person as Sextus of Chaeronea , [ 3 ] as do other pre-modern sources, but this identification is commonly doubted.

[ 4 ] In his medical work, as reflected by his name, tradition maintains that he belonged to the Empiric school in which Pyrrhonism was popular. However, at least twice in his writings, Sextus seems to place himself closer to the Methodic school .

Philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Pyrrhonism As a skeptic, Sextus Empiricus raised concerns which applied to all types of knowledge. He doubted the validity of induction [ 5 ] long before its best known critic, David Hume , and raised the regress argument against all forms of reasoning: Those who claim for themselves to judge the truth are bound to possess a criterion of truth. This criterion, then, either is without a judge's approval or has been approved. But if it is without approval, whence comes it that it is trustworthy? For no matter of dispute is to be trusted without judging. And, if it has been approved, that which approves it, in turn, either has been approved or has not been approved, and so on ad infinitum .

[ 6 ] This view is known as Pyrrhonian skepticism , which Sextus differentiated from Academic skepticism as practiced by Carneades which, according to Sextus, denies the possibility of knowledge altogether, something that Sextus criticized as being an affirmative belief. Instead, Sextus advocates simply giving up belief; in other words, suspending judgment ( epoché ) about whether or not anything is knowable.

[ 7 ] Only by suspending judgment can we attain a state of ataraxia (roughly, 'peace of mind').

There is some debate as to the extent to which Sextus advocated the suspension of judgement. According to Myles Burnyeat , [ 8 ] Jonathan Barnes , [ 9 ] and Benson Mates , [ 10 ] Sextus advises that we should suspend judgment about virtually all beliefs; that is to say, we should neither affirm any belief as true nor deny any belief as false, since we may live without any beliefs, acting by habit.

Michael Frede , however, defends a different interpretation, [ 11 ] according to Sextus, beliefs are permissible so long as they are not grounded in reason, philosophy, or speculation; a skeptic may, for instance, accept commonly held views within their society. The key distinction between the skeptic and the dogmatist lies in the source of belief: the skeptic does not arrive at beliefs through rigorous philosophical inquiry.

Writings [ edit ] Diogenes Laërtius [ 12 ] and the Suda [ 3 ] report that Sextus Empiricus wrote ten books on Pyrrhonism. The Suda also says Sextus wrote a book Ethica . Sextus Empiricus's three surviving works are the Outlines of Pyrrhonism ( Πυῤῥώνειοι ὑποτυπώσεις , Pyrrhōneioi hypotypōseis , thus commonly abbreviated PH ), and two distinct works preserved under the same title, Adversus Mathematicos ( Πρὸς μαθηματικούς , Pros mathematikous , commonly abbreviated "AM" or "M" and known as Against Those in the Disciplines, or Against the Mathematicians ).

Adversus Mathematicos is incomplete as the text references parts that are not in the surviving text.

Adversus Mathematicos also includes mentions of three other works which did not survive: Medical Commentaries (AD I 202) Empirical Commentaries (AM I 62) Commentaries on the Soul which includes a discussion of the Pythagoreans' metaphysical theory of numbers (AD IV 284) and shows that the soul is nothing (AM VI 55) [ 13 ] The surviving first six books of Adversus Mathematicos are commonly known as Against the Professors . Each book also has a traditional title; [ 14 ] although none of these titles except Pros mathematikous and Pyrrhōneioi hypotypōseis are found in the manuscripts.

Book English title Greek title I Against the Grammarians Πρὸς γραμματικούς / Pros grammatikous II Against the Rhetoricians Πρὸς ῥητορικούς / Pros rhetorikous III Against the Geometers Πρὸς γεωμετρικούς / Pros geometrikous IV Against the Arithmeticians Πρὸς ἀριθμητικούς / Pros arithmetikous V Against the Astrologers Πρὸς ἀστρολόγους / Pros astrologous VI Against the Musicians Πρὸς μουσικούς / Pros mousikous Adversus Mathematicos I–VI is sometimes distinguished from Adversus Mathematicos VII–XI by using another title, Against the Dogmatists ( Πρὸς δογματικούς , Pros dogmatikous ) and then the remaining books are numbered as I–II, III–IV, and V, despite the fact that it is commonly inferred that what we have is just part of a larger work whose beginning is missing and it is unknown how much of the total work has been lost. The supposed general title of this partially lost work is Skeptical Treatises' ( Σκεπτικὰ Ὑπομνήματα / Skeptika Hypomnēmata ).

[ 15 ] Book English title Greek title VII–VIII Against the Logicians Πρὸς λογικούς / Pros logikous IX–X Against the Physicists Πρὸς φυσικούς / Pros Physikous XI Against the Ethicists Πρὸς ἠθικούς / Pros Ethikous Legacy [ edit ] An influential Latin translation of Sextus's Outlines was published by Henricus Stephanus in Geneva in 1562, [ 16 ] and this was followed by a complete Latin Sextus with Gentian Hervet as translator in 1569.

[ 17 ] Petrus and Jacobus Chouet published the Greek text for the first time in 1621. Stephanus did not publish it with his Latin translation either in 1562 or in 1569, nor was it published in the reprint of the latter in 1619.

Sextus's Outlines were widely read in Europe during the 16th, 17th and 18th centuries, and had a profound effect on Michel de Montaigne , David Hume and Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel , among many others. Another source for the circulation of Sextus's ideas was Pierre Bayle 's Dictionary .

[ 18 ] Since the Renaissance, French philosophy has been continuously influenced by Sextus: Montaigne in the 16th century, Descartes , Blaise Pascal , Pierre-Daniel Huet and François de La Mothe Le Vayer in the 17th century, many of the "Philosophes", and in recent times controversial figures such as Michel Onfray , in a direct line of filiation between Sextus' radical skepticism and secular or even radical atheism.

[ 19 ] Works [ edit ] Translations [ edit ] Old complete translation in four volumes Sextus Empiricus, Sextus Empiricus I: Outlines of Pyrrhonism .

R.G. Bury (trans.) (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1933/2000).

ISBN 0-674-99301-2 Sextus Empiricus, Sextus Empiricus II: Against the Logicians . R.G. Bury (trans.) (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1935/1997).

ISBN 0-674-99321-7 Sextus Empiricus, Sextus Empiricus III: Against the Physicists, Against the Ethicists . R.G. Bury (trans.) Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1936/1997.

ISBN 0-674-99344-6 Sextus Empiricus, Sextus Empiricus IV: Against the Professors . R.G. Bury (trans.) (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1949/2000).

ISBN 0-674-99420-5 New partial translations Sextus Empiricus, Against the Grammarians (Adversos Mathematicos I) David Blank (trans.) Oxford:  Clarendon Press, 1998.

ISBN 0-19-824470-3 Sextus Empiricus, Against the Mathematicians (Adversos Mathematicos IV) Lorenzo Corti (trans.) Leiden: Brill, 2024.

ISBN 978-90-04-67949-8 Sextus Empiricus, Against those in the Disciplines (Adversos Mathematicos I-VI). Richard Bett (trans.) (New York: Oxford University Press 2018).

ISBN 9780198712701 Sextus Empiricus, Against the Logicians . (Adversus Mathematicos VII and VIII). Richard Bett (trans.) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.

ISBN 0-521-53195-0 Sextus Empiricus, Against the Physicists (Adversus Mathematicos IX and X). Richard Bett (trans.) Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2012.

ISBN 0-521-51391-X Sextus Empiricus, Against the Ethicists (Adversus Mathematicos XI). Richard Bett (trans.) (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2000).

ISBN 0-19-825097-5 Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Scepticism . Julia Annas and Jonathan Barnes (trans.) (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2nd ed. 2000).

ISBN 0-521-77809-3 Sextus Empiricus, The Skeptic Way: Sextus Empiricus's Outlines of Pyrrhonism . Benson Mates (trans.) Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996.

ISBN 0-19-509213-9 Sextus Empiricus, Selections from the Major Writings on Skepticism Man and God . Sanford G. Etheridge (trans.) Indianapolis: Hackett, 1985.

ISBN 0-87220-006-X French translations Sextus Empiricus, Contre les Professeurs (the first six treatises), Greek text and French Translation, under the editorship of Pierre Pellegrin (Paris: Seuil-Points, 2002).

ISBN 2-02-048521-4 Sextus Empiricus, Esquisses Pyrrhoniennes , Greek text and French Translation, under the editorship of Pierre Pellegrin (Paris: Seuil-Points, 1997).

Old editions Sexti Empirici Adversus mathematicos , hoc est, adversus eos qui profitentur disciplinas , Gentiano Herveto Aurelio interprete, Parisiis, M. Javenem, 1569 ( Vicifons ).

See also [ edit ] Philosophical skepticism Protagoras Dissoi Logoi References [ edit ] ^ Outlines of Pyrrhonism . W. Heinemann, Limited.

ISBN 978-0-674-99301-3 .

Archived from the original on 2023-06-08 . Retrieved 2023-10-15 .

^ Lehoux, Daryn (March 15, 2012).

What Did the Romans Know?: An Inquiry into Science and Worldmaking . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-47115-0 – via Google Books.

^ a b Suda , Sextos σ 235.

^ Luciano Floridi Sextus Empiricus: The Transmission and Recovery of Pyrrhonism 2002 ISBN 0195146719 pp 3–7.

^ Sextus Empiricus.

Outlines of Pyrrhonism trans.

R.G. Bury (Loeb edn) (London: W. Heinemann, 1933), p. 283.

^ Sextus Empiricus.

Against the Logicians trans. R.G. Bury (Loeb edn) (London: W. Heinemann, 1935) p. 179 ^ See PH I.3, I.8, I.198; cf. J. Barnes, "Introduction", xix ff., in Sextus Empiricus, Outlines of Scepticism . Julia Annas and Jonathan Barnes (transl.) (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).

^ Burnyeat, M., "Can The Sceptic Live His Scepticism" in Myles Burnyeat and Michael Frede (ed.), The Original Sceptics: A Controversy (Hackett, 1997): 25–57. Cf. Burnyeat, M., "The Sceptic in His Place and Time", ibid.

, 92–126.

^ Barnes, J., "The Beliefs of a Pyrrhonist" in Myles Burnyeat and Michael Frede (ed.), The Original Sceptics: A Controversy (Hackett, 1997): 58–91.

^ Mates, B.

The Skeptic Way (Oxford UP, 1996).

^ Frede, M., "The Sceptic's Beliefs" in Myles Burnyeat and Michael Frede (ed.), The Original Sceptics: A Controversy (Hackett, 1997): 1–24. Cf. Frede, M., "The Skeptic's Two Kinds of Assent and the Question of the Possibility of Knowledge", ibid.

, 127–152.

^ Diogenes Laërtius Lives of Eminent Philosophers "Life of Timon" Book IX Chapter 12 Section 116 [1] ^ Machuca, Diego Sextus Empiricus : his outlook, works, and legacy 2008 p. 35 [2] ^ Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

"Sextus Empiricus" . Retrieved 29 May 2015 .

^ Sara Ahbel-Rappe; Rachana Kamtekar (2009).

A Companion to Socrates . John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-1-4051-9260-6 .

^ Bican Şahin, [ Toleration: The Liberal Virtue ], Lexington Books, 2010, p. 18.

^ Richard Popkin (editor), History of Western Philosophy (1998) p. 330.

^ The legacy of Pyrrhonism is described in Richard Popkin 's The History of Skepticism from Erasmus to Descartes and High Road to Pyrrhonism . The transmission of Sextus's manuscripts through antiquity and the Middle Ages is reconstructed by Luciano Floridi 's Sextus Empiricus, The Recovery and Transmission of Pyrrhonism (Oxford: Oxford University Press , 2002).

^ Recent Greek-French edition of Sextus's works by Pierre Pellegrin, with an upbeat commentary. Paris: Seuil-Points, 2002.

Bibliography [ edit ] Annas, Julia and Barnes, Jonathan , The Modes of Scepticism: Ancient Texts and Modern Interpretations , Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1985.

ISBN 0-521-27644-6 Bailey, Alan, Sextus Empiricus and Pyrrhonean scepticism , Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.

ISBN 0-19-823852-5 Berry, Jessica (2011).

Nietzsche and the Ancient Skeptical Tradition . Oxford University Press. p. 230.

ISBN 978-0-19-536842-0 .

Bett, Richard, Pyrrho, His Antecedents, and His Legacy , Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.

ISBN 0-19-925661-6 Breker, Christian, Einführender Kommentar zu Sextus Empiricus' "Grundriss der pyrrhonischen Skepsis" , Mainz, 2011: electr. publication, University of Mainz.

available online (comment on Sextus Empiricus' "Outlines of Pyrrhonism" in German language) Brennan, Tad, Ethics and Epistemology in Sextus Empiricus , London: Garland, 1999.

ISBN 0-8153-3659-4 Brochard, Victor , Les Sceptiques grecs (1887) reprint Paris: Librairie générale française, 2002.

Burnyeat, Myles and Frede, Michael The Original Sceptics: A Controversy , Hackett: Indianapolis, 1997.

ISBN 0-87220-347-6 Floridi, Luciano , Sextus Empiricus: the Transmission and Recovery of Pyrrhonism , Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2002.

ISBN 0-19-514671-9 Hankinson, R.J., The Sceptics , London: Routledge, 1998.

ISBN 0-415-18446-0 Hookway, C., Scepticism , London: Routledge, 1992.

ISBN 0-415-08764-3 Jourdain, Charles, Sextus Empiricus et la philosophie scholastique , Paris: Paul Dupont, 1858.

Janáček, Karel, Sexti Empirici indices , Firenze: Olschki, 2000.

Janáček, Karel, Studien zu Sextus Empiricus, Diogenes Laertius und zur pyrrhonischen Skepsis . Hrsg. v. Jan Janda / Filip Karfík (= Beiträge zur Altertumskunde; Bd. 249), Berlin: de Gruyter 2008.

Mates, Benson, The Skeptic Way: Sextus Empiricus's Outlines of Pyrrhonism , Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996.

Pappenheim Eugen, Lebensverhältnisse des Sextus Empiricus , Berlin, Nauck, 1875.

Perin, Casey, The Demands of Reason: An Essay on Pyrrhonian Scepticism , Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2010.

Popkin, Richard , The History of Scepticism: From Savonarola to Bayle , Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003.

ISBN 0-19-510768-3 Vazquez, Daniel, Reason in Check: the Skepticism of Sextus Empiricus , Hermathena , 186, 2009, pp. 43–57.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Sextus Empiricus .

Works by or about Sextus Empiricus at Wikisource Excerpts from the "Outlines of Pyrrhonism" by Sextus Empiricus Morison, Benjamin.

"Sextus Empiricus" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Sextus Empiricus and Greek Scepticism (at Project Gutenberg; includes translation of first book of the Pyrrhonic Sketches) The complete works of Sextus Empiricus in Greek (at Google Books ).

Sexti Empirici opera recensuit Hermannus Mutschmann , voll. 2, Lipsiae in aedibus B. G. Teubneri, 1912.

v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism v t e Medicine in ancient Rome Tools Cimolian earth Speculum Spoon of Diocles Strigil Physicians Pedanius Dioscorides Soranus of Ephesus Galen Asclepiades of Bithynia Aulus Cornelius Celsus Oribasius Muscio Philonides Antiochis of Tlos Antonius Musa Aurelius Opilius Meges of Sidon Sextius Niger Archagathus Marcellus Empiricus Caelius Aurelianus Cassius Felix Gessius of Petra Antyllus Criton of Heraclea Sextus Empiricus Marcellus of Side Serenus Sammonicus Sextus Placitus Aemilia Hilaria Quintus Gargilius Martialis Thessalus of Tralles Albucius Arcyon Athenaeus of Attalia Crinas of Marseilles Damocrates Charmis of Marseilles Scribonius Largus Andromachus Eudemus Alcon Herodotus Medical literature Gynaecology De Medicina De materia medica Galenic Corpus Medicina Plinii Roles Archiater Dentistry in ancient Rome Disability in ancient Rome Disease in Imperial Rome Food and diet in ancient medicine Gynecology in ancient Rome Mental illness in ancient Rome Nutrition in classical antiquity Surgery in ancient Rome Theories Dogmatic school Empiric school Humorism Methodic school Miasma theory Pneumatic school Religion Febris Vejovis Plagues Antonine Plague Cyprian Plague Category v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Academics CiNii zbMATH People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Sextus_Empiricus&oldid=1301236770 " Categories : 2nd-century Greek philosophers Roman-era Skeptic philosophers 2nd-century Roman physicians 2nd-century Greek physicians Ancient Greek epistemologists Pyrrhonism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 20:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Sextus Empiricus 45 languages Add topic

