Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Childhood 2 Scientific disciplines 3 Pioneering scientific society 4 Technological contributions 5 Religious complications 6 Playwright 7 Works 8 References 9 Sources 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Giambattista della Porta 30 languages Afrikaans العربية تۆرکجه Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Malagasy Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian polymath (1535–1615) Giambattista della Porta Porta in 1586 Born late 1535 Vico Equense , Kingdom of Naples Died 4 February 1615 (1615-02-04) (aged 79) Naples , Kingdom of Naples Scientific career Fields Occultism , astrology , alchemy , mathematics , meteorology , natural philosophy Giambattista della Porta ( Italian: [dʒambatˈtista della ˈpɔrta] ; 1535 – 4 February 1615), also known as Giovanni Battista Della Porta , was an Italian scholar, polymath and playwright who lived in Naples at the time of the Renaissance , Scientific Revolution and Counter-Reformation .

Giambattista della Porta spent the majority of his life on scientific endeavours. He benefited from an informal education of tutors and visits from renowned scholars. His most famous work, first published in 1558, is entitled Magia Naturalis (Natural Magic).

[ 1 ] In this book he covered a variety of the subjects he had investigated, including occult philosophy , astrology , alchemy , mathematics , meteorology , and natural philosophy . He was also referred to as "professor of secrets".

[ 2 ] Childhood [ edit ] Giambattista della Porta was born at Vico Equense , near Naples , to the nobleman Nardo Antonio della Porta . He was the third of four sons and the second to survive childhood, having an older brother Gian Vincenzo and a younger brother Gian Ferrante.

[ 3 ] Della Porta had a privileged childhood including his education. His father had a thirst for learning, a trait he would pass on to all of his children.  He surrounded himself with distinguished people and entertained the likes of philosophers, mathematicians, poets, and musicians. The atmosphere of the house resembled an academy for his sons. The members of the learned circle of friends stimulated the boys, tutoring and mentoring them, under the strict guidance of their father.

In addition to having talents for the sciences and mathematics, all the brothers were also extremely interested in the arts, music in particular. Despite their interest, none of them possessed any sort of talent for it, but they did not allow that to stifle their progress in learning theory. They were all accepted into the Scuola di Pitagora , a highly exclusive academy of musicians.

More aware of their social position than the idea that his sons could have professions in science, Nardo Antonio raised the boys more as gentlemen than as scholars.  Therefore, the boys struggled to learn to sing, as that was considered a courtly accomplishment of gentlemen. They were taught to dance, ride, perform well in tournaments and games, and dress well. The training gave della Porta, at least earlier in his life, a taste for the finer aspects of privileged living.

[ 4 ] Scientific disciplines [ edit ] From De humana physiognomonia , 1586 In 1563, della Porta published De Furtivis Literarum Notis , a work about cryptography . In it, he described the first known digraphic substitution cipher .

[ 5 ] Charles J. Mendelsohn commented: He was, in my opinion, the outstanding cryptographer of the Renaissance. Some unknown who worked in a hidden room behind closed doors may possibly have surpassed him in general grasp of the subject, but among those whose work can be studied he towers like a giant.

[ 6 ] Della Porta invented a method which allowed him to write secret messages on the inside of eggs. Some of his friends were imprisoned by the Inquisition. At the gate of the prison, everything was checked except for eggs. Della Porta wrote messages on the eggshell using a mixture made of plant pigments and alum . The ink penetrated the eggshell which is semi-porous. When the eggshell was dry, he boiled the egg in hot water and the ink on the outside of the egg was washed away. When the recipient in prison peeled off the shell, the message was revealed once again on the egg white.

[ 7 ] De Furtivis Literarum Notis also contains one of the earliest known examples of music substitution ciphers .

In 1586 della Porta published a work on physiognomy , De humana physiognomonia libri IIII (1586). This influenced the Swiss eighteenth-century pastor Johann Kaspar Lavater as well as the 19th-century criminologist Cesare Lombroso . Della Porta wrote extensively on a wide spectrum of subjects throughout his life – for instance, an agricultural encyclopedia entitled "Villa" as well as works on meteorology , optics , and astronomy .

Phytognomonica , 1588 In 1589, on the eve of the early modern Scientific Revolution, della Porta became the first person to attack in print, on experimental grounds, the ancient assertion that garlic could disempower magnets. This was an early example of the authority of early authors being replaced by experiment as the backing for a scientific assertion. Della Porta's conclusion was confirmed experimentally by Thomas Browne , among others.

[ 8 ] In later life, della Porta collected rare specimens and grew exotic plants. His work Phytognomonica lists plants according to their geographical location. In Phytognomonica the first observation of fungal spores is recorded, making him a pioneer of mycology .

His private museum was visited by travellers and was one of the earliest examples of natural history museums. It inspired the Jesuit Athanasius Kircher to begin a similar, even more renowned, collection in Rome.

Pioneering scientific society [ edit ] Della Porta was the founder of a scientific society called the Academia Secretorum Naturae (Accademia dei Segreti).

This group was more commonly known as the Otiosi , (Men of Leisure). Founded sometime before 1580, the Otiosi were one of the first scientific societies in Europe and their aim was to study the "secrets of nature." Any person applying for membership had to demonstrate they had made a new discovery in the natural sciences .

The Academia Secretorum Naturae was compelled to disband when its members were suspected of dealing with the occult . Della Porta was summoned to Rome by Pope Gregory XIII . Though he personally emerged from the meeting unscathed, the Academia Secretorum Naturae disbanded. Despite this incident, della Porta remained religiously devout and became a lay Jesuit brother.

Della Porta joined The Academy of the Lynxes in 1610.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Technological contributions [ edit ] Chemical apparatus for a still from De distillatione , 1608 His interest in a variety of disciplines resulted in the technological advances of the following: agriculture , hydraulics , Military Engineering , instruments , and pharmacology . He published a book in 1606 on raising water by the force of the air. In 1608 he published a book on military engineering, and another on distillation .

Additionally, della Porta perfected the camera obscura . In a later edition of his Natural Magic , della Porta described this device as having a convex lens . Though he was not the inventor, the popularity of this work helped spread knowledge of it. He compared the shape of the human eye to the lens in his camera obscura, and provided an easily understandable example of how light could bring images into the eye.

Della Porta also claimed to have invented the first telescope , but died while preparing the treatise ( De telescopiis ) in support of his claim. His efforts were also overshadowed by Galileo Galilei 's improvement of the telescope in 1609, following its introduction by Lippershey in the Netherlands in 1608.

In the book, della Porta also mentioned an imaginary device known as a sympathetic telegraph . The device consisted of two circular boxes, similar to compasses, each with a magnetic needle, supposed to be magnetized by the same lodestone . Each box was to be labelled with the 26 letters, instead of the usual directions. Della Porta assumed that this would coordinate the needles such that when a letter was dialled in one box, the needle in the other box would swing to point to the same letter, thereby helping in communicating.

[ 2 ] Religious complications [ edit ] A Catholic , della Porta was examined by the Inquisition in the years prior to 1578. He was forced to disband his Academia Secretorum Naturae , and in 1592 his philosophical works were prohibited from further publication by the Church; the ban was lifted in 1598. Porta's involvement with the Inquisition puzzles historians due to his active participation in charitable Jesuit works by 1585. A possible explanation for this lies in Porta's personal relations with Fra Paolo Sarpi after 1579.

Playwright [ edit ] The 17 theatrical works that have survived from a total of perhaps 21 or 23 works [ 11 ] comprise 14 comedies , one tragicomedy , one tragedy and one liturgical drama .

Comedies Lo Astrologo; La Carbonaria; La Chiappinaria; La Cintia; Gli Duoi fratelli rivali; La Fantesca; La Furiosa; Il Moro; L'Olimpia; I Simili; La Sorella; La Tabernaria; La Trappolaria; La Turca Others La Penelope ( tragicomedy ); L'Ulisse ( tragedy ); Il Giorgio ( liturgical drama ) Although they belong to the lesser-known tradition of the commedia erudita rather than the commedia dell'arte - which means they were written out as entire scripts instead of being improvised from a scenario -  della Porta's comedies are eminently performable. While there are obvious similarities between some of the characters in della Porta's comedies and the masks of the commedia dell'arte, it should be borne in mind that the characters of the commedia erudita are uniquely created by the text in which they appear, unlike the masks, which remain constant from one scenario to another. Indeed, the masks of the improvised theatre evolved as stylised versions of recurring character types in written comedies. One of Della Porta's most notable stock characters was the parasito or parassita , a gluttonous trickster whose lack of moral scruples enabled him to pull off stunts that initially might risk bringing the plot crashing down, but ended up winning the day in unexpected ways. The term parasito was translated by John Florio in his Italian to English Dictionary first published in 1598 [ 12 ] as a smell-feast, a flatterer, a parasite, a trencherd or bellie friend, one that saieth and doeth all things to please the humor of another, and agreeth unto him in all things to have his repast scotfree . Perhaps the best example of this type is Morfeo in the comedy La Fantesca .

Works [ edit ] Le commedie (1910 edition), full pdf Natural Magic (1558) expanded to 20 books in 1589. English translation 1658. Available online at [2] De furtivis Literarum Notis (1563) On secret codes and cryptography Villa (1583–92) Agricultural encyclopedia De refractione optices (1589) On Optics Elementorum curvilineorum libri duo (1601) Coelestis Physiogranonia (1603) pub. Naples De occultis literarum notis (1606). Available online at [3] De aeris transmutanionbus (1609) On meteorology De Miracoli & Maravigliosi Effetti dalla Natura prodotti (1665) pub. Venice Giovanni Battista Della Porta (1586).

De humana physiognomonia libri IV . Vico Equense: Giuseppe Cacchi.

Giovanni Battista Della Porta (1602).

De humana physiognomonia libri VI . Neapoli: Tarquinio Longo.

Giovanni Battista Della Porta, Phytognomonica , Napoli, Orazio Salviani, 1588.

Giovanni Battista Della Porta (1601).

Pneumaticorum libri tres . Napoli: Giovanni Giacomo Carlino.

Giovanni Battista Della Porta (1608).

De distillatione . Roma: Stamperia Camerale.

Giovanni Battista Della Porta (1677).

Della chirofisonomia . Napoli: Antonio Bulifon .

Giovanni Battista Della Porta (1910).

Le commedie . Vol. 1 ( Scrittori d'Italia ed.). Bari: Vincenzo Spampanato; Laterza.

Giovanni Battista Della Porta (1911).

Le commedie . Vol. 2 ( Scrittori d'Italia ed.). Bari: Vincenzo Spampanato; Laterza.

References [ edit ] ^ Voelkel, James (2013).

"Laws of Attraction" .

Chemical Heritage Magazine .

31 (3).

Chemical Heritage Foundation . Archived from the original on 25 March 2018 . Retrieved 24 March 2018 .

^ a b Salomon "Introduction" in Data Compression Handbook , p. 1 ^ Giambattista della Porta , (accessed 28 August 2012) ^ Louise Clubb, Giambattista Della Porta, Dramatist. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1965 ^ David Kahn, The Codebreakers , 1967, p. 139 ^ Mendelsohn, Charles.

Proceedings, American Philosophical Society (vol. 82, 1940) . American Philosophical Society. p. 113.

ISBN 978-1-4223-7224-1 .

^ NEMO, Captain; Cercone, Fra' (28 December 2015).

Philalethe Reveal'd Vol. 2 B/W . Lulu.com.

ISBN 978-1-329-79134-3 .

^ David Wootton: Garlic and Magnets.

History Today Vol. 66/1 (January 2016), p. 38.

^ COMMITTEE FOR THE NATIONAL IV CENTENNIAL OF THE FOUNDATION ACADEMY OF LINCEI - Federico Cesi [ permanent dead link ] ^ " The sharp-eyed lynx, outfoxed by nature: Galileo and friends taught us that there is more to observing than meets the eye - Column ", Natural History,  May, 1998 by Stephen Jay Gould ^ Louise Clubb, Giambattista Della Porta, Dramatist . Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1965, pp. 69 and 300–301 ^ John Florio, A Worlde of Wordes, Or Most copious, and exact Dictionarie in Italian and English . London: Arnold Hatfield, 1598.

[1] Sources [ edit ] Clubb, Louise George (1965) Giambattista Della Porta, Dramatist . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Arianna Borrelli : Giovan Battista Della Porta's Neapolitan Magic & His Humanistic Meteorology, in: Variantology 5. Neapolitain Affairs.

(Cologne: Verlag der Buchhandlung Walther König, 2011), ISBN 978-3-86560-887-1 .

Siegfried Zielinski : Deep Time of the Media. Toward an Archaeology of Hearing and Seeing by Technical Means (Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press, 2008), ISBN 978-0-262-74032-6 .

Philippe Malgouyres : La Science de l’émerveillement. Artistes et intellectuels à la cour de Rodolphe II (1552-1612) (Paris, Mare & Martin, 2025) ISBN 978-2-36222-125-5 , p. 215-227 External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Giambattista della Porta .

Wikisource has the text of the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica article " Della Porta, Giovanni Battista ".

Library resources about Giambattista della Porta Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Giambattista della Porta Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Giambattista della Porta" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews della Porta's Life Giambattista della Porta: De humana physiognomonia libri IIII (Vico Equense, Italy, 1586) . Selected pages scanned from the original work. Historical Anatomies on the Web. US National Library of Medicine.

Burns, Paul The History of the Discovery of Cinematography Archived 5 October 2020 at the Wayback Machine An Illustrated Chronology Works by Giambattista della Porta at Project Gutenberg Works by or about Giambattista della Porta at the Internet Archive Online Galleries, History of Science Collections, University of Oklahoma Libraries High resolution images of works by and/or portraits of Giambattista della Porta in .jpg and .tiff format.

Natural magick, by John Baptista Porta, a Neapolitane: in twenty books ... wherein are set forth all the riches and delights of the natural sciences From the Collections at the Library of Congress Della Porta's (1576) De refractione optices parte libri novem Archived 8 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine - digital facsimile from the Linda Hall Library Della Porta's (1586) De humana physiognomonia Archived 8 July 2015 at the Wayback Machine - digital facsimile from the Linda Hall Library Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands 2 3 Norway Croatia Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC RISM Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Giambattista_della_Porta&oldid=1305768919 " Categories : 1535 births 1615 deaths People from the Kingdom of Naples 16th-century cryptographers Italian Roman Catholics 16th-century Italian scientists Italian astrologers 16th-century astrologers 17th-century astrologers 16th-century Italian inventors Physiognomists Members of the Lincean Academy Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2017 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2020 Articles with hCards Pages with Italian IPA Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Middle English (1100-1500)-language text Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 00:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Giambattista della Porta 30 languages Add topic

