Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Taboo against naming the dead Toggle Taboo against naming the dead subsection 1.1 First Nations of Australia 1.1.1 In media 1.1.2 In clinical practice 2 Taboo on contact with the dead 3 Origins and causes 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References Toggle the table of contents Taboo on the dead 1 language Igbo Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Cultural practice regarding the dead The taboo on the dead includes the taboo against touching of the dead, those surrounding them and anything associated with the dead.

Taboo against naming the dead [ edit ] Not to be confused with Deadnaming or Posthumous name .

A taboo against naming the dead is a kind of word taboo whereby the name of a recently deceased person, and any other words similar to it in sound, may not be uttered. It is observed by peoples in many parts of the world, including the indigenous peoples of northern Australia , [ 1 ] Siberia , Southern India , the Sahara , Subsaharan Africa , and the Americas .

[ 2 ] First Nations of Australia [ edit ] As part of funerary ritual, certain Aboriginal cultures in Central Australia, Arnhem Land and Cape York Peninsula prohibit anyone from speaking a person's name during the mourning period after their death. The mourning period varies according to the age and status of the deceased, from a couple of months in the case of a baby up to four years in the case of a prominent leader or lawman.

[ 3 ] During the mourning period the person can be referred to in a roundabout way (e.g., "that old lady"), by a generic kinship name , by a substitute name such as Kuminjay , or by their family name only.

[ 1 ] In some cultures, the taboo extends to the use of the deceased's given name in any context, even when referring to other people, places, objects and concepts with a similar name.

[ 4 ] This can have a long-term impact on the language, as words similar to those of the deceased are progressively replaced with synonyms or loanwords .

[ 5 ] Linguist Bob Dixon considered that this would have resulted in such significant vocabulary replacement over time as to hinder application of the comparative method in linguistics [ 4 ] – though this is disputed.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Ethnologist Philip Jones says that adherents to this taboo believe that the spirit of the deceased is "potentially dangerous, toxic, wicked and mischievous" and must be encouraged to return to its source in the spirit-land. To speak the deceased's name is to risk calling the spirit back to the real world, where it may cause destruction. Over the past century, these beliefs have – for some communities at least – changed to include text, photographs and film as well as speech.

[ 3 ] [ 5 ] In media [ edit ] While many government agencies and other organisations try to respect these traditions, it can be complicated in cases where the person's death is newsworthy. It can also be difficult to determine whether the name of a given Aboriginal person is subject to the taboo. For example, when famous Yolŋu musician Gurrumul Yunupingu died in July 2017, initial news reports used his first name before being changed to refer to him simply as "Yunupingu".

[ 3 ] Some Australian television stations and websites use a blanket disclaimer warning Aboriginals and Torres Strait Islanders about material that may contain images and voices of such people who have died, although this ignores the limited application of the taboo among Aboriginal communities and time limits on the mourning period.

[ 3 ] [ 9 ] In clinical practice [ edit ] McGrath and Phillips argue that "cultural sensitivity and respect, coupled with knowledge of the traditions and practices in respect of the death and dying, are of utmost importance in communicating with Aboriginal peoples" in a clinical context. While they reported that naming taboos were widespread among Northern Territory Aboriginal people, there was considerable variation in how they were applied by families.

[ 10 ] Taboo on contact with the dead [ edit ] In Judaism , contact with a corpse causes a person to become ritually impure , and thus unable to enter the Temple until purified using the ashes of the red heifer .

[ 11 ] This defilement can be caused not only by physical contact with the dead, but also by indirect contact (e.g. contact with one who touched a body) or by entering a building or room containing a corpse. As the red heifer does not currently exist, all Jews are considered by Halakha to be ritually impure regarding the Temple Mount .

Kohanim (Jewish priests) are further restricted , being forbidden from intentionally coming into contact with the dead or from walking too closely to a grave. Exceptions are made for a Kohen's seven closest relatives that have died (father, mother, brother, unmarried sister, son, daughter, or wife).

[ 12 ] Origins and causes [ edit ] Wilhelm Wundt associated the taboo with a fear that the dead man's soul has become a demon .

[ 13 ] Moreover, many cases show a hostility toward the dead and their representation as malevolent figures.

[ 14 ] Edward Westermarck noted that "Death is commonly regarded as the gravest of all misfortunes; hence the dead are believed to be exceedingly dissatisfied with their fate [...] such a death naturally tends to make the soul revengeful and ill-tempered. It is envious of the living and is longing for the company of its old friend." [ 15 ] Sigmund Freud 's explanation for taboos regarding the dead, expanding Wundt's and Westermarck's observations, was that the fear of the presence of the dead person's ghost is a symbolization of unresolved tensions experienced during life, and the guilt pervading a living person's perception of a dead person. This fear, to Freud, is the explanation for ceremonies aimed at keeping the ghost at a distance or driving it off, [ 16 ] with the taboo remaining intact until the body of the dead person has completely decayed.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] De mortuis nil nisi bonum – taboo on speaking ill of the dead Naming taboo Necronym Posthumous name Thanatology Vengeful ghost Notes [ edit ] ^ a b McGrath, Pam; Phillips, Emma (2008). "Australian findings on Aboriginal cultural practices associated with clothing, hair, possessions and use of name of deceased persons".

International Journal of Nursing Practice .

14 (1): 57– 66.

doi : 10.1111/j.1440-172X.2007.00667.x .

PMID 18190485 .

^ Frazer (1922, 3).

^ a b c d Stewart, Cameron (13 July 2013). "Naming taboo often ignored in breaking news".

The Weekend Australian . p. 16.

^ a b Dixon (2002, 27).

^ a b Flood, Josephine (2006).

The original Australians : story of the Aboriginal people . Crows Nest, N.S.W.: Allen & Unwin. pp.

155– 157.

ISBN 1-74114-872-3 .

OCLC 71089055 .

^ Alpher & Nash (1991) ^ Evans (June 2005, 258–261).

^ McGregor (2004, 34).

^ "ABC Indigenous Content" .

ABC Editorial Policies . Australian Broadcasting Corporation. 8 October 2015.

^ McGrath & Phillips 2008 .

^ Numbers 19:11, 19:16 ^ Sefer ha-Chinuch ("Book of Education"), section # 263, Jerusalem: Eshkol Publishers; Leviticus 21:1–3 ^ Freud (1950, 58), quoting Wundt (1906, 49).

^ Freud (1950, 58).

^ Freud (1950, 59), quoting Westermarck (1906–8, 2 , 534f.).

^ Freud (1950, 57).

^ Freud (1990, 372).

References [ edit ] Alpher, Barry; Nash, David (1991). "Lexical Replacement and Cognate Equilibrium in Australia".

Australian Journal of Linguistics .

19 (1): 5– 56.

doi : 10.1080/07268609908599573 .

Dixon, R. M. W.

(2002).

Australian Languages: Their Nature and Developments . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-47378-1 .

Evans, Nicholas (June 2005). "Australian Languages Reconsidered: A Review of Dixon (2002)".

Oceanic Linguistics .

44 (1): 242– 286.

doi : 10.1353/ol.2005.0020 .

hdl : 1885/31199 .

S2CID 145688642 .

Freud, Sigmund (1950).

Totem and Taboo:Some Points of Agreement between the Mental Lives of Savages and Neurotics . trans. Strachey. New York: W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0-393-00143-3 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) McGregor, William B. (2004).

The Languages of the Kimberley, Western Australia . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-30808-3 .

Westermarck, E.

(1906–8).

The Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas (2 vols.). London.

Wundt, W.

(1906).

Mythus und Religion , Teil II ( Völkerpsychologie , Band II). Leipzig.

v t e Death In medicine Cell death Necrosis Avascular necrosis Coagulative necrosis Liquefactive necrosis Gangrenous necrosis Caseous necrosis Fat necrosis Fibrinoid necrosis Temporal lobe necrosis Programmed cell death AICD Anoikis Apoptosis Autophagy Intrinsic apoptosis Necroptosis Paraptosis Parthanatos Phenoptosis Pseudoapoptosis Pyroptosis Autolysis Autoschizis Eschar Immunogenic cell death Ischemic cell death Pyknosis Karyorrhexis Karyolysis Mitotic catastrophe Suicide gene Abortion Accidental death Autopsy Brain death Brainstem death Clinical death DOA Death by natural causes Death rattle Dysthanasia End-of-life care Euthanasia Lazarus sign Lazarus syndrome Medical declaration of death Organ donation Terminal illness Unnatural death Lists Causes of death by rate Notable deaths by year Expressions related to death Natural disasters People by cause of death Premature obituaries Preventable causes of death Unusual deaths List of ways people dishonor the dead List of ways people honor the dead Mortality Birthday effect Child mortality Excess mortality Gompertz–Makeham law of mortality Infant mortality Karoshi Maternal death Maternal mortality in fiction Memento mori Micromort Mortality rate RAMR Mortality salience Perinatal mortality After death Body Stages Pallor mortis Livor mortis Algor mortis Rigor mortis Putrefaction Decomposition Skeletonization Fossilization Preservation Cryopreservation Cryonics Neuropreservation Embalming Maceration Mummification Plastination Prosection Taxidermy Disposal Burial Natural burial Sky burial Ocean burial Cremation Dismemberment Excarnation Promession Resomation Beating heart cadaver Body donation Cadaveric spasm Coffin birth Death erection Dissection Gibbeting Postmortem caloricity Post-mortem interval Other aspects Carrion Cemetery Consciousness after death Afterlife Tukdam Customs Crematorium Desecration of graves Eternal oblivion Examination Funeral Grief Internet Midwife Mourning Online mourning Obituary Reincarnation Palingenesis Saṃsāra Resurrection Underworld Viewing Vigil Wake Paranormal Ghosts Near-death experience Near-death studies Necromancy Out-of-body experience Reincarnation research Séance Legal Abortion law Administration Capital punishment Cause of death Civil death Coroner Death-qualified jury Death certificate Declared death in absentia Death row Dying declaration Inquest Legal death Murder Necropolitics Prohibition of dying Right to die Suspicious death Trust law Will Fields Death tech [ pt ] Forensic pathology Funeral director Mortuary science Necrobiology Post-mortem chemistry Post-mortem photography Taphonomy Biostratinomy Thanatology Other Apparent death Chinese burial money Coins for the dead Dark tourism Darwin Awards Death and culture Death anniversary Death anxiety Death deity Personification of death Dying-and-rising god Psychopomp Death camp Death drive Death education Death from laughter Death hoax Death knell Death march Death messenger Death notification Death panel Death poem Death pose Death-positive movement Death squad Death threat Death trajectory Dignified death Extinction Festival of the Dead Fascination with death Hierarchy of death Homicide Immortality Last rites Longevity Martyr Museum of Death Necronym Necrophilia Necrophobia Philosophy of death Predation Sacrifice human Suicide Assisted suicide Thanabot [ ca ] Thanatosensitivity Category Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Taboo_on_the_dead&oldid=1305936686 " Categories : Taboo Death customs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 00:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Taboo on the dead 1 language Add topic

