Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Notable theorists 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Libertarian theories of law 1 language Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Aspect of jurisprudence This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Libertarian theories of law" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The examples and perspective in this section deal primarily with the United States and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( February 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article is part of a series on Libertarianism in the United States Schools Agorism Anarcho-capitalism Austro Authoritarian Autarchism Bleeding-heart Christian Conservative Consequentialist Feminist Fusionism Geo Green Market anarchism Minarchism Natural-rights Neo Paleo Panarchism Paternalist Propertarianism Socialist Techno Transhumanist Voluntaryism Principles Anti-imperialism Civil libertarianism Constitutionalism Counter-economics Decentralization Departurism Economic freedom Evictionism Free banking Free market Free-market environmentalism Free migration Free trade Free will Freedom of association Freedom of contract Freedom of speech Homestead principle Individuality Individualism Liberty Limited government Localism Marriage privatization Natural rights and legal rights Non-aggression principle Non-interventionism Non-politics Non-voting Open border Polycentric law Private defense agency Private property Public choice theory Restorative justice Right to bear arms Right to privacy Rugged Individualism Self-ownership Single tax Small government Spoiled ballot Spontaneous order Stateless society Tax resistance Title-transfer theory of contract Voluntary association Voluntary society History Age of Enlightenment Abolitionism in the United States Classical liberalism Anti-Federalists Transcendentalism Individualist anarchism in the United States Old Right New Left New Right Freedom School Economics Austrian School Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Georgism Laissez-faire Neoliberalism Supply-side economics Intellectuals Andrews Barnett Block Boudreaux Brennan Caplan Carson Chamberlain Chartier Chodorov Cowen Ebeling Epstein Franklin D. Friedman M. Friedman P. Friedman R. Friedman Galambos Garrett George Griffin Gordon Harper Hazlitt Heinlein Hess Hoppe Hospers Huemer Jefferson Kinsella Konkin R. Lane Liggio LeFevre Machan Mencken Menger Mises Nock Nozick Paterson Rand Raico Read Robertson Rockwell Rothbard Samuels Schulman Sciabarra Scott Skousen Smith Spooner Somin Sowell Sumner Sutton Stephenson Szasz Taleb Thoreau Tuccille Tucker Volokh Wilder Williams Wilson (Clyde) Wilson (Robert) Politicians Amash Barr Brakey Burt Chafee Cleveland Flake Goldwater Jacobs Johnson Jorgensen Lee Massie McAfee Nolan Oliver Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Polis Sanford Sarwark Sununu Ventura Weld Wu Commentators Chamberlain Gillespie Gutfeld Jones Kauffman McElroy Miller Napolitano Postrel Pugsley Rogan Smith Soave Stone Stossel Welch Will Woods Activists Ben Garrison Jillette Koch (Charles) Koch (David) Reitman Kubrick Smith Prince Teller Thiel Literature The Anarchist Cookbook Anarchy, State, and Utopia The Betrayal of the American Right The Case Against Education Civil Disobedience Conceived in Liberty The Creature from Jekyll Island Defending the Undefendable The Discovery of Freedom End the Fed The Ethics of Liberty For a New Liberty Free to Choose The Future and Its Enemies The God of the Machine It Usually Begins with Ayn Rand Liberty The Machinery of Freedom Man, Economy and State The Moon is a Harsh Mistress The Mainspring of Human Progress The Market for Liberty The Myth of the Rational Voter No, They Can't No Treason New Libertarian Manifesto Our Enemy, the State The Problem of Political Authority Progress and Poverty Protection or Free Trade Radicals for Capitalism Seeing Like a State To Serve and Protect The Unconstitutionality of Slavery Issues Abortion Capital punishment Criticism Foreign affairs Immigration Intellectual property Internal debates LGBT rights Objectivism Political parties Politics State Theories of law Symbols Come and take it Gadsden flag Idols Ron Swanson Patrick Bateman Walter White Organizations Cato Institute Federalist Society Free State Project Foundation for Economic Education International Alliance of Libertarian Parties Libertarian Party Liberty International Mises Institute Reason Foundation Reason (magazine) Students for a Democratic Society Students for Liberty Young Americans for Liberty Movements American militia movement Boogaloo movement Dark Enlightenment Objectivist movement Objectivism Sovereign citizen movement Comparable Libertarianism in Hong Kong Libertarianism in the United Kingdom ( England ) Related Conservatism in the United States Left-libertarianism Liberalism in the United States Libertarian Democrat Libertarian Republican Libertarian science fiction On Democracy in America Outline of libertarianism Right-libertarianism Liberalism portal Conservatism portal Libertarianism portal United States portal v t e Libertarian theories of law build upon classical liberal and individualist doctrines.

The defining characteristics of libertarian legal theory are its insistence that the amount of governmental intervention should be kept to a minimum and the primary functions of law should be enforcement of contracts and social order, though social order is often seen as a desirable side effect of a free market rather than a philosophical necessity.

Historically, the Austrian economist Friedrich Hayek is the most important libertarian legal theorist.

[ citation needed ] Another important predecessor was Lysander Spooner , a 19th-century American individualist anarchist and lawyer.

John Locke was also an influence on libertarian legal theory (see Two Treatises of Government ) .

Ideas range from anarcho-capitalism to a minimal state providing physical protection and enforcement of contracts. Some advocate regulation, including the existence of a police force, military, public land and public infrastructure.

Geolibertarians oppose absolute ownership of land on Georgist grounds.

Notable theorists [ edit ] Authors discussing libertarian legal theory include: Randy Barnett ( The Structure of Liberty ) Frédéric Bastiat ( The Law ) Bruce L. Benson ( The Enterprise of Law: Justice Without the State ) Frank van Dun (The Fundamental Principle of Law) Richard Epstein ( Skepticism and Freedom ) David Friedman ( The Machinery of Freedom ) Friedrich Hayek ( Law, Legislation and Liberty ) Gene Healy Hans Hermann Hoppe ( The Economics and Ethics of Private Property ) Stephan Kinsella ( Legal Foundations of a Free Society ) Bruno Leoni ( Freedom and the Law ) Robert P. Murphy ( Chaos Theory ) Andrew Napolitano Robert Nozick ( Anarchy, State, and Utopia ) Roger Pilon Ayn Rand ( Capitalism: The Unknown Ideal ) Murray Rothbard ( The Ethics of Liberty ) Bernard Siegan ( Economic Liberties and the Constitution ) Lysander Spooner ( The Unconstitutionality of Slavery ) Linda and Morris Tannehill ( The Market for Liberty ) See also [ edit ] Law portal Libertarianism portal Politics portal Constitutional economics Equality before the law Hans-Hermann Hoppe § Argumentation ethics Judicial activism Law and economics Outline of libertarianism Philosophy of law Polycentric law Rule according to higher law References [ edit ] Randy Barnett (1998).

The Structure of Liberty: Justice and the Rule of Law . Oxford: Clarendon Press.

ISBN 0-19-829324-0 .

Richard Epstein (2003).

Skepticism and Freedom: A Modern Case for Classical Liberalism . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-21304-8 .

Friedrich Hayek (1981).

Law, Legislation and Liberty: The Political Order of a Free People . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-415-09868-8 , ISBN 0-226-32090-1 .

External links [ edit ] "The Structure of Liberty" "Legal Theory Lexicon: Libertarian Theories of Law" v t e Jurisprudence Legal theory Constitutionalism Critical legal studies Comparative law Economic analysis Legal norms International legal theory Legal history Philosophy of law Sociology of law Philosophers Alexy Aquinas Aristotle Austin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Blackstone Bobbio Bork Brożek Cardozo Durkheim Dworkin Ehrlich Finnis Fuller Grotius Gurvitch Habermas Haller Han Hart Hegel Hobbes Hägerström Jellinek Jhering Kant Kelsen Leoni Llewellyn Luhmann Maistre Marx Montesquieu Müller Nussbaum Olivecrona Pashukanis Perelman Petrażycki Plato Posner Pound Pufendorf Radbruch Rawls Raz Reinach Renner Ross Rumi Savigny Scaevola Schmitt Shang Suárez Stahl Unger Voegelin Waldron Walzer Weber Works Laws (c. 355 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1270) The Spirit of Law (1748) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Pure Theory of Law (1934) The Concept of Law (1961) Natural Law and Natural Rights (1980) Law's Empire (1986) Theories Analytical jurisprudence Deontological ethics Fundamental theory of Catholic canon law German historical school Interpretivism Legal moralism Legal positivism Legal realism Legalism Libertarian theories of law Natural law Paternalism Utilitarianism Virtue jurisprudence Concepts Constitutional amendment Dharma Fa Judicial interpretation Judicial reform Justice Law without the state Legal system Li Question of law Rational-legal authority Usul al-Fiqh Category Law portal Philosophy portal WikiProject Law WikiProject Philosophy changes Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Libertarian_theories_of_law&oldid=1242462911 " Categories : Classical liberalism Theories of law Libertarian theory Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from May 2008 All articles needing additional references Articles with limited geographic scope from February 2019 United States-centric Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2012 This page was last edited on 26 August 2024, at 22:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Libertarian theories of law 1 language Add topic

