Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 15th century 2 16th century Toggle 16th century subsection 2.1 16th-century artists 3 17th century 4 Research 5 Gallery 6 See also 7 Citations 8 References Toggle References subsection 8.1 General 8.2 El Greco 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Cretan school 15 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Occitan Português Русский Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Style of Greek religious painting during the Renaissance Saint Menas by Emmanuel Lambardos (17th century) Cretan school describes an important school of icon painting, under the umbrella of post-Byzantine art , [ 1 ] which flourished while Crete was under Venetian rule during the late Middle Ages , reaching its climax after the fall of Constantinople , becoming the central force in Greek painting during the 15th, 16th and 17th centuries. The Cretan artists developed a particular style of painting under the influence of both Eastern and Western artistic traditions and movements; the most famous product of the school, El Greco , was the most successful of the many artists who tried to build a career in Western Europe, and also the one who left the Byzantine style farthest behind him in his later career.

15th century [ edit ] Our Lady of Perpetual Help , probably an early Cretan work of 13th or 14th century Deposition, Lamentation and Resurrection triptych by Nikolaos Zafouris , c. 1490s ( National Museum , Warsaw ) There was a substantial demand for Byzantine icons in Europe throughout the Middle Ages and, as a Venetian possession since 1204, Crete had a natural advantage and soon came to dominate the supply. A probable early example is the famous icon of the Virgin in Rome known as Our Mother of Perpetual Help , which was certainly well known in Rome by 1499. At this date there is little to distinguish Cretan work from other Byzantine icons stylistically, and the quality of work is lower than that associated with Constantinople .

This period also saw considerable numbers of wall-paintings in local churches and monasteries – altogether some 850 from the 14th and 15th centuries survive in Crete, far more than from earlier or later periods.

[ 2 ] By the late 15th century, Cretan artists had established a distinct icon-painting style, distinguished by "the precise outlines, the modelling of the flesh with dark brown underpaint and dense tiny highlights on the cheeks of the faces, the bright colours in the garments, the geometrical treatment of the drapery, and, finally the balanced articulation of the composition", [ 3 ] or "sharp contours, slim silhouettes, linear draperies and restrained movements".

[ 4 ] The most famous artist of the period was Andreas Ritzos ( c.

1421 –1492), whose son Nicholas was also well known. Angelos Akotantos, until recently thought to be a conservative painter of the 17th century, is now, after the discovery of a will dated 1436, seen to have been an innovative artist in fusing Byzantine and Western styles, who survived until about 1457, when the will was actually registered. The will was made in anticipation of a voyage to Constantinople; several icons were bequeathed to church institutions, some Catholic but mainly Orthodox, and the disposition of his stock of pattern drawings was carefully specified.

[ 5 ] Andreas Pavias (d. after 1504) and his pupil Angelos Bizamanos , and Nicholas Tzafuris (d. before 1501) were other leading artists.

[ 6 ] Even before the fall of Constantinople there is evidence that leading Byzantine artists were leaving the capital in order to settle in Crete. The migration of Byzantine artists to Crete continued increasingly during the following years and reached its peak after the fall of Constantinople in 1453, when Crete became "the most important centre of art in the Greek world", influencing artistic developments in the rest of the Greek world. Cretan icons were commissioned for monasteries on Mount Athos and elsewhere.

[ 7 ] Until it fell to the Turks in 1522, the Cretan school was rivalled by the smaller and less significant community of artists in Rhodes .

[ 8 ] The Venetian archives preserve considerable documentation on the trade of artistic icons between Venice and Crete, which by the end of the 15th century had become one of mass production. There is documentation of a specific order in 1499, of 700 icons of the Virgin , 500 in a Western style, and 200 in Byzantine style. The order was placed with three artists by two dealers, one Venetian and one from mainland Greece , and the time between contract date and delivery was set at only forty-five days. Probably the quality of many such commissioned icons was fairly low, and the dismissive term Madonneri was devised to describe such bulk painters, who later practiced in Italy also, often using a quasi-Byzantine style, and apparently often Greek or Dalmatian individuals. Production of icons at these levels seems to have led to a glut in the market, and in the following two decades there is much evidence that the Cretan trade declined significantly, as the European demand had been reduced.

[ 9 ] But at the top end of the market Cretan icons were now the finest in the Byzantine world.

16th century [ edit ] Works by El Greco Pietà (1566), Benaki Museum Saint Luke Painting the Virgin (1560–67), Benaki Museum Dormition of the Virgin (before 1567), Ermoupoli About 120 artists can be documented working in Candia (the Venetian name of Chandax , present day Herakleion ), in the period 1453–1526, and they had organized a Schuola di San Luca painter's guild , based on the Italian model.

[ 10 ] The blending of the Eastern and the Western traditions, and a relaxed interchange between Greek Orthodox and Roman Catholic rites led to the " Cretan Renaissance ", a golden period for the arts on the island, where both literature and painting flourished. Some of these painters chose to continue the Byzantine tradition of Constantinople, while others were influenced by the masters of the Venetian Renaissance, such as Giovanni Bellini and Titian .

[ 11 ] Later, Paolo Veronese was to be a particular influence. Works by these masters or copies were in monasteries and churches of the island, while examples of early Netherlandish painting decorated the Catholic churches of Candia or were to be found in the private collections of rich Venetians and Greeks.

[ 12 ] In particular, Candia contained a large Franciscan church and a large Orthodox monastery, a daughter-house of Saint Catherine's Monastery , both of which had strong collections from their respective traditions.

Contemporary documents refer to two styles in painting: the maniera greca ( alla greca , in line with the Byzantine idiom) and the maniera Latina ( alla Latina , in accordance with Western techniques), which artists knew and utilized according to the circumstances; as a result some kind of " eclecticism " appeared.

[ 13 ] Indeed, sometimes both styles could be found in the same icon, the one right next to the other.

[ 12 ] The fame of the most prominent Cretan painters spread throughout Greece , the Mediterranean and Europe. After the beginning of the 16th century, the Cretan artists once again had more commissions and their works were avidly sought, since they had started to use new motives and to adjust their iconography to the new trends of their era. To an extent quantity was probably replaced by quality compared with the previous century.

16th-century artists [ edit ] Scenes of Christ's Passion triptych by Georgios Klontzas (the right wing is lost) Apart from El Greco, the most famous Cretan artists during the century were Theophanis Strelitzas (Θεοφάνης Στρελίτζας), known as Theophanes the Cretan , Michael Damaskenos (Μιχαήλ Δαμασκηνός), and Georgios Klontzas (Γεώργιος Κλόντζας).

[ 11 ] Various members of the Lambardos family were also significant artists. Fortunately for art historians, many Cretan painters adopted the practice, perhaps as early as Western painters, of signing their work, which was not a traditional Byzantine practice.

[ 14 ] Theophanes the Cretan was a relatively conservative Cretan artist, whose first dated work is from 1527, and all of whose known works were done on the mainland or smaller islands. He was the most important Greek wall painter of his day, incorporating some Western iconographic and stylistic elements, but remaining essentially Byzantine in spirit.

The intellectual and artistic personality of the young El Greco was formed in this artistic environment. In 1563, at the age of twenty-two, El Greco was described in a document as a "master" ("maestro Domenigo"), meaning he was already an enrolled master of the local guild, presumably in charge of his own workshop.

[ 15 ] He left for Venice a few years later, and never returned to Crete. His Dormition of the Virgin , of before 1567 in tempera and gold on panel (61.4 × 45 cm, Holy Cathedral of the Dormition of the Virgin, Hermoupolis , Syros ) was probably created near the end of El Greco 's Cretan period. The painting combines post-Byzantine and Italian Mannerist stylistic and iconographic elements, and incorporates stylistic elements of the Cretan school.

Styles in the work of Michael Damaskenos Holy Liturgy , an Orthodox composition, though showing Western stylistic and iconographic influence, for example in depicting God the Father Decapitation of Agia Paraskevi , conceived in Venetian style Last Supper During the second half of the 16th century, many Cretan artists went to Venice , in the hope of gaining commissions and recognition. Unlike El Greco, the other Cretan painters who moved there did not substantially alter their styles or working methods. They simply incorporated more Italian motifs into a consistent Byzantine framework.

Jonathan Brown provides a perceptive analysis of the ways that El Greco distinguished himself from other Cretan artists active in Venice, while Richard Mann argues that "none of these painters accepted Renaissance ideas about the relevance of change to the creation of art works".

[ 16 ] Michael Damaskenos returned to Crete after three years, and remained there for the rest of his life.

17th century [ edit ] In Thee Rejoiceth Georgios Klontzas (1530–1608) In Thee Rejoiceth Theodore Poulakis (1622–1692) The 1600s were characterized as the final period of the Cretan school. The movement featured many artists. The late Cretan school was characterized by prototypes set forth by Michael Damaskinos and Georgios Klontzas . During that period Damaskinos 's Beheading of John the Baptist and the Stoning of Stephen were copied by countless Cretan artists. Some included Philotheos Skoufos .

[ 17 ] Georgios Klontzas was another Cretan painter copied by many artists of the late Cretan school. Both his In Thee Rejoiceth and his The Last Judgment set the standard for painters of the late Cretan school.

Theodore Poulakis was a prominent member of the late Cretan school. His version of Klontzas's painting was also called In Thee Rejoiceth . Both paintings are very similar. Many other painters also created their own version of Klontzas's In Thee Rejoiceth .

[ 18 ] The Last Judgement was covered by artists of the Greek-Italian Byzantine style. Klontzas created his own unique version of the painting. Klontzas's Last Judgment was copied by artists of the late Cretan school. Notable versions include Moskos 's Last Judgment and Kavertzas 's Last Judgment .

[ 19 ] One of the most important artistic advancements of the late Cretan school was the work of Ieremias Palladas , a Sinaitic monk. His painting of Saint Catherine of Alexandria , in Saint Catherine's Monastery , was copied by numerous contemporary artists and has served as a prototype for the depiction of the saint into modern times. Painters of the late Cretan school also created their own version of the Crucifixion. Notable version were Ioannis Moskos 's Crucifixion and Georgios Markazinis 's Crucifixion .

[ 20 ] Icon by Emmanuel Tzanes (Paul and Alexandra Kanellopoulos Museum, Athens ).

Another major representative of the Cretan school during the 17th century was famous Greek painter Emmanuel Tzanes , 130 of his works survived. Cretan icon painters continued to flourish, until the mid-century. Venetian art was not the only influence of the Cretan school. The late Cretan school was characterized by the influence of flemish engravings namely that of engraver Jan Sadeler I .

Sadeler had a workshop in Venice . His work influenced Konstantinos Tzanes and Georgios Markazinis .

The Ottoman Turks occupied all the island except for Candia, which finally fell after twenty years of siege in 1669.

[ 21 ] After the Ottoman occupation of Crete, the centre of Greek painting moved to the Ionian Islands , which remained under Venetian rule until the Napoleonic Wars . A new artistic movement was created called the Heptanese school which was mostly influenced by Western European artistic trends. Many Cretan artists migrated to the Heptanese or Western Europe to enjoy the artistic freedom. Few artists continued to flourish in Crete after the occupation. Some of them were Michael Prevelis , Ioannis Kornaros and Georgios Kastrofylakas . A successive occupation of the Ionian islands by the French and the British allowed the Heptanese to remain the centre of Greek art until the independence of Greece in 1830.

Research [ edit ] Triptych by Andreas Ritzos , c. 1510 The Institute of Neohellenic Research published three encyclopaedias outlining the records of countless artists from the fall of the Byzantine Empire until the establishment of modern Greece. It is the first time in history Greek painters were listed on this scale and magnitude. The work resembles Giorgio Vasari 's Lives of the Most Excellent Painters, Sculptors, and Architects and Bernardo de' Dominici 's Vite dei Pittori, Scultori, ed Architetti Napolitani .

[ 17 ] The books feature thousands of paintings, frescos, and other artistic works. The encyclopaedias feature hundreds of painters. The three volumes are currently only available in Greek and entitled Έλληνες Ζωγράφοι μετά την Άλωση (1450–1830) or Greek Painters After the Fall (1450–1830) . Eugenia Drakopoulou and Manolis Hatzidakis were the major contributors. The volumes were published in 1987, 1997, and 2010. The books feature many artists from the Cretan school or Greek Renaissance period. Drakopoulou continues her research with the institute until today.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] The program's purpose is to build an archive of Greek painters after the fall of Constantinople (1450-1830). It features biographical details and an index of artistic works. The Institute of Neohellenic Research catalogues portable icons, church frescoes, and or any other artistic works. This is the first time in history a systematic record was accumulated in Greece representing the period.

[ 24 ] Gallery [ edit ] Saint George by Angelos Akotantos (15th century) Two Scenes from the Life of Saint John the Divine by Andreas Ritzos (15th century) Benaki Museum Saint George Dragon Slayer by Georgios Klontzas (16th) Crucifixion by Emmanuel Lambardos (17th) Archangel Michael by Theodoros Poulakis (17th) Nativity of Christ by Theodoros Poulakis Saint Mark by Emmanuel Tzanes (17th) Saint Theodora by Emmanuel Tzanes Resurrection by Elias Moskos (17th) Martyrdom of Saint Stephen by Filotheos Skoufos (17th) Mary Magdalene by Konstantinos Tzanes (17th) See also [ edit ] Part of a series on the History of Greek art Greek Bronze Age Aegean art Cycladic art Minoan art Minoan pottery Mycenaean art Mycenaean pottery Protogeometric art Ancient Greece Geometric art Archaic Greek art Ancient Greek art Ancient Greek architecture Ancient Greek pottery Ancient Greek sculpture Hellenistic art see also: Greco-Buddhist art Medieval Greece Byzantine art Byzantine Iconoclasm Macedonian art Post-Byzantine Greece Cretan school Heptanese school Modern Greece Modern Greek art Modern Greek architecture Munich School Contemporary Greek art v t e Greek scholars in the Renaissance Benaki Museum National Gallery (Athens) Vitsentzos Kornaros Citations [ edit ] ^ Spratt, Emily L. (2012). "Toward a Definition of 'Post-Byzantine' Art: The Angleton Collection at the Princeton University Art Museum".

Record of the Art Museum, Princeton University . 71/72: 2– 19.

JSTOR 24416383 .

^ Manolis Chatzidakis, in From Byzantium to El Greco , p.42, Athens 1987, Byzantine Museum of Arts ^ Nano Chatzidakis, in From Byzantium to El Greco , p.49, Athens 1987, Byzantine Museum of Arts ^ Anne Met-Graavgard in Post-Byzantine Art , Grove Art Online, accessed January 31, 2008 ^ Robin Cormack; Painting the Soul; pp. 182–191; 1997; Reaktion Books, London; ISBN 1-86189-001-X . For the older view, see D. Talbot-Rice, Byzantine Art ^ Manolis Chatzidakis in The Icon, 1982, Evans Brothers Ltd, London, p. 311-12, ISBN 0-237-45645-1 ^ Nano Chatzidakis, op cit, p. 48 ^ Robin Cormack in Byzantium to El Greco , p.27, Athens 1987, Byzantine Museum of Arts ^ Maria Constantoudaki-Kitromilides in From Byzantium to El Greco , p.51-2, Athens 1987, Byzantine Museum of Arts ^ Manolis Chatzidakis in The Icon, 1982, Evans Brothers Ltd, London, p. 310, ISBN 0-237-45645-1 ^ a b M. Tazartes, El Greco , 23–24 ^ a b M. Lambraki-Plaka, El Greco—The Greek ^ M. Lambraki-Plaka, El Greco-The Greek , 40–41 * M. Tazartes, El Greco , 23–24 ^ David Talbot-Rice, Byzantine Art , 3rd edn 1968, Penguin Books Ltd, p. 384. See also Cormack, 1997, op cit., pp.172–4 & passim ^ N.M. Panayotakis, The Cretan Period of Doménicos , 29 ^ J. Brown, El Greco and Toledo , 76–78 * R.G. Mann, Tradition and Originality in El Greco's Work , 88 ^ a b Hatzidakis, Manolis (1987).

Έλληνες Ζωγράφοι μετά την Άλωση (1450–1830). Τόμος 1: Αβέρκιος – Ιωσήφ [ Greek Painters After the Fall of Constantinople (1450–1830). Volume 1: Averkios – Iosif ]. Athens: Center for Modern Greek Studies, National Research Foundation. pp.

241– 254.

hdl : 10442/14844 .

ISBN 960-7916-01-8 .

^ Speake, Graham (2021).

Georgios Klontzas Encyclopedia of Greece and the Hellenic Tradition . London And New York: Rutledge Taylor & Francis Group. p. 893.

ISBN 9781135942069 .

^ Siopis, Ioannis (2016).

Το Θέμα της Δευτέρας Παρουσίας στις εικόνες [ A Detailed History of the Second Coming (Last Judgment) in Greek Paintings (Greek) ] (PDF) . Thessaloniki, Greece: Aristotle University of Thessaloniki School of Philosophy Division of Archaeology and History. pp.

51– 53.

^ Vafea, Flora (2017).

The Astronomical Instruments in Saint Catherine's Iconography at the Holy Monastery of Sinai The Almagest Volume 8, Issue 2 . Paris, France: University of Paris. pp.

85– 106.

doi : 10.1484/J.ALMAGEST.5.114932 .

^ X. Papaefthimiou, Popular Aspects of the Greek Iconography Archived 2012-05-24 at archive.today ^ Hatzidakis, Manolis & Drakopoulou, Eugenia (1997).

Greek Painters After the Fall (1450–1830) Volume B . Athens, GR: Center for Modern Greek Studies E.I.E. pp.

10– 15.

^ * Drakopoulou, Eugenia (2010).

Greek Painters After the Fall (1450-1830) Volume C . Athens, GR: Center for Modern Greek Studies E.I.E. pp.

1– 20.

^ Eugenia Drakopoulou (August 15, 2021).

"Χριστόδουλος Καλλέργης (Καλέργης)" . Institute for Neohellenic Research . Retrieved August 15, 2021 .

References [ edit ] General [ edit ] Various authors, From Byzantium to El Greco , Athens 1987, Byzantine Museum of Arts Chatzidakis, Manolis, in The Icon , 1982, Evans Brothers Ltd, London, 1981, ISBN 0-237-45645-1 Cormack, Robin (1997).

Painting the Soul; Icons, Death Masks and Shrouds . Reaktion Books, London.

David Talbot-Rice, Byzantine Art, 3rd edn 1968, Penguin Books Ltd Hatzidakis, Manolis (1987).

Έλληνες Ζωγράφοι μετά την Άλωση (1450–1830). Τόμος 1: Αβέρκιος – Ιωσήφ [ Greek Painters After the Fall of Constantinople (1450–1830). Volume 1: Averkios – Iosif ]. Athens: Center for Modern Greek Studies, National Research Foundation.

hdl : 10442/14844 .

ISBN 960-7916-01-8 .

Hatzidakis, Manolis; Drakopoulou, Evgenia (1997).

Έλληνες Ζωγράφοι μετά την Άλωση (1450–1830). Τόμος 2: Καβαλλάρος - Ψαθόπουλος [ Greek Painters After the Fall of Constantinople (1450–1830). Volume 2: Kavallaros – Psathopoulos ]. Athens: Center for Modern Greek Studies, National Research Foundation.

hdl : 10442/14088 .

ISBN 960-7916-00-X .

Drakopoulou, Evgenia (2010).

Έλληνες Ζωγράφοι μετά την Άλωση (1450–1830), Τόμος 3: Αβέρκιος - Ιωσήφ (Συμπληρώσεις-Διορθώσεις) [ Greek Painters After the Fall of Constantinople (1450–1830). Volume 3: Averkios – Iosif (Addenda-Corrigenda) ]. Athens: Center for Modern Greek Studies, National Research Foundation.

hdl : 10442/14845 .

ISBN 978-960-7916-94-5 .

Voulgaropoulou, Margarita (2020).

"From Domestic Devotion to the Church Altar: Venerating Icons in Late Medieval and Early Modern Adriatic" .

Religions .

10 (6): 390.

doi : 10.3390/rel10060390 .

El Greco [ edit ] Bray, Xavier; El Greco ; 2004; National Gallery Company, London (dist Yale UP); ISBN 1-85709-315-1 Brown, Jonathan (1982). "El Greco and Toledo".

El Greco of Toledo (catalogue) . Little Brown. ASIN B-000H4-58C-Y.

Lambraki-Plaka, Marina (1999).

El Greco-The Greek . Kastaniotis.

ISBN 960-03-2544-8 .

Mann, Richard G. (2002).

"Tradition and Originality in El Greco's Work" (PDF) .

Journal of the Rocky Mountain .

23 . The Medieval and Renaissance Association: 83– 110. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2006-09-06 . Retrieved 2006-12-12 .

Panayotakis, Nikolaos M. (1986). "The Cretan Period of the Life of Doménicos Theotocópoulos".

Festschrift in Honor of Nikos Svoronos, Volume B . Crete University Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Cretan School .

National Gallery of Athens Nano Hatzidakis: Velimezis Icon Collection Giorgios Klontzas icon in Philadelphia The Origins of El Greco: Icon Painting in Venetian Crete Exhibition in NY, 2009–10 The New York Times Art Review: 'The Origins of El Greco' Saints at a Cultural Crossroads Byzantium: Faith and Power (1261–1557) , an exhibition catalogue from The Metropolitan Museum of Art (fully available online as PDF), which contains material on the Cretan school v t e Crete People Minos Epimenides Nearchus Georgios Chortatzis Vitsentzos Kornaros Marcus Musurus El Greco Cyril Lucaris Dimitrios Kallergis Eleftherios Venizelos Nikos Kazantzakis Sfakians Cretan Turks History Ancient Crete Minoan period Mycenaean period Classical and Hellenistic period Creta et Cyrenaica First Byzantine period Emirate of Crete Second Byzantine period Kingdom of Candia Revolt of Saint Titus Cretan War (1645–69) Ottoman Crete Greek War of Independence Cretan Revolt (1866–69) Cretan State Theriso revolt Battle of Crete Cretan resistance Major cities Agios Nikolaos Chania Heraklion Ierapetra Rethymno Siteia Gorges Agia Eirini Gorge Ha Gorge Imbros Gorge Kotsifos Gorge Kourtaliotiko Gorge Milona Gorge Richtis Gorge Samariá Gorge Sarakina Gorge Landmarks Ancient Archanes Armenoi Eleutherna Gortyn Gournia Hagia Triada Kommos Knossos Kydonia Lato Malia Monastiraki Phaistos Polyrrhenia Tylissos Zakros Museums Archaeological Museum of Chania Cretaquarium Heraklion Archaeological Museum Nautical Museum of Crete St. Mark Basilica (Museum of Visual Arts) Religious Agia Triada Monastery Agios Minas Cathedral Agios Titos, Heraklion Arkadi Monastery Assumption Cathedral Gouverneto Monastery Küçük Hasan Pasha Mosque Moni Toplou Neradje Mosque St. Catherine, Heraklion St. Peter of Dominicans, Heraklion Fortresses Aptera Firkas Fortezza of Rethymno Frangokastello Gramvousa Kazarma Koules Spinalonga Natural Cave of Zeus Lasithi Plateau Lefka Ori Matala Messara Plain Mirabello Bay Mount Ida Psychro Cave Vai Other Elounda Sfakia Souda Culture Cretan Greek dialect Cretan school (icon painting) Cretan literature Cretan lyra Cuisine ( wine ) Kri-kri Mantinada Minotaur Music v t e Icon -painting schools Aleppo school Cretan school Godunov school [ ru ] Macedonian school [ ru ] Moscow school Novgorod school Siberian school [ ru ] Stroganov school Vologda school [ ru ] v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cretan_school&oldid=1297655271 " Categories : Cretan Renaissance El Greco Eastern Orthodox icons Byzantine icons Icon-painting schools Hidden categories: CS1: long volume value Webarchive template archiveis links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from May 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 27 June 2025, at 16:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cretan school 15 languages Add topic

