Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Kinematic equations Toggle Kinematic equations subsection 1.1 Forward kinematics 1.2 Inverse kinematics 2 Robot Jacobian Toggle Robot Jacobian subsection 2.1 Velocity kinematics 2.2 Static force analysis 3 Fields of study 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Robot kinematics 3 languages Slovenščina Српски / srpski Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikibooks Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Geometric analysis of multi-DoF kinematic chains that model a robot Robot kinematics applies geometry to the study of the movement of multi-degree of freedom kinematic chains that form the structure of robotic systems.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The emphasis on geometry means that the links of the robot are modeled as rigid bodies and its joints are assumed to provide pure rotation or translation .

Robot kinematics studies the relationship between the dimensions and connectivity of kinematic chains and the position, velocity and acceleration of each of the links in the robotic system, in order to plan and control movement and to compute actuator forces and torques . The relationship between mass and inertia properties, motion, and the associated forces and torques is studied as part of robot dynamics .

Kinematic equations [ edit ] Further information: Kinematic equation A fundamental tool in robot kinematics is the kinematics equations of the kinematic chains that form the robot.  These non-linear equations are used to map the joint parameters to the configuration of the robot system. Kinematics equations are also used in biomechanics of the skeleton and computer animation of articulated characters.

Forward kinematics uses the kinematic equations of a robot to compute the position of the end-effector from specified values for the joint parameters.

[ 3 ] The reverse process that computes the joint parameters that achieve a specified position of the end-effector is known as inverse kinematics.  The dimensions of the robot and its kinematics equations define the volume of space reachable by the robot, known as its workspace.

There are two broad classes of robots and associated kinematics equations: serial manipulators and parallel manipulators . Other types of systems with specialized kinematics equations are air, land, and submersible mobile robots, hyper-redundant, or snake, robots and humanoid robots .

Forward kinematics [ edit ] Main article: Forward kinematics Forward kinematics specifies the joint parameters and computes the configuration of the chain. For serial manipulators this is achieved by direct substitution of the joint parameters into the forward kinematics equations for the serial chain.  For parallel manipulators substitution of the joint parameters into the kinematics equations requires solution of the a set of polynomial constraints to determine the set of possible end-effector locations.

Inverse kinematics [ edit ] Main article: Inverse kinematics Inverse kinematics specifies the end-effector location and computes the associated joint angles. For serial manipulators this requires solution of a set of polynomials obtained from the kinematics equations and yields multiple configurations for the chain.  The case of a general 6R serial manipulator (a serial chain with six revolute joints ) yields sixteen different inverse kinematics solutions, which are solutions of a sixteenth degree polynomial. For parallel manipulators, the specification of the end-effector location simplifies the kinematics equations, which yields formulas for the joint parameters.

Robot Jacobian [ edit ] The time derivative of the kinematics equations yields the Jacobian of the robot, which relates the joint rates to the linear and angular velocity of the end-effector.  The principle of virtual work shows that the Jacobian also provides a relationship between joint torques and the resultant force and torque applied by the end-effector.  Singular configurations of the robot are identified by studying its Jacobian.

Velocity kinematics [ edit ] The robot Jacobian results in a set of linear equations that relate the joint rates to the six-vector formed from the angular and linear velocity of the end-effector, known as a twist .  Specifying the joint rates yields the end-effector twist directly.

The inverse velocity problem seeks the joint rates that provide a specified end-effector twist.  This is solved by inverting the Jacobian matrix . It can happen that the robot is in a configuration where the Jacobian does not have an inverse.  These are termed singular configurations of the robot.

Static force analysis [ edit ] The principle of virtual work yields a set of linear equations that relate the resultant force-torque six vector, called a wrench , that acts on the end-effector to the joint torques of the robot.  If the end-effector wrench is known, then a direct calculation yields the joint torques.

The inverse statics problem seeks the end-effector wrench associated with a given set of joint torques, and requires the inverse of the Jacobian matrix.  As in the case of inverse velocity analysis, at singular configurations this problem cannot be solved. However, near singularities small actuator torques result in a large end-effector wrench. Thus near singularity configurations robots have large mechanical advantage .

Fields of study [ edit ] Robot kinematics also deals with motion planning , singularity avoidance , redundancy , collision avoidance , as well as the kinematic synthesis of robots.

[ 4 ] See also [ edit ] Physics portal Robotics conventions Mobile robot Robot locomotion References [ edit ] ^ Paul, Richard (1981).

Robot manipulators: mathematics, programming, and control : the computer control of robot manipulators . MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

ISBN 978-0-262-16082-7 .

^ J. M. McCarthy, 1990, Introduction to Theoretical Kinematics, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

^ John J. Craig, 2004, Introduction to Robotics: Mechanics and Control (3rd Edition), Prentice-Hall.

^ J. M. McCarthy and G. S. Soh, Geometric Design of Linkages, 2nd Edition, Springer 2010.

v t e Robotics Main articles Outline Glossary Index History Geography Hall of Fame Ethics Laws Competitions AI competitions Types Aerobot Anthropomorphic Humanoid Android Cyborg Gynoid Claytronics Companion Automaton Animatronic Audio-Animatronics Industrial Articulated arm Domestic Educational Entertainment Juggling Military Medical Service Disability Agricultural Food service Retail BEAM robotics Soft robotics Classifications Biorobotics Cloud robotics Continuum robot Unmanned vehicle aerial ground Mobile robot Microbotics Nanorobotics Necrobotics Robotic spacecraft Space probe Swarm Telerobotics Underwater remotely-operated Robotic fish Locomotion Tracks Walking Hexapod Climbing Electric unicycle Robotic fins Navigation and mapping Motion planning Simultaneous localization and mapping Visual odometry Vision-guided robot systems Research Evolutionary Kits Simulator Suite Open-source Software Adaptable Developmental Human–robot interaction Paradigms Perceptual Situated Ubiquitous Companies ABB Amazon Robotics Anybots Barrett Technology Boston Dynamics Doosan Robotics Energid Technologies FarmWise FANUC Figure AI Foster-Miller Harvest Automation HD Hyundai Robotics Honeybee Robotics Intuitive Surgical IRobot KUKA Rainbow Robotics Starship Technologies Symbotic Universal Robotics Wolf Robotics Yaskawa Related Critique of work Powered exoskeleton Workplace robotics safety Robotic tech vest Technological unemployment Terrainability Fictional robots Category Outline NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐mcvcm
Cached time: 20250812000427
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.277 seconds
Real time usage: 0.354 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 523/1000000
Revision size: 8713/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 23729/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 764/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 16204/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.185/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4379842/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  302.630      1 -total
 33.17%  100.376      1 Template:Reflist
 30.40%   91.988      1 Template:Robotics
 29.65%   89.738      1 Template:Navbox
 28.34%   85.764      1 Template:Cite_book
 21.26%   64.330      1 Template:Short_description
 11.72%   35.480      2 Template:Pagetype
  6.39%   19.353      1 Template:See
  6.36%   19.234      3 Template:Main_other
  5.90%   17.863      1 Template:Portal Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1318031:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812000427 and revision id 1280915500. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Robot_kinematics&oldid=1280915500 " Category : Robot kinematics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 17 March 2025, at 04:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Robot kinematics 3 languages Add topic

