Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Middle Ages 2 Anti-Highlander and anti-Jacobite sentiment 3 Modern day 4 In the media 5 See also 6 References Toggle References subsection 6.1 Sources Toggle the table of contents Anti-Scottish sentiment Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hatred for Scotland, the Scots, or Scottish culture This article's lead section may be too short to adequately summarize the key points .

Please consider expanding the lead to provide an accessible overview of all important aspects of the article.

( March 2022 ) Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Anti-Scottish sentiment is disdain for, discrimination against or hatred of Scotland , Scottish people or Scottish culture . It may also include the persecution or oppression of the Scottish people as an ethnic group or nation . It can also be referred to as Scotophobia [ 1 ] [ 2 ] or Albaphobia .

Middle Ages [ edit ] Much of the anti-Scottish literature of the Middle Ages drew heavily on the writings from Greek and Roman antiquity. The writings of Ptolemy in the 2nd century AD in particular dominated concepts of Scotland till the Late Middle Ages and drew on stereotypes perpetuating fictitious, as well as satirical accounts of the Kingdom of the Scots . The English Church and the propaganda of royal writs from 1337 to 1453 encouraged a barbarous image of the kingdom as it allied with England's enemy, the Kingdom of France , during the Hundred Years' War .

[ 3 ] Medieval authors seldom visited Scotland but called on such accounts as " common knowledge ", influencing the works of Hector Boece 's " Scotorum Historiae " (Paris 1527) and William Camden 's " Brittania " (London 1586) plagiarising and perpetuating negative attitudes. In the 16th century Scotland—particularly the Scottish Gaelic -speaking Highlands —was characterised as lawless, savage and filled with wild Scots. As seen in Camden's account to promote an image of the nation as a wild and barbarous people: They drank the bloud [blood] out of wounds of the slain: they establish themselves, by drinking one anothers bloud [blood] and suppose the great number of slaughters they commit, the more honour they winne [win] and so did the Scythians in old time. To this we adde [add] that these wild Scots, like as the Scythians, had for their principall weapons, bowes and arrows. Camden (1586) [ 4 ] Camden's accounts were modified to compare the Highland Scots to the inhabitants of Ireland.

[ 5 ] Negative stereotypes flourished, and by 1634 the German author Martin Zeiler linked the origins of the Scots to the Scythians and in particular the Highlander to the Goths based on their wild and Gothic-like appearance.

[ 6 ] Quoting the 4th-century Roman historian Ammianus Marcellinus , [ 7 ] he describes the Scots as descendants of the tribes of the British Isles who were unruly troublemakers. With a limited amount of information, the medieval geographer embellished such tales, including, less favourable assertions that the ancestors of Scottish people were cannibals.

[ 5 ] A spurious accusation proposed by Jerome 's tales of Scythian atrocities was adapted to lay claims as evidence of cannibalism in Scotland. Despite the fact that there is no evidence of the ancestors of the Scots in ancient Gaul , [ 8 ] moreover Jerome's text was a mistranslation of Attacotti , [ 9 ] another tribe in Roman Britain , the myth of cannibalism was attributed to the people of Scotland: What shall I [St. Jerome] say of other nations – how when I was in Gaul as a youth I saw the Scots , a British race, eating human flesh, and how, when these men came upon the forests upon herds of swine and sheep, and cattle, they would cut off the buttocks of the shepherds and paps of the woman and hold these for their greatest delicasy.

A part of the spurious De Situ Britanniae .

Accepted as fact with no evidence, such ideas were encouraged and printed as seen in De Situ Britanniae a fictitious account of the peoples and places of Roman Britain . It was published in 1757, after having been made available in London in 1749. Accepted as genuine for more than one hundred years, it was virtually the only source of information for northern Britain (i.e., modern Scotland) for the time period, and historians eagerly incorporated its spurious information into their own accounts of history. The Attacotti's homeland was specified as just north of the Firth of Clyde , near southern Loch Lomond , in the region of Dunbartonshire .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] This information was combined with legitimate historical mentions of the Attacotti to produce inaccurate histories and to make baseless conjectures. For example, Edward Gibbon combined De Situ Britanniae with St. Jerome's description of the Attacotti by musing on the possibility that a 'race of cannibals' had once dwelt in the neighbourhood of Glasgow .

These views were echoed in the works of Dutch, French and German authors.

Nicolaus Hieronymus Gundling proposed that the exotic appearance and cannibalism of the Scottish people made them akin to the "savages" of Madagascar . Even as late as the mid-18th century, German authors likened Scotland and its ancient population to the exotic tribes of the South Seas.

[ 12 ] With the close political ties of the Franco-Scottish alliance in the late Medieval period, before William Shakespeare 's Macbeth , English Elizabethan theatre dramatised the Scots and Scottish culture as comical, alien, dangerous and uncivilised. In comparison to the manner of Frenchmen who spoke a form of English, [ 13 ] Scots were used in material for comedies; including Robert Greene's James IV in a fictitious English invasion of Scotland satirising the long Medieval wars with Scotland. English fears and hatred were deeply rooted in the contemporary fabric of society, drawing upon stereotypes as seen in Raphael Holinshed 's Chronicles " and politically edged material such as George Chapman 's Eastward Hoe in 1605, offended King James with its anti-Scottish satire, resulting in the imprisonment of the playwright.

[ 14 ] Despite this, the play was never banned or suppressed. Authors such as Claude Jordan de Colombier in 1697 plagiarised earlier works, [ 15 ] Counter-Reformation propaganda associated the Scots and particularly Highland Gaelic-speakers as barbarians from the north [ 16 ] who wore nothing but animal skins. Confirming old stereotypes relating back to Roman and Greek philosophers in the idea that "dark forces" from northern Europe (soldiers from Denmark, Sweden, Netherlands, France and Scotland) acquired a reputation as fierce warriors.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] With Lowland soldiers along the North Sea and Baltic Sea , as well as Highland mercenaries wearing the distinctive Scottish kilt , became synonymous with that of wild, rough and fierce fighting men.

[ 20 ] However, the fact that Scots had married into every royal house in Europe who had also married into the Scottish royal house indicates that the supposed anti-Scottish sentiment there has been exaggerated as opposed to in England where the wars and raids in Northern England increased anti-Scottish sentiment. An increase in the English anti-Scottish sentiments after the Jacobite uprisings and the anti-Scottish bills of the parliament are clearly shown in comments by leaders in English such as Samuel Johnson, whose anti-Scottish remarks such as that "in those times nothing had been written in the Earse [i.e. Scots Gaelic] language" is well known.

[ 21 ] Anti-Highlander and anti-Jacobite sentiment [ edit ] Sawney Beane at the Entrance of His Cave.

published in the 1720s The Newgate Calendar caption: The woman in the background carries a severed leg.

Stereotypes of Highland cannibalism lasted till the mid-18th century and were embraced by Lowland Scots Presbyterian and English political and anti- Jacobite propaganda, in reaction to a series of Jacobite uprisings and rebellions, in the British Isles between 1688 and 1746. The Jacobite uprisings themselves in reaction to the Glorious Revolution of 1688, were aimed at returning James VII of Scotland and II of England , and later his descendants of the House of Stuart . Anti-Jacobite predominantly anti-Highland propaganda of the 1720s includes publications such as the London Newgate Calendar a popular monthly bulletin of executions, produced by the keeper of Newgate Prison in London. One Newgate publication created the legend of Sawney Bean , the head of a forty-eight strong clan of incestual , lawless and cannibalistic family in Galloway . Although based on fiction, the family was reported by the Calendar to have murdered and cannibalised over one thousand victims. Along with the Bible and John Bunyan 's The Pilgrim's Progress , the Calendar was famously in the top three works most likely to be found in the average home and the Calendar's title was appropriated by other publications, who put out biographical chapbooks . With the intent to create a work of fiction to demonstrate the superiority of the Protestant mercantile establishment in contrast to the 'savage pro-Jacobite uncivilised Highland Gaels'.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] From 1701 to 1720 a sustained Whig single party state campaign of anti-Jacobite pamphleteering across Britain and Ireland sought to halt Jacobitism as a political force and undermine the claim of James II and VII to the British throne. In 1705 Lowland Scots Protestant Whig politicians in the Scottish parliament voted to maintain a status quo and to award financial incentives of £4,800 to each writer having served the interests of the nation.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Such measures had the opposite effect and furthered the Scots towards the cause, enabling Jacobitism to flourish as a sustained political presence in Scotland.

[ 24 ] Pro-Jacobite writings and pamphleteers, e.g. Walter Harries and William Sexton, were liable to imprisonment for producing seditious or scurrilous tracts; all works were seized or destroyed.

[ 26 ] Anti-Jacobite Pamphleteering, as an example An Address to All True Englishmen , [ 27 ] routed a sustained propaganda war with Scotland's pro-Stuart supporters. British Whig campaigners pushed pro-Saxon and anti-Highlander Williamite satire, [ 28 ] resulting in a backlash by pro-Jacobite pamphleteers.

From 1720 Lowland Scots Presbyterian Whiggish literature sought to remove the Highland Jacobite, being beyond the pale, or an enemy of John Bull or a unified Britain and Ireland as seen in Thomas Page's The Use of the Highland Broadsword published in 1746.

[ 29 ] Propaganda of the time included the minting of anti-Jacobite or anti-Highlander medals, [ 30 ] and political cartoons to promote the Highland Scots as a barbaric and backward people, [ 31 ] similar in style to the 19th-century depiction of the Irish as being backward or barbaric, in Lowland Scottish publications such as The Economist .

[ 31 ] Shakespeare's Macbeth was popularised and considered a pro-British, pro- Hanoverian and anti- Jacobite play.

[ 13 ] Prints such as Sawney in The Boghouse , itself a reference to the tale of Sawney Bean, depicted the Highland Scots as too stupid to use a lavatory and gave a particularly 18th-century edge to traditional depictions of cannibalism.

[ 32 ] The Highland Scots people were promoted as brutish thugs, figures of ridicule and no match for the "civilised" Lowland Scots supporters of the Protestant Hanovarians. They were feminised as a parody of the female disguise used by Bonny Prince Charlie in his escape, [ 32 ] and as savage warriors that needed the guiding hand of the industrious Lowland Scots Protestants to render them civilised.

[ 29 ] William Hogarth 's Francophobic painting The Gate of Calais or O! The Roast Beef of Old England , in which in the foreground, a Highlander , an exile from the Jacobite rising of 1745 , [ 33 ] sits slumped against the wall, his strength sapped by the poor French fare – a raw onion and a crust of bread.

Depictions included the Highland Scots Jacobites as ill-dressed and ill-fed, loutish and verminous usually in league with the French [ 34 ] as can be seen in William Hogarth 's 1748 painting The Gate of Calais with a Highlander exile sits slumped against the wall, his strength sapped by the poor French fare – raw onion and a crust of bread. Political cartoons in 1762 depict the Prime Minister, Lord Bute (accused of being a Jacobite sympathiser), as a poor John Bull depicted with a bulls head with crooked horns ridden by Jacobite Scots taking bribes from a French monkey [ 34 ] Anti- Jacobite sentiment was captured in a verse appended to various songs, including in its original form as an anti-Jacobite song Ye Jacobites By Name, God save the King with a prayer for the success of Field Marshal George Wade 's army which attained some short-term use debatably in the late 18th century. This song was widely adopted and was to become the national anthem of Britain now known as " God Save the King " (but never since sung with that verse).

Lord, grant that Marshal Wade, May by thy mighty aid, Victory bring.

May he sedition hush, And like a torrent rush, Rebellious Scots to crush, God save the King.

The 1837 article and other sources make it clear that this verse was not used soon after 1745, and certainly, before the song became accepted as the British national anthem in the 1780s and 1790s.

[ 35 ] On the opposing side, Jacobite beliefs were demonstrated in an alternative verse used during the same period, attacking Lowland Scots Presbyterianism: [ 36 ] God bless the prince, I pray, God bless the prince, I pray, Charlie I mean; That Scotland we may see Freed from vile Presbyt'ry , Both George and his Feckie , Ever so, Amen.

Modern day [ edit ] In 2007 a number of Scottish members of Parliament (MPs) warned of increasing anti-Scottish sentiment in England, citing the increased tension over devolution , the West Lothian question and the Barnett formula as causes.

[ 37 ] There have been a number of attacks on Scots in England in recent years. In 2004 a Scottish former soldier was attacked by a group of children, teenagers, and young adults with bricks and bats, allegedly for having a Scottish accent.

[ 38 ] In Aspatria , Cumbria, a group of Scottish schoolgirls say they received anti-Scottish taunts and foul language from a group of teenage girls during a carnival parade.

[ 39 ] An English football supporter was banned for life for shouting "Kill all the Jocks" before attacking Scottish football fans.

[ 40 ] One Scottish woman says she was forced to move from her home in England because of anti-Scottish feeling, [ 41 ] while another had a haggis thrown through her front window.

[ 42 ] In 2008 a student nurse from London was fined for assault and hurling anti-Scottish abuse at police while drunk during the T in the Park festival in Kinross .

[ 43 ] In the media [ edit ] In June 2019 an anti-Scottish poem titled " Friendly Fire " was recirculated on the internet, leading to criticism of Boris Johnson . The poem was written by James Michie and published in The Spectator magazine in 2004 by Johnson, who was its editor at the time.

[ 44 ] In a 2007 obituary titled "James Michie, gentle genius", Johnson dubbed Michie "one of the most distinguished poets and translators of the 20th century" and referred to "Friendly Fire" as an example of how he wrote "whimsically, sometimes with bite." [ 45 ] The term Scottish mafia is used pejoratively to refer to a group of Scottish Labour Party politicians and broadcasters who are perceived as having had undue influence over the governance of England , such as the constitutional arrangement allowing Scottish MPs to vote on English matters, but not the other way round . The termed had found use in the British press [ 46 ] [ 47 ] and in parliamentary debates.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] Members of this group include Tony Blair , Gordon Brown , Alistair Darling , Charles Falconer , Derry Irvine , Michael Martin and John Reid .

An edition of the BBC panel show Have I Got News for You aired on 26 April 2013 prompted over 100 complaints to the BBC and Ofcom for its perceived anti-Scottish stance during a section discussing Scottish independence . The panelist Paul Merton had suggested Mars bars would become the currency of a post-independence Scotland, while the guest host Ray Winstone added, "To be fair the Scottish economy has its strengths – its chief exports being oil, whisky, tartan and tramps." [ 50 ] In July 2006 Kelvin MacKenzie , a former editor of The Sun , and who is of Scottish descent himself, [ 51 ] wrote a column referring to Scots as " Tartan Tosspots" and mocking the fact that Scotland has a lower life expectancy than the rest of the UK. MacKenzie's column provoked a storm of Scottish protest and was heavily condemned by numerous commentators including Scottish MPs and members of the Scottish Parliament (MSPs).

[ 52 ] In October 2007 MacKenzie appeared on the BBC's Question Time TV programme and launched another attack on Scotland, claiming that: Scotland believes not in entrepreneurialism like London and the south east… Scots enjoy spending [money] but they don't enjoy creating it, which is the opposite to down south.

[ 53 ] In 2015 the Conservative Party MP Lucy Frazer was forced to apologise after criticism for her joke on the floor of the House of Commons that Scots should be sold as slaves to solve the "Lothian question." [ 54 ] In 2015 a cartoon published in The Guardian featuring the Scottish nationalist politicians Nicola Sturgeon and Alex Salmond by the prestigious satirist Steve Bell featuring the line that they would defend Scots' right to practise incest was widely decried as 'racist' and anti-Scottish.

[ 55 ] In 2024 a cartoon in The Telegraph by the satirist Peter Brookes depicting Scottish political leaders being crucified was criticised as anti-Scottish in many quarters.

[ 56 ] See also [ edit ] Scottish cringe Scottish national identity References [ edit ] ^ "Scotophobia".

Oxford English Dictionary: The definitive record of the English language .

Oxford English Dictionary . Oxford University Press. 2008. Archived from the original on 25 June 2006 . Retrieved 6 April 2008 .

Scotophobia, a morbid dread or dislike of the Scots or things Scottish (tartan, bagpipes, ginger hair, accents, flag) ^ Neal Ascherson (28 June 2006).

"Scotophobia" . OpenDemocracy. Archived from the original on 9 January 2008 . Retrieved 2 January 2008 .

^ The Hundred Years' War . W. R. Jones (1979). Journal of British Studies ^ W. Camden, Britannia, or, A Chorographical description of the most flourishing kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland . (London 1610), p114-127 ^ a b Travels to Terra Incognita: The Scottish Highlands and Hebrides in Early Modern Travellers' Accounts c. 1600 to 1800 . Martin Rackwitz. Waxmann Verlag 2007. p33, p94 ^ Zeiller, Martin, Itinerarium Magnae Britanniae , 2nd ed. (1674) Zeiller's account is based on the travels of an anonymous Count of the Holy Roman Empire in 1609, p. 232.

^ Travels to Terra Incognita: The Scottish Highlands and Hebrides in Early Modern Travellers' Accounts c. 1600 to 1800 . Martin Rackwitz. Waxmann Verlag 2007. p34 Ibid.p123 ^ Travels to Terra Incognita: The Scottish Highlands and Hebrides in Early Modern Travellers' Accounts c. 1600 to 1800 . Martin Rackwitz. Waxmann Verlag 2007. p38, p39 ^ Camden Britain part i, p. 127 ^ Bertram & 1757E :59–60 (English) ^ Bertram & 1757L :44 (Latin) ^ Travels to Terra Incognita: The Scottish Highlands and Hebrides in Early Modern Travellers' Accounts c. 1600 to 1800 . Martin Rackwitz. Waxmann Verlag 2007. p40 ^ a b Macbeth by William Shakespeare. A. R. Braunmuller p9 Cambridge University Press, 1997 ^ Eastward Ho!

by Ben Jonson, George Chapman, John Marston, Royal Shakespeare Company ^ C. Jordan de Colombier, Voyages Historique de l'Europe , 8 vols, (Paris, 1693–1697) ^ Williamson Scots, indians and Empire , pp 50–55 ^ The Volois Tapestries a barbaric northerner is depicted ibid., p. 55 ^ Jean Bodin's Les Six Livres de la Républic (Paris 1576) ^ "Early Modern Representations of the far North. The 1670 Voyage of la Martinére", AVR Nordic Yearbook of Folklore , vol lviii(Stockholm 2002), pp. 19–42.

^ Travels to Terra Incognita: The Scottish Highlands and Hebrides in Early Modern Travellers' Accounts c. 1600 to 1800 . Martin Rackwitz. Waxmann Verlag 2007.

^ Johnson, Samuel.

Johnson's Journey to the Western Islands of Scotland and Boswell's Journal of a Tour to the Hebrides . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp.

104– 105.

^ Travels to Terra Incognita: The Scottish Highlands and Hebrides in Early Modern Travellers' Accounts c. 1600 to 1800 . Martin Rackwitz. Waxmann Verlag 2007.p39 ^ "A Taste of Scotlands Historical Fictions of sawney bean and his Family", in E. Cowan and D. Gilford (eds), The Polar Twins . 200 Edinburgh ^ a b Steele. M. (1981) Anti-Jacobite Pamphleteering, 1701 – 1720 ^ Acts of the Parliament of Scotland, xi, 221, 224 cited in Steele. M. (1981) Anti-Jacobite Pamphleteering, 1701 – 1720 ^ Steele. M. (1981) ^ http://www.nls.uk/collections/rare-books/acquisitions/popup/jacobite1701 [ permanent dead link ] – 1720 ^ Poetry and Jacobite politics in eighteenth-century Britain and Ireland by Murray Pittock p33 ^ a b "Contextualising Western Martial Arts The case of Thomas Page's The Use of the Highland Broadsword". 2007 By Bethan Jenkins cited in http://www.sirwilliamhope.org/Library/Articles/Jenkins/Contextualising.php Archived 15 May 2011 at the Wayback Machine ^ Jacobite and Anti-Jacobite Medals by Michael Sharp. The Royal Stuart Society Paper LXXIV ^ a b The myth of the Jacobite clans by Murray Pittock p9 ^ a b The myth of the Jacobite clans by Murray Pittock p10 ^ J. B. Nichols, 1833 p.63 - p.64 "I meant to display to my own countryman the striking difference of food, priests, soldiers, &c. of two nations" ...

"The melancholy and miserable Highlander, browzing on his scanty fare, consisting of a bit of bread and an onion, is intended for one of the many that fled this country after the rebellion in 1745." ^ a b The myth of the Jacobite clans by Murray Pittock ^ Richards, Jeffrey (2002).

Imperialism and Music: Britain 1876 to 1953 . Manchester University Press. p. 90.

ISBN 978-0-7190-4506-6 .

^ Groom, Nick (2006).

The Union Jack: the Story of the British Flag . Atlantic Books. Appendix.

ISBN 978-1-84354-336-7 .

^ Walker, Helen (3 December 2007).

"Scottish MPs voice concern over increase in anti-Scottish sentiment" .

The Journal . Archived from the original on 15 April 2011 . Retrieved 16 April 2011 .

^ "News & Star – News – Beaten Up By 20 Kids for Being Scottish" . Archived from the original on 17 June 2015 . Retrieved 17 June 2015 .

^ "Police probe pipe band race abuse" .

BBC News . 15 June 2007 . Retrieved 25 April 2010 .

^ " 'Kill the Jocks' Thug is Caged; Curse of the Casuals Day 4 – Girlfriend Assaulted" . Retrieved 17 June 2015 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Mum Run out of England for Being Scottish; Racist Hell: Victim Tells How Cats Were Killed and Home Burned" . Retrieved 17 June 2015 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Police probe haggis 'hate crime' " .

BBC News . 23 May 2001 . Retrieved 25 April 2010 .

^ "Student nurse fined hundreds for assault and anti-Scottish abuse" .

STV News . Archived from the original on 17 June 2015 . Retrieved 17 June 2015 .

^ "Fact-check: Did Boris Johnson call Scottish people a 'verminous race'?" .

The National . 17 June 2019 . Retrieved 24 November 2021 .

^ Johnson, Boris (10 November 2007).

"James Michie, gentle genius | The Spectator" .

www.spectator.co.uk . Retrieved 24 November 2021 .

^ Jack, Ian (15 July 2006).

"Border disputes" .

The Guardian . London . Retrieved 2 October 2006 .

^ Johnson, Boris (31 August 2006).

"There's nothing national about the National Health" .

The Daily Telegraph . London. Archived from the original on 9 March 2007 . Retrieved 2 October 2006 .

^ "Daily Hansard" .

Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) . House of Lords. 12 February 2004. col. GC571.

^ "Daily Hansard" .

Parliamentary Debates (Hansard) . House of Lords. 7 July 1997. col. 523.

^ "Ray Winstone calls Scots 'tramps' on TV quiz show" .

The Scotsman . 1 May 2013 . Retrieved 1 January 2014 .

^ "The strange case of the ex-editor with Scottish blood who just can't resist attacking Scotland" .

The Scotsman . 13 October 2007 . Retrieved 14 September 2021 .

) ^ "Sun ed and MacKenzie clash in "tartan tosspots" " .

Press Gazette . 10 July 2006. Archived from the original on 22 March 2008 . Retrieved 12 September 2007 .

^ "MacKenzie attack draws Scots fire" .

BBC News . 12 October 2007 . Retrieved 17 December 2007 .

^ "Tory apologises over 'joke' about turning Scots into 'slaves' " .

Herald Scotland . 7 June 2015 . Retrieved 19 June 2024 .

^ Sommers, Jack (9 March 2015).

"SNP Guardian Cartoon By Steve Bell Branded 'Racist' In Social Media Outrage" .

Huffington Post UK . Retrieved 19 June 2024 .

^ Robertson, Adam (8 April 2023).

"Cartoon depicting SNP figures on crosses condemned" .

The National . Retrieved 19 June 2024 .

Sources [ edit ] Bertram, Charles; Cirencester, Richard of; Leman, Thomas (1809).

The Description of Britain (English translation ed.). J. White.

Bertram, Charles; Cirencester, Richard of; Leman, Thomas (1809).

The Description of Britain (Latin ed.). J. White.

v t e Anti-national sentiment Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people State American Australian British Canadian Chilean Empire of Japan Inter-Korean North South Israeli Zionist People's Republic of China Qing Other Western Related topics Ethnic hatred v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-Scottish_sentiment&oldid=1306027700 " Categories : Anti-Scottish sentiment Anti-national sentiment Society of Scotland Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2016 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with dead external links from February 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from September 2015 Use dmy dates from September 2015 Wikipedia introduction cleanup from March 2022 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from March 2022 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 15 August 2025, at 13:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-Scottish sentiment Add languages Add topic

