Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Personal life 2 Translations 3 Original works 4 Discoveries 5 Testimonials 6 Involvement with peers 7 Writings 8 Influence 9 See also 10 Notes 11 References Toggle the table of contents Qusta ibn Luqa 15 languages العربية تۆرکجه বাংলা Català Esperanto فارسی Français Italiano עברית Қазақша مصرى 日本語 Русский Türkçe اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Lebanese physician and philosopher (820–912) This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( September 2012 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Qusṭā ibn Lūqā al‐Baʿlabakkī قُسطا ابن لُوقا البعلبکی Born 820 Baalbek , Abbasid Caliphate , now Baalbek District , Beqaa Governorate , Lebanon Died 912  (aged 92) Armenia Occupation Physician, scientist, translator Period Abbasid period Years active 840–912 Notable works Risalah fī Auja Al Niqris , Rislah fī al Nabidh , Kitāb fī al‐ʿamal bi‐ʾl-kura al‐nujūmiyya , Hayʾat al‐aflāk , Kitāb al‐Madkhal ilā ʿilm al‐nujūm , Kitāb al‐Madkhal ilā al‐hayʾa wa‐ḥarakāt al‐aflāk wa‐ʾl‐kawākib , Kitāb fī al‐ʿamal bi‐ʾl‐asṭurlāb al‐kurī , Kitāb fī al‐ʿamal bi‐ʾl‐kura dhāt al‐kursī , Qusta ibn Luqa , also known as Costa ben Luca or Constabulus [ 1 ] (820–912) was a Melkite Christian physician, philosopher , astronomer , mathematician and translator.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] He was born in Baalbek . Travelling to parts of the Byzantine Empire , he brought back Greek texts and translated them into Arabic .

Personal life [ edit ] Qusta ibn Luqa al-Ba'albakki originated from Baalbek (or Heliopolis ), now in Lebanon. A Melkite Christian, he was born in 820 and flourished in Baghdad. He was a philosopher , physician, mathematician and astronomer . He died in Armenia , possibly in around 912.

[ 4 ] Translations [ edit ] Qusta ibn Luqa produced, personally revised, or supervised the translations of a number of works. These include works by Diophantus , Theodosius of Bithynia 's Spherics , On Days and Nights , and On the places of habitation , Autolycus 's On the moving sphere and On Risings and Settings , Hypsicles 's On Ascensions , works by Aristarchus , Theophrastus ’s Meteora , Galen ’s catalogue of his books, Hero of Alexandria 's Mechanics , and works by John Philoponus .

He wrote commentaries on Euclid and a treatise on the armillary sphere . He was a prominent figure in the Graeco-Arabic translation movement that reached its peak in the 9th century. At the request of wealthy and influential commissioners, Qusta translated works on astronomy, mathematics, mechanics and natural science from Greek into Arabic.

Original works [ edit ] More than 60 treatises are attributed to Qusta. He wrote mainly on medical subjects, but also on mathematics and astronomy. Only a small number of his works have been published. The extant editions of medical works show that he was thoroughly acquainted with Hippocratic-Galenic humoral medicine—the theoretical system that constituted the basis of formal medicine in Islam.

Qusta's works, many listed in the Fihrist of Ibn al-Nadim , dealt with contemporary science, medicine, astronomy and philosophy. A Latin translation of his work De Differentia Spiritus et Animae was one of the few works not attributed to Aristotle that was included in a list of ‘books to be read by the Masters of the Faculty of Arts, at Paris in 1254, as part of their study of Natural Philosophy.

[ 5 ] The work was translated by John of Seville (fl. 1140). He wrote a treatise on Nabidh . His Medical Regime for the Pilgrims to Mecca : The Risālā Fī Tadbīr Safar Al-ḥa is available in translation.

[ 6 ] Discoveries [ edit ] Research in 2021 traces the discovery of pulmonary circulation to Qusta's book A Treatise on the Difference Between Spirit and Soul (Arabic: رسالة في الفرق بين الروح والنفس).

[ 7 ] Testimonials [ edit ] Of him Ibn al-Nadim says: "He is an excellent translator; he knew well Greek , Syriac , and Arabic ; he translated texts and corrected many translations. Many are his medical writings." [ 8 ] Qusta was with Hunayn ibn Ishaq the author who best served Greek culture in the Arab civilization.

Involvement with peers [ edit ] He was also involved, with his fellow Christian Hunayn ibn Ishaq, in an epistolary exchange with the Muslim astronomer, Abu Isa Yahya ibn al-Munajjim , who had invited them to embrace Islam. Both refused, and provided their reasons for rejecting al-Munajjim's Islamic faith.

[ 9 ] Writings [ edit ] Risalah fī Auja Al Niqris by Qusta Ibn Luqa. Edited with translation and commentary by Hakim Syed Zillur Rahman , Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine and Sciences , Aligarh , 2007 ( ISBN 978-81-901362-8-0 ).

Rislah fī al Nabidh (Arabic translation of Qusta ibn Luqa by Rufus. Edited with translation and commentary by Hakim Syed Zillur Rahman , Ibn Sina Academy of Medieval Medicine and Sciences , Aligarh , 2007 ( ISBN 978-81-901362-7-3 ).

Rîsâlah-i Nabîdh of Qustâ bin Lûqâ by Hakim Syed Zillur Rahman , Supplement to 'Studies in the History of Medicine and Science' (SHMS), Jamia Hamdard , Vol. IX(1985), pp. 185–201.

Kitāb fī al‐ʿamal bi‐ʾl–kura al‐nujūmiyya (On the use of the celestial globe; with some variations as to title), which contains 65 chapters and was widely disseminated through at least two Arabic recensions as well as Latin, Hebrew, Spanish, and Italian translations. The Latin translation is edited by R. Lorch - J. Martínez: Qusta ben Lucae De sphera uolubili , in Suhayl , vol. 5 [1] the extant astronomical work, Hayʾat al‐aflāk (On the configuration of celestial bodies; Bodleian Library MS Arabic 879, Uri, p. 190), which is one of the earliest compositions in theoretical (hayʾa) astronomy Kitāb al‐Madkhal ilā ʿilm al‐nujūm (Introduction to the science of astronomy – astrology) Kitāb al‐Madkhal ilā al‐hayʾa wa‐ḥarakāt al‐aflāk wa‐ʾl‐kawākib (Introduction to the configuration and movements of celestial bodies and stars) Kitāb fī al‐ʿamal bi‐ʾl‐asṭurlāb al‐kurī (On the use of the spherical astrolabe; Leiden University Library MS Or. 51.2: Handlist, p. 12) Kitāb fī al‐ʿamal bi‐ʾl‐kura dhāt al‐kursī (On the use of the mounted celestial sphere). It is identical to Kitāb fī al‐ʿamal bi‐ʾl-kura al‐nujūmiyya mentioned above.

The Introduction to Geometry . Translation and Commentary by Jan P. Hogendijk in Suhayl , vol. 8 [2] Influence [ edit ] He was named (as Kusta Ben Luka) by the poet W. B. Yeats as a source for the ideas in the poet's philosophical treatise, A Vision .

See also [ edit ] Latin translations of the 12th century Toledo School of Translators 10th century in Lebanon Notes [ edit ] ^ Nancy G. Siraisi, Medicine and the Italian Universities, 1250-1600 (Brill Academic Publishers, 2001), p 134.

^ Worrell, W. H. (1944). "Qusta Ibn Luqa on the Use of the Celestial Globe".

Isis .

35 (4): 285– 293.

doi : 10.1086/358720 .

JSTOR 330840 .

S2CID 143503145 .

^ N. Swanson, Mark (2010-03-24), "Qusṭā ibn Lūqā" , Christian-Muslim Relations 600 - 1500 , Brill , retrieved 2024-02-07 ^ "Qusta ibn Luqa al-Balabakki" .

^ J. A Burns, article on ‘The Faculty of Arts’ in The Catholic Encyclopedia, Vol. 1, [NY: Robert Appleton, 1907], 758.

^ Lūqā, Qusṭā ibn; Bos, Gerrit (1992).

Qusṭā Ibn Lūqā's Medical Regime for the Pilgrims to Mecca: The Risālā Fī Tadbīr Safar Al-ḥajj . BRILL.

ISBN 9789004095410 . Retrieved 29 September 2012 .

^ Mahlooji, Kamran; Abdoli, Mahsima; Tekiner, Halil; Zargaran, Arman (2021-03-23).

"A new evidence on pulmonary circulation discovery: A text of Ibn Luqa (860-912 AD)" .

European Heart Journal .

42 (26): 2522– 2523.

doi : 10.1093/eurheartj/ehab039 .

ISSN 1522-9645 .

PMID 33755117 .

^ see Ibn al-Nadim, Fihrist, ed. Fugel, p. 234.

^ Sydney H. Griffith, The Church in the Shadow of the Mosque: Christians and Muslims in the World of Islam, Jews , Christians, and Muslims from the Ancient to the Modern World (Princeton University Press, 2008), p. 86; Samir Khalil Samir and Paul Nwyia, Une correspondance islamo-chrétienne entre ibn al-Munaggim, Hunaym ibn Ishaq et Qusta ibn Luqa , Patrologia Orientalis, 40:4, no. 185 (Turnhout: Brepols, 1981).

References [ edit ] Kheirandish, Elaheh (2007).

"Qusṭā ibn Lūqā al-Baʿlabakkī" . In Thomas Hockey; et al. (eds.).

The Biographical Encyclopedia of Astronomers . New York: Springer. pp.

948– 9.

ISBN 978-0-387-31022-0 .

( PDF version ) Les Arabes et les Arméniens à l'époque médiévale Harvey, L. Ruth (2008) [1970-80].

"Qusṭā Ibn Lūqā Al-BaʿLabakkī" .

Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography . Encyclopedia.com.

v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Sweden Poland Vatican 2 Israel Catalonia Academics zbMATH MathSciNet People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC İslâm Ansiklopedisi Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Qusta_ibn_Luqa&oldid=1301202335 " Categories : 820 births 912 deaths Greek–Arabic translators Astronomers from the Abbasid Caliphate Mathematicians from the Abbasid Caliphate Physicians from the Abbasid Caliphate Medieval Lebanese physicians Medieval Lebanese astronomers Medieval Lebanese mathematicians 10th-century physicians 10th-century Lebanese people 9th-century Lebanese people Eastern Orthodox Christians from the Abbasid Caliphate Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from September 2012 All articles lacking in-text citations This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 16:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Qusta ibn Luqa 15 languages Add topic

