Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Mode of production 2 Social relations Toggle Social relations subsection 2.1 Role of the state 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References Toggle the table of contents Socialist mode of production 11 languages العربية Català Español Euskara فارسی Bahasa Indonesia پښتو Português Türkçe Vahcuengh 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Marxian economy centered around use value, planning and contribution-based distribution This article is about socialism as a historical evolutionary stage of development in Marxist theory. For socialism meaning a method for analyzing socioeconomic development in Marxism, see Scientific socialism . For broader definitions of socialism, see Socialism .

Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e The socialist mode of production , also known as socialism or communism , [ a ] is a specific historical phase of economic development and its corresponding set of social relations that emerge from capitalism in the schema of historical materialism within Marxist theory . The Marxist definition of socialism is that of production for use-value (i.e., abolition of commodity production, direct satisfaction of human needs, or economic demands), therefore the law of value no longer directs economic activity. Marxist production for use is coordinated through conscious economic planning . According to Marx, distribution of products is based on the principle of " to each according to his needs "; [ 3 ] Soviet models often distributed products based on the principle of " to each according to his contribution ".

[ 4 ] Marx characterized the social relations of communism, the first stage of which is now called socialism, by the abolition of class distinctions and the common ownership of the means of production .

[ 5 ] As classes are abolished, the state withers away. Later self-titled socialist countries revised this definition of socialism and used the term more loosely as a rough equivalent to the dictatorship of the proletariat .

[ 6 ] The Marxian conception of socialism stands in contrast to other early conceptions of socialism, most notably early forms of market socialism based on classical economics such as mutualism and Ricardian socialism . Unlike the Marxian conception, these conceptions of socialism retained commodity exchange ( markets ) for labour and the means of production seeking to perfect the market process.

[ 7 ] The Marxist idea of socialism was also heavily opposed to utopian socialism . Although Marx and Engels wrote very little on socialism and neglected to provide any details on how it might be organized, [ 8 ] numerous social scientists and neoclassical economists have used Marx's theory as a basis for developing their own models of socialist economic systems . The Marxist view of socialism served as a point of reference during the socialist calculation debate .

Marx himself did not use the term socialism to refer to this development. Instead, Marx called it a communist society that has not yet reached its higher-stage.

[ 9 ] The term socialism was popularized during the Russian Revolution by Vladimir Lenin . This view is consistent with and helped to inform early concepts of socialism in which the law of value no longer directs economic activity. Monetary relations in the form of exchange-value , profit , interest and wage labour would not operate and apply to Marxist socialism.

[ 10 ] Mode of production [ edit ] Part of a series on Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related  topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Part of a series on Socialism History Outline Development French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Ideas Calculation in kind Collective ownership Cooperative Common ownership Critique of political economy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal liberty Equal opportunity Free association Freed market Industrial democracy Input–output model Internationalism Labour-time calculation Labour voucher Material balance planning Peer‑to‑peer economics Production for use Sharing economy Spontaneism Social dividend Social ownership Socialism in one country Socialist mode of production Soviet democracy Strike action To each according to his contribution / needs Vanguardism Workers' self-management Workplace democracy Models Communalism Socialist planned economy Decentralized planning Inclusive Democracy OGAS Project Cybersyn Soviet-type Market socialism Lange model Mutualism Socialist market economy Socialist-oriented market Participatory economics Variants 21st-century African Arab Agrarian Anarchism Authoritarian Blanquism Buddhist Chinese Christian Communism Democratic Democratic road Digital Ethical Ecological Evolutionary Feminist Fourierism Free-market Gandhian Guild Islamic Jewish Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Marhaenism Market Marxism Municipal Nationalist Nkrumaism Owenism Popular (Central Europe) Popular (Nordic) Reformism Religious Revolutionary Ricardian Saint-Simonianism Scientific Sewer Social democracy State Syndicalism Third World Utopian Yellow Zionist Intellectuals More Campanella d'Hupay Saint-Simon Buonarroti Saint-Just Owen Fourier Cabet Leroux Sue Blanqui Proudhon Greeley Herzen Bakunin Marx Kingsley Engels Wallace Lavrov Lassalle Saltykov Chernyshevsky Tolstoy Michel Morris Jones Kropotkin Carpenter Sorel Bellamy Kautsky Wilde Bellamy Plekhanov Ferrer Dewey Wells Du Bois Gorky Goldman Landauer Berkman Luxemburg Russell Pannekoek Rocker Spengler Keller Pankhurst Volin Lukács Korsch Polanyi Vanzetti Bordiga Serge Gramsci Sacco Day Marcuse James Orwell Montseny Sartre Bookchin Zinn Castoriadis Thompson Chomsky Fotopoulos Newton Wolff Ali Öcalan Hampton Žižek West Hedges Varoufakis Saito Politicians (Tiberius) Gracchus (Gaius) Gracchus Mazdak Roux Babeuf Blanc Hong Bebel Bernstein Malatesta Debs Markievicz Connolly Gandhi Liebknecht Savage Blum Stauning Martov Nygaardsvold Trotsky Kerensky Attlee Spiridonova Chifley Drees Makhno Nehru Tito Nagy Durruti Gerhardsen Van Acker Spaak Sukarno Erlander Douglas Senghor Allende van der Lubbe Nkrumah Kreisky Whitlam Corvalán Mitterrand Nasser Mandela Dubček Nyerere Koivisto Manley Benn Palme Bhutto Che Gorbachev Ismail Vázquez Sanders González Lula Ortega Guterres Corbyn Sankara Mélenchon Chávez Galloway Marcos Morales Sánchez Ocasio-Cortez Organizations Socialist Party Labour and Socialist International Network of Social Democracy in Asia Party of European Socialists Socialist International World Socialist Movement Young European Socialists Related topics Capitalism Communist society Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Economic calculation problem Economic system French Left Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Market abolitionism Marxist philosophy Nanosocialism Progressivism Socialism and LGBTQ rights Socialist calculation debate Socialist Party Socialist state Workers' council Lists Democratic socialists Democratic socialist parties and organizations Economists Films Social democrats Social democratic parties Songs States Socialism portal ( WikiProject ) Economics portal Organized Labour portal Philosophy portal Politics portal v t e See also: Mode of production Karl Marx described a socialist society as such: What we have to deal with here is a communist society, not as it has developed on its own foundations, but, on the contrary, just as it emerges from capitalist society; which is thus in every respect, economically, morally, and intellectually, still stamped with the birthmarks of the old society from whose womb it emerges. Accordingly, the individual producer receives back from society – after the deductions have been made – exactly what he gives to it. What he has given to it is his individual quantum of labor. For example, the social working day consists of the sum of the individual hours of work; the individual labor time of the individual producer is the part of the social working day contributed by him, his share in it. He receives a certificate from society that he has furnished such-and-such an amount of labor (after deducting his labor for the common funds); and with this certificate, he draws from the social stock of means of consumption as much as the same amount of labor cost. The same amount of labor which he has given to society in one form, he receives back in another.

[ 9 ] In Marxist theory, Socialism , referred to by Marx as the first stage of communism, is a classless, post- commodity economic system in which production is carried out to directly produce use-value rather than to generate profit . According to Marx and Engels, it is what follows after the transitionary period of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat .

[ 11 ] Private ownership and accumulation of capital have been abolished along with class distinctions as a whole and production is carried out in a planned fashion according to the needs of society. In his Critique of the Gotha Progamme , Marx suggested that in the first stage of communism people would receive labor vouchers according to the hours they work, but with subtractions, a sort of taxation, made for social services. With these vouchers one would be able to "buy" the goods produced by society (i.e. produced using the commonly owned means of production ) valued according to the labor hours needed for their production, so that one only takes as much as one has contributed. There is no extraction of surplus value and thus no exploitation in such a system. The higher stage of communism differs from the lower stage of communism in some aspects. To quote Marx: In a higher phase of communist society, after the enslaving subordination of the individual to the division of labor, and therewith also the antithesis between mental and physical labor, has vanished; after labor has become not only a means of life but life's prime want; after the productive forces have also increased with the all-around development of the individual, and all the springs of co-operative wealth flow more abundantly – only then can the narrow horizon of bourgeois right be crossed in its entirety and society inscribe on its banners: From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs!

[ 9 ] The prerequisite of the higher phase of communism is a long period of growth within the first phase, during which all imprints left from the old capitalist society gradually disappear. Tremendous development of technology and productive capacity allow for fully automated production, resulting in a superabundance of goods and services . This post-scarcity economy , along with the cultural development resulting in the widespread disappearance of individualism and exploitation, allow for goods to be distributed based on need rather than merit.

Social relations [ edit ] The fundamental goal of socialism from the view of Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels was the realization of human freedom and individual autonomy . Specifically, this refers to freedom from the alienation imposed upon individuals in the form of coercive social relations as well as material scarcity , whereby the individual is compelled to engage in activities merely to survive to reproduce his or herself. The aim of socialism is to provide an environment whereby individuals are free to express their genuine interests, creative freedom and desires unhindered by forms of social control that force individuals to work for a class of owners who expropriate and live off the surplus product .

[ 12 ] As a set of social relations, socialism is defined by the degree to which economic activity in society is planned by the associated producers so that the surplus product produced by socialized assets is controlled by a majority of the population through marxist-democratic processes. Complete socialism, the first phase of communism, means the abolition of class distinctions and the control over production by society as a whole. The sale of labour power would be abolished so that every individual participates in running their institution as stakeholders or members with no one having coercive power over anyone else in a vertical social division of labour which is to be distinguished from a non-social, technical division of labour which would still exist in socialism.

[ 13 ] The incentive structure changes in a socialist society given the change in the social environment so that an individual labourers' work becomes increasingly autonomous and creative, creating a sense of responsibility for his or her institution as a stakeholder.

Role of the state [ edit ] In Marxist theory, the state is "the institution of organised violence which is used by the ruling class of a country to maintain the conditions of its rule. Thus, it is only in a society which is divided between hostile social classes that the state exists".

[ 14 ] The state is seen as a mechanism dominated by the interests of the ruling class. It subjugates other classes, to protect and legitimize the existing economic system .

After a proletarian revolution , the state would initially become the instrument of the proletariat . Conquest of the state by the proletariat is a prerequisite to establishing a socialist system. As socialism is built, the role and scope of the state changes. Class distinctions, based on ownership of the means of production, gradually deteriorate. The concentration of means of production increasingly falls into state hands. Once all means of production become state property, class distinctions are no more and socialism, the first stage of communism is achieved, the primary function of the state changes. Political rule via coercion over men diminishes through the creation and enforcement of laws, scientific administration and the direction of the processes of production. As a result, the state becomes an entity of economic coordination rather than a mechanism of class or political control and is no longer a state in the Marxian sense.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Capitalist mode of production Communism Critique of political economy Economic planning Green socialism Law of value Marxism Marxian economics Mode of production Post-capitalism Primary stage of socialism Production for use Relations of production Scientific socialism Socialist calculation debate Socialist economics Socialisation Yellow socialism Notes [ edit ] ^ Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels used the terms communism and socialism interchangeably.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] References [ edit ] ^ Steele, David (1992).

From Marx to Mises: Post-Capitalist Society and the Challenge of Economic Calculation . Open Court Publishing Company. pp.

44– 45.

ISBN 978-0-87548-449-5 .

By 1888, the term 'socialism' was in general use among Marxists, who had dropped 'communism', now considered an old fashioned term meaning the same as 'socialism'. ... At the turn of the century, Marxists called themselves socialists. ... The definition of socialism and communism as successive stages was introduced into Marxist theory by Lenin in 1917 ... , the new distinction was helpful to Lenin in defending his party against the traditional Marxist criticism that Russia was too backward for a socialist revolution.

^ Hudis, Peter; Vidal, Matt, Smith, Tony; Rotta, Tomás; Prew, Paul, eds. (September 2018–June 2019).

The Oxford Handbook of Karl Marx .

"Marx's Concept of Socialism" . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-069554-5 .

doi : 10.1093/oxfordhb/9780190695545.001.0001 .

"Marx used many terms to refer to a post-capitalist society—positive humanism, socialism, Communism, realm of free individuality, free association of producers, etc. He used these terms completely interchangeably. The notion that 'socialism' and 'Communism' are distinct historical stages is alien to his work and only entered the lexicon of Marxism after his death." ^ Marx, Karl (1875). " Part I ".

Critique of the Gotha Program .

^ Gregory and Stuart, Paul and Robert (2003).

Comparing Economic Systems in the Twenty-First . South-Western College Pub. p. 118.

ISBN 0-618-26181-8 . "Under socialism, each individual would be expected to contribute according to capability, and rewards would be distributed in proportion to that contribution. Subsequently, under communism, the basis of reward would be need." ^ "Socialism" .

Glossary of Terms . Marxists Internet Archive . Retrieved 20 February 2013 .

^ "Constitution (Fundamental law) of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2025-07-06 .

^ McNally, David (1993).

Against the Market: Political Economy, Market Socialism and the Marxist Critique . Verso.

ISBN 978-0-86091-606-2 .

^ Gasper, Phillip (October 2005).

The Communist Manifesto: A Road Map to History's Most Important Political Document . Haymarket Books. p. 23.

ISBN 978-1-931859-25-7 .

Marx and Engels never speculated on the detailed organization of a future socialist or communist society. The key task for them was building a movement to overthrow capitalism. If and when that movement was successful, it would be up to the members of the new society to decide democratically how it was to be organized, in the concrete historical circumstances in which they found themselves.

^ a b c Marx, Karl (1875).

"Part I" .

Critique of the Gotha Program . Marxists Internet Archive. Retrieved 8 March 2019.

^ Bockman, Johanna (2011).

Markets in the name of Socialism: The Left-Wing origins of Neoliberalism . Stanford University Press. p. 20.

ISBN 978-0-8047-7566-3 .

According to nineteenth-century socialist views, socialism would function without capitalist economic categories – such as money, prices, interest, profits and rent – and thus would function according to laws other than those described by current economic science. While some socialists recognized the need for money and prices at least during the transition from capitalism to socialism, socialists more commonly believed that the socialist economy would soon administratively mobilize the economy in physical units without the use of prices or money.

^ "Letters: Marx-Engels Correspondence 1875" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 2025-07-06 .

^ Fromm, Erich (1961).

"Marx's Concept Of Socialism" .

Marx's Concept of Man . Frederick Ungar Publishing . Retrieved 20 February 2013 .

^ Schweickart, David; Lawler, James; Ticktin, Hillel; Ollman, Bertell (1998). "Definitions of market and socialism".

Market Socialism: The Debate Among Socialists . pp. 58–59. "For an Anti-Stalinist Marxist, socialism is defined by the degree to which the society is planned. Planning here is understood as the conscious regulation of society by the associated producers themselves. Put it differently, the control over the surplus product rests with the majority of the population through a resolutely democratic process. ... The sale of labour power is abolished and labour necessarily becomes creative. Everyone participates in running their institutions and society as a whole. No one controls anyone else." ^ "State" .

Glossary of Terms . Marxists Internet Archive . Retrieved 20 February 2013 .

^ Engels, Friedrich (1880).

"The Development of Utopian Socialism" .

Socialism: Utopian and Scientific . Marxists Internet Archive. "In 1816, he declares that politics is the science of production, and foretells the complete absorption of politics by economics. The knowledge that economic conditions are the basis of political institutions appears here only in embryo. Yet what is here already very plainly expressed is the idea of the future conversion of political rule over men into an administration of things and a direction of processes of production." v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e Marxist phraseology and terminology Philosophy and politics ( Marxist ) Barracks communism Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Bourgeois democracy Bourgeois nationalism Bourgeois revolution Bourgeois right Bourgeois socialism Capitalist mode of production Class struggle Commodification Dialectics Dictatorship of the proletariat Historical materialism Imperialism Liquidationism Lumpenproletariat Means of labor Metabolic rift Petite bourgeoisie Primitive accumulation of capital Proletarian internationalism Proletarian revolution Pure communism Revisionism Revolutionary spontaneity Revolutionary wave Scientific socialism Socialist mode of production Super-imperialism Theoretician Two-stage theory Wage slavery Workers of the world, unite!

Workers' council Workers' control World communism World revolution Sociology and economics ( Marxian ) Critique of political economy Accumulation of capital Capital Capitalist mode of production Crisis of capitalism Commanding heights of the economy Commodity Commodity production Dominant ideology Exchange value Free association Law of value Materialism Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Production for use Relations of production Ruling class Simple commodity production Socialist mode of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Social murder Subject of labor Surplus value Use value Value Worker cooperative Marxist–Leninist Anti-revisionism Cadre Central Committee Democratic centralism Dual power Enemy of the people Foco General line of the party National liberation New class People's democracy Politburo Political rehabilitation Popular front Real socialism Revisionism Revolutionary terror Secretariat Self-criticism Socialist accumulation Socialism in one country Social fascism Social imperialism Soviet democracy Democracy in Marxism United front Vanguardism Trotskyist Deformed workers' state Degenerated workers' state French Turn Permanent revolution Social revolution Transitional demand Uneven and combined development United front World revolution Maoist Antagonistic contradiction Anti-revisionism Capitalist roader Continuous revolution theory The East wind prevails over the West wind Four Olds Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Mass line New Democracy Whole-process people's democracy One Divides Into Two People's war Political power grows out of the barrel of a gun Revisionism Revolutionary base area Revolution is not a dinner party Social imperialism Struggle session Other People's Multiparty Democracy v t e Socialism History - Outline Schools of thought 21st century Agrarian Communist Democratic Ethical Feminist Green Guild Labourism Syndicalism Liberal Market Marxian Nationalist Reformist Revolutionary Scientific Social democracy Utopian Fourierism Icarianism Owenism Saint-Simonianism Technocracy Libertarian ( from below ) Anarchism Collectivist Communist Free-market Left-wing laissez-faire Green Individualist Insurrectionary Magonism Mutualism Neozapatismo Platformism Communalism Social Syndicalist Left-libertarianism Libertarian Marxism Left communism Council communism Luxemburgism Mao-Spontex Trotskyism Pabloism Posadism Orthodox Third camp Authoritarian ( from above ) Barracks Nechayevism Blanquism Bolshevism Leninism Marxism–Leninism Brezhnevism Castroism Ceaușism Guevarism Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism Dengism Maoism–Third Worldism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Gonzalo Thought Marxism–Leninism–Maoism–Prachanda Path Xi Jinping Thought Stalinism Neo-Stalinism National Tkachevism State Lassallism Religious Buddhist Christian anarchism communism Islamic Jewish Regional variants African African-Caribbean Arab Bolivarian Chinese Communist Nationalist Chiangist European Eurocommunism Indian Israeli Indonesian Melanesian Mexican Soviet In one country Real Sri Lankan Third World Yugoslav Key topics and issues Anti-revisionism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of socialism Critique of political economy Critique of work Class struggle Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Egalitarianism Equal liberty Equality of opportunity Equality of outcome History of anarchism History of communism History of socialism History of social democracy Impossibilism " The Internationale " Internationalism Socialist Internationals First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Socialist International Land reform Left-wing politics Mixed economy Mode of production Nanosocialism Nationalization Planned economy Post-capitalism Proletarian revolution Reformism Revisionism Socialisation of production Socialist economics Socialist market economy Socialist state State capitalism State-owned enterprise Trade union Welfare state Workers' council Concepts Adhocracy Basic income Calculation in kind Common ownership Cooperative ownership Decentralized planning Direct democracy Economic democracy Economic planning Equal opportunity Free association of producers Industrial democracy Labor-time calculation Labour voucher Organizational self-management Production for use Public ownership Social dividend Socialist mode of production Technocracy Workplace democracy People 16th c.

Tommaso Campanella Thomas More 18th c.

Gracchus Babeuf Louis Antoine de Saint-Just Victor d'Hupay Gabriel Bonnot de Mably Sylvain Maréchal Étienne-Gabriel Morelly 19th c.

Stephen Pearl Andrews Mikhail Bakunin John Goodwyn Barmby Enrico Barone August Bebel Edward Bellamy Eduard Bernstein Louis Blanc Louis Auguste Blanqui Philippe Buchez Georg Büchner Philippe Buonarroti Francisco Largo Caballero Étienne Cabet Edward Carpenter Nikolay Chernyshevsky James Connolly Victor Prosper Considerant Claire Démar Théodore Dézamy W. E. B. Du Bois Prosper Enfantin Friedrich Engels Charles Fourier Emma Goldman William Batchelder Greene Charles Hall Alexander Herzen Thomas Hodgskin Jean Jaurès Mother Jones Karl Kautsky Peter Kropotkin Paul Lafargue Ferdinand Lassalle Pyotr Lavrov Alexandre Ledru-Rollin Pierre Leroux Helen Macfarlane Errico Malatesta Karl Marx Louise Michel Nikolay Mikhaylovsky William Morris Robert Owen Antonie Pannekoek Giovanni Pascoli Constantin Pecqueur Georgi Plekhanov Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Luis Emilio Recabarren Henri de Saint-Simon Mikhail Saltykov-Shchedrin George Sand Friedrich Wilhelm Schulz Eugène Sue Lysander Spooner Fred M. Taylor William Thompson Pyotr Tkachev Benjamin Tucker Suzanne Voilquin Alfred Russel Wallace Josiah Warren Wilhelm Weitling Oscar Wilde 20th c.

Tariq Ali Salvador Allende Inejirō Asanuma Hafez al-Assad Clement Attlee Aung San Deng Xiaoping Jiang Zemin Henri Barbusse Jyoti Basu Simone de Beauvoir Walter Benjamin Tony Benn Léon Blum Grace Lee Boggs Murray Bookchin Bertolt Brecht Aristide Briand Nikolai Bukharin Cornelius Castoriadis Noam Chomsky M. N. Roy G. D. H. Cole Jeremy Corbyn Marcel Déat Guy Debord Eugene V. Debs John Dewey Alexander Dubček Albert Einstein Faiz Ahmad Faiz Muammar Gaddafi Einar Gerhardsen Mikhail Gorbachev Maxim Gorky Antonio Gramsci Safdar Hashmi Eric Hobsbawm Saddam Hussein Dolores Ibárruri Pablo Iglesias Posse Jayaprakash Narayan Russell Jacoby Kim Jong-il Kim Il Sung Martin Luther King Jr.

Alexandra Kollontai James Larkin E. M. S. Namboodiripad Jack Layton Henri Lefebvre Claude Lefort Vladimir Lenin György Lukács Rosa Luxemburg Lu Xun Alasdair MacIntyre Nestor Makhno Nelson Mandela José Carlos Mariátegui Adrien Marquet Mao Dun Salama Moussa François Mitterrand Imre Nagy Gamal Abdel Nasser Jawaharlal Nehru Ernst Niekisch Ne Win George Orwell Sylvia Pankhurst Fred Paterson Karl Polanyi Pierre Renaudel B. T. Ranadive Bertrand Russell Gaetano Salvemini Bernie Sanders Jean-Paul Sartre Arthur Scargill Léopold Sédar Senghor George Bernard Shaw Sukarno Sun Yat-sen R. H. Tawney E. P. Thompson Ernst Toller Leon Trotsky Ram Manohar Lohia H. G. Wells Cornel West Clara Zetkin Howard Zinn J. Posadas 21st c.

Pedro Castillo Hugo Chávez Bob Crow Hu Jintao Kemal Kılıçdaroğlu Kim Jong Un Hasan Piker Lula da Silva Evo Morales Yanis Varoufakis Xi Jinping Vaush Organizations International socialist organizations Socialist parties See also Economic calculation problem Marxist philosophy New Left Old Left Socialism by country Socialist calculation debate Categories Socialism WikiProject Socialism portal Communism portal Organized Labour portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5749f589c8‐lvt82
Cached time: 20250812223640
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.725 seconds
Real time usage: 0.910 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2848/1000000
Revision size: 18146/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 295860/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7736/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 116535/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.340/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7510064/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  590.573      1 -total
 28.79%  170.047      2 Template:Reflist
 28.26%  166.916      3 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 23.78%  140.465      1 Template:Marxism
 19.64%  115.975      4 Template:Cite_book
 15.03%   88.745      5 Template:Navbox
 12.61%   74.463      1 Template:Short_description
 11.26%   66.521      1 Template:Sidebar
  8.53%   50.368     17 Template:Portal-inline
  7.64%   45.139      2 Template:Communism Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:42220079:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812223640 and revision id 1299589910. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Socialist_mode_of_production&oldid=1299589910 " Categories : Economic ideologies Economic systems Marxian economics Dialectical materialism Political ideologies Political movements Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from May 2019 This page was last edited on 9 July 2025, at 08:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Socialist mode of production 11 languages Add topic

