Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Creation 2 Content 3 Publication and reception 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Steal This Book 7 languages Català Deutsch Español 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1971 book by Abbie Hoffman Steal This Book First edition cover Author Abbie Hoffman Language English Publisher Pirate Editions / Grove Press Publication date 1971 Publication place United States Pages 308 +xii, illustrations, bibliography [ 1 ] ISBN 1-56858-053-3 OCLC 32589277 Dewey Decimal 335/.83 20 LC Class HX843.7.H64 A3 1971a Steal This Book is a book written by Abbie Hoffman . Written in 1970 and published the following year, it exemplifies the counterculture of the 1960s . The book sold more than a quarter of a million copies between April and November 1971.

[ 2 ] The number of copies that were stolen is unknown.

[ 3 ] The book is, in the style of the counterculture, mainly focused on ways to fight against the government and against corporations in any way possible. The book is written in the form of a guide to the youth. Hoffman, a political and social activist himself, used many of his own activities as the inspiration for some of his advice in Steal This Book .

[ 4 ] Creation [ edit ] The main author of the book, Abbie Hoffman, was one of the most influential and recognizable North American activists of the late 1960s and early 1970s, gaining fame with his leadership in anti-Vietnam War protests. In the introduction, Hoffman writes that 50 people were involved in the creation of Steal This Book . Izak Haber and Bert Cohen are credited on the title page as "co-conspirator" and "accessory after the fact", respectively.

Steal This Book was written in the climate of the counterculture , in which opposition to tradition and government was rampant, and experimentation with new forms of living was encouraged. When the book was published, it took hold among the new left , especially among students on college campuses, such as Brandeis University , where Hoffman had been a student.

[ 5 ] Content [ edit ] Steal This Book is divided into three sections, "Survive!", "Fight!" and "Liberate!". There is also an introduction and appendix that lists "approved" organizations and other books worth stealing.

"Survive!" gives information and methods for obtaining goods and services for free or at discounted rates. It covers a broad range of items, including food, clothing, furniture, transportation, land, livestock, housing, education, medical care, communication, entertainment, money, and drugs. There is further advice on slug coins , panhandling, welfare , shoplifting , growing cannabis , and establishing a commune .

"Fight!" includes chapters on starting an underground press , broadcasting through guerrilla radio or guerrilla television , non-violent demonstrations and how to protect oneself if they become violent, how to make an assortment of home-made bombs, first aid for street fighters, legal advice, how to seek political asylum, guerrilla warfare, gun laws, and identification papers.

The final section, "Liberate!", contains information particular to four major cities: New York City , Chicago , Los Angeles , and San Francisco .

Hoffman has an idiosyncratic writing style, and incorporates slang specific to his subculture—e.g., referring to his country as " Amerika ." In the book, Hoffman calls America the "Pig Empire" and contends that it is not immoral to steal from it—in fact, Hoffman wrote, it is immoral not to do so.

[ 6 ] The term was picked up by the Yippies , and was widely used by what became known as the " Woodstock Nation ." [ 7 ] Some of the information in the book has since become obsolete for technological or regulatory reasons, but the book iconically reflects the hippie zeitgeist .

[ 8 ] Publication and reception [ edit ] Steal This Book was rejected by at least 30 publishers before it was able to get into print, and Hoffman was eventually forced to make a publishing company of his own, Pirate Editions, to publish the book at his own expense, [ 3 ] with Grove Press as the distributor. Some of the publishers rejected the book out of moral opposition to its content, while others were afraid of the government. Some editors feared a negative reaction from booksellers, to the title as well as the content. This fear proved to be well-founded; in the United States, many regional distributors and bookstores were unwilling to carry the book. In Canada, it was banned by the government.

[ 9 ] Once it got into print, Steal This Book had many readers and became a bestseller mainly through word of mouth.

Dotson Rader in The New York Times described it as a "necessary" work "of warning and practical knowledge" that had been written with "gentleness and affection." He wrote that the book had received no reviews and that only one paper had permitted an advertisement, though the book had sold 100,000 copies. Rader felt that the "remarkable" suppression of the book constituted a form of "fearsome censorship." [ 10 ] Hoffman was quoted saying, "It's embarrassing when you try to overthrow the government and you wind up on the Best Seller's List." [ 11 ] Subsequent to publication, two contributors to the book, Tom Forcade and Izak Haber, had a dispute with Hoffman. Forcade accused him of failing to pay sufficient royalties, contravening the contract Hoffman had made. Hoffman responded that Forcade had done an "inadequate job" of editing the book. Haber threatened to sue Hoffman for breaking his contract; he claimed that he was due 22 percent of the royalties for having compiled and written the book, but received only $1,000.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Steal This Movie!

Woodstock Nation (book) The Anarchist Cookbook Steal This Film Steal This Album Steal This Album!

" Steal This Episode " " Download This Song " by MC Lars References [ edit ] ^ CATNYP: New York Public Library online catalog ^ Bill Hartel (August 26, 1996).

"Steal This Book-Abbie's Magnum Opus" .

^ a b Bates, Stephe (Summer 2011). "Stealing the Revolution".

Wilson Quarterly .

35 (3): 13.

^ Linder, Douglas O. (21 Feb 2012).

"The Chicago Seven Conspiracy Trial" . UMKC School of Law.

^ Gitlin, Todd (1987).

The Sixties: Years of Hope, Days of Rage . Toronto: Bantam.

ISBN 9780553052336 .

OCLC 781900043 .

^ Raskin, Jonah (1996).

For the Hell of It . Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 0-520-21379-3 .

^ Harris, Randy (1993).

The Linguistics Wars . Oxford Oxfordshire: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-509834-X .

^ Lezard, Nicholas (May 25, 2002).

"Direct action" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 26 April 2020 .

^ "Steal This Book (Published 1971)" . 1971-07-18 . Retrieved 2023-08-20 .

^ Rader, Dotson (July 18, 1971).

"Book Review: Steal This Book" .

The New York Times . p. BR19.

^ Solheim, Bruce Olav (2006).

The Vietnam War Era: A Personal Journey . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 111.

ISBN 978-0-275-98308-6 – via Google Books .

^ Graham, Fred P. (September 9, 1971).

"Abbie Hoffman Accused Before 'Court' of Peers" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 26 April 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Steal This Book on Internet Archive HTML version of the book PDF version of the book v t e Critique of work Historical persons Abbie Hoffman Edward Bellamy Alfredo M. Bonanno André Gorz Bob Black Günther Anders Guy Debord Heinrich Böll Ivan Illich Mikhail Bakunin Paul Lafargue Walter Benjamin Antonio Negri Bertrand Russell Friedrich Nietzsche Henry David Thoreau Herbert Marcuse Jerry Rubin Josef Pieper Karl Marx Max Stirner Max Weber Pierre-Joseph Proudhon Raoul Vaneigem Renzo Novatore Zo d'Axa Contemporary persons Franco Berardi L. Susan Brown Madeleine Bunting David Graeber Michael Hardt Maurizio Lazzarato Claus Peter Ortlieb Roland Paulsen Jeremy Rifkin Penelope Rosemont Mark Slouka Nick Srnicek Claire Wolfe John Zerzan Terminology and related topics 996 working hour system Absenteeism Abusive supervision Aktion Arbeitsscheu Reich All work and no play makes Jack a dull boy Autonomism Bare minimum Monday Bullshit job Career catfishing Coffee badging Corporatocracy Conscious quitting Cycle of poverty Dolce far niente Effects of overtime Eight-hour day Employee ghosting Extermination through labour Career cushioning Careerism Flextime Forced labour Four-day workweek Funemployment Ghost job Uberisation / Gig worker Glass cliff Happiness economics Honeymoon-hangover effect Hush trip Infinite workday Job crafting Job cuffing Jobless employed Karoshi Loud quitting Neijuan Microretirement Occupational burnout Occupational safety and health Occupational stress Orange S.A. suicides Overwork Performance punishment Post-work society Precariat Presenteeism Digital presenteeism Productivity theater Professional abuse Protestant work ethic Psychological safety Quick quitting Quiet hiring Quiet promotion Quiet quitting Quiet thriving Lazy girl job Rage applying Refusal of work Resenteeism Right to rest and leisure Sampo generation Sunday scaries Six-hour day Tang ping Technological unemployment Toxic workplace Narcissism Psychopathy Wage slavery Work ethic Workaholic Working poor Work–life interface Theater, movies, music and art À Nous la Liberté Office Space Swedish Public Freedom Service " Take This Job and Shove It " The Future of Work and Death The Main Thing Is Work!

The Working Class Goes to Heaven Yama—Attack to Attack Literature Anekdote zur Senkung der Arbeitsmoral Bartleby, the Scrivener Bonjour paresse Bullshit Jobs The Conquest of Bread Critique of Economic Reason Fight Club Future Primitive and Other Essays In Praise of Idleness and Other Essays Inventing the Future Manifesto Against Work New Escapologist On the Poverty of Student Life The Society of the Spectacle Steal This Book The Abolition of Work The End of Work The Human Use of Human Beings The Idler The Revolution of Everyday Life The Right to Be Lazy The Soul at Work: From Alienation to Autonomy Communities R/antiwork CrimethInc.

Situationist International See also Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Job strain v t e Culture jamming Forms Art intervention Billboard hacking Broadcast signal intrusion Détournement Flash mob Guerrilla communication Hacktivism Media prank Subvertising Tactical frivolity Groups Adbusters Anonymous Barbie Liberation Organization Billboard Liberation Front Billionaires for Bush The Bubble Project Cacophony Society Guerrilla Girls Improv Everywhere Luther Blissett Merry Pranksters monochrom Negativland RTMark Sisters of Perpetual Indulgence Society for Indecency to Naked Animals Space Hijackers Veterans of Future Wars Whirl-Mart Wu Ming The Yes Men Yippies Movements Discordianism Church of the SubGenius Provo Psychogeography Reverend Billy and the Church of Stop Shopping People Alan Abel Banksy Reverend Billy Captain Midnight Captain Crunch Ron English Abbie Hoffman Naomi Klein John Law Malaclypse the Younger Ben Masel Sal Randolph Jerry Rubin Joey Skaggs Ivan Stang Kerry Wendell Thornley Bill Wasik Robert Anton Wilson Peter Lamborn Wilson Works The Illuminatus! Trilogy Schrödinger's Cat Trilogy Principia Discordia Book of the SubGenius Temporary Autonomous Zone No Logo Steal This Book Events Notre-Dame Affair (1950) Saint Stupid's Day Parade (late 1970s) Burning Man (1986) Max Headroom signal hijacking (1987) Grunge speak (1992) K Foundation (1993) SantaCon (1994) Portland Urban Iditarod (2001) Pillow fight flash mob (2008) Related Anti-consumerism Artivist Critique of work List of culture jamming organizations and people Performance art Street art Subculture Surreal humour Operation Mindfuck Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Steal_This_Book&oldid=1277243253 " Categories : 1971 non-fiction books Counterculture of the 1970s Literature critical of work and the work ethic Non-fiction books about consumerism Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 February 2025, at 14:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Steal This Book 7 languages Add topic

