Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Theory 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Affluenza 15 languages العربية Español Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Русский Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Socio-psychological effects of consumerism For diseases correlating with affluence, see Diseases of affluence . For other uses, see Affluenza (disambiguation) .

Part of a series on Anti-consumerism Theories and ideas Asceticism Affluenza Alternative culture Anti-capitalism Autonomous building Billboard hacking Buyer's remorse Bioeconomics Buddhist economics Buy Nothing Day Collaborative consumption Collapsology Commodification Commodity fetishism Commune Compulsive buying disorder Conspicuous consumption Consumer capitalism Consumerism Conviviality Criticism of advertising Culture jamming Degrowth Do it yourself Downshifting Durable good Earth Overshoot Day Ecological economics Ecovillage Ethical consumerism Feminist political ecology Food loss and waste Freeganism Gift economy Green consumption Hyperconsumerism Laconophilia Local food Microgeneration Non-possession Overconsumption Planned obsolescence Right to repair Political ecology Post-consumerism Simple living Slow Food Steady-state economy Subvertising Sustainable consumer behaviour Sustainable consumption Notable works Walden The Theory of the Leisure Class Brave New World The Affluent Society One-Dimensional Man The Society of the Spectacle ( book , film ) The Consumer Society: Myths and Structures [ fr ] Steal This Book Small Is Beautiful To Have or to Be?

Future Primitive and Other Essays Fight Club ( novel , film ) Escape from Affluenza No Logo Profit over People: Neoliberalism and Global Order The Cultural Creatives Affluenza: The All-Consuming Epidemic Evasion The Corporation Surplus: Terrorized into Being Consumers So, What's Your Price?

What Would Jesus Buy?

Organizations and groups Adbusters Crass CrimethInc.

Deep Green Resistance Democracy Now!

Earth Liberation Front Fifth Estate Freecycle Green Anarchy Institute for Social Ecology Monthly Review Rage Against the Machine Reverend Billy The Venus Project The Yes Men 350.org People Mauro Bonaiuti Noam Chomsky Erich Fromm Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen Edward Goldsmith Paul Goodman André Gorz Ivan Illich Serge Latouche Donella Meadows Pierre Rabhi John Ruskin E. F. Schumacher Bernard Stiegler Henry David Thoreau Related social movements Alter-globalization Amateurism Anarcho-communism Anarcho-primitivism Anarcho-punk Anti-capitalism Anti-corporate activism Anti-globalization movement Communism Diggers (theater) Ecofeminism Eco-socialism Environmentalism Food Not Bombs Fossil fuel phase-out Green anarchism Green left Green politics Hippie Libertarian socialism Neo-Luddism New Left Occupy Wall Street Postmodernism Punk Situationists Slow movement Social anarchism Social ecology See also Advanced capitalism Advertising Barter Consumer behaviour Consumption (economics) Consumption (sociology) Cooperative Counterculture Disneyfication Ecological economics Economic materialism Economic problems Frugality Green economy Gross National Happiness Heterodox economics HospEx Illth Influence of mass media Informal sector Intentional community Left-wing politics McDonaldization Mutual aid Natural resource economics Non-monetary economy Permaculture Post-materialism Productivism Shopping Subsistence economy Sustainability Sweatshops Veblen good Workaholic v t e Affluenza describes the psychological and social effects of affluence. It is a portmanteau of affluence and influenza , and is used most commonly by critics of consumerism . Some psychologists consider it to be a pseudo-scientific term; [ 1 ] however, the word continues to be used in scientific literature.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] The word is thought to have been first used in 1908, and to have been adopted for its most common current usage in California in 1973.

[ 3 ] It was also used by John Levy, executive director of the C.G. Jung Institute in San Francisco in 1984 to describe the lack of motivation that could dog wealthy people.

[ 4 ] It was popularized in 1997 with a PBS documentary of the same name [ 5 ] and the subsequent book Affluenza: The All-Consuming Epidemic (2001, revised in 2005, 2014). These works define affluenza as "a painful, contagious , socially transmitted condition of overload, debt , anxiety , and waste resulting from the dogged pursuit of more". A more informal definition of the term describes it as "a quasi-illness caused by guilt for one's own socio-economic superiority".

[ 6 ] The term "affluenza" has also been used to refer to an inability to understand the consequences of one's actions because of financial privilege.

The term "affluenza" was re-popularized in 2013 with the arrest of Ethan Couch , a wealthy Texas teen, for driving while intoxicated and killing four pedestrians and injuring several others. Testimony from a psychologist in court referred to Couch as having a case of affluenza, sparking a media frenzy and victim family outrage. The psychologist testified during the sentencing phase as a part of mitigation of penalty, not, as was reported, as a defence to the charge at trial.

[ citation needed ] Theory [ edit ] Clive Hamilton and Richard Denniss 's 2005 book, Affluenza: When Too Much is Never Enough , poses the question: "If the economy has been doing so well, why are we not becoming happier?" [ 7 ] : vii They argue that affluenza causes overconsumption , "luxury fever", consumer debt , overwork, waste, and harm to the environment. These pressures lead to "psychological disorders, alienation and distress", [ 7 ] : 179 causing people to "self-medicate with mood-altering drugs and excessive alcohol consumption".

[ 7 ] : 180 They note that a number of Australians have reacted by " downshifting "—they decided to "reduce their incomes and place family, friends and contentment above money in determining their life goals". Their critique leads them to identify the need for an "alternative political philosophy", and the book concludes with a "political manifesto for wellbeing".

[ 8 ] In 2007 British pop psychologist Oliver James asserted that there was a correlation between the increasing occurrence of affluenza and the resulting increase in material inequality: the more unequal a society, the greater the unhappiness of its citizens.

[ 9 ] Referring to Vance Packard 's thesis The Hidden Persuaders on the manipulative methods used by the advertising industry, James related the stimulation of artificial needs to the rise in affluenza. To highlight the spread of affluenza in societies with varied levels of inequality, James interviewed people in several cities including Sydney , Singapore , Auckland , Moscow , Shanghai , Copenhagen and New York .

In 2008 James wrote that higher rates of mental disorders were the consequence of excessive wealth-seeking in consumerist nations.

[ 10 ] In a graph created from multiple data sources, James plotted "Prevalence of any emotional distress" and "Income inequality", attempting to show that English-speaking nations have nearly twice as much emotional distress as mainland Europe and Japan: 21.6 percent vs 11.5 percent.

[ 11 ] James defined affluenza as "placing a high value on money, possessions, appearances (physical and social) and fame", which was the rationale behind the increasing mental illness in English-speaking societies. He explained the greater incidence of affluenza as the result of 'selfish capitalism', the market liberal political governance found in English-speaking nations as compared to the less selfish capitalism pursued in mainland Europe. James asserted that societies can remove the negative consumerist effects by pursuing real needs over perceived wants, and by defining themselves as having value independent of their material possessions.

[ page needed ] See also [ edit ] Affluenza (film) Diseases of affluence – Health conditions thought to be a result of increasing wealth in society Escape from Affluenza Lifestyle disease – Diseases linked with the way people live their life People v. Turner – 2015 American criminal case References [ edit ] ^ Ferguson, Christopher J. (14 December 2013).

"Psychologist: "Affluenza" is Junk Science" .

Time .

ISSN 0040-781X . Retrieved 3 January 2022 .

^ Flurry, Laura Ann; Swimberghe, Krist R. (1 January 2021).

"The affluenza epidemic: consequences of parent-child value congruence in a material world" .

Journal of Consumer Marketing .

38 (2): 201– 210.

doi : 10.1108/JCM-04-2019-3159 .

ISSN 0736-3761 .

^ Oxford English Dictionary , s.v. “affluenza (n.), sense 2,” July 2023, https://doi.org/10.1093/OED/1155293244 ^ Sylvia Rubin, 'The Trouble with Inheriting a Fortune,' San Francisco Chronicle , 15 August 1984 ^ "Escape from Affluenza" , KCTS ^ Affluenza: The All-Consuming Epidemic , John de Graaf, David Wann & Thomas H. Naylor , 2001 ISBN 1-57675-199-6 ^ a b c Clive Hamilton; Richard Denniss (2005).

Affluenza: When Too Much Is Never Enough . Allen & Unwin.

ISBN 978-1-74115-624-9 .

^ "A Manifesto For Wellbeing" .

Wellbeingmanifesto.net . The Australia Institute. 7 May 2005.

Archived from the original on 7 May 2005 . Retrieved 29 May 2018 .

(Archive is the same work, but on a different website) ^ James, Oliver (2007).

Affluenza: How to Be Successful and Stay Sane .

Vermilion .

ISBN 978-0-09-190011-3 .

^ James, Oliver (2008).

The Selfish Capitalist .

Vermilion .

ISBN 978-0-09-192381-5 .

^ James, Oliver (2007).

"Appendix 2: Emotional Distress and Inequality: Selfish vs Unselfish Capitalist Nations" .

Affluenza: How to be Successful and Stay Sane . London: Vermilion. p.

344 .

ISBN 978-0-09-190010-6 .

1. The mean prevalence of emotional distress for the six English-speaking nations combined was 21.6%. The mean for the other nations, mainland Western Europe plus Japan, was 11.5%.

Further reading [ edit ] The Circle of Simplicity , Cecile Andrews, ISBN 0-06-092872-7 The Golden Ghetto: The Psychology of Affluence , Jessie H. O'Neill, ISBN 978-0-9678554-0-0 Voluntary Simplicity , Duane Elgin, ISBN 0-688-12119-5 How Much Is Too Much? Raising Likeable, Responsible, Respectful Children-From Toddler to Teens-In an Age of Overindulgence , Clarke, Jean Illsley, Bredehoft, David & Dawson, Connie, ISBN 978-0-7382-1681-2 External links [ edit ] Look up affluenza in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

"Affluenza" .

pbs.org .

Macquarie Dictionary Word of the Year Winners: Affluenza The Affluenza Project Affluenza issues in the USA Affluenza video Archived 27 November 2020 at the Wayback Machine A film clip "The Open Mind - Affluenza (1984)" is available for viewing at the Internet Archive v t e High wealth Concepts Capital accumulation Overaccumulation Economic inequality Wealth distribution Income distribution Consumption distribution History of economic inequality International inequality Elite Oligarchy Overclass Plutocracy Plutonomy Broligarchy Primitive accumulation of capital Upper class Nouveau riche (new money) Vieux riche (old money) Luxury goods Veblen goods Conspicuous consumption Conspicuous leisure Luxury beliefs People Billionaire Captain of industry High-net-worth individual Magnate Business Millionaire Oligarch Business Russian Ukrainian Robber baron Wealth Concentration Distribution Effect Geography Inheritance Dynastic Estate planning Management National Paper Religion Tax Lists People Forbes list of billionaires List of centibillionaires Female billionaires Richest royals Wealthiest Americans Wealthiest families Organizations Largest companies by revenue Largest corporate profits and losses Largest corporations by market capitalization Largest financial services companies by revenue Largest manufacturing companies by revenue Largest software companies by revenue Largest technology companies by revenue Religious organizations Charities Philanthropists Universities Endowment size Number of billionaire alumni Other Cities by number of billionaires Countries by number of billionaires Countries by total wealth Countries by wealth inequality Wealth inequality in the United States Income inequality in the United States Most expensive items by category Wealthiest animals Related Diseases of affluence Affluenza Acquired situational narcissism Argumentum ad crumenam Prosperity theology Philanthropy Gospel of Wealth The Giving Pledge Philanthrocapitalism Venture philanthropy Sayings The rich get richer and the poor get poorer Socialism for the rich and capitalism for the poor Too big to fail Media Das Kapital Plutus Greek god of wealth Superclass List The Theory of the Leisure Class Wealth The Wealth of Nations Category by country Authority control databases : National United States Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Affluenza&oldid=1302502633 " Categories : Anti-corporate activism Economic problems Wealth Popularity Neologisms Wealth in the United States Criminal defenses Social privilege Social status Social problems in medicine 1950s neologisms Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2021 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2023 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2025 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Internet Archive links This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 20:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Affluenza 15 languages Add topic

