Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Ideological anti-intellectualism 2 Academic anti-intellectualism 3 Distrust of intellectuals 4 In the United States Toggle In the United States subsection 4.1 17th century 4.2 19th century 4.3 20th–21st centuries 4.3.1 Education and knowledge 4.3.2 Corporate mass media 5 In Europe Toggle In Europe subsection 5.1 Soviet Union 5.2 Fascism 6 In Asia Toggle In Asia subsection 6.1 China 6.1.1 Imperial China 6.1.2 People's Republic of China 6.2 Democratic Kampuchea 6.3 Ottoman Empire 7 See also 8 Footnotes 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Anti-intellectualism 34 languages العربية বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Cymraeg Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français Gĩkũyũ 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Shqip Simple English کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hostility to and mistrust of education, philosophy, art, literature, and science Not to be confused with opposition to Moral intellectualism .

Anti-intellectualism contrasts the reedy scholar with the bovine boxer ; the comparison epitomizes the populist view of reading and study as antithetical to sport and athleticism. Note the disproportionate heads and bodies, with the size of the head representing mental ability and the size of the body representing physical ability. ( Thomas Nast ) Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e Anti-intellectualism is hostility to and mistrust of intellect , intellectuals , and intellectualism , commonly expressed as deprecation of education and philosophy and the dismissal of art , literature , history , and science as impractical, politically motivated, and even contemptible human pursuits.

[ 1 ] Anti-intellectuals may present themselves and be perceived as champions of common folk— populists against political and academic elitism —and tend to see educated people as a status class that dominates political discourse and higher education while being detached from the concerns of ordinary people.

[ 1 ] Totalitarian governments have, in the past, manipulated and applied anti-intellectualism to repress political dissent .

[ 2 ] During the Spanish Civil War (1936–1939) and the following dictatorship (1939–1975) of Francisco Franco , the reactionary repression of the White Terror (1936–1945) was notably anti-intellectual, with most of the 200,000 civilians killed being the Spanish intelligentsia , the politically active teachers and academics, artists and writers of the deposed Second Spanish Republic (1931–1939).

[ 3 ] During the Cambodian genocide (1975–1979), the totalitarian regime of Cambodia led by Pol Pot nearly destroyed its entire educated population. During the first and second Trump administrations , fake news and alternative facts became central pillars of discourse in the United States .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Ideological anti-intellectualism [ edit ] The new rulers of Cambodia call 1975 "Year Zero" , the dawn of an age in which there will be no families, no sentiment, no expressions of love or grief, no medicines, no hospitals, no schools, no books, no learning, no holidays, no music, no song, no post, no money – only work and death.

John Pilger , Year Zero: The Silent Death of Cambodia (1979) [ 6 ] In the 20th century, societies systematically removed intellectuals from power to expediently end public political dissent. During the Cold War (1945–1991), the Czechoslovak Socialist Republic (1948–1990) ostracized the philosopher Václav Havel as a politically unreliable man unworthy of ordinary Czechs' trust; the post-communist Velvet Revolution (17 November – 29 December 1989) elected Havel president for ten years.

[ 7 ] Ideologically -extreme dictatorships who mean to recreate a society such as the Khmer Rouge rule of Cambodia (1975–1979) pre-emptively killed potential political opponents, especially the educated middle-class and the intelligentsia . To realize the Year Zero of Cambodian history, Khmer Rouge social engineering restructured the economy by de-industrialization and assassinated non-communist Cambodians suspected of "involvement in free-market activities" such as the urban professionals of society (physicians, attorneys, engineers, et al.

) and people with political connections to foreign governments. The doctrine of Pol Pot identified the farmers as the true proletariat of Cambodia and the true representatives of the working class entitled to hold government power, hence the anti-intellectual purges.

In the Night of the Long Batons (29 July 1966), the federal police physically purged politically incorrect academics who opposed the right-wing military dictatorship of Juan Carlos Onganía (1966–1970) in Argentina from five faculties of the University of Buenos Aires.

In 1966, the anti-communist Argentine military dictatorship of Juan Carlos Onganía (1966–1970) intervened at the University of Buenos Aires with the Night of the Long Batons to physically dislodge politically dangerous academics from five university faculties . That expulsion to the exile of the academic intelligentsia became a national brain drain upon the society and economy of Argentina.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In opposition to the military repression of free speech, biochemist César Milstein said ironically: "Our country would be put in order, as soon as all the intellectuals who were meddling in the region were expelled." Academic anti-intellectualism [ edit ] In The Campus War (1971), the philosopher John Searle said, [T]he two most salient traits of the radical movement are its anti-intellectualism and its hostility to the university as an institution. ... Intellectuals, by definition, are people who take ideas seriously for their own sake. Whether or not a theory is true or false is important to them, independently of any practical applications it may have. [Intellectuals] have, as Richard Hofstadter has pointed out, an attitude to ideas that is at once playful and pious. But, in the radical movement, the intellectual ideal of knowledge for its own sake is rejected. Knowledge is seen as valuable only as a basis for action, and it is not even very valuable there. Far more important than what one knows is how one feels.

[ 10 ] In Social Sciences as Sorcery (1972), the sociologist Stanislav Andreski advised laymen to distrust the intellectuals' appeals to authority when they make questionable claims about resolving the problems of their society: "Do not be impressed by the imprint of a famous publishing house, or the volume of an author's publications. ... Remember that the publishers want to keep the printing presses busy, and do not object to nonsense if it can be sold." [ 11 ] In Science and Relativism: Some Key Controversies in the Philosophy of Science (1990), philosopher of science and epistemologist Larry Laudan said that the prevailing type of philosophy taught at universities in the U.S. ( Postmodernism and Poststructuralism ) is anti-intellectual, because "the displacement of the idea that facts and evidence matter, by the idea that everything boils down to subjective interests and perspectives is—second only to American political campaigns—the most prominent and pernicious manifestation of anti-intellectualism in our time." [ 12 ] Distrust of intellectuals [ edit ] In the U.S., the conservative [ 13 ] American economist Thomas Sowell argued for distinctions between unreasonable and reasonable wariness of intellectuals in their influence upon the institutions of a society. In defining intellectuals as "people whose occupations deal primarily with ideas", Sowell conveys the view that they are different from people whose work is the practical application of ideas. Under this framework, the cause for layman's mistrust lies in the intellectuals' supposed incompetence outside their fields of expertise. The portrayed view is that, although having great working knowledge in their specialist fields when compared to other professions and occupations, the intellectuals of society could face little discouragement against speaking authoritatively beyond their field of formal expertise and thus are unlikely to face responsibility for the social and practical consequences of their errors. Hence, a physician is judged competent by the effective treatment of a patient's sickness, yet might face a medical malpractice lawsuit should the treatment harm the patient. In contrast, a tenured university professor is unlikely to be judged competent or incompetent by the effectiveness of their intellectualism (ideas) and thus not face responsibility for the social and practical consequences of the implementation of the ideas.

In the book Intellectuals and Society (2009), Sowell said: [ 14 ] By encouraging, or even requiring, students to take stands where they have neither the knowledge nor the intellectual training to seriously examine complex issues, teachers promote the expression of unsubstantiated opinions, the venting of uninformed emotions, and the habit of acting on those opinions and emotions, while ignoring or dismissing opposing views, without having either the intellectual equipment or the personal experience to weigh one view against another in any serious way.

In the view of Sowell, school teachers are, therefore, part of the intelligentsia who recruit children in elementary school and teach them politics—to advocate for or to advocate against public policy—as part of community service projects, which later assists them in earning admission to a university. Therefore, the suggestion is that the intellectuals of a society intervene and participate in social arenas in which they might not possess expert knowledge, unduly influencing the formulation and realization of public policy . Teaching political advocacy in elementary school encourages students to formulate opinions "without any intellectual training or prior knowledge of those issues, making constraints against falsity few or non-existent." [ 15 ] In Britain, the anti-intellectualism of the writer Paul Johnson derived from his close examination of twentieth-century history, which brought him to the conclusion that intellectuals have continually championed disastrous public policies for social welfare and public education , and warned the layman public to "beware [the] intellectuals. Not merely should they be kept well away from the levers of power, they should also be objects of suspicion when they seek to offer collective advice." [ 16 ] In that vein, "In the Land of the Rococo Marxists" (2000), the American writer Tom Wolfe characterized the intellectual as "a person knowledgeable in one field, who speaks out only in others." [ 17 ] In 2000, British publisher Imprint Academic published Dumbing Down , a compilation of essays edited by Ivo Mosley , grandson of the British fascist Oswald Mosley , which included essays on a perceived widespread anti-intellectualism by Jaron Lanier , Ravi Shankar , Robert Brustein , Michael Oakshott among others.

[ 18 ] In the United States [ edit ] 17th century [ edit ] In The Powring Out of the Seven Vials (1642), the Puritan John Cotton demonized intellectual men and women by saying that "the more learned and witty you bee, the more fit to act for Satan will you bee. ... Take off the fond doting ... upon the learning of the Jesuits , and the glorie of the Episcopacy, and the brave estates of the Prelates. I say bee not deceived by these pompes, empty shewes, and faire representations of goodly condition before the eyes of flesh and blood, bee not taken with the applause of these persons".

[ 19 ] Yet, not every Puritan concurred with Cotton's religious contempt for secular education, such as John Harvard , a major early benefactor of the university which now bears his name .

[ citation needed ] In The Quest for Cosmic Justice (2001), the economist Thomas Sowell said that anti-intellectualism in the U.S. began in the early Colonial era as an understandable wariness of the educated upper classes because the country mostly was built by people who had fled political and religious persecution by the social system of the educated upper classes. Moreover, few intellectuals possessed the practical hands-on skills required to survive in the New World of North America, which absence from society led to a deep-rooted, populist suspicion of men and women who specialize in "verbal virtuosity", rather than tangible, measurable products and services: [ 20 ] From its colonial beginnings, American society was a "decapitated" society—largely lacking the top-most social layers of European society. The highest elites and the titled aristocracies had little reason to risk their lives crossing the Atlantic, and then face the perils of pioneering. Most of the white population of colonial America arrived as indentured servants and the black population as slaves . Later waves of immigrants were disproportionately peasants and proletarians , even when they came from Western Europe ... The rise of American society to pre-eminence, as an economic, political, and military power, was thus the triumph of the common man, and a slap across the face to the presumptions of the arrogant, whether an elite of blood or books.

19th century [ edit ] In U.S. history, the advocacy and acceptability of anti-intellectualism have varied, in part because the majority of Americans lived a rural life of arduous manual labor and agricultural work prior to the industrialization of the late nineteenth century. Therefore, academic education in the Greco–Roman classics was primarily perceived as having impractical value, and the bookish scholar deemed an unprofitable occupation. Yet, Americans of the nineteenth century were generally literate people who read Shakespeare for intellectual pleasure and the Christian Bible for emotional succor; thus, the ideal American was a literate and technically skilled man who was successful in his trade , ergo a productive member of society.

[ 21 ] Culturally, the ideal American was the self-made man whose knowledge derived from life-experience, not an intellectual man whose knowledge of the real world was derived from books, formal education, and academic study; thus, the justified anti-intellectualism reported in The New Purchase, or Seven and a Half Years in the Far West (1843), the Rev. Bayard R. Hall, A.M., said about frontier Indiana: [ 19 ] We always preferred an ignorant, bad man to a talented one, and, hence, attempts were usually made to ruin the moral character of a smart candidate; since, unhappily, smartness and wickedness were supposed to be generally coupled, and [like-wise] incompetence and goodness.

Yet, the "real-life" redemption of the egghead American intellectual was possible if he embraced the mores and values of mainstream society; thus, in the fiction of O. Henry , a character notes that once an East Coast university graduate "gets over" his intellectual vanity, he no longer thinks himself better than other men, realizing he makes just as good a cowboy as any other young man, despite his common-man counterpart being the slow-witted naïf of good heart, a pop culture stereotype from stage shows.

20th–21st centuries [ edit ] There is a cult of ignorance in the United States, and there has always been. The strain of anti-intellectualism has been a constant thread winding its way through our political and cultural life, nurtured by the false notion that democracy means that 'my ignorance is just as good as your knowledge'.

Isaac Asimov , 1980 [ 22 ] In 1912, New Jersey governor Woodrow Wilson described the battle: [ 23 ] What I fear is a government of experts. God forbid that, in a democratic country, we should resign the task and give the government over to experts. What are we for if we are to be scientifically taken care of by a small number of gentlemen who are the only men who understand the job?

In Anti-intellectualism in American Life (1963), the historian Richard Hofstadter said that anti-intellectualism is a social-class response by the middle-class "mob", against the privileges of the political elites.

[ 24 ] As the middle class developed political power, they exercised their belief that the ideal candidate to the office was the "self-made man", not the well-educated man born to wealth. The self-made man from the middle class could be trusted to act in the best interest of his fellow citizens.

[ 25 ] As evidence of this view, Hofstadter cited the derision of Adlai Stevenson as an " egghead ". In Americans and Chinese: Passages to Differences (1980), Francis Hsu said that American egalitarianism is stronger in the United States than in Europe, e.g. in England, [ 26 ] English individualism developed hand in hand with legal equality. American self-reliance, on the other hand, has been inseparable from an insistence upon economic and social as well as political equality. The result is that a qualified individualism, with a qualified equality, has prevailed in England, but what has been considered the inalienable right of every American is unrestricted self-reliance and, at least ideally, unrestricted equality. The English, therefore, tend to respect class-based distinctions in birth, wealth, status, manners, and speech, while Americans resent them.

Such social resentment characterises contemporary political discussions about the socio-political functions of mass-communication media and science; that is, scientific facts, generally accepted by educated people throughout the world, are misrepresented as opinions in the U.S., specifically about climate science and global warming .

[ 27 ] Miami University anthropology professor Homayun Sidky has argued that 21st-century anti-scientific and pseudoscientific approaches to knowledge, particularly in the United States, are rooted in a postmodernist "decades-long academic assault on science:" "Many of those indoctrinated in postmodern anti-science went on to become conservative political and religious leaders, policymakers, journalists, journal editors, judges, lawyers, and members of city councils and school boards. Sadly, they forgot the lofty ideals of their teachers, except that science is bogus." [ 28 ] In 2017, a Pew Research Center poll revealed that a majority of American Republicans thought colleges and universities had a negative impact on the United States. In 2019, academics Adam Waters and E.J. Dionne stated that U.S. President Donald Trump "campaigned for the presidency and continues to govern as a man who is anti-intellectual, as well as anti-fact and anti-truth." [ 29 ] [ 30 ] In 2020, Trump signed an executive order banning anti-racism bias trainings from offices of federal agencies, grant programs, and federal contractors [ 31 ] [ 32 ] as part of a larger strategy to combat a perceived progressive academic bias , like emphases on the political legacy of American slavery , with " patriotic education " instead.

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Education and knowledge [ edit ] The U.S. ranks at a middling quality of education compared to other countries, and Americans often lack basic knowledge and skills.

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] John Traphagan of the University of Texas attributes this to a culture of anti-intellectualism, noting that nerds and other intellectuals are often stigmatized in American schools and popular culture.

[ 37 ] At universities, student anti-intellectualism has resulted in the social acceptability of cheating on schoolwork, especially in the business schools, a manifestation of ethically expedient cognitive dissonance rather than of academic critical thinking .

[ 38 ] The American Council on Science and Health said that denialism of the facts of climate science and of climate change misrepresents verifiable data and information as political opinion.

[ 39 ] Anti-intellectualism puts scientists in the public view and forces them to align with either a liberal or a conservative political stance. Moreover, 53% of Republican U.S. Representatives and 74% of Republican senators deny the scientific facts of the causes of climate change.

[ 40 ] In the rural U.S., anti-intellectualism is an essential feature of the religious culture of Christian fundamentalism .

[ 41 ] Mainline Protestant churches and the Roman Catholic Church have directly published their collective support for political action to counter climate change, whereas Southern Baptists and Evangelicals have denounced belief in both evolution and climate change as a sin, and have dismissed scientists as intellectuals attempting to create "Neo-nature paganism".

[ 42 ] People of fundamentalist religious belief tend to report not seeing evidence of global warming.

[ 43 ] Corporate mass media [ edit ] The reportage of corporate mass-communications media appealed to societal anti-intellectualism by misrepresenting university life in the U.S., where the students' pursuit of book learning (intellectualism) was secondary to the after-school social life. That the reactionary ideology communicated in mass-media reportage misrepresented the liberal political activism and social protest of students as frivolous, social activities thematically unrelated to the academic curriculum, which is the purpose of attending university.

[ 44 ] In Anti-intellectualism in American Media (2004), Dane Claussen identified the contemporary anti-intellectualist bent of manufactured consent that is inherent to commodified information: [ 45 ] [ 46 ] The effects of mass media on attitudes toward intellect are certainly multiple and ambiguous. On the one hand, mass communications greatly expand the sheer volume of information available for public consumption. On the other hand, much of this information comes pre-interpreted for easy digestion and laden with hidden assumption, saving consumers the work of having to interpret it for themselves. Commodified information naturally tends to reflect the assumptions and interests of those who produce it, and its producers are not driven entirely by a passion to promote critical reflection.

The editorial perspective of the corporate mass media misrepresented intellectualism as a separate profession from the jobs and occupations of regular folk. In presenting academically successful students as social failures, an undesirable social status for the average young man and young woman, corporate media established to the U.S. mainstream their opinion that the intellectualism of book learning is a form of mental deviancy; thus, most people would shun intellectuals as friends, lest they risk social ridicule and ostracism.

[ 47 ] Hence, the popular acceptance of anti-intellectualism led to populist rejection of the intelligentsia for resolving the problems of society.

[ 48 ] Moreover, in the book Inventing the Egghead: The Battle over Brainpower in American Culture (2013), Aaron Lecklider indicated that the contemporary ideological dismissal of the intelligentsia derived from the corporate media's reactionary misrepresentations of intellectual men and women as lacking the common-sense of regular folk.

[ 49 ] In Europe [ edit ] Soviet Union [ edit ] See also: Doctors' plot In the first decade after the Russian Revolution of 1917, the Bolsheviks suspected the Tsarist intelligentsia as having the potential to betray the proletariat . Thus, the initial Soviet government consisted of men and women without much formal education. Moreover, the deposed propertied classes were termed Lishentsy ("the disenfranchised"), whose children were excluded from education. Eventually, some 200 Tsarist intellectuals such as writers, philosophers, scientists and engineers were deported to Germany on philosophers' ships in 1922 while others were deported to Latvia and Turkey in 1923.

During the revolutionary period, the pragmatic Bolsheviks employed "bourgeois experts" to manage the economy, industry, and agriculture and so learn from them. After the Russian Civil War (1917–1922), to achieve socialism the Soviet Union (1922–91) emphasized literacy and education in service to modernizing the country via an educated working class intelligentsia rather than an Ivory Tower intelligentsia. During the 1930s and 1950s, Joseph Stalin replaced Vladimir Lenin 's intelligentsia with an intelligentsia that was loyal to him and believed in a specifically Soviet world view, thereby producing the pseudoscientific theories of Lysenkoism and Japhetic theory .

In October 1937, there was a mass extermination of Belarusian writers, artists and statespeople by the Soviet Union occupying authorities. This event marked the peak of the Great Purge and repressions of Belarusians in the Soviet -controlled area of eastern Belarus . More than 100 notable persons were executed, most of them on the night of 29–30 October 1937. Their innocence was later admitted by the Soviet Union after Joseph Stalin 's death.

[ 50 ] At the beginning of World War II , the Soviet secret police carried out mass executions of the Polish intelligentsia and military leadership in the 1940 Katyn massacre .

Fascism [ edit ] Part of a series on Fascism Principles Actual idealism Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-materialism Anti-pacifism Authoritarianism Chauvinism Class collaboration Corporatism Proprietary Corporation Counter-Enlightenment Cult of personality Dictatorship Direct action Dirigisme Eugenics Heroic capitalism Heroic realism Heroism Imperialism Economic Social Irrationalism Machismo Masculinity Militarism National syndicalism Nationalism Integral Palingenetic Ultra New Man One-party state Perpetual war Populism Proletarian nation Propaganda Racism Reactionary modernism Social Darwinism Social order Spazio vitale State capitalism Statolatry Supercapitalism Syncretism Third Position Totalitarianism Topics Definitions Economics Ideology Martyrs Movements Mysticism Symbolism Politicians al-Gaylani Arcand Araki Balbo Bandera Bose Böszörmény Bottai Blythe Bucard Ciano Codreanu Darnand Déat Degrelle Déroulède Doriot Engdahl Federzoni Flores Franco Frashëri Goga Hitler Hlinka Hoornaert Ljotić de Man von Marées Monshizadeh Mosley Mussolini Nakano O'Duffy Quisling Pavelić Pavolini Pelley Preto Primo de Rivera Rodzaevsky Saadeh Salgado Sima Starace Starhemberg Strasser (Gregor) Strasser (Otto) Szálasi Tiso Türkeş Vallat Valois Van Severen Wilson Intellectuals Ahimeir Arthuys Bardèche Béraud Brăileanu Brasillach Céline Chamberlain Chesterton Civinini Cogni Collins Corradini Crainic Croce Cupcea D'Annunzio Dilling Drieu La Rochelle Evola Gentile Giani Gini de Gobineau Herseni Ionescu Kita Krannhals de Lapouge Lewis Malaparte Manuilă Marinetti Maxence Michels Mosley Ojetti Ōkawa Olivetti Orano Panero Panunzio Pirandello Pitt-Rivers Pound Ramos Rebatet Reghini Rosenberg Sadoveanu-Evan Saint-Loup Savarkar Scaligero Schmitt Schwarz Soffici Sorel Spirito Streel Thomson Ungaretti Valois Literature Triumph of Death (1894) The Flame (1900) The Will to Power (1901) Reflections on Violence (1908) Fascio Rivoluzionario d'Azione Internazionalista (1914) Prussianism and Socialism (1919) " Futurist Manifesto " (1919) Fascist Manifesto (1919) Das Dritte Reich (1923) Mein Kampf (1925) Manifesto of the Fascist Intellectuals (1925) Frederick the Second (1927) My Autobiography (1928) The Myth of the Twentieth Century (1930) The Outlaws (1930) " The Doctrine of Fascism " (1932) Twenty-Six Point Program of the Falange (1934) Man, the Unknown (1935) For My Legionaries (1936) Guide to Kulchur (1938) A Warning to the Hindus (1939) Gilles (1939) Organizations Arrow Cross Party Blackshirts Blueshirts Brazilian Integralist Action British Democratic Party (2013) British National Party British Union of Fascists Stewards Canadian Union of Fascists Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Fasci Italiani di Combattimento Fatherland Front FE de las JONS FET y de las JONS French Popular Party Futurist Political Party IKL Iron Guard Kataeb Party Kokumin Dōmei Lapua Movement Mouvement Franciste Nasjonal Samling National Christian Party National Fascist Party Nazi Party Gestapo Hitler Youth RAD SA SS National Radical Camp National Social Movement New Party Opera Nazionale Balilla Patriotic People's Movement Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh Ratniks Republican Fascist Party Revolutionary Mexicanist Action Revolutionary Union Rexist Party Russian Fascist Party Silver Legion of America Squadrismo School of Fascist Mysticism Slovak People's Party Taisei Yokusankai Tōhōkai UR Group Ustaše Ustaše Youth Verdinaso VFO Vlajka VNV Media Action Ajan Suunta The American Review Der Angriff Arriba The Blackshirt Buna Vestire Critica fascista Fashist Gândirea Gringoire Il Popolo d'Italia Je suis partout La Conquista del Estado Le Pays Réel L'Idea Nazionale Lidel Nash Put' Nástup Neues Volk Nippon Fujin NS-Frauen-Warte Das Schwarze Korps Volk en Staat Völkischer Beobachter History March on Rome Beer Hall Putsch Gentile Reform Aventine Secession Second Italo-Senussi War Mukden Incident German election of 1932 Enabling Act Austrian Civil War Exhibition of the Fascist Revolution 1934 Montreux Fascist conference Second Italo-Ethiopian War 1935 Revolution Day Zócalo Battle Spanish Civil War Unification Decree Battle of Cable Street Second Sino-Japanese War Marco Polo Bridge Incident Japanese war crimes Anti-Comintern Pact Kristallnacht Italian invasion of Albania Pact of Steel Peasant March World War II The Holocaust Downfall in Italy Downfall in Germany Surrender of Japan Nuremberg trials International Military Tribunal for the Far East Variants Albanian Arab Argentine Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Austrian Brazilian British Christian Christian Identity Clerical Crypto- Croatian socialism Eco- Falangism Francoism French Doriotism Pétainism Valoisism Hindutva Hungarism Hutu Ibañism Ilminism Irish Islamic Qutbism Khomeinism Italian Intransigent Japanese Emperor-system Reform bureaucratism Statism Restoration Ultra- Jewish/Israeli Kahanism Revisionist Maximalism Nazism Austrian Esoteric Hitlerism Strasserism Swedish Neo- Finnish Legionarism Pan-Turkic Rexism Romanian Legionarism National Legionary State Neo- Romanianism/Stelism Russian Syndicalist Syrian Social Nationalism Techno- Third Position National-anarchism National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism Ukrainian Banderism National Shevchenkoism Uruguayan Marzism Revisionism Sosism By continent Asia Europe Bulgaria Netherlands Russia North America Canada United States South America Peru Uruguay Related topics Anti-fascism Axis powers Criticism of fascism Donald Trump and fascism Extremism of the centre F-scale Fascist as an insult Feudal fascism Futurism Glossary of Fascist Italy Lebensphilosophie Mediterraneanism Para-fascism Paramilitary Post-fascism Proto-fascism Red fascism Social fascism Politics portal v t e The idealist philosopher Giovanni Gentile established the intellectual basis of Fascist ideology with the autoctisi (self-realisation) that distinguished between the good (active) intellectual and the bad (passive) intellectual: Fascism combats [...] not intelligence, but intellectualism, [...] which is [...] a sickness of the intellect, [...] not a consequence of its abuse, because the intellect cannot be used too much. [...] [I]t derives from the false belief that one can segregate oneself from life.

— Giovanni Gentile, addressing a Congress of Fascist Culture, Bologna, 30 March 1925 To counter the "passive intellectual" who used their intellect abstractly, and was therefore "decadent", he proposed the "concrete thinking" of the active intellectual who applied intellect as praxis —a "man of action", like the Fascist Benito Mussolini , versus the decadent Communist intellectual Antonio Gramsci . The passive intellectual stagnates intellect by objectifying ideas, thus establishing them as objects. Hence the Fascist rejection of materialist logic , because it relies upon a priori principles improperly counter-changed with a posteriori ones that are irrelevant to the matter-in-hand in deciding whether or not to act.

In the praxis of Gentile's concrete thinking criteria, such consideration of the a priori toward the properly a posteriori constitutes impractical , decadent intellectualism. Moreover, this fascist philosophy occurred parallel to Actual Idealism , his philosophic system; he opposed intellectualism for its being disconnected from the active intelligence that gets things done, i.e. thought is killed when its constituent parts are labelled, and thus rendered as discrete entities.

[ 51 ] [ 52 ] Related to this is the confrontation between the Spanish Francoist General José Millán-Astray and the writer Miguel de Unamuno during the Dia de la Raza celebration at the University of Salamanca in 1936, during the Spanish Civil War . The General exclaimed: ¡Muera la inteligencia! ¡Viva la Muerte!

("Death to the intelligentsia! Long live death!"); the Falangists applauded.

[ 53 ] In Asia [ edit ] China [ edit ] Imperial China [ edit ] Qin Shi Huang (246–210 BC), the first Emperor of unified China, consolidated political thought, and power, by suppressing freedom of speech at the suggestion of Chancellor Li Si , who justified such anti-intellectualism by accusing the intelligentsia of falsely praising the emperor, and dissenting through libel . From 213 to 206 BC, it was generally thought that the works of the Hundred Schools of Thought were incinerated, especially the Shi Jing ( Classic of Poetry , c. 1000 BC) and the Shujing ( Classic of History , c. 6th century BC). The exceptions were books by Qin historians, and books of Legalism , an early type of totalitarianism —and the Chancellor's philosophic school (see the Burning of books and burying of scholars ). However, upon further inspection of Chinese historical annals such as the Shi Ji and the Han Shu, this was found not to be the case. The Qin Empire privately kept one copy of each of these books in the Imperial Library but it publicly ordered that the books should be banned. Those who owned copies were ordered to surrender the books to be burned; those who refused were executed. This eventually led to the loss of most ancient works of literature and philosophy when Xiang Yu burned down the Qin palace in 208 BC.

People's Republic of China [ edit ] See also: Stinking Old Ninth The Cultural Revolution (1966–1976) was a politically violent decade which saw wide-ranging social engineering throughout the People's Republic of China by its leader Chairman Mao Zedong . After several national policy crises during which he was motivated by his desire to regain public prestige and control of the Chinese government , Mao announced on 16 May 1966 that the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) and Chinese society were permeated with liberal bourgeois elements who meant to restore capitalism to China and he also announced that people could only be removed after a post–revolutionary class struggle was waged against them. To that effect, China's youth nationally organized themselves into Red Guards and hunted the "liberal bourgeois" elements who were supposedly subverting the CCP and Chinese society. The Red Guards acted nationally, purging the country, the military, urban workers and the leaders of the CCP. The Red Guards were particularly aggressive when they attacked their teachers and professors, causing most schools and universities to be shut down once the Cultural Revolution began. Three years later in 1969, Mao declared that the Cultural Revolution was ended, yet the political intrigues continued until 1976, concluding with the arrest of the Gang of Four , the de facto end of the Cultural Revolution.

Democratic Kampuchea [ edit ] Main article: Year Zero (political notion) See also: Killing Fields When the Communist Party of Kampuchea and the Khmer Rouge (1951–1981) established their regime as Democratic Kampuchea (1975–1979) in Cambodia , their anti-intellectualism which idealised the country and demonised the cities was immediately imposed on the country in order to establish agrarian socialism , thus, they emptied cities in order to purge the Khmer nation of every traitor , enemy of the state and intellectual , often symbolised by eyeglasses.

Ottoman Empire [ edit ] Some of the Armenian intellectuals who were detained, deported, and killed in the Armenian genocide of 1915 In the early stages of the Armenian genocide of 1915, around 2,300 Armenian intellectuals were deported from Constantinople ( Istanbul ) and most of them were subsequently murdered by the Ottoman government.

[ 54 ] The event has been described by historians as a decapitation strike , [ 55 ] [ 56 ] the purpose of which was intended to deprive the Armenian population of an intellectual leadership and a chance to resist.

[ 57 ] See also [ edit ] Antiscience – attitudes that reject science and the scientific method Conspiracy theory – attributing events to secret plots instead of more probable explanation Counter-Enlightenment , not to be confused with the more recent Dark Enlightenment – Various intellectual stances against mainstream attitudes of the 18th-century Enlightenment Decapitation strike and or just cultural genocide generally – imperial strategy, wherein destroying a society's epistemic elite makes subduing it much easier; Discrimination of excellence Dumbing down – deliberate oversimplification of intellectual content Equality of outcome or Substantive equality as distinct from equal opportunity Harrison Bergeron – 1961 short story by Kurt Vonnegut Just-world fallacy Legacy preferences Myth of meritocracy Noble savage – stock character Philistinism – hostility to intellect, art and beauty Populism – when the democratic ethos moves into places it is purported not to belong; paradigmatically academic research Ressentiment – tendency to reflexively detract from others, e.g. as regards their greater, implicitly perceived, intelligence; as described chiefly by Nietzsche and Scheler Tall poppy syndrome Footnotes [ edit ] ^ a b A Handbook to Literature (1980), Fourth Edition, C. Hugh Holman, Ed. p. 27 ^ Courtois, Stephanie.

The Black Book of Communism . p. 601.

^ Dictionary of Wars (2007), Third Edition, pp. 517–18.

^ di Tella, Rafael M; McAra, Sarah.

"Populism in America: Fake News, Alternative Facts and Elite Betrayal in the Trump Era - Case - Faculty & Research - Harvard Business School" .

www.hbs.edu . Harvard Business School . Retrieved 24 March 2025 .

^ Smith, David (28 December 2020).

"Alternative facts, witch-hunt, bigly: the Trump era in 32 words and phrases" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 24 March 2025 .

^ "Year Zero: The Silent Death of Cambodia" . 30 October 1979.

^ "Václav Havel" .

^ Police repression at the Universidad de Buenos Aires - University of Toronto ^ (in Spanish) La noche de los bastones largos Archived May 14, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ John R. Searle (1971), The Campus Wars, Chapter 2: The Students , URL retrieved 14 June 2010.

^ Stanislav Andreski, The Social Sciences as Sorcery . 1972, The University of California Press ^ Larry Laudan, Science and Relativism: Some Key Controversies in the Philosophy of Science (1990), University of Chicago Press ^ "Black and Conservative: A Look at Thomas Sowell" . 2011-08-08.

^ Sowell, Thomas (2009).

Intellectuals and Society . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0465019489 . Retrieved 16 November 2013 .

[ pages needed ] ^ Sowell (2009), p. 296.

^ Johnson, Paul (2009).

Intellectuals . HarperCollins.

ISBN 978-0061871474 . Retrieved 16 November 2013 .

^ Wolfe, Tom. (2000). "In the Land of the Rococo Marxists", Harper's Monthly , June 2000.

^ Coupe, Lawrence (27 November 2000).

"The Moronic Inferno" .

PN Review 136 . Vol. 27.

^ a b Hofstadter, Richard Anti-intellectualism in American Life (1962), p. 46.

^ Sowell, Thomas. (2001) The Quest for Cosmic Justice . Simon and Schuster, 2001, ISBN 978-0-7432-1507-7 , p. 187.

^ Vinovskis, Maris (1992).

"Schooling and Poor Children in 19th-Century America" (PDF) .

American Behavioral Scientist .

35 (3): 313– 331.

doi : 10.1177/0002764292035003008 .

hdl : 2027.42/68138 .

S2CID 9269525 .

^ Pyle, George (6 April 2020).

"George Pyle: It can be hard to know who to trust. And easy to know who not to" .

The Salt Lake Tribune .

Archived from the original on 13 April 2020.

^ Cronin, Thomas E. (2015-12-03).

On the Presidency: Teacher, Soldier, Shaman, Pol . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-25502-4 .

^ Hofstadter, Richard (1963).

Anti-Intellectualism in American Life . United States of America: Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 978-0394415352 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Wood, Gordon (2011).

Empire of Liberty: A History of the Early Republic, 1789–1815 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199832460 .

^ Hsu, Francis (1980).

Americans and Chinese: Passages to Differences . University of Hawaii Press.

ISBN 978-0824807573 .

^ Stokes, Bruce; Wike, Richard; Carle, Jill (2015-11-05).

"Global Concern about Climate Change, Broad Support for Limiting Emissions" .

Pew Research Center's Global Attitudes Project . Retrieved 2017-03-01 .

^ Sidky, H. (2018).

"The War on Science, Anti-Intellectualism, and 'Alternative Ways of Knowing' in 21st-Century America" .

Skeptical Inquirer .

42 (2): 38– 43. Archived from the original on 2018-06-06 . Retrieved 6 June 2018 .

^ "America hits peak anti-intellectualism: Majority of Republicans now think college is bad" .

Salon . 2017-07-11 . Retrieved 2019-09-18 .

^ "Is Anti-Intellectualism Ever Good for Democracy?" .

Dissent . Winter 2019 . Retrieved 2019-09-18 .

^ Rummler, Jacob Knutson,Orion (23 September 2020).

"Trump pushes to expand ban against anti-racism training to federal contractors" .

Axios . Retrieved 2020-09-25 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "LDF Issues Statement in Response to President Trump's Executive Order" .

NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund . Retrieved 2020-09-25 .

^ Wise, Alana (17 September 2020).

"Trump Announces 'Patriotic Education' Commission, A Largely Political Move" .

NPR.org . Retrieved 2020-09-25 .

^ "Trump pushes for 'patriotic education' in schools" .

NBC4 WCMH-TV . 2020-09-02 . Retrieved 2020-09-25 .

^ DeSilver, Drew (2020-08-21).

"U.S. students' academic achievement still lags that of their peers in many other countries" .

Pew Research Center . Retrieved 2023-04-02 .

^ "Education Rankings by Country 2023" .

2023 World Population by Country (Live) . Retrieved 2023-04-02 .

^ "Anti-Intellectualism and the "Dumbing Down" of America" .

Psychology Today . Archived from the original on 2015-09-19 . Retrieved 2017-03-01 .

^ Rafik, Elias (2009). "The Impact of Anti-Intellectualism Attitudes and Academic Self-Efficacy on Business Students' Perceptions of Cheating".

Journal of Business Ethics .

86 (2): 199– 209.

doi : 10.1007/s10551-008-9843-8 .

S2CID 144064671 .

^ "Anti-Intellectualism Is Biggest Threat to Modern Society | American Council on Science and Health" .

acsh.org . 2016-06-27 . Retrieved 2017-03-01 .

^ "Anti-Intellectualism and the "Dumbing Down" of America" .

Psychology Today . Archived from the original on 2015-09-19 . Retrieved 2017-03-01 .

^ "Anti-intellectualism Is Killing America" .

Psychology Today . Retrieved 2017-03-01 .

^ Zaleha, Bernard Daley; Szasz, Andrew (2015-01-01).

"Why conservative Christians don't believe in climate change" .

Bulletin of the Atomic Scientists .

71 (5): 19– 30.

Bibcode : 2015BuAtS..71e..19Z .

doi : 10.1177/0096340215599789 .

ISSN 0096-3402 .

S2CID 145477853 .

^ "cultural cognition project – Cultural Cognition Blog – MAPKIA! "answer" episode 1: The interaction effect of religion & science comprehension on perceptions of climate change risk" .

www.culturalcognition.net . Retrieved 2017-03-01 .

^ Dane, Claussen (2004).

Anti-Intellectualism in American Media . New York: Peter Lang Publishing. pp.

197– 198.

ISBN 978-0-8204-5721-5 .

^ Rigney, Daniel (1991). "Three kinds of Anti-intellectualism: Rethinking Hofstadter".

Sociological Inquiry .

61 (4): 431– 451.

doi : 10.1111/j.1475-682X.1991.tb00172.x .

^ Dane, Claussen (2004).

Anti-Intellectualism in American Media . New York: Peter Lang Publishing. p. 43.

ISBN 978-0-8204-5721-5 .

^ Dane, Claussen (2004).

Anti-Intellectualism in American Media . New York: Peter Lang Publishing. p. 198.

ISBN 978-0-8204-5721-5 .

^ Claussen, Danes. "A Brief History of Anti-Intellectualism in American Media".

Academe .

97 .

^ Lecklider, Aaron (2013).

Inventing the Egghead: The Battle over Brainpower in American Culture .

^ Маракоў Л.

Ахвяры і карнікі . Мн.: Зміцер Колас, 2007 г.

ISBN 978-985-6783-38-1 ^ Gentile, Giovanni, Origins and Doctrine of Fascism (with selections from other works) , A. James Gregor, ed., pp. 22–23, 33, 65–66 ^ The Oxford Guide to Philosophy (2005), Ted Honderich, ed., p. 332.

^ Beevor, Antony. The Battle for Spain: The Spanish Civil War 1936-1939. Hachette UK, 2012.

^ Dadrian, Vahakn N.

(2004).

The history of the Armenian genocide: ethnic conflict from the Balkans to Anatolia to the Caucasus (6th rev. ed.). New York: Berghahn Books. p. 221.

ISBN 978-1-57181-666-5 .

^ Blinka, David S. (2008).

Re-creating Armenia: America and the memory of the Armenian genocide . Madison: University of Wisconsin Press. p. 31.

In what scholars commonly refer to as the decapitation strike on April 24, 1915...

^ Bloxham, Donald (2005).

The Great Game of Genocide: Imperialism, Nationalism, and the Destruction of the Ottoman Armenians . Oxford University Press. p. 70.

...the decapitation of the Armenian nation with the series of mass arrests that began on 24 April...

^ Sahаkian, T. A. (2002).

"Արևմտահայ մտավորականության սպանդի արտացոլումը հայ մամուլում 1915–1916 թթ. [The interpretation of the fact of extermination of the Armenian intelligentsia in the Armenian press in 1915–1916]" .

Lraber Hasarakakan Gitutyunneri (in Armenian).

1 (1): 89– 97.

Դրանով թուրքական կառավարությունը ձգտում էր արևմտահայությանը գլխատել, նրան զրկել ղեկավար ուժից, բողոքի հնարավորությունից: Further reading [ edit ] Dane S. Claussen (2004).

Anti-Intellectualism in American Media . New York: Peter Lang Publishing.

ISBN 978-0820457215 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) Liza Featherstone, Doug Henwood, and Christian Parenti, "'Action Will be Taken': Left Anti-Intellectualism and its Discontents," Left Business Observer.

William Hinton, Hundred Day War: The Cultural Revolution at Tsinghua University . New York: New York University Press, 1972.

Richard Hofstadter , Anti-intellectualism in American Life .

New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1963.

Susan Jacoby , The Age of American Unreason.

New York: Pantheon Books, 2008.

Aaron Lecklider (2013).

Inventing the Egghead: The Battle over Brainpower in American Culture . Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 978-0-8122-4486-1 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) Elvin T. Lim (2008).

The Anti-Intellectual Presidency: The Decline of Presidential Rhetoric from George Washington to George W. Bush . New York: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199898091 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) "Anti-Intellectualism and the "Dumbing Down" of America" . psychology today. 2014.

There is a growing and disturbing trend of anti-intellectual elitism in American culture. It's the dismissal of science, the arts, and humanities and their replacement by entertainment, self-righteousness, ignorance, and deliberate gullibility.

External links [ edit ] Look up anti-intellectualism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Media related to Anti-intellectualism at Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote has quotations related to Anti-intellectualism .

v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-intellectualism&oldid=1305326617 " Categories : Anti-intellectualism Barriers to critical thinking Academia Social theories Persecution of intellectuals Hidden categories: Articles with Spanish-language sources (es) Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2016 CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 Armenian-language sources (hy) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2025 CS1 maint: publisher location Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 11:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-intellectualism 34 languages Add topic

