Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins Toggle Origins subsection 1.1 Counterrevolutionary anti-fascism 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Italy: against Fascism and Mussolini 2.2 Slovenians and Croats under Italianization 2.3 Germany: against the NSDAP and Hitlerism 2.4 Spain: Civil War against the Nationalists 2.5 France: against Action Française and Vichy 2.6 United Kingdom: against Mosley's BUF 2.7 United States, World War II 2.8 Burma, World War II 2.9 Poland, World War II 2.10 After World War II 2.10.1 Italy 2.10.2 Germany 2.10.3 Greece 2.10.4 United States 2.10.5 Elsewhere 3 Use of the term 4 See also 5 Notes Toggle Notes subsection 5.1 Bibliography 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Anti-fascism 56 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Latviešu Lombard Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Shqip සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Vèneto Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 18 August 2025 .

Opposition to fascism Anti-fascism is a political movement in opposition to fascist ideologies, groups and individuals. Beginning in European countries in the 1920s, it was at its most significant shortly before and during World War II , where the Axis powers were opposed by many countries forming the Allies of World War II and dozens of resistance movements worldwide. Anti-fascism has been an element of movements across the political spectrum and holding many different political positions such as anarchism , communism , pacifism , republicanism , social democracy , socialism and syndicalism as well as centrist , conservative , liberal and nationalist viewpoints.

Fascism, a far-right ultra-nationalistic ideology best known for its use by the Italian Fascists and the German Nazis , became prominent beginning in the 1910s. Organization against fascism began around 1920. Fascism became the state ideology of Italy in 1922 and of Germany in 1933, spurring a large increase in anti-fascist action, including German resistance to Nazism and the Italian resistance movement . Anti-fascism was a major aspect of the Spanish Civil War , which foreshadowed World War II.

Before World War II, the West had not taken seriously the threat of fascism, and anti-fascism was sometimes associated with communism. However, the outbreak of World War II greatly changed Western perceptions, and fascism was seen as an existential threat by not only the communist Soviet Union but also by the liberal-democratic United States and United Kingdom. The Axis Powers of World War II were generally fascist, and the fight against them was characterized in anti-fascist terms.

Resistance during World War II to fascism occurred in every occupied country, and came from across the ideological spectrum. The defeat of the Axis powers generally ended fascism as a state ideology.

After World War II, the anti-fascist movement continued to be active in places where organized fascism continued or re-emerged. There was a resurgence of antifa in Germany in the 1980s, as a response to the invasion of the punk scene by neo-Nazis . This influenced the antifa movement in the United States in the late 1980s and 1990s, which was similarly carried by punks. In the 21st century, this greatly increased in prominence as a response to the resurgence of the radical right , especially after the 2016 election of Donald Trump .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Origins [ edit ] See also: Fascism and ideology Part of a series on Anti-fascism Interwar Ethiopia Black Lions Central Europe Arbeiter-Schutzbund Republikanischer Schutzbund Socialist Action Germany Antifaschistische Aktion Black Band Catholic resistance to Nazi Germany Confessing Church Iron Front Reichsbanner Schwarz-Rot-Gold Roter Frontkämpferbund Three Arrows Italy 1922 Italian general strike Aventine Secession Arditi del Popolo Concentrazione Antifascista Italiana Giustizia e Libertà Manifesto of the Anti-Fascist Intellectuals TIGR Volante Rossa Spain ( Spanish Civil War ) Antifascist Worker and Peasant Militias Confederal militias International Brigades Abraham Lincoln Brigade British Battalion Dabrowski Battalion ILP Contingent Mackenzie-Papineau Battalion Palafox Battalion Thälmann Battalion World War II Resistance during World War II Albania Albanian resistance National Liberation Movement Austria Austrian resistance Baltic states Estonian resistance Latvian resistance movement Lithuanian resistance Soviet partisans Belgium Belgian Resistance Belgian National Movement Front de l'Indépendance Secret Army Witte Brigade Bulgaria Bulgarian resistance movement Fatherland Front People's Liberation Insurgent Army Burma Anti-Fascist Organisation China Second United Front Kuomintang Chinese Communist Party National Revolutionary Army Eighth Route Army East River Column Czechia Resistance in the Protectorate of Bohemia and Moravia Jan Žižka partisan brigade Prague uprising Denmark Danish resistance movement France French Resistance Maquis Armée Juive Armée secrète Combat Franc-Tireur Francs-Tireurs et Partisans Libération-Nord Libération-sud Mouvements Unis de la Résistance National Council of the Resistance National Front Germany German resistance to Nazism Catholic resistance to Nazi Germany Pope Pius XII and the German Resistance National Committee for a Free Germany AKFD Rote Kapelle Saefkow-Jacob-Bästlein Organization Schwarze Kapelle 20 July plot Oster conspiracy White Rose Greece Cretan resistance Greek resistance ELAS Italy Italian resistance movement National Liberation Committee Japan Political dissidence in the Empire of Japan Japanese in the Chinese resistance to the Empire of Japan Japanese People's Emancipation League Jewish Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee Jewish partisans Jewish resistance during the Holocaust Jewish Labor Committee Luxembourg Luxembourg resistance Netherlands Dutch resistance Binnenlandse Strijdkrachten Norway Norwegian resistance movement Poland Polish resistance movement in World War II ( Polish Underground State ) Anti-Fascist Bloc Armia Krajowa Armia Ludowa Bataliony Chłopskie Gwardia Ludowa Kampfgruppe Auschwitz Narodowe Siły Zbrojne Olimp Polscy Socjaliści Warsaw Ghetto Uprising Żydowska Organizacja Bojowa Zydowski Zwiazek Walki Romania Romanian resistance movement during World War II Slovakia Slovak partisans Slovak National Uprising Spain Spanish Maquis Soviet Union Soviet partisans Moldovan resistance movement Yugoslavia Yugoslav resistance movement Anti-fascist Assembly for the National Liberation of Macedonia Anti-fascist Assembly for the National Liberation of Serbia Anti-Fascist Council for the National Liberation of Yugoslavia Croatian Partisans Liberation Front of the Slovenian People Macedonian Partisans Slovene Partisans Yugoslav Partisans Postwar Post–World War II anti-fascism ( denazification ) Germany Antifa Arsch huh, Zäng ussenander Italy ANPI Bella ciao Liberation Day Netherlands Anti-fascist research group Kafka Portugal Armed Forces Movement Carnation Revolution Spain Spanish Maquis Sweden Antifascistisk Aktion Switzerland Aktion Kinder des Holocaust United Kingdom 43 Group 62 Group Anti-Fascist Action Anti-Nazi League Unite Against Fascism United States Antifa Anti-Racist Action Redneck Revolt Refuse Fascism Music and culture " A las Barricadas " " ¡Ay Carmela!

" " Bella ciao " " First they came ...

" " Fischia il vento " " Grândola, Vila Morena " " Nazi Punks Fuck Off " Rock Against Racism " Rock gegen Rechts " Skinheads Against Racial Prejudice " This machine kills fascists " " (We Don't Need This) Fascist Groove Thang " Red and anarchist black metal Tactics and methods Black bloc Deplatforming Direct action Diversity of tactics Milkshaking Popular front Squadism United front See also Red triangle Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-nationalism Anti-Germans (political current) Anti-Japaneseism Anti-racism Civil libertarianism Fantifa Left-wing politics Anarchism Anarchist communism Democratic socialism Left-libertarianism Libertarian socialism Social liberalism Politics portal v t e A print depicting Roman armour and accessories including two versions of the fasces (lower right) Modern fasces symbol A fasces ( / ˈ f æ s iː z / FASS -eez ; Latin: [ˈfaskeːs] ; a plurale tantum , from the Latin word fascis , meaning 'bundle'; Italian : fascio littorio ) is a bound bundle of wooden rods, often but not always including an axe (occasionally two axes) with its blade emerging. The fasces is an Italian symbol that had its origin in the Etruscan civilization and was passed on to ancient Rome , where it symbolized a Roman king 's power to punish his subjects, [ 3 ] and later, a magistrate 's power and jurisdiction . They were carried in a procession with a magistrate by lictors , who carried the fasces and at times used the birch rods as punishment to enforce obedience with magisterial commands.

[ 4 ] In common language and literature, the fasces were regularly associated with certain offices: praetors were referred to in Greek as the hexapelekys ( lit.

' six axes ' ) and the consuls were referred to as "the twelve fasces" as literary metonymy .

[ 5 ] Beyond serving as insignia of office, it also symbolised the Roman Republic and its prestige.

[ 6 ] After the classical period, with the fall of the Roman state , thinkers were removed from the "psychological terror generated by the original Roman fasces" in the antique period. By the Renaissance , there emerged a conflation of the fasces with a Greek fable first recorded by Babrius in the second century AD depicting how individual sticks can be easily broken but how a bundle could not be.

[ 7 ] This story is common across Eurasian culture and by the thirteenth century AD was recorded in the Secret History of the Mongols .

[ 8 ] While there is no historical connection between the original fasces and this fable, [ 9 ] by the sixteenth century AD, fasces were "inextricably linked" with interpretations of the fable as one expressing unity and harmony.

[ 8 ] Italian Fascism , which derives its name from the fasces, arguably used this symbolism the most in the 20th century.

With the development and spread of Italian Fascism, i.e. the original fascism, the National Fascist Party 's ideology was met with increasingly militant opposition by Italian communists and socialists. Organizations such as Arditi del Popolo [ 10 ] and the Italian Anarchist Union emerged between 1919 and 1921, to combat the nationalist and fascist surge of the post-World War I period.

In the words of historian Eric Hobsbawm , as fascism developed and spread, a "nationalism of the left" developed in those nations threatened by Italian irredentism (e.g. in the Balkans , and Albania in particular).

[ 11 ] After the outbreak of World War II, the Albanian and Yugoslav resistances were instrumental in antifascist action and underground resistance. This combination of irreconcilable nationalisms and leftist partisans constitute the earliest roots of European anti-fascism. Less militant forms of anti-fascism arose later. During the 1930s in Britain, "Christians – especially the Church of England – provided both a language of opposition to fascism and inspired anti-fascist action".

[ 12 ] French philosopher Georges Bataille believed that Friedrich Nietzsche was a forerunner of anti-fascism due to his derision for nationalism and racism.

[ 13 ] Michael Seidman argues that traditionally anti-fascism was seen as the purview of the political left but that in recent years this has been questioned. Seidman identifies two types of anti-fascism, namely revolutionary and counterrevolutionary: [ 14 ] Revolutionary anti-fascism was expressed amongst communists and anarchists, where it identified fascism and capitalism as its enemies and made little distinction between fascism and other forms of right-wing authoritarianism.

[ 15 ] It did not disappear after the Second World War but was used as an official ideology of the Soviet bloc, with the "fascist" West as the new enemy.

Counterrevolutionary anti-fascism was much more conservative in nature, with Seidman arguing that Charles de Gaulle and Winston Churchill represented examples of it and that they tried to win the masses to their cause. Counterrevolutionary antifascists desired to ensure the restoration or continuation of the prewar old regime and conservative antifascists disliked fascism's erasure of the distinction between the public and private spheres. Like its revolutionary counterpart, it would outlast fascism once the Second World War ended.

Seidman argues that despite the differences between these two strands of anti-fascism, there were similarities. They would both come to regard violent expansion as intrinsic to the fascist project. They both rejected any claim that the Versailles Treaty was responsible for the rise of Nazism and instead viewed fascist dynamism as the cause of conflict. Unlike fascism, these two types of anti-fascism did not promise a quick victory but an extended struggle against a powerful enemy. During World War II, both anti-fascisms responded to fascist aggression by creating a cult of heroism which relegated victims to a secondary position.

[ 14 ] However, after the war, conflict arose between the revolutionary and counterrevolutionary anti-fascisms; the victory of the Western Allies allowed them to restore the old regimes of liberal democracy in Western Europe, while Soviet victory in Eastern Europe allowed for the establishment of new revolutionary anti-fascist regimes there.

[ 16 ] Counterrevolutionary anti-fascism [ edit ] Franklin D. Roosevelt Winston Churchill Charles de Gaulle Counterrevolutionary anti-fascism, also known as conservative and liberal anti-fascism, refers to the opposition to fascism grounded in the defense of democracy, constitutional order, and traditional institutions. Unlike revolutionary anti-fascism, which aims for social and political transformation, counterrevolutionary anti-fascism is focused on preserving or restoring pre-war political systems, such as constitutional monarchies and republics based on Enlightenment ideals.

[ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] This form of anti-fascism is often associated with prominent figures such as Franklin D. Roosevelt , Winston Churchill and Charles de Gaulle , who opposed fascist authoritarianism while also resisting revolutionary movements that sought to radically change society.

[ 18 ] [ 21 ] It was supported by a broad coalition of groups, including capitalists, trade unionists, social democrats, and traditionalists, all of whom united in their opposition to fascism and their support for political stability.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 21 ] Counterrevolutionary anti-fascism sought to challenge fascist ideologies and movements, aiming to preserve existing democratic structures and stabilize society. It focused on reinforcing confidence in democratic governance and addressing extremist movements, setting itself apart from revolutionary anti-fascism, which frequently aimed at challenging capitalist systems.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] In Britain, conservative anti-fascism primarily concentrated on maintaining democratic governance and marginalizing fascist groups through legal and institutional means.

[ 22 ] [ 20 ] Liberal anti-fascism, on the other hand, opposed fascism through media campaigns, petitions, parliamentary debates, and public discourse. Both forms recognized fascism as a threat to state stability, and both approached revolutionary ideologies, including communism, with caution.

[ 22 ] [ 20 ] British counterrevolutionary anti-fascism in the 1930s was shaped by an alliance that transcended traditional political divisions. Churchill's leadership was pivotal in creating an antifascist front that included both conservative and social democratic figures.

[ 22 ] [ 20 ] This coalition rejected the idea that fascism was the only way to prevent communism and instead promoted a defense of "ordered freedom," which emphasized representative democracy, religious tolerance, and private property.

[ 22 ] [ 20 ] Through organizations like the Anti-Nazi Council , the counterrevolutionary antifascist movement rallied elites across the political spectrum, including trade unionists and churchmen, to oppose fascism and preserve liberal democracy.

[ 22 ] [ 20 ] This broader vision of antifascism, distinct from Marxist and communist approaches, helped shape Britain’s resistance to Nazi aggression.

[ 20 ] [ 22 ] French counterrevolutionary anti-fascism, particularly in the years leading up to and during World War II, was characterized by opposition to both Italian Fascism and German Nazism.

[ 23 ] Figures such as Benjamin Crémieux , a Jewish intellectual, criticized Mussolini's anti-parliamentarianism and the Fascist regime's approach to democracy, expressing concern about a potential alignment between Italian Fascism and far-right movements in France.

[ 23 ] Meanwhile, journals like L’Europe Nouvelle and individuals such as Georges Bernanos and Charles de Gaulle opposed the policy of appeasement, emphasizing the potential dangers of Fascism's totalitarianism.

[ 23 ] They also critiqued the French right’s minimization of the threats posed by Hitler and Mussolini and advocated for an anti-fascist stance, which, in some cases, included support for alliances with the Soviet Union despite differing views on Communism.

[ 23 ] This counterrevolutionary anti-fascism was influenced by concerns over national sovereignty, democracy, and resistance to totalitarian movements.

[ 23 ] In the United States, a coalition of liberals and conservatives, particularly under President Franklin D. Roosevelt, opposed fascism through both political and military means, with an emphasis on preserving democratic institutions in the face of growing fascist threats.

[ 18 ] [ 21 ] [ 24 ] American counterrevolutionary anti-fascism emerged as a response to the increasing spread of fascism in Europe and the potential for its expansion into the Western Hemisphere.

[ 18 ] [ 21 ] [ 24 ] Initially, Roosevelt navigated a delicate balance, adopting limited measures to avoid alienating isolationist sentiment while preparing for the possibility of war.

[ 18 ] [ 21 ] [ 24 ] As Germany's expansion progressed, Roosevelt shifted towards providing more active support for Britain and its allies, eventually securing public and political backing for military aid.

[ 18 ] [ 21 ] [ 24 ] Despite opposition from isolationists and anti-interventionists, Roosevelt's administration, supported by business and labor leaders, increasingly aligned with anti-fascist forces.

[ 18 ] [ 21 ] [ 24 ] This shift in American foreign policy reinforced the country's focus on countering Nazi Germany, reducing the influence of isolationists, and establishing an anti-fascist position.

[ 18 ] [ 21 ] [ 24 ] Examples of anti-fascist propaganda in the United States are the films Hitler's Reign of Terror (1934), [ 25 ] often credited as being the "first-ever American anti-Nazi film," [ 26 ] and Don't Be a Sucker (1943).

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] History [ edit ] Italian partisans in Milan during the final insurrection leading to the liberation of Italy in April 1945 Anti-fascist movements emerged first in Italy during the rise of Benito Mussolini , [ 31 ] but they soon spread to other European countries and then globally. In the early period, Communist, socialist, anarchist and Christian workers and intellectuals were involved. Until 1928, the period of the United front , there was significant collaboration between the Communists and non-Communist anti-fascists.

In 1928, the Comintern instituted its ultra-left Third Period policies, ending co-operation with other left groups, and denouncing social democrats as " social fascists ". From 1934 until the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact , the Communists pursued a Popular Front approach, of building broad-based coalitions with liberal and even conservative anti-fascists. As fascism consolidated its power, and especially during World War II , anti-fascism largely took the form of partisan or resistance movements.

Italy: against Fascism and Mussolini [ edit ] An Italian partisan in Florence , 14 August 1944, during the liberation of Italy See also: Italian resistance movement and Italian Civil War Flag of Arditi del Popolo , an axe cutting a fasces .

Arditi del Popolo was a militant anti-fascist group founded in 1921 in Italy In Italy, Mussolini's Fascist regime used the term anti-fascist to describe its opponents. Mussolini's secret police was officially known as the Organization for Vigilance and Repression of Anti-Fascism . During the 1920s in the Kingdom of Italy , anti-fascists, many of them from the labor movement , fought against the violent Blackshirts and against the rise of the fascist leader Benito Mussolini. After the Italian Socialist Party (PSI) signed a pacification pact with Mussolini and his Fasces of Combat on 3 August 1921, [ 32 ] and trade unions adopted a legalist and pacified strategy, members of the workers' movement who disagreed with this strategy formed Arditi del Popolo .

[ 33 ] The Italian General Confederation of Labour (CGL) and the PSI refused to officially recognize the anti-fascist militia and maintained a non-violent, legalist strategy, while the Communist Party of Italy (PCd'I) ordered its members to quit the organization. The PCd'I organized some militant groups, but their actions were relatively minor.

[ 34 ] The Italian anarchist Severino Di Giovanni , who exiled himself to Argentina following the 1922 March on Rome , organized several bombings against the Italian fascist community.

[ 35 ] The Italian liberal anti-fascist Benedetto Croce wrote his Manifesto of the Anti-Fascist Intellectuals , which was published in 1925.

[ 36 ] Other notable Italian liberal anti-fascists around that time were Piero Gobetti and Carlo Rosselli .

[ 37 ] 1931 badge of a member of Concentrazione Antifascista Italiana Concentrazione Antifascista Italiana (English: Italian Anti-Fascist Concentration ), officially known as Concentrazione d'Azione Antifascista (Anti-Fascist Action Concentration), was an Italian coalition of Anti-Fascist groups which existed from 1927 to 1934. Founded in Nérac , France, by expatriate Italians, the CAI was an alliance of non-communist anti-fascist forces (republican, socialist, nationalist) trying to promote and to coordinate expatriate actions to fight fascism in Italy; they published a propaganda paper entitled La Libertà .

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] [ 40 ] Flag of Giustizia e Libertà , anti-fascist movement active from 1929 to 1945 Giustizia e Libertà (English: Justice and Freedom ) was an Italian anti-fascist resistance movement , active from 1929 to 1945.

[ 41 ] The movement was cofounded by Carlo Rosselli , [ 41 ] Ferruccio Parri , who later became Prime Minister of Italy , and Sandro Pertini , who became President of Italy , were among the movement's leaders.

[ 42 ] The movement's members held various political beliefs but shared a belief in active, effective opposition to fascism, compared to the older Italian anti-fascist parties.

Giustizia e Libertà also made the international community aware of the realities of fascism in Italy, thanks to the work of Gaetano Salvemini .

Many Italian anti-fascists participated in the Spanish Civil War with the hope of setting an example of armed resistance to Franco 's dictatorship against Mussolini's regime; hence their motto: "Today in Spain, tomorrow in Italy".

[ 43 ] Between 1920 and 1943, several anti-fascist movements were active among the Slovenes and Croats in the territories annexed to Italy after World War I , known as the Julian March .

[ 44 ] [ 45 ] The most influential was the militant insurgent organization TIGR , which carried out numerous sabotages, as well as attacks on representatives of the Fascist Party and the military.

[ 46 ] [ 47 ] Most of the underground structure of the organization was discovered and dismantled by the Organization for Vigilance and Repression of Anti-Fascism (OVRA) in 1940 and 1941, [ 48 ] and after June 1941 most of its former activists joined the Slovene Partisans .

During World War II, many members of the Italian resistance left their homes and went to live in the mountains, fighting against Italian fascists and German Nazi soldiers during the Italian Civil War . Many cities in Italy, including Turin , Naples and Milan , were freed by anti-fascist uprisings.

[ 49 ] Slovenians and Croats under Italianization [ edit ] See also: Liberation Front of the Slovenian People and TIGR Lojze Bratuž , a Slovenian choirmaster and composer who was martyerd by fascists for singing Christmas songs in Slovenian at mass with his choir.

The anti-fascist resistance emerged within the Slovene minority in Italy (1920–1947) , whom the Fascists meant to deprive of their culture, language and ethnicity.

[ citation needed ] The 1920 burning of the National Hall in Trieste , the Slovene center in the multi-cultural and multi-ethnic Trieste by the Blackshirts, [ 50 ] was praised by Benito Mussolini (yet to become Il Duce) as a "masterpiece of the Triestine fascism" ( capolavoro del fascismo triestino ).

[ 51 ] The use of Slovene in public places, including churches, was forbidden, not only in multi-ethnic areas, but also in the areas where the population was exclusively Slovene.

[ 52 ] Children, if they spoke Slovene, were punished by Italian teachers who were brought by the Fascist State from Southern Italy . Slovene teachers, writers, and clergy were sent to the other side of Italy.

The first anti-fascist organization, called TIGR , was formed by Slovenes and Croats in 1927 in order to fight Fascist violence. Its guerrilla fight continued into the late 1920s and 1930s.

[ 53 ] By the mid-1930s, 70,000 Slovenes had fled Italy, mostly to Slovenia (then part of Yugoslavia) and South America .

[ 54 ] The Slovene anti-fascist resistance in Yugoslavia during World War II was led by Liberation Front of the Slovenian People . The Province of Ljubljana , occupied by Italian Fascists, saw the deportation of 25,000 people, representing 7.5% of the total population, filling up the Rab concentration camp and Gonars concentration camp as well as other Italian concentration camps .

Germany: against the NSDAP and Hitlerism [ edit ] See also: German resistance to Nazism 1928 Roter Frontkämpferbund rally in Berlin. Organized by the Communist Party of Germany , the RFB had at its height over 100,000 members.

Iron Front Three Arrows through the NSDAP Swastika The specific term anti-fascism was primarily used [ citation needed ] by the Communist Party of Germany (KPD), which held the view that it was the only anti-fascist party in Germany. The KPD formed several explicitly anti-fascist groups such as Roter Frontkämpferbund (formed in 1924 and banned by the Social Democrats in 1929) and Kampfbund gegen den Faschismus (a de facto successor to the latter).

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] [ need quotation to verify ] [ 57 ] [ need quotation to verify ] At its height, Roter Frontkämpferbund had over 100,000 members. In 1932, the KPD established the Antifaschistische Aktion as a "red united front under the leadership of the only anti-fascist party, the KPD".

[ 58 ] Under the leadership of the committed Stalinist Ernst Thälmann , the KPD primarily viewed fascism as the final stage of capitalism rather than as a specific movement or group, and therefore applied the term broadly to its opponents, and in the name of anti-fascism the KPD focused in large part on attacking its main adversary, the centre-left Social Democratic Party of Germany , whom they referred to as social fascists and regarded as the "main pillar of the dictatorship of Capital." [ 59 ] The movement of Nazism , which grew ever more influential in the last years of the Weimar Republic , was opposed for different ideological reasons by a wide variety of groups, including groups which also opposed each other, such as social democrats, centrists, conservatives and communists. The SPD and centrists formed Reichsbanner Schwarz-Rot-Gold in 1924 to defend liberal democracy against both the Nazi Party and the KPD, and their affiliated organizations. Later, mainly SPD members formed the Iron Front which opposed the same groups.

[ 60 ] The name and logo of Antifaschistische Aktion remain influential. Its two-flag logo, designed by Max Gebhard [ de ] and Max Keilson [ de ] , is still widely used as a symbol of militant anti-fascists in Germany and globally, [ 61 ] as is the Iron Front's Three Arrows logo.

[ 62 ] Spain: Civil War against the Nationalists [ edit ] Main article: Spanish Civil War Anarchists in Barcelona . The civil war was fought between the anarchist territories and stateless lands that achieved workers' self-management , and capitalist areas of Spain controlled by the autocratic Nationalist faction .

The historian Eric Hobsbawm wrote: "The Spanish civil war was both at the centre and on the margin of the era of anti-fascism. It was central, since it was immediately seen as a European war between fascism and anti-fascism, almost as the first battle in the coming world war, some of the characteristic aspects of which – for example, air raids against civilian populations – it anticipated." [ 63 ] In Spain, there were histories of popular uprisings in the late 19th century through to the 1930s against the deep-seated military dictatorships.

[ 64 ] of General Prim and Primo de Rivera [ 65 ] These movements further coalesced into large-scale anti-fascist movements in the 1930s, many in the Basque Country, before and during the Spanish Civil War . The republican government and army, the Antifascist Worker and Peasant Militias (MAOC) linked to the Communist Party (PCE), [ 66 ] the International Brigades , the Workers' Party of Marxist Unification (POUM), Spanish anarchist militias , such as the Iron Column and the autonomous governments of Catalonia and the Basque Country , fought the rise of Francisco Franco with military force.

Woman with a rifle, soldier of Mujeres Libres , Confederal militias Barcelona, 1936 Spanish Civil War The Friends of Durruti , associated with the Federación Anarquista Ibérica (FAI), were a particularly militant group. Thousands of people from many countries went to Spain in support of the anti-fascist cause, joining units such as the Abraham Lincoln Brigade , the British Battalion , the Dabrowski Battalion , the Mackenzie-Papineau Battalion , the Naftali Botwin Company and the Thälmann Battalion , including Winston Churchill 's nephew, Esmond Romilly .

[ 67 ] Notable anti-fascists who worked internationally against Franco included: George Orwell (who fought in the POUM militia and wrote Homage to Catalonia about his experience), Ernest Hemingway (a supporter of the International Brigades who wrote For Whom the Bell Tolls about his experience), and the radical journalist Martha Gellhorn .

The Spanish anarchist guerrilla Francesc Sabaté Llopart fought against Franco's regime until the 1960s, from a base in France. The Spanish Maquis , linked to the PCE, also fought the Franco regime long after the Spanish Civil war had ended.

[ 68 ] France: against Action Française and Vichy [ edit ] See also: French Resistance 1934 demonstration in Paris, with a sign reading "Down with fascism" Maquis members in 1944 In the 1920s and 1930s in the French Third Republic , anti-fascists confronted aggressive far-right groups such as the Action Française movement in France, which dominated the Latin Quarter students' neighborhood.

[ citation needed ] After fascism triumphed via invasion, the French Resistance ( French : La Résistance française ) or, more accurately, resistance movements fought against the Nazi German occupation and against the collaborationist Vichy régime . Resistance cells were small groups of armed men and women (called the maquis in rural areas), who, in addition to their guerrilla warfare activities, were also publishers of underground newspapers and magazines such as Arbeiter und Soldat ( Worker and Soldier ) during World War Two, providers of first-hand intelligence information, and maintainers of escape networks.

[ citation needed ] United Kingdom: against Mosley's BUF [ edit ] The rise of Oswald Mosley 's British Union of Fascists (BUF) in the 1930s was challenged by the Communist Party of Great Britain , socialists in the Labour Party and Independent Labour Party , anarchists , Irish Catholic dockmen and working class Jews in London's East End . A high point in the struggle was the Battle of Cable Street , when thousands of local residents and others turned out to stop the BUF from marching. Initially, the national Communist Party leadership wanted a mass demonstration at Hyde Park in solidarity with Republican Spain , instead of a mobilization against the BUF, but local party activists argued against this. Activists rallied support with the slogan They shall not pass , adopted from Republican Spain.

There were debates within the anti-fascist movement over tactics. While many East End ex-servicemen participated in violence against fascists, [ 69 ] Communist Party leader Phil Piratin denounced these tactics and instead called for large demonstrations.

[ 70 ] In addition to the militant anti-fascist movement, there was a smaller current of liberal anti-fascism in Britain; Sir Ernest Barker , for example, was a notable English liberal anti-fascist in the 1930s.

[ 71 ] United States, World War II [ edit ] "Anti-fascism in the United States" redirects here. For the contemporary anti-fascist movement, see Antifa (United States) .

American singer-songwriter and anti-fascist Woody Guthrie and his guitar labelled " This machine kills fascists " Anti-fascist Italian expatriates in the United States founded the Mazzini Society in Northampton, Massachusetts in September 1939 to work toward ending Fascist rule in Italy. As political refugees from Mussolini's regime, they disagreed among themselves whether to ally with Communists and anarchists or to exclude them. The Mazzini Society joined with other anti-Fascist Italian expatriates in the Americas at a conference in Montevideo , Uruguay in 1942. They unsuccessfully promoted one of their members, Carlo Sforza , to become the post-Fascist leader of a republican Italy. The Mazzini Society dispersed after the overthrow of Mussolini as most of its members returned to Italy.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] During the Second Red Scare which occurred in the United States in the years that immediately followed the end of World War II, the term "premature anti-fascist" came into currency and it was used to describe Americans who had strongly agitated or worked against fascism, such as Americans who had fought for the Republicans during the Spanish Civil War , before fascism was seen as a proximate and existential threat to the United States (which only occurred generally after the invasion of Poland by Nazi Germany and only occurred universally after the attack on Pearl Harbor ). The implication was that such persons were either Communists or Communist sympathizers whose loyalty to the United States was suspect.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] [ 76 ] However, the historians John Earl Haynes and Harvey Klehr have written that no documentary evidence has been found of the US government referring to American members of the International Brigades as "premature antifascists": the Federal Bureau of Investigation , Office of Strategic Services , and United States Army records used terms such as "Communist", "Red", "subversive", and "radical" instead. Indeed, Haynes and Klehr indicate that they have found many examples of members of the XV International Brigade and their supporters referring to themselves sardonically as "premature antifascists".

[ 77 ] Burma, World War II [ edit ] Main article: Anti-Fascist Organisation The Anti-Fascist Organisation (AFO) was a resistance movement which advocated the independence of Burma and fought against the Japanese occupation of Burma during World War II. It was the forerunner of the Anti-Fascist People's Freedom League . The AFO was formed during a meeting which was held in Pegu in August 1944, the meeting was held by the leaders of the Communist Party of Burma (CPB), the Burma National Army (BNA) led by General Aung San , and the People's Revolutionary Party (PRP), later renamed the Burma Socialist Party .

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] Whilst in Insein prison in July 1941, CPB leaders Thakin Than Tun and Thakin Soe had co-authored the Insein Manifesto , which, against the prevailing opinion in the Burmese nationalist movement led by the Dobama Asiayone , identified world fascism as the main enemy in the coming war and called for temporary cooperation with the British in a broad allied coalition that included the Soviet Union . Soe had already gone underground to organise resistance against the Japanese occupation, and Than Tun as Minister of Land and Agriculture was able to pass on Japanese intelligence to Soe, while other Communist leaders Thakin Thein Pe and Thakin Tin Shwe made contact with the exiled colonial government in Simla , India . Aung San was War Minister in the puppet administration which was set up on 1 August 1943 and included the Socialist leaders Thakin Nu and Thakin Mya .

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] During a meeting which was held between 1 and 3 March 1945, the AFO was reorganized as a multi-party front which was named the Anti-Fascist People's Freedom League .

[ 80 ] Poland, World War II [ edit ] Main articles: Anti-Fascist Bloc , Anti-Fascist Military Organisation , and Lviv Anti-Fascist Congress of Cultural Workers Proclamation of the Anti-Fascist Bloc , 15 May 1942 The Anti-Fascist Bloc was an organization of Polish Jews formed in the March 1942 in the Warsaw Ghetto . It was created after an alliance between leftist-Zionist , communist and socialist Jewish parties was agreed upon. The initiators of the bloc were Mordechai Anielewicz , Józef Lewartowski (Aron Finkelstein) from the Polish Workers' Party , Josef Kaplan from Hashomer Hatzair , Szachno Sagan from Poale Zion -Left, Jozef Sak as a representative of socialist-Zionists and Izaak Cukierman with his wife Cywia Lubetkin from Dror . The Jewish Bund did not join the bloc though they were represented at its first conference by Abraham Blum and Maurycy Orzech .

[ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] After World War II [ edit ] Main article: Post–World War II anti-fascism Anti-fascist graffiti in San Sebastián , Spain Antifascist sticker in Warsaw , Poland .

The anti-fascist movements which emerged during the period of classical fascism, both liberal and militant, continued to operate after the defeat of the Axis powers in response to the resilience and mutation of fascism both in Europe and elsewhere. In Germany, as Nazi rule crumbled in 1944, veterans of the 1930s anti-fascist struggles formed Antifaschistische Ausschüsse , Antifaschistische Kommittees , or Antifaschistische Aktion groups, all typically abbreviated to "antifa".

[ 85 ] The socialist government of East Germany built the Berlin Wall in 1961, and the Eastern Bloc referred to it officially as the "Anti-fascist Protection Rampart".  Resistance to fascists dictatorships in Spain and Portugal continued, including the activities of the Spanish Maquis and others, leading up to the Spanish transition to democracy and the Carnation Revolution , respectively, as well as to similar dictatorships in Chile and elsewhere. Other notable anti-fascist mobilisations in the first decades of the post-war period include the 43 Group in Britain.

[ 86 ] Liberation of Italy parade in Turin on 6 May 1945.

The war ends in Italy on 2 May 1945, with the complete surrender of German and RSI forces to the Allied forces , as formally established during the so-called Surrender at Caserta on 29 April 1945, marks the definitive defeat of Nazism and Fascism in Italy. By 1 May, all of northern Italy was liberated from occupation, including Bologna (21 April), Genoa (23 April), Milan (25 April), Turin [ 87 ] and Venice (28 April). The liberation put an end to two  and a half years of German occupation, five years of war, and twenty-three years of fascist dictatorship. The aftermath of World War II left Italy bitter toward the monarchy for endorsing the Fascist regime for over 20-plus years. These frustrations contributed to a revival of the Italian republican movement.

[ 88 ] The liberation symbolically represents the beginning of the historical journey which led to the referendum of 2 June 1946 , when Italians opted for the end of the monarchy and the creation of the Italian Republic. This was followed by the adoption of the 1948 Constitution of the Republic , [ 89 ] created by the Constituent Assembly and representatives from the anti-fascist forces that defeated the Nazis and the Fascists during the liberation of Italy and the Italian civil war .

[ 90 ] With the start of the Cold War between the former World War II allies of the United States and the Soviet Union, the concept of totalitarianism became prominent in Western anti-communist political discourse as a tool to convert pre-war anti-fascism into post-war anti-communism.

[ 91 ] [ 92 ] [ 93 ] [ 94 ] [ 95 ] Modern antifa politics can be traced to opposition to the infiltration of Britain's punk scene by white power skinheads in the 1970s and 1980s, and the emergence of neo-Nazism in Germany following the fall of the Berlin Wall . In Germany, young leftists, including anarchists and punk fans, renewed the practice of street-level anti-fascism. Columnist Peter Beinart writes that "in the late '80s, left-wing punk fans in the United States began following suit, though they initially called their groups Anti-Racist Action (ARA) on the theory that Americans would be more familiar with fighting racism than they would be with fighting fascism".

[ 96 ] Italy [ edit ] Anti-fascist demonstration at Porta San Paolo in Rome , Italy , on the occasion of the Liberation Day on 25 April 2013 Today's Italian constitution is the result of the work of the Constituent Assembly , which was formed by the representatives of all the anti-fascist forces that contributed to the defeat of Nazi and Fascist forces during the liberation of Italy .

[ 97 ] Liberation Day is a national holiday in Italy that commemorates the victory of the Italian resistance movement against Nazi Germany and the Italian Social Republic , puppet state of the Nazis and rump state of the fascists, in the Italian Civil War, a civil war in Italy fought during World War II, which takes place on 25 April. The date was chosen by convention, as it was the day of the year 1945 when the National Liberation Committee of Upper Italy (CLNAI) officially proclaimed the insurgency in a radio announcement, propounding the seizure of power by the CLNAI and proclaiming the death sentence for all fascist leaders (including Benito Mussolini , who was shot three days later).

[ 98 ] ANPI logo Associazione Nazionale Partigiani d'Italia (ANPI; "National Association of Italian Partisans ") is an association founded by participants of the Italian resistance against the Italian Fascist regime and the subsequent Nazi occupation during World War II. ANPI was founded in Rome in 1944 [ 99 ] while the war continued in northern Italy . It was constituted as a charitable foundation on 5 April 1945. It persists due to the activity of its antifascist members. ANPI's objectives are the maintenance of the historical role of the partisan war by means of research and the collection of personal stories. Its goals are a continued defense against historical revisionism and the ideal and ethical support of the high values of freedom and democracy expressed in the 1948 constitution , in which the ideals of the Italian resistance were collected.

[ 100 ] Since 2008, every two years ANPI organizes its national festival. During the event, meetings, debates, and musical concerts that focus on antifascism, peace, and democracy are organized.

[ 101 ] Bella ciao (instrumental only version performed by the Band of the Guard of the Serbian Armed Forces ) Bella ciao ( Italian pronunciation: [ˈbɛlla ˈtʃaːo] ; "Goodbye beautiful") is an Italian folk song modified and adopted as an anthem of the Italian resistance movement by the partisans who opposed nazism and fascism, and fought against the occupying forces of Nazi Germany, who were allied with the fascist and collaborationist Italian Social Republic between 1943 and 1945 during the Italian Civil War . Versions of this Italian anti-fascist song continue to be sung worldwide as a hymn of freedom and resistance.

[ 102 ] As an internationally known hymn of freedom, it was intoned at many historic and revolutionary events. The song originally aligned itself with Italian partisans fighting against Nazi German occupation troops, but has since become to merely stand for the inherent rights of all people to be liberated from tyranny.

[ 103 ] [ 104 ] Germany [ edit ] Main article: Antifa (Germany) Logo of Antifaschistische Aktion , the militant anti-fascist network in 1930s Germany that inspired the antifa movement The logo as it appears on a flag held by an antifa protester in Cologne , 2008 The contemporary antifa movement in Germany comprises different anti-fascist groups which usually use the abbreviation antifa and regard the historical Antifaschistische Aktion (Antifa) of the early 1930s as an inspiration, drawing on the historic group for its aesthetics and some of its tactics, in addition to the name.  Many new antifa groups formed from the late 1980s onward. According to Loren Balhorn, contemporary antifa in Germany "has no practical historical connection to the movement from which it takes its name but is instead a product of West Germany's squatter scene and autonomist movement in the 1980s".

[ 105 ] One of the biggest antifascist campaigns in Germany in recent years was the ultimately successful effort to block the annual Nazi-rallies in the east German city of Dresden in Saxony which had grown into "Europe's biggest gathering of Nazis".

[ 106 ] Unlike the original Antifa which had links to the Communist Party of Germany and which was concerned with industrial working-class politics, the late 1980s and early 1990s, autonomists were independent anti-authoritarian libertarian Marxists and anarcho-communists not associated with any particular party. The publication Antifaschistisches Infoblatt , in operation since 1987, sought to expose radical nationalists publicly.

[ 107 ] German government institutions such as the Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution and the Federal Agency for Civic Education describe the contemporary antifa movement as part of the extreme left and as partially violent. Antifa groups are monitored by the federal office in the context of its legal mandate to combat extremism .

[ 108 ] [ 109 ] [ 110 ] [ 111 ] The federal office states that the underlying goal of the antifa movement is "the struggle against the liberal democratic basic order " and capitalism.

[ 109 ] [ 110 ] In the 1980s, the movement was accused by German authorities of engaging in terrorist acts of violence.

[ 112 ] Greece [ edit ] In Greece, anti-fascism is a popular part of leftist and anarchist culture, September 2013 anti-fascist hip-hop artist Pavlos 'Killah P' Fyssas was accosted and attacked with bats and knives by a large group of Golden Dawn affiliated people leaving Pavlos to be pronounced dead at the hospital. The attack lead international protests and riots, the retaliatory shooting of three Golden Dawn members outside of their Neo Irakleio as well as condemnations against the party by politicians and other public figures, including Prime Minister Antonis Samaras .

[ citation needed ] This episode led to Golden Dawn to being criminally investigated, with the result in sixty-eight members of Golden Dawn being declared part of a criminal organization whilst fifteen out of the seventeen members accused in Pavlos's murder were convicted, [ 113 ] "effectively banning" the party.

[ 114 ] United States [ edit ] Main article: Antifa (United States) Dartmouth College historian Mark Bray, author of Antifa: The Anti-Fascist Handbook , credits the ARA as the precursor of modern antifa groups in the United States. In the late 1980s and 1990s, ARA activists toured with popular punk rock and skinhead bands in order to prevent Klansmen , neo-Nazis and other assorted white supremacists from recruiting.

[ 115 ] [ 116 ] Their motto was "We go where they go" by which they meant that they would confront far-right activists in concerts and actively remove their materials from public places.

[ 117 ] In 2002, the ARA disrupted a speech in Pennsylvania by Matthew F. Hale , the head of the white supremacist group World Church of the Creator , resulting in a fight and twenty-five arrests. In 2007, Rose City Antifa , likely the first group to utilize the name antifa, was formed in Portland, Oregon .

[ 118 ] [ 119 ] [ 120 ] Other antifa groups in the United States have other genealogies. In 1987 in Boise, Idaho , the Northwest Coalition Against Malicious Harassment (NWCAMH) was created in response to the Aryan Nation's annual meeting near Hayden Lake, Idaho . The NWCAMH brought together over 200 affiliated public and private organizations, and helped people, across six states—Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Oregon, Washington and Wyoming.

[ 121 ] In Minneapolis, Minnesota , a group called the Baldies was formed in 1987 with the intent to fight neo-Nazi groups directly. In 2013, the "most radical" chapters of the ARA formed the Torch Antifa Network [ 122 ] which has chapters throughout the United States.

[ 123 ] Other antifa groups are a part of different associations such as NYC Antifa or operate independently.

[ 124 ] Modern antifa in the United States is a highly decentralized movement. Antifa political activists are anti-racists who engage in protest tactics, seeking to combat fascists and racists such as neo-Nazis, white supremacists , and other far-right extremists .

[ 125 ] This may involve digital activism , harassment , physical violence , and property damage [ 126 ] against those whom they identify as belonging to the far-right.

[ 127 ] [ 128 ] According to antifa historian Mark Bray, most antifa activity is nonviolent, involving poster and flyer campaigns, delivering speeches, marching in protest, and community organizing on behalf of anti-racist and anti- white nationalist causes.

[ 129 ] [ 119 ] A June 2020 study  by the Center for Strategic and International Studies of 893 terrorism incidents in the United States since 1994 found one attack staged by an anti-fascist that led to a fatality (the 2019 Tacoma attack , in which the attacker, who identified as an anti-fascist, was killed by police), while attacks by white supremacists or other right-wing extremists resulted in 329 deaths.

[ 130 ] [ 131 ] [ 132 ] Since the study was published, one homicide has been connected to anti-fascism.

[ 130 ] A DHS draft report from August 2020 similarly did not include "antifa" as a considerable threat, while noting white supremacists as the top domestic terror threat.

[ 133 ] There have been multiple efforts to discredit antifa groups via hoaxes on social media, many of them false flag attacks originating from alt-right and 4chan users posing as antifa backers on Twitter .

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] Some hoaxes have been picked up and reported as fact by right-leaning media.

[ 136 ] [ 137 ] During the George Floyd protests in May and June 2020, the Trump administration blamed antifa for orchestrating the mass protests. Analysis of federal arrests did not find links to antifa.

[ 138 ] There had been repeated calls by the Trump administration to designate antifa as a terrorist organization, [ 139 ] a move that academics, legal experts and others argued would both exceed the authority of the presidency and violate the First Amendment .

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] [ 142 ] Elsewhere [ edit ] Some post-war anti-fascist action took place in Romania under the Anti-Fascist Committee of German Workers in Romania , founded in March 1949.

[ 143 ] A Swedish group, Antifascistisk Aktion , was formed in 1993.

[ 144 ] Use of the term [ edit ] See also: Fascist (insult) , Nazi analogies , Red fascism , Reductio ad Hitlerum , and Social fascism The Christian Democratic Union of Germany politician Tim Peters notes that the term is one of the most controversial terms in political discourse .

[ 145 ] Michael Richter , a researcher at the Hannah Arendt Institute for Research on Totalitarianism , highlights the ideological use of the term in the Soviet Union and the Eastern bloc, in which the term fascism was applied to Eastern bloc dissidents regardless of any connection to historical fascism, and where the term anti-fascism served to legitimize the ruling government.

[ 146 ] See also [ edit ] All-Slavic Anti-Fascist Committee Anti anti-communism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti- Chinilpa ( Korea ) Anti-fascist Assembly for the National Liberation of Macedonia Anti-fascist Assembly for the National Liberation of Serbia Anti-Fascist Committee of Cham Immigrants Anti-Fascist Council for the National Liberation of Yugoslavia Anti-fascist works Antifascist Front of Slavs in Hungary Anti-Germans (political current) Anti-racism Anti-Stalinist left Denazification Jewish Anti-Fascist Committee Laws against Holocaust denial Resistance during World War II Redskin (subculture) Slovak National Uprising Squadism Notes [ edit ] ^ Beinart, Peter (6 August 2017).

"The Rise of the Violent Left" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 21 October 2020 .

^ Beauchamp, Zack (8 June 2020).

"Antifa, explained" .

Vox . Retrieved 21 October 2020 .

^ Pearson, Patricia O'Connell; Holdren, John (May 2021).

World History: Our Human Story . Versailles, Kentucky: Sheridan Kentucky. p. 152.

ISBN 978-1-60153-123-0 .

^ Brennan 2022 , pp. 2, 12.

^ Brennan 2022 , p. 1.

^ Brennan 2022 , p. 2.

^ Brennan 2022 , p. 3.

^ a b Brennan 2022 , p. 4.

^ Brennan 2022 , p. 4. "It must be stressed that, in historical terms, there is no close connection between the Roman fasces and the Aesop fable... other than the attractive coincidence that each involves a bundle of sticks".

^ Gli Arditi del Popolo (Birth) Archived 7 August 2008 at the Wayback Machine (in Italian) ^ Hobsbawm, Eric (1992).

The Age of Extremes . Vintage. pp.

136 –37.

ISBN 978-0394585758 .

^ Lawson, Tom (2010).

Varieties of Anti-Fascism: Britain in the Inter-War Period . Palgrave Macmillan UK. pp.

119– 139.

ISBN 978-1-349-28231-9 .

^ LaCoss, D.W. (2001).

The Revolutionary Politics of Surrealism in Paris, 1934-9 . University of Michigan . Retrieved 17 March 2023 .

^ a b Seidman, Michael. Transatlantic Antifascisms: From the Spanish Civil War to the End of World War II. Cambridge University Press, 2017, pp.1–8 ^ Conway III, Lucian Gideon; Zubrod, Alivia; Chan, Linus; McFarland, James D.; Van de Vliert, Evert (8 February 2023).

"Is the myth of left-wing authoritarianism itself a myth?" .

Frontiers in Psychology .

13 .

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1041391 .

ISSN 1664-1078 .

PMC 9944136 .

PMID 36846476 .

^ Seidman, Michael.

Transatlantic Antifascisms: From the Spanish Civil War to the End of World War II . Cambridge University Press, 2017, p. 252 [ ISBN missing ] ^ García, Hugo (November 2016).

"Transnational History: A New Paradigm for Anti-Fascist Studies?" .

Contemporary European History .

25 (4): 567.

doi : 10.1017/S0960777316000382 .

ISSN 0960-7773 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Seidman, Michael (20 December 2020).

"The Rise of Counterrevolutionary Anti-Fascism in the United States from the Munich Conference to the Fall of France" .

Dictatorships & Democracies : 37– 68.

doi : 10.7238/dd.v0i7.3163 .

^ a b c Seidman, Michael (2017).

Transatlantic Antifascisms: From the Spanish Civil War to the End of World War II . Cambridge University Press. pp.

1– 8.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9781108278386 .

ISBN 978-1-108-27838-6 .

^ a b c d e f g Copsey, Nigel; Olechnowicz, Andrzej (2010).

Varieties of anti-fascism: Britain in the inter-war period . Basingstoke, England: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 9780230282674 .

^ a b c d e f g h Rosenblum, Noah (2020).

"The Antifascist Roots of Presidential Administration" .

SSRN Electronic Journal . Columbia Law Review.

doi : 10.2139/ssrn.3635821 .

SSRN 3635821 .

^ a b c d e f Seidman, Michael (2017).

Transatlantic Antifascisms: From the Spanish Civil War to the End of World War II . Cambridge University Press. pp.

84– 98.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9781108278386 .

ISBN 978-1-108-27838-6 .

^ a b c d e Seidman, Michael (2017).

Transatlantic Antifascisms: From the Spanish Civil War to the End of World War II . Cambridge University Press. pp.

98– 104.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9781108278386 .

ISBN 978-1-108-27838-6 .

^ a b c d e f Seidman, Michael (2017).

Transatlantic Antifascisms: From the Spanish Civil War to the End of World War II . Cambridge University Press. pp.

130– 153.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9781108278386 .

ISBN 978-1-108-27838-6 .

^ Doherty, Thomas Patrick.

Pre-Code Hollywood: Sex, Immorality, and Insurrection in American Cinema 1930-1934 . New York: Columbia University Press 1999.

^ Greenhouse, Emily (May 21, 2013) "The First American Anti-Nazi Film, Rediscovered" The New Yorker . Accessed: March 5, 2015.

^ Cole, Ben (5 July 1953). "Jenner Bares Red Tricks in Schools".

The Indianapolis Star . p. 4.

^ Gabbatt, Adam (14 August 2017).

"How a 1947 US government anti-Nazi film went viral after Charlottesville" .

The Guardian . Retrieved 16 August 2017 .

^ Hawkins, Derek (14 August 2017).

"After Charlottesville violence, World War II anti-fascist propaganda video finds a new audience" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on 22 June 2018 . Retrieved 16 August 2017 .

^ Meyer, Robinson (13 August 2017).

"After Charlottesville, an Anti-Nazi Film Goes Viral" .

The Atlantic .

Archived from the original on 14 June 2018 . Retrieved 9 February 2024 .

^ "Working Class Defence Organization, Anti-Fascist Resistance and the Arditi Del Popolo in Turin, 1919–22" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 March 2022 . Retrieved 23 September 2021 .

^ Charles F. Delzell, edit., Mediterranean Fascism 1919–1945 , New York, NY, Walker and Company, 1971, p. 26 ^ "Working Class Defence Organization, Anti-Fascist Resistance and the Arditi Del Popolo in Turin, 1919–22" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 19 March 2022 . Retrieved 23 September 2021 .

^ Working Class Defence Organization, Anti-Fascist Resistance and the Arditi Del Popolo in Turin, 1919–22 Archived 19 March 2022 at the Wayback Machine , Antonio Sonnessa, in the European History Quarterly , Vol. 33, No. 2, 183–218 (2003) ^ "Anarchist Century" . Anarchist_century.tripod.com . Retrieved 7 April 2014 .

^ Bruscino, Felicia (25 November 2017).

"Il Popolo del 1925 col manifesto antifascista: ritrovata l'unica copia" .

Ultima Voce (in Italian) . Retrieved 23 March 2022 .

^ James Martin, 'Piero Gobetti's Agonistic Liberalism', History of European Ideas , 32 , (2006), pp. 205–222.

^ Pugliese, Stanislao G.; Pugliese, Stanislao (2004).

Fascism, Anti-fascism, and the Resistance in Italy: 1919 to the Present . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 10.

ISBN 978-0-7425-3123-9 . Retrieved 11 June 2020 .

^ Tollardo, Elisabetta (2016).

Fascist Italy and the League of Nations, 1922-1935 . Springer. p. 152.

ISBN 978-1-349-95028-7 .

^ Scala, Spencer M. Di (1988).

Renewing Italian Socialism: Nenni to Craxi . Oxford University Press. pp.

6– 8.

ISBN 978-0-19-536396-8 . Retrieved 11 June 2020 .

^ a b James D. Wilkinson (1981).

The Intellectual Resistance Movement in Europe . Harvard University Press. p. 224.

^ Stanislao G. Pugliese (1999).

Carlo Rosselli: socialist heretic and antifascist exile . Harvard University Press. p. 51.

^ " "Oggi in Spagna, domani in Italia" " (in Italian) . Retrieved 12 May 2023 .

^ Milica Kacin Wohinz , Jože Pirjevec , Storia degli sloveni in Italia : 1866–1998 (Venice: Marsilio, 1998) ^ Milica Kacin Wohinz, Narodnoobrambno gibanje primorskih Slovencev : 1921–1928 (Trieste: Založništvo tržaškega tiska, 1977) ^ Milica Kacin Wohinz , Prvi antifašizem v Evropi (Koper: Lipa, 1990) ^ Mira Cenčič, TIGR : Slovenci pod Italijo in TIGR na okopih v boju za narodni obstoj (Ljubljana: Mladinska knjiga, 1997) ^ Vid Vremec, Pinko Tomažič in drugi tržaški proces 1941 (Trieste: Založništvo tržaškega tiska, 1989) ^ "Intelligence and Operational Support for the Anti-Nazi Resistance" . Darbysrangers.tripod.com.

^ "90 let od požiga Narodnega doma v Trstu" [90 Years From the Arson of the National Hall in Trieste].

Primorski dnevnik [The Littoral Daily] (in Slovenian). 2010. pp.

14– 15.

COBISS 11683661 . Archived from the original on 14 October 2012 . Retrieved 28 February 2012 .

Požig Narodnega doma ali šentjernejska noč tržaških Slovencev in Slovanov [Arson of the National Hall or the St. Bartholomew's Night of the Triestine Slovenes and Slavs] ^ Sestani, Armando, ed. (10 February 2012).

"Il confine orientale: una terra, molti esodi" [The Eastern Border: One Land, Multiple Exoduses] (PDF) .

I profugi istriani, dalmati e fiumani a Lucca [ The Istrian, Dalmatian and Rijeka Refugees in Lucca ] (in Italian). Instituto storico della Resistenca e dell'Età Contemporanea in Provincia di Lucca. pp.

12– 13.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Hehn, Paul N. (2005).

A low dishonest decade: the great powers, Eastern Europe, and the economic origins of World War II, 1930–1941 . Continuum International Publishing Group. pp.

44– 45.

ISBN 978-0-8264-1761-9 .

^ Cresciani, Gianfranco (2004) Clash of civilisations Archived 6 May 2020 at the Wayback Machine , Italian Historical Society Journal, Vol. 12, No. 2, p. 4 ^ Jože Pirjevec, Milica Kacin-Wohinz: Zgodovina primorskih Slovencev (The history of the Slovenians living on the Coast), Nova revija, Ljubljana 2002 ^ Eve Rosenhaft, Beating the Fascists?: The German Communists and Political Violence 1929–1933 , Cambridge University Press, 25 Aug 1983, pp. 3–4 ^ Heinrich August Winkler: Der Weg in die Katastrophe. Arbeiter und Arbeiterbewegung in der Weimarer Republik 1930–1933 . Bonn 1990, ISBN 3-8012-0095-7 .

^ Hoppe, Bert (2011).

In Stalins Gefolgschaft: Moskau und die KPD 1928–1933 . Oldenbourg Verlag.

ISBN 9783486711738 .

^ Stephan, Pieroth (1994).

Parteien und Presse in Rheinland-Pfalz 1945–1971: ein Beitrag zur Mediengeschichte unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der Mainzer SPD-Zeitung 'Die Freiheit' . v. Hase & Koehler Verlag. p. 96.

ISBN 9783775813266 .

^ Braunthal, Julius (1963).

Geschichte der Internationale: 1914–1943 . Vol. 2, p. 414. Dietz.

^ Siegfried Lokatis: Der rote Faden. Kommunistische Parteigeschichte und Zensur unter Walter Ulbricht . Böhlau Verlag, Köln 2003, ISBN 3-412-04603-5 ( Zeithistorische Studien series, vol. 25), p. 60 ^ Loren Balhorn "The Lost History of Antifa" Archived 24 August 2017 at the Wayback Machine Jacobin May 2017 ^ Friedmann, Sarah (15 August 2017).

"This Is What The Antifa Flag Symbols Mean" .

Bustle . Retrieved 16 April 2019 .

^ Hobsbawm, Eric (17 February 2007).

"The Spanish civil war united a generation of young writers, poets and artists in political fervour, says Eric Hobsbawm" .

The Guardian .

ISSN 0261-3077 . Retrieved 5 June 2020 .

^ Stevens, David R. (2008).

Sin Perdón . AuthorHouse.

ISBN 978-1-4343-8094-4 .

^ The Literary Digest . Funk & Wagnalls. April 1929.

^ De Miguel, Jesús y Sánchez, Antonio: Batalla de Madrid, in his Historia Ilustrada de la Guerra Civil Española.

Alcobendas, Editorial Libsa, 2006, pp. 189–221.

^ Boadilla by Esmond Romilly .

The Clapton Press Limited, London. 2018.

ISBN 978-1999654306 ^ See Wolf Moon by Julio Llamazares , Peter Owen Publications, London 2017 ISBN 978-0720619454 [ page needed ] ^ Jacobs, Joe (1991) [1977].

Out of the Ghetto . London: Phoenix Press.

^ Phil Piratin Our Flag Stays Red . London: Lawrence & Wishart, 2006.

^ Andrzej Olechnowicz, 'Liberal anti-fascism in the 1930s the case of Sir Ernest Barker', Albion 36, 2005, pp. 636–660 ^ Tirabassi, Maddalena (1984–1985). "Enemy Aliens or Loyal Americans?: the Mazzini Society and the Italian-American Communities".

Rivista di Studi Anglo-Americani ( 4– 5): 399– 425.

^ Morrow, Felix (June 1943).

"Washington's Plans for Italy" .

Fourth International .

4 (6): 175– 179 . Retrieved 25 October 2018 .

^ Premature antifascists and the Post-war world Archived 31 December 2013 at the Wayback Machine , Abraham Lincoln Brigade Archives  Bill Susman Lecture Series. King Juan Carlos I of Spain Center at New York University , 1998. Retrieved 9 August 2009.

^ Knox, Bernard (Spring 1999). "Premature Anti-Fascist".

Antioch Review .

57 (2): 133– 149.

doi : 10.2307/4613837 .

JSTOR 4613837 .

^ John Nichols (26 October 2009).

"Clarence Kailin: 'Premature Antifascist' – and proudly so" .

Cap Times . Capital Times (Madision, Wisconsin) . Retrieved 29 December 2013 .

^ Haynes, John Earl ; Klehr, Harvey (2005).

In Denial: Historians, Communism & Espionage . San Francisco: Encounter Books. p. 123.

ISBN 978-1594030888 . Retrieved 22 March 2014 .

^ a b Oliver Hensengerth (2005).

The Burmese Communist Party and the State-to-State Relations between China and Burma (PDF) . Leeds East Asia Papers. pp.

10– 12. Archived from the original (PDF) on 28 May 2008 . Retrieved 23 September 2020 .

^ a b Martin Smith (1991).

Burma – Insurgency and the Politics of Ethnicity . London and New Jersey: Zed Books. pp.

60– 61.

^ Haruhiro Fukui (1985) Political parties of Asia and the Pacific , Greenwood Press, pp. 108–109 ^ Gutman, Yisrael (1989).

The Jews of Warsaw, 1939–1943: Ghetto, Underground, Revolt . Indiana University Press.

ISBN 978-0-253-20511-7 .

^ Kassow, Samuel D.

(2007).

Who Will Write Our History?: Emanuel Ringelblum, the Warsaw Ghetto, and the Oyneg Shabes Archive . Indiana University Press. p. 294.

ISBN 978-0-253-00003-3 .

^ Encyclopaedia Judaica . Vol. 16. Keter Publishing House. 1972. p. 349.

^ Zuckerman, Yitzhak (1993). Harshav, Barbara (ed.).

A Surplus of Memory: Chronicle of the Warsaw Ghetto Uprising . University of California Press. p. 183.

ISBN 978-0-520-91259-5 .

^ Balhorn, Loren (8 May 2017).

"The Lost History of Antifa" .

Jacobin .

^ Mark Bray (2017). "'Never Again': The Development of Modern Antifa, 1945–2003". In Antifa: The Anti-Fascist Handbook . Melville House Publishing. pp. 39–76.

^ "Torino 1938|45 - la citta' della liberazione (Solo testo)" .

^ "Italia", Dizionario enciclopedico italiano (in Italian), vol. VI, Treccani , 1970, p. 456 ^ Dieter Nohlen & Philip Stöver (2010) Elections in Europe: A data handbook , p. 1047 ISBN 978-3-8329-5609-7 ^ Smyth, Howard McGaw Italy: From Fascism to the Republic (1943–1946) The Western Political Quarterly vol. 1 no. 3 (pp. 205–222), September 1948.

JSTOR 442274 ^ Defty, Brook (2007).

Britain, America and Anti-Communist Propaganda 1945–1953 . Chapters 2–5. The Information Research Department.

^ Siegel, Achim (1998).

The Totalitarian Paradigm after the End of Communism: Towards a Theoretical Reassessment . Rodopi. p. 200.

ISBN 9789042005525 . "Concepts of totalitarianism became most widespread at the height of the Cold War. Since the late 1940s, especially since the Korean War, they were condensed into a far-reaching, even hegemonic, ideology, by which the political elites of the Western world tried to explain and even to justify the Cold War constellation." [ page needed ] ^ Guilhot, Nicholas (2005).

The Democracy Makers: Human Rights and International Order . Columbia University Press. p. 33.

ISBN 9780231131247 . "The opposition between the West and Soviet totalitarianism was often presented as an opposition both moral and epistemological between truth and falsehood. The democratic, social, and economic credentials of the Soviet Union were typically seen as 'lies' and as the product of a deliberate and multiform propaganda. [...] In this context, the concept of totalitarianism was itself an asset. As it made possible the conversion of prewar anti-fascism into postwar anti-communism." ^ Caute, David (2010).

Politics and the Novel during the Cold War . Transaction Publishers. pp.

95– 99.

ISBN 9781412831369 .

^ Reisch, George A. (2005).

How the Cold War Transformed Philosophy of Science: To the Icy Slopes of Logic . Cambridge University Press. pp. 153–154.

ISBN 9780521546898 .

^ Beinart, Peter (16 August 2017).

"What Trump Gets Wrong About Antifa" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 16 August 2017 .

^ McGaw Smyth, Howard (September 1948). "Italy: From Fascism to the Republic (1943–1946)".

The Western Political Quarterly .

1 (3): 205– 222.

doi : 10.2307/442274 .

JSTOR 442274 .

^ "Fondazione ISEC – cronologia dell'insurrezione a Milano – 25 aprile" (in Italian) . Retrieved 28 September 2019 .

^ "Chi Siamo" .

Website . ANPI.it. Archived from the original on 2 May 2011 . Retrieved 14 April 2011 .

^ "RISCOPRIRE I VALORI DELLA RESISTENZA NELLA COSTITUZIONE" (in Italian) . Retrieved 22 October 2022 .

^ "Festa dell'anpi" . anpi.it. Archived from the original on 24 May 2010 . Retrieved 22 October 2022 .

^ "Bella ciao, significato e testo: perché la canzone della Resistenza non appartiene (solo) ai comunisti" (in Italian). 13 September 2022 . Retrieved 21 October 2022 .

^ "ATENE – Comizio di chiusura di Alexis Tsipras" . Archived from the original on 20 April 2020 . Retrieved 23 January 2015 .

^ "Non solo Tsipras: "Bella ciao" cantata in tutte le lingue del mondo Guarda il video – Corriere TV" [Not only Tsipras: "Bella ciao" sung in all languages of the world Watch the video – Corriere TV].

video.corriere.it (in Italian).

^ "The Lost History of Antifa" .

Jacobin Mag . 15 August 2017 . Retrieved 5 December 2014 .

^ Focus-Online.

"Demo-Samstag in Dresden: Nazi-Aufmärsche und Linke treffen aufeinander" . Focus-Online.

^ Bray, Mark (2017).

Antifa: The Antifascist Handbook . Melville House Publishing. p. 54.

ISBN 9781612197043 .

^ Pfahl-Traughber, Armin (6 March 2008).

"Antifaschismus als Thema linksextremistischer Agitation, Bündnispolitik und Ideologie" [Anti-fascism as a topic of far-left extremist agitation, political alliances and ideology].

Federal Agency for Civic Education .

^ a b "Aktionsfeld 'Antifaschismus' " [The field of "anti-fascism"].

Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution . Archived from the original on 15 May 2020 . Retrieved 29 July 2019 .

Das Aktionsfeld "Antifaschismus" ist seit Jahren ein zentrales Element der politischen Arbeit von Linksextremisten, insbesondere aus dem gewaltorientierten Spektrum. [...] Die Aktivitäten von Linksextremisten in diesem Aktionsfeld zielen aber nur vordergründig auf die Bekämpfung rechtsextremistischer Bestrebungen. Im eigentlichen Fokus steht der Kampf gegen die freiheitliche demokratische Grundordnung, die als "kapitalistisches System" diffamiert wird, und deren angeblich immanente "faschistische" Wurzeln beseitigt werden sollen.

^ a b Linksextremismus: Erscheinungsformen und Gefährdungspotenziale [ Far-left extremism: Manifestations and danger potential ] (PDF) .

Federal Office for the Protection of the Constitution . 2016. pp.

33– 35. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 June 2020.

Die Aktivitäten "antifaschistischer" Linksextremisten (Antifa) dienen indes nur vordergründig der Bekämpfung rechtsextremistischer Bestrebungen. Eigentliches Ziel bleibt der "bürgerlich-demokratische Staat", der in der Lesart von Linksextremisten den "Faschismus" als eine mögliche Herrschaftsform akzeptiert, fördert und ihn deshalb auch nicht ausreichend bekämpft. Letztlich, so wird argumentiert, wurzle der "Faschismus" in den gesellschaftlichen und politischen Strukturen des "Kapitalismus". Dementsprechend rücken Linksextremisten vor allem die Beseitigung des "kapitalistischen Systems" in den Mittelpunkt ihrer "antifaschistischen" Aktivitäten.

^ "Linksextremismus" [Far-left extremism].

Verfassungsschutzbericht 2018 (PDF) .

Federal Ministry of the Interior, Building and Community . 2019. pp.

106– 167. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 September 2020 . Retrieved 21 October 2020 .

^ Horst Schöppner: Antifa heißt Angriff: Militanter Antifaschismus in den 80er Jahren (pp. 129–132). Unrast, Münster 2015, ISBN 3-89771-823-5 .

^ "Δίκη Χρυσής Αυγής: Ένοχοι για εγκληματική οργάνωση Μιχαλολιάκος και πολιτικά στελέχη" .

CNN.gr (in Greek). 7 October 2020 . Retrieved 1 October 2021 .

^ Maltezou, Renee; Papadimas, Lefteris (7 October 2020).

"Greek court rules leaders of far-right Golden Dawn political party ran a crime group" .

National Post . Retrieved 1 October 2021 .

^ Stein, Perry (16 August 2017).

"Anarchists and the antifa: The history of activists Trump condemns as the 'alt-left' " .

Chicago Tribune . Retrieved 10 November 2017 .

^ Snyders, Matt (20 February 2008).

"Skinheads at Forty" .

City Pages . Archived from the original on 3 August 2012 . Retrieved 29 July 2012 .

^ Bray, Mark (16 August 2017).

"Who are the antifa?" .

The Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 10 November 2017 .

^ Bogel-Burroughs, Nicholas (2 July 2019).

"What Is Antifa? Explaining the Movement to Confront the Far Right" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 13 July 2019 .

^ a b Sacco, Lisa N. (9 June 2020).

"Are Antifa Members Domestic Terrorists? Background on Antifa and Federal Classification of Their Actions InFocus IF10839" . Congressional Research Service . Retrieved 9 September 2020 .

Updated June 9, 2020.

^ Bogel-Burroughs, Nicholas; Garcia, Sandra E. (28 September 2020).

"What Is Antifa, the Movement Trump Wants to Declare a Terror Group?" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 1 October 2020 .

One of the first groups in the United States to use the name was Rose City Antifa, which says it was founded in 2007 in Portland.

^ "One America - Northwest Coalition Against Malicious Harassment" .

The White House . Retrieved 27 February 2024 .

^ Enzinna, Wes (27 April 2017).

"Inside the Underground Anti-Racist Movement That Brings the Fight to White Supremacists" .

Mother Jones . Retrieved 9 September 2020 .

^ Strickland, Patrick (21 February 2017).

"US anti-fascists: 'We can make racists afraid again' " . Al-Jazeera . Retrieved 9 September 2020 .

^ Lennard, Natasha (19 January 2017).

"Anti-Fascists Will Fight Trump's Fascism in the Streets" .

The Nation . Archived from the original on 15 August 2017 . Retrieved 9 September 2020 .

^ Clarke, Colin; Kenney, Michael (23 June 2020).

"What Antifa Is, What It Isn't, and Why It Matters" .

War on the Rocks . Retrieved 26 June 2020 .

[...] Antifa, a highly decentralized movement of anti-racists who seek to combat neo-Nazis, white supremacists, and far-right extremists whom Antifa's followers consider 'fascist' [...].

^ "Designating Antifa as Domestic Terrorist Organization Is Dangerous, Threatens Civil Liberties" . Southern Poverty Law Center. 2 June 2020 . Retrieved 8 September 2020 .

^ Kaste, Martin; Siegler, Kirk (16 June 2017).

"Fact Check: Is Left-Wing Violence Rising?" .

NPR.org . NPR . Retrieved 15 August 2017 .

^ Maida, Adam (16 January 2018).

"Meet Antifa's Secret Weapon Against Far-Right Extremists" .

Wired . Retrieved 13 November 2018 .

^ Beauchamp, Zack (8 June 2020).

"Antifa, explained" .

Vox . Retrieved 12 June 2020 .

^ a b Lois, Beckett (27 July 2020).

"Anti-fascists linked to zero murders in the US in 25 years" .

The Guardian .

^ Jones, Seth G. (4 June 2020).

"Who Are Antifa, and Are They a Threat?" . Center for Strategic and International Studies . Retrieved 4 September 2020 .

^ Pasley, James.

"Trump frequently accuses the far-left of inciting violence, yet right-wing extremists have killed 329 victims in the last 25 years, while antifa members haven't killed any, according to a new study" .

Business Insider . Retrieved 6 October 2020 .

^ Swan, Betsy Woodruff (4 September 2020).

"DHS draft document: White supremacists are greatest terror threat" .

Politico . Retrieved 5 September 2020 .

^ "A Fake Antifa Account Was 'Busted' for Tweeting from Russia" . Vice News. 28 September 2017 . Retrieved 11 September 2018 .

^ "Far-right smear campaign against Antifa exposed by Bellingcat" . BBC. 24 August 2017 . Retrieved 20 July 2022 .

^ Feldman, Brian (21 August 2017).

"How to Spot a Fake Antifa Account" .

New York . Retrieved 14 August 2019 .

^ Glaun, Dan (14 September 2017).

"Fake Boston Antifa group, which claimed credit for anti-racism banner at Red Sox game, is actually run by right wing trolls" .

The Republican . Retrieved 14 August 2019 .

^ Feuer, Alan; Goldman, Adam; MacFarquhar, Neil (11 June 2020).

"Federal Arrests Show No Sign That Antifa Plotted Protests" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 11 June 2020 .

Despite claims by President Trump and Attorney General William P. Barr, there is scant evidence that loosely organized anti-fascists are a significant player in protests. [...] A review of the arrests of dozens of people on federal charges reveals no known effort by antifa to perpetrate a coordinated campaign of violence. Some criminal complaints described vague, anti-government political leanings among suspects, but a majority of the violent acts that have taken place at protests have been attributed by federal prosecutors to individuals with no affiliation to any particular group.

^ Peiser, Jaclyn (10 August 2020).

" 'Their tactics are fascistic': Barr slams Black Lives Matter, accuses the left of 'tearing down the system' " .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 10 August 2020 .

^ Haberman, Maggie; Savage, Charlie (31 May 2020).

"Trump, Lacking Clear Authority, Says U.S. Will Declare Antifa a Terrorist Group" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 13 June 2020 .

^ Perez, Evan; Hoffman, Jason (31 May 2020).

"Trump tweets Antifa will be labeled a terrorist organization but experts believe that's unconstitutional" .

CNN . CNN . Retrieved 13 June 2020 .

^ Bray, Mark (1 June 2020).

"Antifa isn't the problem. Trump's bluster is a distraction from police violence" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 8 June 2020 .

^ Dokumentation der Vertreibung der Deutschen aus Ost-Mitteleuropa . Vol. 3. Bundesministerium für Vertriebene. 1953. p. 101.

^ "Samtalskompassen – Våldsbejakande vänsterextremism: Ideologi" .

Samtalskompassen.samordnarenmotextremism.se . Archived from the original on 24 August 2017 . Retrieved 24 August 2017 .

^ Peters, Tim (2007).

Der Antifaschismus der PDS aus antiextremistischer Sicht [ The antifascism of the PDS from an anti-extremist perspective ]. Springer. pp.

33– 37, 186.

ISBN 9783531901268 .

^ Richter, Michael (2006). "Die doppelte Diktatur: Erfahrungen mit Diktatur in der DDR und Auswirkungen auf das Verhältnis zur Diktatur heute ( "The double dictatorship: experiences with dictatorship in the GDR and effects on the relationship to the dictatorship today" )". In Besier, Gerhard; Stoklosa, Katarzyna (eds.).

Lasten diktatorischer Vergangenheit – Herausforderungen demokratischer Gegenwart [ Burdens of a dictatorial past – challenges of a democratic present ]. LIT Verlag. pp.

195– 208.

ISBN 9783825887896 . Archived from the original on 22 December 2021 . Retrieved 6 June 2020 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Brennan, T Corey (2022).

The fasces: a history of ancient Rome's most dangerous political symbol . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-764488-1 .

Copsey, Nigel (2016).

Anti-Fascism in Britain . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-1-317-39762-5 .

Diner, Dan; Gundermann, Christian (1996). "On the Ideology of Antifascism".

New German Critique (67): 123– 132.

doi : 10.2307/827781 .

ISSN 0094-033X .

JSTOR 827781 .

Eley, Geoff (1996). "Legacies of Antifascism: Constructing Democracy in Postwar Europe".

New German Critique (67): 73– 100.

doi : 10.2307/827778 .

ISSN 0094-033X .

JSTOR 827778 .

Jarausch, Konrad H. (1991).

"The Failure of East German Antifascism: Some Ironies of History as Politics" .

German Studies Review .

14 (1): 85– 102.

doi : 10.2307/1430155 .

ISSN 0149-7952 .

JSTOR 1430155 .

Mammone, Andrea (2006).

"A Daily Revision of the Past: Fascism, Anti-Fascism, and Memory in Contemporary Italy" .

Modern Italy .

11 (2): 211– 226.

doi : 10.1080/13532940600709338 .

ISSN 1353-2944 .

S2CID 145602289 .

Rabinbach, Anson (1996). "Introduction: Legacies of Antifascism".

New German Critique (67): 3– 17.

doi : 10.2307/827774 .

ISSN 0094-033X .

JSTOR 827774 .

Further reading [ edit ] David Berry " 'Fascism or Revolution!' Anarchism and Antifascism in France, 1933–39 " Contemporary European History Volume 8, Issue 1 March 1999, pp. 51–71 Birchall, Sean, ed. (2013).

Beating The Fascists: The Untold Story of Anti-Fascist Action . Freedom Press.

ISBN 978-1-904491-12-5 .

Brasken, Kasper. " Making Anti-Fascism Transnational: The Origins of Communist and Socialist Articulations of Resistance in Europe, 1923–1924 ." Contemporary European History 25.4 (2016): 573–596.

Bray, Mark (2017).

Antifa: The Anti-Fascist Handbook . New York: Melville House.

ISBN 978-1612197036 .

OCLC 1016082358 .

Brinks, J. H. “Political Anti-Fascism in the German Democratic Republic.” Journal of Contemporary History 32, no. 2 (1997): 207–17.

[1] .

Bullstreet, K. (2001).

Bash the Fash: Anti-Fascist Recollections 1984–1993 . Kate Sharpley Library.

ISBN 978-1-873605-87-5 .

Class War/3WayFight/Kate Sharpley Library Interview from Beating Fascism: Anarchist Anti-Fascism in Theory and Practice , anarkismo.net Copsey, N. (2011) "From direct action to community action: The changing dynamics of anti-fascist opposition", in Copsey, Nigel (2011).

The British National Party : contemporary perspectives . Abingdon, Oxon New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-48384-1 .

OCLC 657270952 .

Nigel Copsey & Andrzej Olechnowicz (eds.), Varieties of Anti-fascism. Britain in the Inter-war Period , Palgrave Macmillan Gilles Dauvé " Fascism/Antifascism Archived 30 January 2010 at the Wayback Machine ", libcom.org David Featherstone " Black Internationalism, Subaltern Cosmopolitanism, and the Spatial Politics of Antifascism " Annals of the Association of American Geographers Volume 103, 2013, Issue 6, pp. 1406–1420 Fisher, David James. “Malraux: Left Politics and Anti-Fascism in the 1930’s.” Twentieth Century Literature 24, no. 3 (1978): 290–302.

[2] .

Joseph Fronczak "Local People's Global Politics: A Transnational History of the Hands Off Ethiopia Movement of 1935" Diplomatic History , Volume 39, Issue 2, 1 April 2015, pp. 245–274 Hugo Garcia, ed, Transnational Anti-Fascism: Agents, Networks, Circulations Contemporary European History Volume 25, Issue 4 November 2016, pp. 563–572 Gottfried, Paul. Antifascism: The Course of a Crusade. Cornell University Press, 2021.

[3] .

Key, Anna, ed. (2005).

Beating Fascism: Anarchist anti-fascism in theory and practice . Kate Sharpley Library.

ISBN 978-1-873605-88-2 .

Renton, Dave.

Fascism, Anti-fascism and Britain in the 1940s . Springer, 2016.

Stout, James (24 June 2020).

"A Brief History of Anti-Fascism" .

Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved 4 September 2020 .

Enzo Traverso "Intellectuals and Anti-Fascism: For a Critical Historization" New Politics , vol. 9, no. 4 (new series), whole no. 36, Winter 2004 When Hate Groups Come to Town: A Handbook of Effective Community Responses . Atlanta: Center for Democratic Renewal. 1992.

ISBN 978-1-881320-05-0 .

United Front Against Fascism records , 1945-2021. At the Labor Archives of Washington, University of Washington Libraries Special Collections .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Anti-fascism .

Library resources about Anti-fascism Online books Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Centre for fascist, anti-fascist and post-fascist studies – Teesside University (archived 24 August 2017) Remembering the Anarchist Resistance to fascism v t e Fascism Themes Core tenets Actual idealism Aestheticization of politics Anti-communism Anti-intellectualism Anti-materialism Anti-pacifism Authoritarianism Chauvinism Class collaboration Conspiracism Corporatism Cult of personality Dictatorship Direct action Dirigisme Economic interventionism Eugenics Heroic capitalism Heroic realism Heroism Imperialism Indoctrination Irrationalism Machismo Masculinity Militarism National syndicalism Nationalism Integral Palingenetic Ultra New Man One-party state Perpetual war Populism Proletarian nation Propaganda Racism Reactionary modernism Social Darwinism Social interventionism Social order State capitalism Statolatry Supercapitalism Syncretism Third Position Totalitarianism Topics Definitions Economics Fascism and ideology Fascism worldwide Symbolism Variants Arab Argentine Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Austrian Banderism Brazilian British Christian Christian Identity Mexican synarchism Clerical Crypto Eco English Falangism French Doriotism Pétainism Neo-Pétainism Jeune Nation L'Œuvre Française Valoisism Hindutva Hungarism Hutu Irish Islamic Ziaism Italian Intransigent Japanese Emperor-system Statism Restoration Ultra Jewish/Israeli Kahanism Revisionist Maximalism Korean Ilminism Nyulaiteu Latvian Mystical Nazism Austrian Esoteric Hitlerism Neo-Nazism Russian Strasserism Swedish Neo Finnish NRx Pan-Turkic Rexism Polish Romanian Legionarism Neo-Legionarism Romanianism/Stelism Russian Neo-Eurasianism Syndicalist Syrian Social Nationalism Techno Third Positionism National-anarchism National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism Uruguayan Marzism Revisionism Sosism Ustašism Movements Africa Afrikaner Weerstandsbeweging Coalition for the Defence of the Republic Greyshirts Muslim Association of the Lictor National Revolutionary Movement for Development Ossewabrandwag Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines Republican Democratic Movement Young Egypt Party (1933) Asia Abhinav Bharat Al-Muthanna Club Aria Party Azerbaijan National Democrat Party Azure Party Black Dragon Society Brit HaBirionim Concordia Association Grey Wolves Golden Square Hindu Mahasabha Iran-e-No Party Jewish National Front Kach Kataeb Party Kenkokukai Kokumin Dōmei Korea Nationalist Party Korean National Youth Association Lehi Liberal Party (South Korea) Nasyonal Aktivite ve Zinde İnkişaf National Socialism Association National Socialist Japanese Workers' Party Nationalist Movement Party Nationalist Task Party National Will Party Nation Party of Iran Otzma Yehudit Pan-Iranist Party Palestine Arab Party Patrol 36 Progress Party (Iran) Philippine Falange Rastakhiz Party Rastriya Prajatantra Party Reform bureaucrats Religious Zionist Party Sakurakai Sangh Parivar Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad Bharatiya Gau Raksha Dal Bharatiya Janata Party Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha Bharatiya Jana Sangh Bharatiya Kisan Sangh Bharatiya Mazdoor Sangh Bharat Vikas Parishad Ekal Vidyalaya Hindu Makkal Katchi Hindu Munnani Hindu Swayamsevak Sangh Jammu Praja Parishad Muslim Rashtriya Manch Ram Janmabhoomi Nyas Rashtra Sevika Samiti Rashtriya Sikh Sangat Rashtriya Swayamsevak Sangh Akhil Bharatiya Itihas Sankalan Yojana Seva Bharati Vidya Bharati Vanavasi Kalyan Ashram Vishva Hindu Parishad Bajrang Dal Durga Vahini SUMKA Syrian Social Nationalist Party Tōhōkai Tsagaan Khas Turkish Union Party Wang Jingwei Kuomintang Northern / Northwestern Europe Academic Karelia Society Ailtirí na hAiséirghe Autonome Nationalisten Bases Autónomas Black Front (Netherlands) Blood & Honour Blueshirts Breton Social-National Workers' Movement British Democratic Party British Fascists Britain First British League of Ex-Servicemen and Women British Movement British National Party (1960) British National Party British People's Party (1939) British People's Party (2005) British Union of Fascists The Britons La Cagoule Casuals United Centre Party '86 Clerical People's Party Dutch Defence League Dutch Fascist Union English Defence League European Defence League English National Association European Liberation Front Le Faisceau Fédération d'action nationale et européenne Finnish National Socialist Labor Organisation Finnish People's Organisation Finnish-Socialist Workers' Party Flemish National Union French National-Collectivist Party French Nationalist Party French Popular Party General Dutch Fascist League Greater Britain Movement Groupe Collaboration Heathen Front Imperial Fascist League International Third Position Jeune Nation Lalli Alliance of Finland Lapua Movement League of Saint George Les Identitaires Mouvement d'Action Civique Mouvement Franciste Nasjonal Samling National Action (UK) National Alliance (Sweden) National Corporate Party National Fascisti National Front (UK) National League of Sweden Nationalist Party National Popular Rally National Rally National Socialist Bloc National Socialist Dutch Workers Party National Socialist Front National Socialist League National Socialist Movement (UK, 1962) National Socialist Movement (United Kingdom) National Socialist Movement in the Netherlands National Socialist Movement of Norway National Socialist Union of Finland National Socialist Workers' Party (Sweden) National Socialist Workers' Party of Denmark National Socialists of Finland National Syndicalists National Union (Netherlands) National Union (Portugal) New Party Nipsters Nordic League The Nordic Realm Party Nordic Resistance Movement Northern League Norwegian Defence League Nouvelle Droite GRECE L'Œuvre Française Official National Front Order of Flemish Militants Order of Nine Angles Organisation of National Socialists Parti Communautaire National-Européen Party of Finnish Labor Party of the Swedes Patriotic Alternative Patriotic People's Movement Patriotic People's Movement (1993) Pērkonkrusts Phalange Française Ragnarock Rebelles Européens Rexist Party Rising Finland Scottish Democratic Fascist Party Scottish Protestant League Skrewdriver Skullhead Stormers Terre et Peuple Third Way (France) Third Way (UK) Union Movement Verdinaso Vigrid White Aryan Resistance World Union of National Socialists Central Europe Action Front of National Socialists/National Activists Arrow Cross Party Artgemeinschaft Austrian Nazism Black Front (Germany) Bund Deutscher Osten Christian National Socialist Front Deutsche Reichspartei Eidgenössische Sammlung Falanga Free German Workers' Party German Faith Movement German National Movement in Liechtenstein German National Socialist Workers' Party (Czechoslovakia) German Party (Slovakia) German Social Union Honor Hungarian National Front Hungarian National Socialist Agricultural Labourers' and Workers' Party Hungarian National Socialist Party Combat League of German Socialists Kotlebists – People's Party Our Slovakia Landser Liechtenstein Homeland Service National Democratic Party (Austria) National Democratic Party of Germany National Fascist Community National Front (Hungary) National Front (Switzerland) National Movement of Switzerland National Radical Camp National Radical Camp (1993) National Revival of Poland National Union (Switzerland) Nationalist Front (Germany) Nazi Party Greater German People's Community Nazi Germany National Socialist Freedom Movement National Socialist Working Association New Order Nipsters No Colours Records PC Records Positive Christianity German Christians Republic Movement The Right (Germany) Rock-O-Rama Records Shield and Sword Slovak People's Party Socialist Reich Party Stahlgewitter Sudeten German Party The Third Path United Hungarian National Socialist Party Vlajka Volksdeutsche Bewegung Volkssozialistische Bewegung Deutschlands/Partei der Arbeit Wiking-Jugend Southern Europe ADÑ–Spanish Identity Albanian Fascist Party Balli Kombëtar Brothers of Italy CEDADE Democratic Fascist Party European Nation State Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Fasci Italiani di Combattimento Fascio d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Falange Sección Femenina La Falange (1999) Falange Auténtica Falange Española Falange Española Auténtica Falange Española de las JONS Falange Española de las JONS (1976) Falange Española Independiente Falangist Movement of Spain Freethinkers' Party Imperium Europa Italian fascism National Fascist Party (Italy) Italian Social Republic Republican Fascist Party Italian Social Movement Juntas de Ofensiva Nacional-Sindicalista Juntas Españolas National Alliance (Spain) National Alliance July 18 National Democracy (Italy) National Democracy (Spain) National Front (Spain, 1986) National Front (Spain, 2006) National Union (Italy, 1923) National Union (Spain) New Force (Italy) New Force (Spain) Republican Social Movement The Right (Italy) Sammarinese Fascist Party Spanish Military Union Struggle of the People Student Action Terza Posizione Tricolour Flame Unidad Falangista Montañesa Youth Front Eastern and Southeastern Europe Autochthonous Croatian Party of Rights Bosnian Movement of National Pride Bulgarian National Socialist Workers Party Croatian Liberation Movement Croatian National Resistance Croatian Party of Rights Crusade of Romanianism Ethnic National Union Eurasia Movement Eurasia Party Format18 For the Native Language!

Front of National Revolutionary Action German Party German People's Party Golden Dawn Greek National Socialist Party Hosank Iron Guard Kolovrat LEPEN Liberal Democratic Party of Russia Lithuanian Nationalist Union National Agrarian Party National Bolshevik Front National Bolshevik Party National-Christian Defense League National Christian Party National Fascist Movement National Italo-Romanian Cultural and Economic Movement National Party – Greeks National Socialist Patriotic Organisation National Socialist Society National Social Movement National Romanian Fascio National Renaissance Front National Salvation Front Nokturnal Mortum National Socialism / White Power Obraz Occupy Pedophilia Order of Nine Angles Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists The Other Russia of E. V. Limonov Pamyat Patriotic Alliance People's Party Progressive Socialist Party of Ukraine Ratniks (Bulgaria) Romanian Front Russian Imperial Movement Russian Fascist Party Russian National Unity Russian Women's Fascist Movement Serbian Action Serbian Radical Party Steel Shield Svoboda Union of Bulgarian National Legions Ustaše Ustaše in Australia Croatian Revolutionary Brotherhood Yugoslav Radical Union ZBOR North America Fascism in Canada Aryan Guard Aryan Nations Canadian Association for Free Expression Canadian Union of Fascists Citizens for Foreign Aid Reform Heritage Front Parti national social chrétien Fascism in the United States American Front American Nazi Party Betar US Creativity Fascist League of North America German American Bund Goyim Defense League Hammerskins Identity Evropa League of the South National Alliance (United States) National Renaissance Party Nationalist Social Club-131 National Socialist Legion National Socialist Liberation Front National Socialist Movement National States' Rights Party National Vanguard Nationalist Front (United States) Patriot Front Proud Boys Rise Above Movement Silver Legion of America Christian Party (United States, 1930s) Traditionalist Worker Party Vanguard America Volksfront White Aryan Resistance Wotansvolk Revolutionary Mexicanist Action Mexican Democratic Party Mexican Fascist Party National Pro Patria Party National Synarchist Union Nationalist Front of Mexico Order of Nine Angles Oceania Action Zealandia Antipodean Resistance Australia First Movement Australia First Party Australian Defence League Australian National Socialist Party Centre Party Lads Society National Action (Australia) National Socialist Network National Socialist Party of Australia Progressive Nationalist Party Reclaim Australia True Blue Crew United Patriots Front South America Agrarian Labor Party Argentine Anticommunist Alliance Argentine Fascist Party Argentine Nationalist Action Argentine Patriotic League Bolivian Socialist Falange Brazilian Integralism Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Integralist Front Falangism in Latin America Female Peronist Party Iron Guard (Argentina) Nacionalismo National Fascist Party (Argentina) National Fascist Union Nationalist Liberation Alliance National Liberation Movement National Socialist Movement of Chile National Universitary Concentration New Triumph Party Patriot Front (Argentina) Popular Dignity Popular Freedom Alliance Popular Representation Party Popular Socialist Vanguard Republican League La Resistencia Dios, Patria y Familia Revolutionary Union Tacuara Nationalist Movement People Australia Campbell (Eric) Campbell (Graeme) Cottrell Groot Mills Saleam Austria Dollfuss Miklas Pfrimer Planetta Schuschnigg Seyss-Inquart Starhemberg Belgium Daye Declercq Degrelle Denis Elias Eriksson Hermans Lagrou Poulet Severen Streel van de Wiele Croatia Boban Francetić Kraljević Kvaternik Luburić Pavelić Pavičić Rover Servatzy Finland Helanen Isotalo Kalsta Konkka Kosola Orko Simojoki Somersalo Törni Varjonen France Augier Bardèche Benoist-Méchin Béraud Brasillach Bucard Châteaubriant Déat Déroulède Dior Doriot La Rochelle Lagardelle Laval Pétain Rebatet Valois Vial Germany Abetz Andrae Baeumler Berchtold Berger Best Brunner Bühler Darré Falkenhausen Hocke Feder Forster Frank Franz V Gesche Goebbels Göring Graf Greiser Günther Hanke Heiden Hess Heydrich Himmler Hitler Klintzsch Kuhn Ludendorff Maurice Müller Niekisch Ploetz Rahn Reitsch Renthe-Fink Ribbentrop Rieger Rosenberg Schmitt Schreck Skorzeny Strasser (Gregor) Strasser (Otto) Streicher Terboven Thadden Krosigk Zündel Greece Dragoumis Kasidiaris Koryzis Lagos Michaloliakos Papadopoulos India Adityanath Advani Bose Godse Golwalkar Hedgewar Modi Mukherjee Savarkar Thakur Vajpayee Iran Forouhar Kashani Monshizadeh Pezeshkpour Teymourtash Israel Ahimeir Ben-Ari Ben-Gvir Eldad Eliyahu Goldstein Gopstein Greenberg Ha'ivri Heruti Kahane Marzel Natan-Zada Stern Yeivin Italy Acerbo Alfieri Ambris D'Annunzio Azara Badoglio Balbo Torrente Ballester Bastianini Bianchi Boni Bono Boselli Bottai Ciano (Costanzo) Ciano (Galeazzo) Cogni Corradini Freda Gentile Giuriati Gozi Grandi Graziani Guidi Malaparte Marinetti Michels Morgagni Mussolini Olivetti Panunzio Papini Pavolini Rauti Ricci Ridruejo Rocco Rossoni Sarfatti Soffici Spirito Volpi Japan Akao Araki Chō Hashimoto Honjō Kita Kodama Matsuoka Nonaka Ōkawa Sasakawa Romania Antonescu Bacaloglu Codreanu Crainic Cuza Gigurtu Goga Manoilescu Moța Ogoranu Sima Russia Astroŭski Borovikov Ilyin Kaminski Martsinkevich Milchakov Oktan Prilepin Prokhanov Rodzaevsky Spain Arrese Bau Nolla Bilbao Eguía Carrero Blanco Fernández-Cuesta Franco Franco y Polo Giménez Caballero Primo de Rivera Ramos Sánchez Mazas Serrano Suñer Ukraine Bandera Biletsky Dontsov Gubarev Klyachkivsky Lebed Rebet Samchuk Shukhevych Stetsko Tyahnybok Vitrenko United Kingdom Beckett Chamberlain Chesterton Lake Leese Mosley (Diana) Mosley (Oswald) Pankhurst Pearson Ramsay Robinson Southgate Tyndall Wellesley United States Auernheimer Collins Fuentes Joyce Pelley Pound Yockey Other Burdi Celmiņš Martínez Quisling Ramírez Riva-Agüero y Osma Šešelj Szálasi Works Literature 1776 Returns La Conquista del Estado The Culture of Critique Defiance Did Six Million Really Die?

The Doctrine of Fascism Essentials of Hindutva Fascist Manifesto For My Legionaries The Foundations of Geopolitics: The Geopolitical Future of Russia The Fourth Political Theory Hitlers Zweites Buch Hutu Ten Commandments Imperium: The Philosophy of History and Politics An Investigation of Global Policy with the Yamato Race as Nucleus Kokutairon and Pure Socialism The Last Will of a Russian Fascist Manifesto of Race Manifesto of the Fascist Intellectuals Mein Kampf My Autobiography My Life The Myth of the Twentieth Century OPROP!

Our Race Will Rule Undisputed Over The World Protestantische Rompilger A Racial Program for the Twentieth Century Uncomfortable Questions for Comfortable Jews A Warning to the Hindus Who Are the Mind Benders?

Periodicals Action Ajan Suunta L'Alba El Alcázar The American Review Der Angriff Arriba The Blackshirt La Conquista del Estado The Daily Stormer Deutsche Allgemeine Zeitung Das Deutsche Mädel La Difesa della Razza Eleftheros Kosmos The European Fashist Fashizmi La France au travail Fritt Folk Fronten Gândirea Gioventù Fascista Golden Dawn Hamaas Hrvatski Domobran Je suis partout Kangura Kansallissosialisti Limonka Masada2000 Münchener Beobachter Nash Put' Nástup Nation Europa Neue Anthropologie Neues Volk Het Nieuwe Volk Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift Novopress Norsk-Tysk Tidsskrift Organiser Panchjanya Panzerbär Parole der Woche Le Pays Réel Der Pimpf Il Popolo d'Italia Das Reich Revue d'histoire du fascisme Das Schwarze Korps Sfarmă-Piatră Signal Siniristi Spearhead Der Stürmer Türkische Post Der Umbruch Vairas Vlajka Volk en Staat Völkischer Beobachter Die Wehrmacht Wochenspruch der NSDAP Film L'Armata Azzurra Bengasi Condottieri The Daughter of the Samurai Erbkrank Europa: The Last Battle The Great Appeal The Old Guard Raza Scipio Africanus: The Defeat of Hannibal Der Sieg des Glaubens The Siege of the Alcazar Lo squadrone bianco Tag der Freiheit: Unsere Wehrmacht Triumph of the Will Music Fashwave Hindutva pop National Socialist black metal Nazi punk Rock Against Communism White power music Other Allach StoneToss Related topics Art of the Third Reich Fascist architecture Heroic realism Nazi architecture Nazism and cinema Organizations Institutional Ahnenerbe Chamber of Fasces and Corporations Grand Council of Fascism Imperial Way Faction Italian Nationalist Association National Socialist League of the Reich for Physical Exercise Quadrumvirs Activist Adelaide Institute Agrarian Trade Union Federation The Britons Casuals United DeVlag European Social Movement Finnish Realm Union Francisco Franco National Foundation Friends of New Germany German American Bund GRECE The Link Mladorossi National Party of Europe National Policy Institute National Popular Consciousness Panzerfaust Records Popular Force Party Right Club Russian Fascist Organization Youth Adler und Falke Albanian Lictor Youth Arab Lictor Youth Bharatiya Janata Yuva Morcha Blue-and-Blacks Ethiopian Lictor Youth Fascist Union of Youth Frente de Juventudes Al-Futuwwa Gioventù Italiana del Littorio Great Japan Youth Party Hitler Youth Faith and Beauty Society Deutsches Jungvolk Jungmädelbund League of German Girls Jeunesse Populaire Française Juventudes de Acción Popular Korean National Youth Association Levente Mocidade Portuguesa Nationale Jeugdstorm National League of Sweden National Socialist Liberation Front National Youth (Sweden) National Youth (Italy) National Youth Alliance National Youth Organisation (Greece) Opera Nazionale Balilla Österreichisches Jungvolk Patriotic/Eureka Youth League Union of Fascist Little Ones Union of Young Fascists – Vanguard (boys) Union of Young Fascists – Vanguard (girls) Ustaše Youth Wiking-Jugend Youth Front Paramilitary and terrorist Abhinav Bharat Albanian Fascist Militia Atomwaffen Division Azov Brigade Bajrang Dal Black Brigades Black Legion Blackshirts Blueshirts (Canada) Blueshirts (Ireland) Column 88 Combat Terrorist Organization Confederation of the Nation Corpul Muncitoresc Legionar Croatian Defence Forces Croatian National Resistance Croatian Revolutionary Brotherhood Bugojno group Einsatzgruppen Fasci di Azione Rivoluzionaria Falange Armata Falange Militia Flemish Guard Flemish Legion Frontbann Goldshirts Greenshirts Hilfspolizei Hitler Youth Greyshirts Heimwehr Hirden Hlinka Guard Hungarian National Defence Association Impuzamugambi Interbrigades Interahamwe Iron Wolf Jewish Defense League Jewish Defense Organization Kataeb Regulatory Forces Lăncieri Legion Wasa Lehava Lehi Levente Makapili Mano Blanca Misanthropic Division National Republican Guard New Guard Ostmärkische Sturmscharen Rodobrana Russian Imperial Movement Russian National Unity (2000) S14 Schutzstaffel Serbian Volunteer Corps Sicarii Sich Battalion Silver Shirts Sturmabteilung Sudetendeutsches Freikorps Terror Against Terror Third Klan Ukrainian Insurgent Army Ukrainian People's Militsiya Ustaše Militia Volkssport Walloon Guard Walloon Legion Waffen-SS Wagner Group Rusich Group Weerbaarheidsafdeling Werwolf Westland New Post Yokusan Sonendan Youth Front Student Akhil Bharatiya Vidyarthi Parishad Avanguardia Giovanile Fascista Frente de Estudiantes Sindicalistas German Student Union National Socialist German Students' League Sindicato Español Universitario Student Action International Axis powers NSDAP/AO ODESSA History 1900s Herero and Nama genocide and the Holocaust 1910s Arditi Fascio Fasci d'Azione Rivoluzionaria Armenian genocide and the Holocaust 1920s March on Rome Corfu incident Acerbo Law Beer Hall Putsch Aventine Secession Italian economic battles Le Faisceau 28 May 1926 coup d'état Libyan genocide 1930s March of the Iron Will November 1932 German federal election March 1933 German federal election Enabling Act Austrian Civil War July Putsch 1934 Montreux Fascist conference Romani Holocaust 4th of August Regime Anti-Comintern Pact Spanish Civil War 1940s World War II Nazi crimes against the Polish nation The Holocaust Genocide of Serbs in the Independent State of Croatia End in Italy Nuremberg Trials Tokyo Trials Lists Anti-fascists Books about Hitler British fascist parties Fascist movements by country ( A-F G-M N-T U-Z ) Nazi ideologues Nazi leaders Secretaries of Italian fascist parties Speeches by Hitler SS personnel Related topics Authoritarian conservatism Chiangism Francoism Khomeinism Maurrassisme Pinochetism Putinism Ziaism Alt-right Alt-lite Alt-right pipeline Alt-tech Identitarian movement Anti-fascism Bahutu Manifesto Berlusconism Conservative Revolution Criticism of fascism Europe a Nation Fascist (epithet) Fascist mysticism Feudal fascism F-scale (personality test) Garveyism Germanisation of Poles during the Partitions Italianization of South Tyrol Japanization Morenazi Neosocialism Para-/semi-fascism Post-fascism Proto-fascism Red fascism Red–green–brown alliance Roman salute Saffronisation Sansepolcrismo Scientific racism Aryanism Nordicism Social fascism Sorelianism Synarchism Szeged Idea Trumpism Donald Trump and fascism Völkisch movement Women in Nazi Germany Category v t e Anarchism Concepts Anarchy Anarchist Black Cross Anarchist criminology Anationalism Anti-authoritarianism Anti-capitalism Anti-militarism Affinity group Autonomous social center Black bloc Classless society Class struggle Consensus decision-making Conscientious objector Critique of work Decentralization Deep ecology Direct action Free love Freethought Horizontalidad Individualism Law Mutual aid Participatory politics Permanent autonomous zone Prefigurative politics Proletarian internationalism Propaganda of the deed Refusal of work Revolution Rewilding Sabotage Security culture Self-ownership Social ecology Sociocracy Somatherapy Spontaneous order Squatting Temporary autonomous zone Union of egoists Voluntary association Workers' council Issues Animal rights Capitalism Education Love and sex Nationalism Religion Violence Schools of thought Classical Individualist Egoist Illegalist Naturist Philosophical Mutualist Social Collectivist Communist Magonist Post-classical Feminist Green Primitivist Social ecology Independence Insurrectionary Pacifist Religious Christian Buddhist Jewish Without adjectives Contemporary Black Free-market Postcolonial Post-anarchist Post-left Queer Types of federation Affinity group Anarcho-syndicalism Platformism Anarchist synthesis Union of egoists Economics Communization Cooperative Cost the limit of price Decentralized planned economy Free association General strike Gift economy Give-away shop Labor voucher Market socialism Mutual bank Mutual credit Social ownership Wage slavery Workers' self-management Culture A las Barricadas Anarchist bookfair Anarcho-punk Anarchy in the U.K.

Architecture Arts DIY ethic Escuela Moderna Films Freeganism Infoshop Independent Media Center The Internationale Lifestylism May Day " No gods, no masters " Popular education " Property is theft!

" Radical cheerleading Radical environmentalism Self-managed social center Symbolism History French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Spanish Regional Federation of the IWA Paris Commune Hague Congress Cantonal rebellion Haymarket affair Trial of the Thirty International Conference of Rome Ferrer movement Strandzha Commune Congress of Amsterdam Tragic Week High Treason Incident Manifesto of the Sixteen German Revolution of 1918–1919 Bavarian Soviet Republic 1919 United States bombings Biennio Rosso Kronstadt rebellion Makhnovshchina Amakasu Incident Alt Llobregat insurrection Anarchist insurrection of January 1933 Anarchist insurrection of December 1933 Spanish Revolution of 1936 Barcelona May Days Red inverted triangle Labadie Collection Provo May 1968 Kate Sharpley Library Carnival Against Capital 1999 Seattle WTO protests Really Really Free Market Occupy movement People Alston Armand Ba Bakunin Berkman Bonanno Bookchin Bourdin Chomsky Cleyre Day Durruti Ellul Ervin Faure Ferrer Feyerabend Giovanni Godwin Goldman González Prada Graeber Guillaume He-Yin Kanno Kōtoku Kropotkin Landauer Liu Magón Makhno Maksimov Malatesta Mett Michel Most Parsons Pi i Margall Pouget Proudhon Raichō Reclus Rocker Santillán Spooner Stirner Thoreau Tolstoy Tucker Volin Ward Warren Yarchuk Zerzan Lists Anarcho-punk bands Books Fictional characters Films Jewish anarchists Musicians Periodicals By region Africa Albania Algeria Andorra Argentina Armenia Australia Austria Azerbaijan Bangladesh Belarus Belgium Bolivia Bosnia and Herzegovina Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Dominican Republic Ecuador Egypt El Salvador Estonia Finland France French Guiana Georgia Germany Greece Guatemala Hong Kong Hungary Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy Japan Korea Latvia Malaysia Mexico Monaco Mongolia Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Singapore South Africa Spain Sweden Switzerland Syria ( DAANES ) Taiwan Timor-Leste Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom United States ( Puerto Rico ) Uruguay Venezuela Vietnam Related topics Anarcho-capitalism Anti-corporatism Anti-consumerism Anti-fascism Anti-globalization Anti-statism Anti-war movement Autarchism Autonomism Communism Definition of anarchism and libertarianism Dual power IWA Labour movement Left communism Left-libertarianism Libertarianism Libertarian socialism Marxism National-anarchism Relationship between Friedrich Nietzsche and Max Stirner Situationist International Socialism Spontaneous order Anarchism portal Category Outline v t e Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐7qj44
Cached time: 20250818043845
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.145 seconds
Real time usage: 2.537 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 11953/1000000
Revision size: 104892/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 668783/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8918/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 41/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 508676/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.292/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 27578818/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1898.192      1 -total
 41.23%  782.645      1 Template:Reflist
 15.18%  288.227      9 Template:Navbox
 13.39%  254.158      1 Template:Anarchism
 12.59%  239.029      9 Template:Excerpt
 11.15%  211.563     34 Template:Cite_web
 11.09%  210.481     41 Template:Cite_book
 11.03%  209.406     28 Template:Cite_news
  4.75%   90.123      2 Template:IPA
  4.72%   89.625      1 Template:Anti-fascism_sidebar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:stable-pcache:41612950:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818043845 and revision id 1306516264. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anti-fascism&oldid=1306516264 " Categories : Anti-fascism Political movements Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Pages with missing ISBNs CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 Slovenian-language sources (sl) All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from March 2022 Articles with permanently dead external links Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2022 CS1 Greek-language sources (el) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Use dmy dates from August 2016 Use American English from May 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Pages with Latin IPA Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing explicitly cited English-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2012 Articles with unsourced statements from June 2020 Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from May 2020 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2017 Articles containing French-language text Articles with unsourced statements from August 2016 Pages with Italian IPA Articles with unsourced statements from October 2021 Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 04:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anti-fascism 56 languages Add topic

