Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Contributions 3 Recognition 4 Selected bibliography 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ben Fine 2 languages العربية مصرى Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia For the New York Times reporter, see Benjamin Fine .

Ben Fine (born 1948) is Professor of Economics at the University of London's School of Oriental and African Studies .

Background [ edit ] Fine was born in Coventry in 1948. One of six brothers, he and all but one other followed their father and studied mathematics at the University of Oxford . Fine graduated at the age of 20, and then was recruited by Sir James Mirrlees , completing an economics degree. He took his doctorate in economics at the London School of Economics , under the supervision of Amartya Sen , in 1974.

[ 1 ] He moved to the newly established economics department at Birkbeck, University of London , later working part-time as an industrial economist at the Greater London Council prior to its abolition. 
He was a member of the Social Science Research Committee of the UK’s Food Standards Agency, that met until 2016.

[ 2 ] Currently, Ben Fine is emeritus professor of economics at the Department of Economics at SOAS, University of London.
He is on the Economists' Oversight Group of the Citizens' Economic Council of the Royal Society of Arts, Commerce and Manufacturing (RSA).

Contributions [ edit ] Fine initially worked on social choice theory, which later informed several studies of consumer choice and consumption patterns. He developed the 'systems of production' framework to understand the ways in which goods are produced and consumed, working with E. Leopold.

[ 3 ] Latterly he turned to understanding labour economics and inequalities in South Africa's extractives sector, based on some earlier work on the British coal industry, which was in decline.

He is the author of a number of works in the broad tradition of Marxist economics , and has made contributions on economic imperialism and critiques of the concept of social capital . Perhaps his most significant book to date is Marx's 'Capital ' (6th ed. 2016, first ed. 1975), with Alfredo Saad-Filho . His work is cited over 39,000 times (Google Scholar, 2018) and his books have been translated into thirteen languages.

He has advised UNCTAD, UNDESA, UNDP, UNRISD, and Oxfam and served as an expert advisor on President Nelson Mandela 's 1995-1996 South African Labour Market Commission.

Recognition [ edit ] Gunnar Myrdal Prize, European Association for Evolutionary Political Economy (Dimitris Milonakis and Ben Fine, for From Political Economy to Economics , 2009).

In September 2019 a plaque was unveiled in Ben Fine's honour at the Wits School of Governance, University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg in recognition of Fine's contribution as an academic economist and policy activist to the South African anti-apartheid struggle.

Selected bibliography [ edit ] Fine, Ben and Ourania Dimakou (2016) Macroeconomics: A Critical Companion . London: Pluto.

Fine, Ben and Alfredo Saad-Filho (2016) Marx's Capital . London: Pluto, sixth edition (first edition 1975).

Fine, Ben (2016) Microeconomics: A Critical Companion . London: Pluto Press.

(2013) The Coal Question: Political Economy and Industrial Change from the nineteenth century to the present day Routledge Revival. (reprint) Fine, Ben and Alfredo Saad-Filho (2012) CA-PI-TAL!:Introduction à l’économie politique de Marx . Paris: Raisons d’agir Éditions.

Fine, Ben (2010) Women's Employment and the Capitalist Family . London: Routledge Revival.

Labour Market Theory: A Constructive Reassessment , Routledge, 2010 From Political Economy to Economics , (with D Milonakis) Routledge, 2009 From Economic Imperialism to Freakonomics (with D Milonakis), Routledge, 2009 Theories of Social Capital: Researchers Behaving Badly , Pluto, 2009 The World of Consumption Routledge, 2002 Social Capital versus Social Theory: Political Economy and Social Science at the Turn of the Millennium (Contemporary Political Economy) Routledge (2001) The Political Economy of Diet, Health and Food Policy , Routledge, 1998 South Africa's Political Economy: From Minerals-Energy Complex to Industrialisation (with Z Rustomjee), Wits University Press, 1997.

Fine, Ben and Michael Heasman and Judith Wright (1995) Consumption in the Age of Affluence: The World of Food . London: Routledge.

The Peculiarities of the British Economy (with L Harris et al.), Lawrence and Wishart, 1985 Class Politics: An Answer to its Critics, (with other authors) (1985) Macroeconomics and Monopoly Capitalism (with A Murfin), Wheatsheaf, 1984 Economic Theory and Ideology Edward Arnold, 1980 Theories of the Capitalist Economy Edward Arnold, 1982 Rereading Capital (with L Harris), Macmillan, 1979 Edited Books Making Democracy Work: a Framework for Macroeconomic Policy in South Africa Joint contributing editor, Cape Town, CDS, 1994 Development Policy in the 21st Century: Beyond the post-Washington Consensus , Routledge With C Lapavitsas and J Pincus (eds) 2001 The New Development Economics: after the Washington Consensus , ed with K.S. Jomo, Zed Press 2006 Beyond the Developmental State: Industrial Policy into the 21st Century co-ed with J Saraswati and D Tavasci, Pluto, 2013 References [ edit ] ^ Fine, B. 2000. Fine, Ben.  In Philip Arestis, Malcolm C. Sawyer (eds.) A Biographical Dictionary of Dissenting Economists . Edward Elgar.

^ "Members of the SSRC | Food Standards Agency" . Archived from the original on 12 February 2018 . Retrieved 11 February 2018 .

^ http://eprints.soas.ac.uk/15968/7/13-2fine.pdf |   Fine, B. 2013. Consumption matters.

Ephemera 13(2): 217-248.

External links [ edit ] Ben Fine page at SOAS Awards Preceded by Kees van der Pijl Deutscher Memorial Prize 2009 With: Dimitris Milonakis Succeeded by David Harvey Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Greece Korea Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ben_Fine&oldid=1305301476 " Categories : 1948 births Living people British economists Alumni of the London School of Economics Academics of SOAS University of London Academics of Birkbeck, University of London Marxian economists Deutscher Memorial Prize winners People from Coventry Hidden category: Use dmy dates from April 2022 This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 07:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ben Fine 2 languages Add topic

