Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Introductory points Toggle Introductory points subsection 1.1 There is something 1.2 Defining the question 1.3 On timescales 2 Arguments against attempting to answer the question Toggle Arguments against attempting to answer the question subsection 2.1 The question is outside our experience 2.2 Causation may not apply 2.3 We may only say the question because of the nature of our minds 2.4 The brute fact approach 2.5 The question may be impossible to answer 3 Explanations Toggle Explanations subsection 3.1 Something may exist necessarily 3.1.1 Natural laws may necessarily exist, and may enable the emergence of matter 3.1.2 A necessary being bearing the reason for its existence within itself 3.2 A state of nothing may be impossible 3.3 A state of nothing may be unstable 3.4 It is possible for something to  come from nothing 3.5 Other explanations 4 Humour 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Why is there anything at all?

11 languages العربية Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia עברית Nedersaksies 日本語 Polski Română Slovenščina Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Fundamental question of metaphysics ) Metaphysical question This question has been written about by philosophers since at least the ancient Parmenides ( c.

515 BC ).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] " Why is there anything at all?

" or " Why is there something rather than nothing?

" is a question about the reason for basic existence which has been raised or commented on by a range of philosophers and physicists , including Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz , [ 3 ] Ludwig Wittgenstein , [ 4 ] and Martin Heidegger , [ 5 ] who called it "the fundamental question of metaphysics ".

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Introductory points [ edit ] There is something [ edit ] No experiment could support the hypothesis "There is nothing" because any observation obviously implies the existence of an observer.

[ 9 ] Defining the question [ edit ] The question is usually taken as concerning practical causality (rather than a moral reason for), and posed totally and comprehensively, rather than concerning the existence of anything specific, such as the universe or multiverse , the Big Bang , God , mathematical and physical laws , time or consciousness . It can be seen as an open metaphysical question, rather than a search for an exact answer.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] The circled dot was used by the Pythagoreans and later Greeks to represent the first metaphysical being and the metaphysical life, the Monad or the Absolute .

On timescales [ edit ] The question does not include the timing of when anything came to exist.

Some have suggested the possibility of an infinite regress , where, if an entity cannot come from nothing and this concept is mutually exclusive from something , there must have always been something that caused the previous effect, with this causal chain (either deterministic or probabilistic ) extending infinitely back in time .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] Arguments against attempting to answer the question [ edit ] The question is outside our experience [ edit ] Philosopher Stephen Law has said the question may not need answering, as it is attempting to answer a question that is outside a spacetime setting while being within a spacetime setting. He compares the question to asking "what is north of the North Pole ?" [ 17 ] Causation may not apply [ edit ] The ancient Greek philosopher Aristotle argued that everything in the universe must have a cause, culminating in an ultimate uncaused cause . (See Four causes .) However, David Hume argued that a cause may not be necessary in the case of the formation of the universe. Whilst we expect that everything has a cause because of our experience of the necessity of causes, the formation of the universe is outside our experience and may be subject to different rules.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Kant supports [ 20 ] and extends this argument.

[ 21 ] We may only say the question because of the nature of our minds [ edit ] Kant argues that the nature of our mind may lead us to ask some questions (rather than asking because of the validity of those questions).

[ 22 ] [ clarification needed ] The brute fact approach [ edit ] In philosophy, the brute fact approach proposes that some facts cannot be explained in terms of a deeper, more "fundamental" fact.

[ 23 ] [ 24 ] It is in opposition to the principle of sufficient reason approach.

[ 25 ] On this question, Bertrand Russell took a brute fact position when he said, "I should say that the universe is just there, and that's all." [ 26 ] [ 27 ] Sean Carroll similarly concluded that "any attempt to account for the existence of something rather than nothing must ultimately bottom out in a set of brute facts; the universe simply is, without ultimate cause or explanation." [ 28 ] [ 29 ] : 25 The question may be impossible to answer [ edit ] Roy Sorensen has discussed that the question may have an impossible explanatory demand, if there are no existential premises.

[ clarification needed ] [ 30 ] Explanations [ edit ] Something may exist necessarily [ edit ] Philosopher Brian Leftow has argued that the question cannot have a causal explanation (as any cause must itself have a cause) or a contingent explanation (as the factors giving the contingency must pre-exist), and that if there is an answer, it must be something that exists necessarily (i.e., something that just exists, rather than is caused).

[ 31 ] Natural laws may necessarily exist, and may enable the emergence of matter [ edit ] Philosopher of physics Dean Rickles has argued that numbers and mathematics (or their underlying laws) may necessarily exist.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] If we accept that mathematics is an extension of logic , as philosophers such as Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead did, then mathematical structures like numbers and shapes must be necessarily true propositions in all possible worlds .

[ 34 ] [ 35 ] [ 36 ] Physicists, including popular physicists such as Stephen Hawking and Lawrence Krauss , have offered explanations (of at least the first particle coming into existence aspect of cosmogony ) that rely on quantum mechanics , saying that in a quantum vacuum state , virtual particles and spacetime bubbles will spontaneously come into existence.

[ 37 ] The actual mathematical demonstration of quantum fluctuations of the hypothetical false vacuum state spontaneously causing an expanding bubble of true vacuum was done by quantum cosmologists in 2014 at the Chinese Academy of Sciences .

[ 38 ] A necessary being bearing the reason for its existence within itself [ edit ] Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz attributed to God as being the necessary sufficient reason for everything that exists (see: Cosmological argument ). He wrote: "Why is there something rather than nothing? The sufficient reason... is found in a substance which... is a necessary being bearing the reason for its existence within itself." [ 39 ] A state of nothing may be impossible [ edit ] The pre-Socratic philosopher Parmenides was one of the first Western thinkers to question the possibility of nothing, and commentary on this has continued.

[ 9 ] A state of nothing may be unstable [ edit ] Nobel Laureate Frank Wilczek is credited with the aphorism that "nothing is unstable." Physicist Sean Carroll argues that this accounts merely for the existence of matter, but not the existence of quantum states , space-time , or the universe as a whole.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] It is possible for something to  come from nothing [ edit ] See also: A Universe from Nothing Some cosmologists believe it to be possible that something (e.g., the universe ) may come to exist spontaneously from nothing. Some mathematical models support this idea, and it is growing to become a more prevalent explanation among the scientific community for why the Big Bang occurred.

[ 40 ] Other explanations [ edit ] Robert Nozick proposed some possible explanations.

[ 41 ] Self-Subsumption : "a law that applies to itself, and hence explains its own truth." The Nothingness Force : "the nothingness force acts on itself, it sucks nothingness into nothingness and produces something..." Mariusz Stanowski explained: "There must be both something and nothing, because separately neither can be distinguished".

[ 42 ] Humour [ edit ] Philosophical wit Sidney Morgenbesser answered the question with an apothegm : "If there were nothing, you'd still be complaining!", [ 43 ] [ 44 ] or "Even if there was nothing, you still wouldn't be satisfied!" [ 29 ] : 17 See also [ edit ] Fine-tuned universe Being Causality Cosmogony First Cause Creatio ex materia Creatio ex nihilo Existence of God Problem of universals Something (concept) Vertiginous question References [ edit ] ^ "Poem of Parmenides : on nature" .

philoctetes.free.fr . Retrieved 2 May 2017 .

^ "Parmenides" .

World History Encyclopedia . Retrieved 2 May 2017 .

^ "Principles of Nature and Grace" , 1714, Article 7 .

^ "Not how the world is, is the mystical, but that it is" , Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus 6.44 ^ "Why are there beings at all, and why not rather nothing? That is the question." What is Metaphysics? (1929), p. 110, Heidegger.

^ Martin Heidegger, Introduction to Metaphysics , Yale University Press, New Haven and London (1959), pp. 7–8.

^ "The Fundamental Question" .

www.hedweb.com . Retrieved 26 April 2017 .

^ Geier, Manfred (2017).

Wittgenstein und Heidegger: Die letzten Philosophen (in German). Rowohlt Verlag. p. 166.

ISBN 978-3644045118 .

^ a b Sorensen, Roy (November 28, 2023). "Nothingness". In Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ "Metaphysics special: Why is there something rather than nothing?" .

New Scientist . Retrieved 26 April 2017 .

^ Sorensen, Roy (2015).

"Nothingness" .

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 26 April 2017 .

^ Dascal, Marcelo (2008).

Leibniz: What Kind of Rationalist?

. Springer. p. 452.

ISBN 978-1402086687 .

^ Goldschmidt, Tyron (2014).

The Puzzle of Existence: Why Is There Something Rather Than Nothing?

. Routledge.

ISBN 978-1136249228 .

^ Brown, Patterson (1969), Kenny, Anthony (ed.), "Infinite Causal Regression" , Aquinas: A Collection of Critical Essays , Modern Studies in Philosophy, London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, pp.

214– 236, doi : 10.1007/978-1-349-15356-5_9 , ISBN 978-1-349-15356-5 , retrieved 2023-10-22 ^ Cameron, Ross (2022), "Infinite Regress Arguments" , in Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2022 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2023-10-22 ^ Brown, Patterson (1966).

"Infinite Causal Regression" .

The Philosophical Review .

75 (4): 510– 525.

doi : 10.2307/2183226 .

ISSN 0031-8108 .

JSTOR 2183226 .

^ "WHY IS THERE ANYTHING AT ALL? (PART 3)" .

Closer to Truth .

^ Gutting, Gary (2016).

Talking God: Philosophers on Belief . W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0393352825 .

[ page needed ] ^ David Hume argues that our demand that things have causes "is not from knowledge or any scientific reasoning," but from "observation and experience". Hume, Treatise of Human Nature, Part III, Section III, "Why a cause is always necessary", p. 82. It may be that what we observe in our own experience may not apply in some other situations.

^ "First cause | God, Creation, Universe | Britannica" .

www.britannica.com .

^ Kant seems to perhaps argue that expecting the laws of nature to apply to this question is misguided, because they cause our experience, rather than are derived from it.  
"rescues the a priori origin of the pure concepts of the understanding and the validity of the general laws of nature as laws of the understanding, in such a way that their use is limited only to experience, because their possibility has its ground merely in the relation of the understanding to experience, however, not in such a way that they are derived from experience, but that experience is derived from them, a completely reversed kind of connection which never occurred to Hume. (ibid.)" https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/kant-hume-causality/ ^ Brook, Andrew; Wuerth, Julian (August 30, 2023). "Kant's View of the Mind and Consciousness of Self". In Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ Ludwig Fahrbach. "Understanding brute facts," Synthese 145 (3):449 - 466 (2005).

^ Mulligan, Kevin; Correia, Fabrice (November 28, 2021). "Facts". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ Melamed, Yitzhak Y.; Lin, Martin (November 28, 2023). "Principle of Sufficient Reason". In Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.).

The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University – via Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy.

^ "5 Reasons Why the Universe Can't Be Merely a Brute Fact : Strange Notions" . 12 July 2016.

^ "Transcript of the Russell/Copleston radio debate" .

Philosophy of Religion .

^ a b Carroll, Sean M. (2018-02-06). "Why Is There Something, Rather Than Nothing?".

arXiv : 1802.02231v2 [ physics.hist-ph ].

^ a b c Holt, Jim (2012).

Why Does The World Exist . New York: Liveright.

ISBN 978-0-87140-409-1 .

^ Sorensen writes in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy that to many philosophers the question is intrinsically impossible to answer, like squaring a circle , and even God does not sufficiently answer it: "To explain why something exists, we standardly appeal to the existence of something else... For instance, if we answer 'There is something because the Universal Designer wanted there to be something', then our explanation takes for granted the existence of the Universal Designer. Someone who poses the question in a comprehensive way will not grant the existence of the Universal Designer as a starting point. If the explanation cannot begin with some entity, then it is hard to see how any explanation is feasible. Some philosophers conclude 'Why is there something rather than nothing?' is unanswerable. They think the question stumps us by imposing an impossible explanatory demand, namely, 'Deduce the existence of something without using any existential premises'. Logicians should feel no more ashamed of their inability to perform this deduction than geometers should feel ashamed at being unable to square the circle." Sorensen, Roy.

"Nothingness" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Stanford . Retrieved 20 April 2019 .

^ "Brian Leftow – Closer To Truth" .

^ "Dean Rickles – Closer To Truth" .

^ "Michael Kuhn (to Christopher Ishaam) – Closer To Truth" .

^ Tennant, Neil (2017), "Logicism and Neologicism" , in Zalta, Edward N. (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2017 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved 2023-10-22 ^ "Logicism - Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

www.rep.routledge.com . Retrieved 2023-10-22 .

^ Physicist Max Tegmark 's speculative mathematical universe hypothesis states that all mathematical structures exist physically, and the physical universe is one of these structures.

Tegmark, Max (2008). "The Mathematical Universe".

Foundations of Physics .

38 (2): 101– 150.

arXiv : 0704.0646 .

Bibcode : 2008FoPh...38..101T .

doi : 10.1007/s10701-007-9186-9 .

S2CID 9890455 .

^ Theories of the events at the earliest stages of universes existence continue to develop, including the Big Bang , initial singularity , big bounce and associated possible distortions of cessations of time.

"What was there before the Big Bang?" .

www.skyatnightmagazine.com .

^ He, Dongshan; Gao, Dongfeng; Cai, Qing-yu (2014-04-03).

"Spontaneous creation of the universe from nothing" .

Physical Review D .

89 (8).

arXiv : 1404.1207 .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevD.89.083510 .

ISSN 1550-7998 .

^ Monadologie (1714).

Nicholas Rescher , trans., 1991.

The Monadology: An Edition for Students . Uni. of Pittsburgh Press.

Jonathan Bennett's translation.

Latta's translation.

Archived 2015-11-17 at the Wayback Machine ^ Scharf, Caleb (25 January 2012).

"Cosmology: Plucked from the vacuum" .

Nature .

481 (7382): 440.

Bibcode : 2012Natur.481..440S .

doi : 10.1038/481440a .

^ Nozick outlined several possible answers to the question: Nozick, Robert (1981).

Philosophical Explanations . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-66479-1 . Retrieved 2022-06-07 .

Self-Subsumption : "a law that applies to itself, and hence explains its own truth." The Nothingness Force : "the nothingness force acts on itself, it sucks nothingness into nothingness and produces something." "Imagine this force as a vacuum force, sucking things into nonexistence
or keeping them there. If this force acts upon itself,
it sucks nothingness into nothingness, producing something or,
perhaps, everything, every possibility. If we introduced the verb
“to nothing” to denote what this nothingness force does to
things as it makes or keeps them nonexistent, then (we would
say) the nothingness nothings itself."
Philosophical Explanations,
Robert Nozick The Principle of Indifference : establishes that nothing is a possibility among the n possibilities of having something. Then "the probability that there is something is n/(n +1) if n is finite and 1 if n is infinite." Fecundity : "Every possibility—including the possibility that there is nothing—exists in its own independent noninteracting realm." Also discussed here; Berker, Selim (February 28, 2019).

"Phil. 169: Nozick's Philosophical Explanations. Meeting 4: Chapter 2 (Nozick on Why There Is Something Rather than Nothing)" (PDF) .

Harvard University .

^ Stanowski, Mariusz (2021).

Theory and Practice of Contrast Integrating Science, Art and Philosophy . Taylor&Francis.

^ There are two errors in the the title of this book: A sourcebook of philosophical puzzles, paradoxes and problems , Robert M. Martin, p. 4, ISBN 1-55111-493-3 ^ Goldstein, Rebecca (2011).

36 Arguments for the Existence of God: A Work of Fiction . Vintage Contemporaries. p. 349.

ISBN 978-0307456717 .

The Cosmological Argument, like The Argument from the Big Bang and The Argument from the Intelligibility of the Universe, is an expression of our cosmic befuddlement at the question, why is there something rather than nothing? The late philosopher Sidney Morgenbesser had a classic response to this question: "And if there were nothing? You'd still be complaining!" Further reading [ edit ] Holt, Jim (2012).

Why does the world exist?: an existential detective story (1st ed.). New York: Liveright Pub. Corp.

ISBN 978-0871404091 .

Kuhn, Robert Lawrence (2013).

Leslie, John (ed.).

The mystery of existence : why is there anything at all?

. Chichester [England]: John Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 978-0-470-67355-3 .

Sorensen, Roy (2023).

"Nothingness" . In Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2023 ed.). Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University.

External links [ edit ] Why Anything at All?

, Closer to Truth Why is there something rather than nothing?

, Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Metaphysics Theories Abstract object theory Action theory Anti-realism Determinism Dualism Enactivism Essentialism Existentialism Free will Idealism Libertarianism Liberty Materialism Meaning of life Monism Naturalism Nihilism Phenomenalism Physicalism Realism Relativism Scientific realism Solipsism Spiritualism Subjectivism Substance theory Theory of forms Truthmaker theory Type theory Concepts Abstract object Anima mundi Category of being Causality Causal closure Cogito, ergo sum Concept Cosmos Embodied cognition Entity Essence Existence Experience Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Importance Information Data Insight Intelligence Intention Linguistic modality Matter Meaning Mental representation Mind Motion Nature Necessity Object Ontology Pattern Perception Physical object Principle Property Qualia Quality Reality Relation Self Soul Subject Substantial form Thought Time Truth Type–token distinction Universal Unobservable Value Metaphysicians Anscombe Aquinas Aristotle Armstrong Averroes Avicenna Baudrillard Bergson Berkeley Boethius Bolzano Carnap Collingwood Davidson Deleuze Descartes Dummett Al-Ghazali Hegel Heidegger Hume Kant Kierkegaard Al-Kindi Kripke Laozi Leibniz Lewis Locke Lotze Lucretius Malebranche Meinong Moore Mozi Newton Nietzsche Parfit Parmenides Peirce Plantinga Plato Plotinus Proclus Putnam Quine Reid Russell Ryle Sartre Schopenhauer Scotus Spinoza Strawson Suárez Whitehead Wittgenstein Wolff more ...

Notable works Sophist (c. 350 BC) Timaeus (c. 350 BC) Nyāya Sūtras (c. 200 BC) De rerum natura (c. 80 BC) Metaphysics (c. 50) Enneads (c. 270) Daneshnameh-ye Alai and Al-Nijat (c. 1000) Meditations on First Philosophy (1641) Ethics (1677) A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge (1710) Monadology (1714) Critique of Pure Reason (1781) Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783) The Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) The World as Will and Representation (1818) Concluding Unscientific Postscript to Philosophical Fragments (1846) Being and Time (1927) Being and Nothingness (1943) Simulacra and Simulation (1981) Related topics Axiology Cosmology Epistemology Feminist metaphysics Interpretations of quantum mechanics Mereology Meta- Phenomenology Philosophy of mind Philosophy of psychology Philosophy of self Philosophy of space and time Teleology Category Philosophy portal v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category Portals : Philosophy Physics Astronomy Religion Science Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Why_is_there_anything_at_all%3F&oldid=1292137613 " Categories : Cosmogony Metaphysical theories Philosophical problems Possibility Thought experiments Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from December 2017 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2024 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2024 This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 11:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Why is there anything at all?

11 languages Add topic

