Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Synopsis 2 Characters Toggle Characters subsection 2.1 1945 2.2 2016 3 Writing and development 4 Art 5 Publication history 6 Critical reception 7 Awards 8 Adaptations 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Archangel (Gibson comic) 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 2016–17 graphic novel William Gibson Archangel Cover of the first issue of Archangel .

Publication information Publisher IDW Publishing Schedule Monthly Format Limited series Publication date May 2016 – August 2017 October 2017 (HC) No.

of issues 5 Main character(s) Naomi Givens Vince Mathews The Pilot Junior Henderson Creative team Created by William Gibson Michael St. John Smith Written by William Gibson Artist(s) Butch Guice Inker(s) Tom Palmer Letterer(s) Shawn Lee Colorist(s) Diego Rodriguez Collected editions Hardcover ISBN 978-1631408755 Archangel , also written as William Gibson Archangel or William Gibson's Archangel , is a five-issue limited series comic book that was created by William Gibson and Michael St. John Smith, written by William Gibson, illustrated by Butch Guice and story-edited by Michael Benedetto. It is Gibson's first comic book series, which is set in an alternative version of 2016 in which the Vice President of America travels back in time to 1945 to secure power.

IDW Publishing first released Archangel from May 2016 to August 2017, then in October as a hardcover graphic novel . It was nominated for an Eisner Award for Best Limited Series and was adapted into an audio play that was released by Audible .

Synopsis [ edit ] In a devastated alternative version of 2016, US Vice President Junior Henderson uses a device called the Splitter to travel back in time with six commandos to 1945 Allied-occupied Berlin . They kill Henderson's grandfather, an Office of Strategic Services major, and Junior takes his place. In 2016, another faction led by Major Torres seizes control of the Splitter and sends a stealth plane to stop Henderson but it crashes with The Pilot parachuting into US-occupied territory.

Royal Air Force officer Naomi Givens, who had been investigating foo fighters , agrees to share information with her ex-boyfriend Vince Matthews, a US Intelligence officer who has custody of The Pilot. Henderson arrives to take command but The Pilot escapes using a stealth suit sent by Torres. To complete his mission, The Pilot allies with Givens—who, based on her observations, accepts him as a time traveller—and Matthews, who is skeptical but realizes Henderson is a dangerous imposter.

The Pilot predicts the bombing of Hiroshima and reveals Henderson's plan to use the second atomic bomb to attack the Port of Arkhangelsk , Soviet Union , destroying half of the Soviet fleet , and killing Joseph Stalin and most of the Soviet chain-of-command, allowing the United States to rule the world unchallenged. With the aid of Soviet Colonel Yermakov, they locate Henderson's B-29 in flight and Torres teleports them aboard the aircraft, where they defeat Henderson and his commandos. In 2016, US government forces breach the Splitter's bunker and overpower Torres. Physicist Jack Davis, the inventor of the Splitter who until then had expressed doubts about the wisdom of Torres's plan, activates the Splitter. The armed nuclear bomb detonates at a temporary White House located outside the Splitter facility. Givens and Matthews are returned to Berlin as news of the nuclear attack on Nagasaki is received in a restored timeline. The Pilot arrives in a peaceful 2016 Berlin, having thwarted one megalomaniac US president only to be confronted by a newspaper headline describing the possibility of another.

Characters [ edit ] 1945 [ edit ] Naomi Givens: An RAF Intelligence Officer, a materials scientist, and one of the main protagonists of the story.

Vince Mathews: A US Intelligence Officer, who is Naomi's ex-boyfriend, and one of the main protagonists of the story.

Fritz: Naomi's driver and black market expert.

Herr Säugling (Mr Baby): Owner of the last surviving night club in Berlin.

Yermakov: A Ukrainian colonel in Soviet intelligence 2016 [ edit ] The Pilot: A tattooed Marine sent back to 1945, and one of the main protagonists of the story.

Junior Henderson: The US vice president, who goes back in time to make sure his powerbase in entrenched in the past. His father is the US President for life .

Major Guadalupe [ 1 ] Torres: A scientist who is in control of the Splitter.

Jack Davis: A physicist who created the Splitter; a detainee and eventual ally of Torres.

Writing and development [ edit ] Archangel 's co-creator and writer William Gibson was inspired by supernatural and conspiracy stories surrounding World War II , which he called "the Weird War", and drew upon his own Cold War nuclear anxiety .

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Gibson, and writer and actor Michael St. John Smith, [ 4 ] first pitched the idea for Archangel to a German television company, [ 5 ] [ 6 ] which declined it. Gibson and St. John Smith then developed the idea into a screenplay and a computer game.

[ 4 ] When IDW Publishing approached Gibson about adapting a novel, he immediately proposed developing Archangel into a comic book.

[ citation needed ] The IDW team included artist Butch Guice , and the comic book includes inking by Tom Palmer, colors by Diego Rodriguez, and letters by Shawn Lee.

[ 1 ] [ 7 ] The comic book's main setting in Berlin is a holdover from the project's original pitch for German television.

[ 8 ] Gibson stated that the story became "leaner" and "more linear" in comics form.

[ 9 ] According to Gibson's afterword in the hardcover edition, the story was continually revised due to contemporaneous events. The final frames give the ending a context the creators "could [not] have possibly imagined when we began work on our first issue".

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] Art [ edit ] Butch Guice illustrated Archangel , except for the fifth issue, which was illustrated by Wagner Reis and Tom Palmer.

[ 10 ] Publishers Weekly noted the art contrasts the bright neon colors of future technology with dark, earthy tones of the 1940s "that evokes wartime cloak-and-dagger exploits".

[ 11 ] A review in Paste noted the "conscious interplay of shadows and silhouettes" in the composition of frames makes for "a thrilling combination of uncertainty, dynamism and intrigue" that is required of the genre.

[ 12 ] Publication history [ edit ] Archangel was initially published as a five-issue limited edition comic book series, the first issue of which was released on 18 May 2016 [ 12 ] and the final issue was released in August 2017.

[ 10 ] The story was republished as a hardcover graphic novel on 3 October 2017.

[ 2 ] [ 9 ] Critical reception [ edit ] Critics gave Archangel a positive reception. Tom Batten of Library Journal described the graphic novel as "thought-provoking, unabashedly political [science fiction]".

[ 13 ] Joel Cunningham described the graphic novel as a "twisting, complex narrative ... [that is] perfectly suited to the medium".

[ 9 ] Writing about the first issue, Toussaint Egan of Paste found it an impressive first comic by Gibson and Smith with strong artwork aiding the establishment of the main characters.

[ 12 ] Jonathan Gitli of Ars Technica stated Archangel has "hit a chord" and is "thought-provoking science fiction"; Gitli writes positively about the female characters with "strong wills and personalities", and also notes IDW Publishing sold out the initial print run in just a few days.

[ 8 ] Cory Doctorow reviewed the first issue in Boing Boing and said it "fires on all cylinders" and that the "art and dialog work extra duty to convey a story that is native to the medium". He concludes the comic is "spectacular".

[ 14 ] A review in Publishers Weekly stated the graphic novel "mines the rich pseudoscience mythology surrounding World War II, or 'The Weird War ' ".

[ 11 ] Laura Hudson of Wired wrote the graphic novel is part of a "long tradition of 'what if' stories about World War II", which examines "the apocalyptic terror of nuclear weaponry" and alludes to repetition of self-destructive human impulses.

[ 2 ] Jason P. Woodbury of Comic Book Resources gave the series a positive review and said it felt "deliriously contemporary" because it was published during the 2016 United States presidential election and features "power-hungry politicians, complicated conspiracies involving Russia, UK and US agents caught between shifting national allegiances ... pondering the justification of their actions".  He took particular note of the Twilight Zone -like ending and asks: "What if the true dystopia is whatever dystopia you happen to inhabit?".

[ 10 ] Awards [ edit ] Archangel was nominated for an Eisner Award for Best Limited Series.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 15 ] Adaptations [ edit ] Archangel was adapted into a full-cast, three-hour radio play that was written by Gibson and Smith, and produced and released by Audible .

[ 16 ] On 25 July 2016, at San Diego Comic-Con , William Gibson stated Archangel had been optioned for television and he later confirmed this on Twitter .

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] List of works by William Gibson William Gibson References [ edit ] ^ a b c Gibson, William ; Smith, Michael St. John ( w ), Guice, Butch ; Barrionuevo, Alejandro; Reis, Wagner ( p ), Palmer, Tom ; Guice, Butch ( i ).

Archangel (hardcover) (October 2017). San Diego, California: IDW Publishing , ISBN 978-1-63142-875-5.

^ a b c Hudson, Laura (2 October 2017).

"William Gibson's New Graphic Novel Takes Nuclear Anxiety to Its Terrifying End" .

Wired .

Archived from the original on 8 October 2017 . Retrieved 1 November 2021 .

^ a b Merchant, Brian (24 August 2017).

"William Gibson: 'I Never Expected to Be Living in an American Retro-Future' " .

Vice .

Archived from the original on 12 November 2020 . Retrieved 1 November 2021 .

^ a b "William Gibson Goes From Sci-Fi To Sky High With Archangel" .

Archived from the original on 2016-05-12 . Retrieved 2016-06-02 .

^ "William Gibson on his time-bending trip into comics with IDW's new Archangel miniseries" .

Archived from the original on 2016-05-21 . Retrieved 2016-06-02 .

^ Riesman, Abraham (1 August 2017).

"William Gibson Has a Theory About Our Cultural Obsession With Dystopias" .

Vulture . Vox media.

^ "GCD :: Issue :: Archangel #2 [Regular Cover]" .

Grand Comics Database . Retrieved 21 December 2021 .

^ a b Gitlin, Jonathan M. (29 May 2016).

"William Gibson has written a comic, and you should read it" .

Ars Technica .

Archived from the original on 26 December 2016 . Retrieved 15 June 2017 .

^ a b c Cunningham, Joel (25 September 2017).

"William Gibson's Archangel Is a Story That Demanded to Be a Comic" .

Barnes & Noble .

Archived from the original on 4 December 2019 . Retrieved 1 November 2021 .

^ a b c d Woodbury, Jason P. (7 August 2017).

"Archangel Successfully Brings William Gibson's Cyberpunk to Comics" .

Comic Book Resources . St Laurent, Quebec.

Archived from the original on 8 March 2021 . Retrieved 1 November 2021 .

^ a b c "William Gibson's Archangel" .

Publishers Weekly .

Archived from the original on 1 November 2021 . Retrieved 31 October 2021 .

^ a b c Egan, Toussaint (20 May 2016). "William Gibson & Butch Guice's Archangel Takes Mind-Bending Flight".

Paste .

^ Batten, Tom (1 November 2017).

"William Gibson's Archangel" .

Library Journal .

Archived from the original on 1 November 2021 . Retrieved 1 November 2021 .

^ Doctorow, Cory (8 July 2016).

"William Gibson's Archangel: intricate military sf, mercilessly optimized for comics" .

Boing Boing .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2016 . Retrieved 14 July 2016 .

^ Brown, Tracy (3 May 2017).

"2017 Eisner Award nominees include 'The Art of Charlie Chan Hock Chye' and 'Saga' " .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on 19 August 2018 . Retrieved 1 November 2021 .

^ Gunderson, Alexis (20 August 2018). "With William Gibson's Archangel , Audible Translates a Graphic Novel into a Radio Play".

Paste .

^ "William Gibson Tweet: "Optioned for television" " .

Archived from the original on 2018-12-16 . Retrieved 2016-08-06 .

External links [ edit ] IDW: Archangel #1 Archangel Annotations Archangel comic animated trailer on YouTube v t e William Gibson List of works List of awards and nominations Novels Sprawl trilogy Neuromancer (1984) Count Zero (1986) Mona Lisa Overdrive (1988) Bridge trilogy Virtual Light (1993) Idoru (1996) All Tomorrow's Parties (1999) Blue Ant trilogy Pattern Recognition (2003) Spook Country (2007) Zero History (2010) Jackpot series The Peripheral (2014) Agency (2020) Other The Difference Engine (with Bruce Sterling ) (1990) Archangel (2016) Short stories " Fragments of a Hologram Rose " " Johnny Mnemonic " " The Gernsback Continuum " " Hinterlands " " New Rose Hotel " " The Belonging Kind " " Burning Chrome " " Red Star, Winter Orbit " " The Winter Market " " Dogfight " " Skinner's Room " Burning Chrome collection Nonfiction Agrippa (A Book of the Dead) " Disneyland with the Death Penalty " No Maps for These Territories Distrust That Particular Flavor Television " Kill Switch " " First Person Shooter " Characters Molly Millions Bobby Newmark Rei Toei Cayce Pollard Hubertus Bigend Story elements Cyberspace Megacorporation Locative art Intrusion Countermeasures Electronics Raygun Gothic Derivative works Neuromancer video game Johnny Mnemonic film New Rose Hotel film Node Magazine William Gibson: A Literary Companion The Peripheral TV series Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Archangel_(Gibson_comic)&oldid=1290169636 " Categories : Novels by William Gibson Comics set in the 21st century Alternate history Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from December 2021 This page was last edited on 13 May 2025, at 05:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Archangel (Gibson comic) 1 language Add topic

