Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Early influences 3 Social philosophy Toggle Social philosophy subsection 3.1 Weaver's Old South 3.2 Communitarian individualism 4 Philosophy of language Toggle Philosophy of language subsection 4.1 Linguistics 4.2 Poetry 4.3 Rhetoric 5 Metaphysics 6 Influence and legacy 7 See also 8 Bibliography 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Richard M. Weaver 7 languages العربية Deutsch Français مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American scholar (1910–1963) For other people with the same name, see Richard Weaver (disambiguation) .

Photo of Weaver Richard Malcolm Weaver, Jr (March 3, 1910 – April 1, 1963) was an American scholar who taught English at the University of Chicago . He is primarily known as an intellectual historian, political philosopher, and a mid-20th century conservative and as an authority on modern rhetoric . Weaver was briefly a socialist during his youth, a lapsed leftist intellectual (conservative by the time he was in graduate school), a teacher of composition , a Platonist philosopher, cultural critic , and a theorist of human nature and society.

Described by biographer Fred Young as a "radical and original thinker", [ 1 ] Weaver's books Ideas Have Consequences (1948) and The Ethics of Rhetoric (1953) remain influential among conservative theorists and scholars of the American South .  Weaver was also associated with a group of scholars who in the 1940s and 1950s promoted traditionalist conservatism .

Life [ edit ] Weaver was the eldest of four children born to a middle-class Southern family in Asheville, North Carolina .  His father, Richard Sr., owned a livery stable. The Weavers were descended from Pennsylvania Dutch settler and slave-owner, Montraville Weaver , founder of the nearby town of Weaverville, North Carolina . After the death of her husband during 1915, Carolyn Embry Weaver supported her children by working in her family's department store in her native Lexington, Kentucky .  Lexington is the home of the University of Kentucky and of two private colleges.

Despite his family's straitened circumstances after the death of his father, Richard Jr. attended a private boarding school and the University of Kentucky . He earned an A.B in English in 1932. The teacher at Kentucky who most influenced him was Francis Galloway .  After a year of graduate study at Kentucky, Weaver began a master's degree in English at Vanderbilt University .

John Crowe Ransom supervised his thesis, titled The Revolt against Humanism , a critique of the humanism of Irving Babbitt and Paul Elmer More .  Weaver then taught one year at Auburn University and three years at Texas A&M University .

During 1940, Weaver began a Ph.D. in English at Louisiana State University (LSU), whose faculty included the rhetoricians and critics Cleanth Brooks and Robert Penn Warren , and the conservative political philosopher Eric Voegelin . While at LSU, Weaver spent summers studying at Harvard University , the University of Virginia , and the Sorbonne . His Ph.D. was awarded in 1943 for a thesis, supervised first by Arlin Turner then by Cleanth Brooks , titled The Confederate South, 1865-1910: A Study in the Survival of a Mind and a Culture . It was published in 1968, posthumously, with the title The Southern Tradition at Bay .

After one year's teaching at North Carolina State University , Weaver joined the English department at the University of Chicago , where he spent the rest of his career, [ 2 ] and where his exceptional teaching earned him that university's Quantrell Award during 1949. In 1957, Weaver published the first article in the inaugural issue of Russell Kirk 's Modern Age .

Weaver spent his academic summers in a house he purchased in his ancestral Weaverville, North Carolina , very near Asheville.  His widowed mother resided there year-round.  Weaver traveled between Chicago and Asheville by train.  To connect himself with traditional modes of agrarian life, he insisted that the family vegetable garden in Weaverville be plowed by mule. Every August the Weaver family had a reunion which Richard regularly attended and not infrequently addressed.

Precocious and bookish from a very young age, Weaver grew up to become "one of the most well-educated intellectuals of his era".

[ 3 ] Highly self-sufficient and independent, he has been described as "solitary and remote", [ 4 ] as a "shy little bulldog of a man".

[ 5 ] Lacking close friends, and having few lifelong correspondents other than his Vanderbilt teacher and fellow Agrarian Donald Davidson , Weaver was able to concentrate on his scholarly activities.

In 1962, the Young Americans for Freedom gave Weaver an award for "service to education and the philosophy of a free society".

[ 6 ] Shortly before his sudden death in Chicago , Weaver accepted an appointment at Vanderbilt University .  Weaver died on April 1, 1963. According to his sister, he died from a cerebral hemorrhage.

[ 7 ] In 1964, the Intercollegiate Studies Institute [ 8 ] created a graduate fellowship in his memory.

[ 9 ] In 1983, the Rockford Institute established the annual Richard M. Weaver Award for Scholarly Letters.

Early influences [ edit ] Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Weaver strongly believed in preserving and defending what he considered to be traditional Southern principles.

[ 10 ] These principles, such as anti-consumerism and Cavalier chivalry , were the basis of Weaver's teaching, writing, and speaking.

Having been raised with strong moral values, Weaver considered religion as the foundation for family and civilization.

[ 11 ] His appreciation for religion is evident in speeches he gave early while an undergraduate at the Christian Endeavour Society , as well as in his later writings.

[ 12 ] Influenced by his University of Kentucky professors, who were mostly of Midwestern origin and of social democratic inclinations, and by the crisis of the Great Depression , Weaver believed that industrial capitalism had caused a general moral, economic, and intellectual failure in the United States . Hoping initially that socialism would afford an alternative to the prevailing industrialist culture, [ 13 ] he joined the Kentucky chapter of the American Socialist Party . During 1932 Weaver actively campaigned for Norman Thomas , the standard-bearer of that party. A few years later, he made a financial contribution to the Loyalist cause in the Spanish Civil War . Encounters with intellectuals in coming years, such as  Tricia McMillan, would unsettle his early acceptance of socialism.

While completing a thesis for a master's degree in English at Vanderbilt University , Weaver discovered ideas related to the Southern Agrarians there.

[ 14 ] Gradually he began a rejection of socialism and embrace of tradition but he loved it. He admired and sought to emulate its leader, the "doctor of culture" John Crowe Ransom .

[ 15 ] The Agrarians wrote passionately about the traditional values of community and the Old South. In 1930, a number of Vanderbilt University faculty and their students, led by Ransom, wrote an Agrarian manifesto, titled I'll Take My Stand .

[ 16 ] Weaver agreed with the group's suspicion of the post-Civil War industrialization of the South.

[ 17 ] He found more congenial Agrarianism's focus on traditionalism and regional cultures than socialism's egalitarian "romanticizing" of the welfare state .

[ 18 ] Weaver abandoned socialism for Agrarianism only gradually over a number of years; the thinking of his 1934 M.A. thesis was not Agrarian.

[ 19 ] Social philosophy [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Weaver's Old South [ edit ] The Southern Tradition at Bay , the title under which Weaver's 1943 doctoral dissertation was published in 1968 after his death, surveyed the post- Appomattox literature of the states that were part of the Confederacy . He revealed what he considered its continuities with the antebellum era . Weaver also discussed certain Southerners who dissented from this tradition, such as Walter Hines Page , George Washington Cable , and Henry W. Grady , whom he termed "Southern liberals." Weaver identified four traditional Southern characteristics: "a feudal theory of society, a code of chivalry , the ancient concept of the gentleman, and a noncreedal faith".

[ 20 ] According to him, the Southern feudal system was centered on the legitimate pride a family line derived from linking its name to a piece of land.

[ 21 ] For Weaver, land ownership gave the individual a much needed "stability, responsibility, dignity, and sentiment".

[ 22 ] However, in his Ideas Have Consequences , Weaver downplayed the materialistic notion of ownership.  He asserted that private property was "the last metaphysical right" of the individual.

[ 23 ] Southern chivalry and gentlemen's behavior, on the other hand, emphasized a paternalistic personal honor, and decorum over competition and cleverness.

[ 24 ] Weaver claimed that women preferred the romanticized soldier to the materialistic businessman.

[ 25 ] The noncreedal faith that Weaver advocated (he was a nonpracticing Protestant ) grew out of what he termed the South's "older religiousness." [ 26 ] The "religion" emphasized a respect for tradition and nature and for the Anglican / Episcopal church, [ 27 ] the established church in Virginia and south during the colonial era. Weaver agreed with the traditional Christian notion that external science and technology could not save man, who was born a sinner and in need of redemption.

[ 28 ] Weaver believed that the South was the "last non-materialist civilization in the Western World." [ 29 ] Weaver came to advocate a revival of southern traditions as the only cure for a commodity-based capitalism. He believed it was a way to combat the social degradation that he witnessed while he lived in Chicago.

Communitarian individualism [ edit ] In a short speech delivered to the 1950 reunion of the Weaver clan, Weaver criticized urban life in Chicago as follows: "the more closely people are crowded together, the less they know one another".

[ 30 ] In a comparative study of Randolph of Roanoke and Thoreau , Weaver defined  "individualism" in two ways: 1) "studied withdrawal from society" (i.e. Thoreau) and 2) "political action at the social level" (i.e. Randolph).

[ 31 ] Thoreau (according to Weaver) rejected society while Randolph embraced social bonds through politics.

Personally opposed to America's centralized political power, Weaver, like Randolph, preferred an individualism that included community.

[ 32 ] "Community" here refers to a shared identity of values tied to a geographical and spatial location – in Weaver's case, the Old South. He concluded that individualism that is founded on community enabled a citizen "to know who he was and what he was about".

[ 33 ] Without this intimate foundation, citizens seeking individualism would be unable to reach a true, personal identity. More importantly, he believed that people should grant priority to a living community and its well-being, not to individual fulfillment.

[ 34 ] Philosophy of language [ edit ] Linguistics [ edit ] Weaver gradually came to see himself as the "cultural doctor of the South" although he made his career in Chicago.

[ 35 ] More specifically, he sought to resist what he saw as America's growing barbarism by teaching his students of the correct way to write, use, and understand language, which connected Weaver with Platonist ideals. Following the tradition of the Socratic dialogues, Weaver taught that misuse of language caused social corruption. That belief led him to criticize jazz as a medium that promoted "barbaric impulses" because he perceived the idiom as lacking form and rules.

[ 36 ] [ 37 ] Poetry [ edit ] Weaver's study of American literature emphasized the past, such as the 19th-century culture of New England and the South and the Lincoln-Douglas debates .

[ 38 ] Attempting a true understanding of language, Weaver concentrated on a culture's fundamental beliefs; that is, beliefs that strengthened and educated citizens into a course of action.

[ 39 ] By teaching and studying language, he endeavored to generate a healthier culture that would no longer use language as a tool of lies and persuasion in a "prostitution of words." [ 40 ] Moreover, in a capitalist society, applied science was the "sterile opposite" of what he saw as redemption, the "poetic and ethical vision of life".

[ 41 ] Weaver condemned modern media and modern journalism as tools for exploiting the passive viewer. Convinced that ideas, not machines, compelled humanity towards a better future, he gave words precedence over technology.

[ 42 ] Influenced by the Agrarians' emphasis of poetry, he began writing poetry.

[ 43 ] In a civilized society, poetry allowed one to express personal beliefs that science and technology could not overrule. In Weaver's words, "We can will our world." [ 44 ] That is, human beings, not mechanical or social forces, can make positive decisions by language that will change their existence.

Rhetoric [ edit ] Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e In The Ethics of Rhetoric , Weaver evaluates the ability of rhetoric to persuade. Similarly to ancient philosophers , Weaver found that language has the power to move people to do good, to do evil, or to do nothing at all.

[ 45 ] In his defense of orthodoxy, Weaver set down a number of rhetorical principles. He grounded his definition of "noble rhetoric" in the work of Plato ; such rhetoric aimed to improve intellect by presenting men with "better versions of themselves".

[ 46 ] He also agreed with Plato's notions of the realities of transcendentals (recall Weaver's hostility to nominalism) and the connection between form and substance.

[ 47 ] For instance, Weaver admired the connection between the forms of poetry and rhetoric. Like poetry, rhetoric relies on the connotation of words as well as their denotation . Good rhetoricians, he asserted, use poetic analogies to relate abstract ideas directly to the listeners.

[ 48 ] Specifically emphasizing metaphor , he found that comparison should be an essential part of the rhetorical process.

[ 49 ] However, arguments from definition—that is, from the very nature of things (justice, beauty, the nature of man) -- had an even higher ethical status, because they were grounded in essences rather than similarities. Arguments grounded in mere circumstance ("I have to quit school because I cannot afford the tuition") Weaver viewed as the least ethical, because they grant the immediate facts a higher status than principle. Finally, Weaver pointed out that arguments from authority are only as good as the authority itself.

[ 50 ] In Language is Sermonic , Weaver pointed to rhetoric as a presentation of values. Sermonic language seeks to persuade the listener, and is inherent in all communication. Indeed, the very choice to present arguments from definition instead of from consequence implies that one of the modes of reason carries greater value. He also considered rhetoric and the multiplicity of man. That is, he acknowledged that logic alone was not enough to persuade man, who is "a pathetic being, that is, a being feeling and suffering".

[ 51 ] He felt that societies that placed great value on technology often became dehumanized. Like a machine relying purely on logic, the rhetorician was in danger of becoming "a thinking robot".

[ 52 ] Weaver divided the nature of man into four categories: rational, emotional, ethical, and religious.

[ 53 ] Without considering these characteristics as a whole, rhetoricians cannot hope to persuade their listeners. Moreover, when motivating the listener to adopt attitudes and actions, rhetoricians must consider the uniqueness of each audience.

[ 54 ] In other words, orators should acknowledge that each audience has different needs and responses, and must formulate their arguments accordingly. Weaver also divided "argumentation" into four categories: cause-effect , definition , consequences , and circumstances .

[ 55 ] The rhetorician must decide which method of argument will best persuade a given audience.

In his The Ethics of Rhetoric , Weaver coined the phrases "god terms" and "devil terms".

[ 56 ] "God terms" are words particular to a certain age and are vague, but have "inherent potency" in their meanings.

[ 57 ] Such words include progress and freedom – words that seem impenetrable and automatically give a phrase positive meaning. In contrast, "devil terms" are the mirror image, and include words such as Communist and Un-American.

[ 58 ] Rhetoric, Weaver argued, must employ such terminology only with care. Employing ethical rhetoric is the first step towards rejecting vague terminology with propagandistic value.

[ 59 ] Upon hearing a "god" or "devil" term, Weaver suggested that a listener should "hold a dialectic with himself" to consider the intention behind such persuasive words.

[ 60 ] He concluded that "a society's health or declension was mirrored in how it used language".

[ 61 ] If a language is pure, so too will be those who employ it.

Metaphysics [ edit ] In Ideas Have Consequences , Weaver analyzed William of Occam's 14th century notions of nominalist philosophy. In broad terms, nominalism is the idea that " universals are not real, only particulars".

[ 62 ] Nominalism deprives people of a measure of universal truth, so that each man becomes his own "priest and ethics professor".

[ 63 ] Weaver deplored this relativism , and believed that modern men were "moral idiots, ... incapable of distinguishing between better and worse".

[ 64 ] Weaver viewed America's moral degradation and turn toward commodity-culture as the unwitting consequences of its belief in nominalism. That is, a civilization that no longer believed in universal transcendental values had no moral ambition to understand a higher truth outside of man.

[ 65 ] The result was a "shattered world", [ 66 ] in which truth was unattainable, and freedom only an illusion. Moreover, without a focus on the sort of higher truth that can be found in organized religions, people turned to the more tangible idols of science and materialism .

More generally, Weaver felt that the shift from universal truth and transcendental order to individual opinion and industrialism adversely affected the moral health of Americans. His Southern view reflected the views of the old English Country Party (as opposed to the Court Party).

Nominalism also undermines the concept of hierarchy , which depends entirely on fundamental truths about people. Weaver, in contrast, believed that hierarchies are necessary. He argued that social, gender, and age-related equality actually undermine stability and order. Believing in "natural social groupings".

[ 67 ] he claimed that it should be possible to sort people into suitable categories without the envy of equality. Using the hierarchical structure of a family as an example, he thought that family members accept various duties grounded in "sentiment" and "fraternity," not equality and rights.

[ 68 ] Continuing in this direction, he claimed not to understand the feminist movement , which led women to abandon their stronger connection to nature and intuition for a superficial political and economic equality with men.

[ 69 ] Weaver maintained that egalitarianism only promoted "[s]uspicion, hostility, and lack of trust and loyalty".

[ 70 ] Instead, he believed that there must be a center, a transcendent truth on which people could focus and structure their lives. Contrary to what nominalism would suggest, language can be pinned down, can serve as a foundation through which one can "find real meaning".

[ 71 ] So, those who do not understand language can never find real meaning, which is inordinately tragic. In Weaver's words, "a world without generalization would be a world without knowledge".

[ 72 ] Thus universals allow true knowledge.

Influence and legacy [ edit ] Some regard The Southern Tradition at Bay as Weaver's best work.

Ideas Have Consequences is more widely known, thanks to its substantial influence on the "postwar intellectual Right ".

[ 73 ] The leading young conservative intellectuals of the era, including Russell Kirk , William F. Buckley Jr.

, and Willmoore Kendall , praised the book for its critical insights.

[ 74 ] Publisher Henry Regnery claims that the book gave the modern conservative movement a strong intellectual foundation.

[ 75 ] Frank S. Meyer , a libertarian theorist of the 1960s – and former Communist Party USA member – publicly thanked Weaver for inspiring him to join the Right.

[ 76 ] For many liberals, Weaver was a misguided authoritarian. For many conservatives, he was a champion of tradition and liberty, with the emphasis on tradition . For Southerners, he was a refreshing defender of an "antimodern" South.

[ 77 ] For others he was a historical revisionist.

[ 78 ] His refutation of what Russell Kirk termed "ritualistic liberalism " [ 79 ] struck a chord with conservative intellectuals. Stemming from a tradition of " cultural pessimism ", [ 80 ] his critique of nominalism, however startling, gave conservatives a new philosophical direction. His writing attacked the growing number of modern Americans denying conservative structure and moral uprightness, confronting them with empirical functionalism . During the 1980s, the emerging paleoconservatives adapted his vision of the Old South to express antimodernism .

[ 81 ] Weaver has come to be seen as defining America's plight and as inspiring conservatives to find "the relationship between faith and reason for an age that does not know the meaning of faith".

[ 82 ] Weaver's personal library is kept at Hillsdale College in Hillsdale, Michigan.

[ 83 ] See also [ edit ] conservatism portal Agrarianism Neo-Confederate Nominalism Paleo-conservatism Problem of universals Rhetoric Weaver family (North Carolina) Anglo-Saxonism People Wendell Berry (b. 1934) Donald Davidson (1893-1968) Russell Kirk (1918-1994) John Crowe Ransom (1888-1974) Leo Strauss (1899-1973) Eric Voegelin (1901-1985) Bibliography [ edit ] 1948.

Ideas Have Consequences .

Univ. of Chicago Press.

1985 (1953).

The Ethics of Rhetoric . Davis CA: Hermagoras Press.

1967 (1957).

Rhetoric and Composition , 2nd ed. of Composition: A Course in Reading and Writing . Holt, Rinehart, and Winston.

1995 (1964).

Visions of Order : The Cultural Crisis of Our Time . Bryn Mawr PA: ISI Press.

1965.

Life without Prejudice and Other Essays . Chicago: Henry Regnery.

1989 (1968).

The Southern Tradition at Bay , Core, George, and Bradford, M.E., eds. Washington DC: Regnery Gateway.

1970.

Language is Sermonic: R. M. Weaver on the Nature of Rhetoric , Johannesen, R., Strickland, R., and Eubanks, R.T., eds. Louisiana State Univ. Press.

1987.

The Southern Essays of Richard M. Weaver , Curtis, G. M. III, and Thompson, James J. Jr., eds. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund.

References [ edit ] ^ Young 4 ^ Young 3-4 ^ Scotchie 4 ^ Young 1 ^ Nash 84 ^ Scotchie x ^ Young, Fred (1995).

Richard M. Weaver, 1910-1963: A Life of the Mind . University of Missouri Press. p. 176.

^ Nash 82 ^ "Intercollegiate Studies Institute - Programs - Richard Weaver Fellowship" . Archived from the original on 2006-02-06 . Retrieved 2006-02-07 .

^ Young 8 ^ Young 21 ^ Young 22 ^ Young 3 ^ Young 69 ^ Young 5 ^ Young 38 ^ Young 47 ^ Scotchie 12 ^ Young 58 ^ Young 78 ^ Young 81 ^ Scotchie 25 ^ Nash 100 ^ Young 83 ^ Scotchie 36 ^ Young 84 ^ Young 84-85 ^ Scotchie 21 ^ Scotchie 17 ^ Address 114 ^ Young 11 ^ Young 12 ^ Young 12 ^ Scotchie 3 ^ Young 5 ^ Scotchie 46 ^ Groothuis, Douglas (2 July 2015).

"Jazz and Politics" . All About Jazz.

Archived from the original on 3 July 2015 . Retrieved 2 July 2015 .

^ Young 6 ^ Young 9 ^ Young 9 ^ Young 62 ^ Nash 96 ^ Young 76 ^ Nash 97 ^ Young 129 ^ Young 135 ^ Johannesen 7 ^ Young 132 ^ Johannesen 23 ^ Johannesen 27 ^ Weaver 1352 ^ Weaver 1353 ^ Johannesen 13 ^ Weaver 1351 ^ Johannesen 27 ^ Young 147-49 ^ Young 147 ^ Weaver 222-23 ^ Johannesen 27 ^ Weaver 232 ^ Young 151 ^ Young 107 ^ Scotchie 5 ^ Nash 89 ^ Nash 89 ^ Young 113 ^ Young 112 ^ Young 113 ^ Young 123 ^ Toledano 270 ^ Young 122 ^ Young 114 ^ Nash 87 ^ Young 179 ^ Nash 82 ^ Nash 88 ^ Nash 108 ^ Bailey, Jeremy David (September 22, 2004).

"Richard Weaver's untraditional case for federalism" . Publius. Archived from the original on February 2, 2014 . Retrieved 13 February 2013 .

^ Nash 87 ^ Nash 92 ^ Nash 109 ^ Toledano 259 ^ "Mossey Library Collections" Archived 2019-04-15 at the Wayback Machine Retrieved 2019-04-15 Further reading [ edit ] Drumm, Robert J.

Richard M. Weaver's Approach to Criticism .  A thesis In Communication Studies Submitted to the Graduate Faculty of Texas Tech University in Partial Fulfillment of the Requirements for the Degree of Master OF Arts.

Duffy, Bernard K. and Martin Jacobi, 1993.

The Politics of Rhetoric:  Richard Weaver and the Conservative Tradition .  Greenwood Press.

Johannesen, Richard L.  ″Some Pedagogical Implications of Richard M. Weaver's Views on Rhetoric″.

College Composition and Communication , Vol. 29, No. 3 (Oct., 1978), pp. 272–279.

Johannesen, Richard L., Rennard Strickland, and Ralph T. Eubanks, 1970.

Richard M. Weaver on the Nature of Rhetoric: An Interpretation in Weaver, R. M., Language is Sermonic . Louisiana State University Press: 7-30.

Nash, George H., 1998, "The Influence of Ideas Have Consequences on the Conservative Intellectual Movement in America," in Smith (1998): 81-124.

Scotchie, Joseph, ed., 1995.

The Vision of Richard Weaver . New Brunswick NJ: Transaction Publishers.

-------, 1997.

Barbarians in the Saddle: An Intellectual Biography of Richard M. Weaver . New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers.

Smith, Ted J. III et al., eds., 1998.

Steps Toward Restoration: The Consequences of Richard Weaver's Ideas . Wilmington DL: Intercollegiate Studies Institute.

Toledano, Ben C., 1998. "The Ideas of Richard Weaver," in Smith (1998): 256-286.

Young, Fred Douglas, 1995.

Richard Weaver: A Life of the Mind . University of Missouri Press.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Richard M. Weaver .

Articles and studies "Agrarianism" by Ted J. Smith, III .

Virginia Viewpoint (July 2002).

The consequences of Richard Weaver by Roger Kimball.

The New Criterion , (September 2006).

″The Critique of Modernity in the Work of Richard M. Weaver″ by Jeffrey B. Gayner .

The Intercollegiate Review , (Spring 1979), pp. 97–104.

″The Ethical Approach: the Literary Philosophy of Richard M. Weaver″ by James J. Kirschke . (9 pdfs) How to Read Richard Weaver: Philosopher of "We the (Virtuous) People" by Willmoore Kendall, Jr.

The Intercollegiate Review , Vol. 2, No. 1, (September 1965), pp. 77–86.

Richard Weaver: Ideas Have Consequences by  Enrico Peppe (7 January 2004) No. 21 on Intellectual Conservative's Top 25 Philosophical and Ideological Conservative Books Richard Weaver, Intercollegiate Studies Institute, and The Philadelphia Society "Richard M. Weaver on Civilization, Ontology, and War" by Joseph Stromberg . (Feb. 27, 2001) antiwar.com Richard M. Weaver: Philosopher From Dixie.

Ideas Have Consequences by Joe Scotchie at the Wayback Machine (archived October 27, 2001).  Formerly on the Southern Events website.

Richard M. Weaver: Philosopher From Dixie.

Ideas Have Consequences by Joe Scotchie [ usurped ] .  The knowsouthernhistory.net version of this article.

Richard Weaver: An Appreciation by Frank S. Meyer.

Modern Age , (Summer-Fall 1970), pp. 243–248.

″Richard Weaver Revisited: Rhetoric Left, Right, and Middle″ by Roger Gilles. Published in Rhetoric Review , Vol. 15 (Fall 1996), pp. 128–141.

Touchstone , Nov./Dec. 1998 issue devoted to Richard Weaver's work.

"Weaver of Liberty" by Joseph Stromberg . (March 6, 2001) Review of the anthology In Defense of Tradition edited by Ted J. Smith, III (1945-2004).

Ludwig von Mises Institute .

Works overviews Rhetoric | Richard M. Weaver by James M. Tallmon.

Richard M. Weaver PHILWEB Bibliographical Archive: Theortetical Resources Off- and On-line .

Biographical overviews North Carolina History Project : Richard M. Weaver, Jr. (1910-1963) by Troy L. Kickler.

Richard M. Weaver (1910-1963) .

Religion & Liberty , Vol. 13, No. 2.

The Acton Institute for the Study of Religion and Liberty website Writings by Richard M. Weaver Beginning of Ideas Have Consequences "Up from Liberalism” (pdf) as it first appeared in the Winter 1958-1959 issue (Vol. 3, No. 1, pp. 21–32) of Modern Age .

v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Southern Agrarians Associated writers Herbert Agar Brainard Cheney Donald Davidson John Gould Fletcher Caroline Gordon Henry Blue Kline Lyle H. Lanier Andrew Nelson Lytle Herman Clarence Nixon Frank Lawrence Owsley John Crowe Ransom Allen Tate John Donald Wade Robert Penn Warren Richard M. Weaver Stark Young Key works " Ode to the Confederate Dead " (1928) " Lee in the Mountains " (1934) Related The American Review Fugitives New Criticism Plain Folk of the Old South The Unregenerate South Vanderbilt University Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Poland Israel Belgium People Trove Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐8c76b
Cached time: 20250815222210
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.893 seconds
Real time usage: 1.102 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4602/1000000
Revision size: 33728/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 212635/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6804/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 93062/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.437/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20875465/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  715.957      1 -total
 22.78%  163.066      1 Template:Conservatism_navbox
 17.94%  128.468      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 17.69%  126.676      1 Template:Reflist
 15.24%  109.101      8 Template:Lang
 14.98%  107.242      1 Template:Capitalism_sidebar
 10.69%   76.522      1 Template:Cite_book
  9.68%   69.339      1 Template:Short_description
  6.69%   47.889      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  5.45%   39.022      1 Template:Authority_control Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:966158:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815222210 and revision id 1303767516. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Richard_M._Weaver&oldid=1303767516 " Categories : 1910 births 1963 deaths American literary critics American political philosophers American social sciences writers Auburn University faculty Harvard University alumni Louisiana State University alumni North Carolina State University faculty Writers from Asheville, North Carolina People from Asheville, North Carolina People from Weaverville, North Carolina Rhetoric theorists American rhetoricians Texas A&M University faculty University of Chicago faculty University of Kentucky alumni University of Paris alumni Vanderbilt University alumni 20th-century American philosophers 20th-century American historians American male non-fiction writers 20th-century American essayists Anti-consumerists Philosophers from Kentucky Philosophers from Texas Philosophers from North Carolina Philosophers from Illinois New Right (United States) Historians from Texas 20th-century American male writers Southern Agrarians Intellectual historians Right-wing anti-capitalism Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 1 August 2025, at 23:40 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Richard M. Weaver 7 languages Add topic

