Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Writings 3 Notes 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Menippus 27 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Français Italiano ქართული Latina Magyar Македонски مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 3rd-century BC Greek Cynic satirist For the orator, see Menippus of Stratonikeia .

For greek myth figure, see Menippus (mythology) .

Menippus, by Velázquez Menippus, Nuremberg Chronicle .

Menippus of Gadara ( / m ə ˈ n ɪ p ə s / ; Greek : Μένιππος ὁ Γαδαρεύς Menippos ho Gadareus ; fl. 3rd century BC) was a Cynic satirist . The Menippean satire genre is named after him. His works, all of which are lost, were an important influence on Varro and Lucian , who ranks Menippus with Antisthenes , Diogenes , and Crates as among the most notable of the Cynics .

Life [ edit ] Little is known about the life of Menippus. He was of Phoenician descent, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] from the Greek city of Gadara [ 3 ] in Coele-Syria .

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] He was originally a slave , [ 6 ] in the service of a citizen of Pontus , but in some way obtained his freedom and relocated to Thebes .

Diogenes Laërtius relates a dubious [ 7 ] story that he amassed a fortune as a money-lender , lost it, and committed suicide .

[ 8 ] Writings [ edit ] His works (written in a mixture of prose and verse ) are all lost. He discussed serious subjects in a spirit of ridicule, and especially delighted in attacking the Epicureans and Stoics .

Strabo and Stephanus call him the "earnest-jester" ( Greek : σπουδογέλοιος , spoudogeloios ). His writings exercised considerable influence upon later literature, and the Menippean satire genre is named after him. Although the writings of Menippus no longer survive, there are some fragments of Varro 's Saturae Menippeae , which were written in imitation of Menippus.

[ 9 ] One of the dialogues attributed to Lucian , his avowed imitator, who frequently mentions him, is called Menippus , but since the sub-title ("The Oracle of the Dead") resembles that of a work ascribed to Menippus by Diogenes Laërtius, it has been suggested that it is imitated from his Necromancy .

[ 10 ] Diogenes Laërtius says the following works were written by Menippus: [ 11 ] Νέκυια – Necromancy Διαθῆκαι – Wills Ἐπιστολαὶ κεκομψευμέναι ἀπὸ τῶν θεῶν προσώπου – Letters artificially composed as if by the Gods Πρὸς τοὺς φυσικοὺς καὶ μαθηματικοὺς καὶ γραμματικοὺς – Replies to the Natural Philosophers, and Mathematicians, and Grammarians Γονὰς Ἐπικούρου – The Birth of Epicurus Τὰς θρησκευομένας ὑπ' αὐτῶν εἰκάδας – The School's reverence of the twentieth day (celebrated in the Epicurean school) In addition, Athenaeus mentions works called Symposium [ 12 ] and Arcesilaus , [ 13 ] and Diogenes Laërtius mentions a Sale of Diogenes ( Greek : Διογένους Πράσει ) [ 14 ] written by Menippus which seems to be the main source of the story that Diogenes of Sinope was captured by pirates and sold into slavery.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Diogenes Laërtius , Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers Book VI, Chapter  8, Section 99 ^ Makolkin, Anna (2016).

"Phoenician cosmology as a proto-base for Greek materialism, naturalist philosophy and Aristotelianism" (PDF) .

Biocosmology – neo-Aristotelism .

6 (3&4): 427– 452.

^ Blank, David, "Philodemus" , The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2019 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), accessed 3 June 2020.

^ Stephanus Byz.; Strabo, xvi.

^ Strabo's Geography 16.2.29 ^ Fuchs, Dieter (2009).

"Joyce, Lucian, and Menippus: An Undiscovered Rewriting of the Ulysses Archetype" .

James Joyce Quarterly .

47 (1): 140– 146.

Menippus, also a Cynic, was by descent a Phoenician—a slave, as Achaicus in his treatise on Ethics says.

^ "The tradition that he was a moneylender and speculator in marine insurance is probably apocryphal, resting as it does on the always dubious authority of Hermippus ." Donald Dudley, (1937) A History of Cynicism , page 70 ^ Diogenes Laërtius , Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers Book VI, Chapter  8, Sections 99-100 ^ Cicero, Academica , i. 2, 8; Aulus Gellius, ii. 18; Macrobius, Sat.

i. 11 ^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Menippus" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

^ Diogenes Laërtius, vi. 101 ^ Athenaeus, 14.629F ^ Athenaeus, 14.664E ^ Diogenes Laërtius, vi. 29.

References [ edit ] Laërtius, Diogenes .

"The Cynics: Menippus" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 2:6. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Menippus .

Lives & Writings on the Cynics , directory of literary references to Ancient Cynics Menippus – Lucian's dialogue in which Menippus visits Hades v t e Cynic philosophers Greek era Antisthenes Diogenes Onesicritus Monimus Philiscus Hegesias of Sinope Anaximenes of Lampsacus Crates Hipparchia Metrocles Cleomenes Bion Menippus Menedemus Cercidas Teles Meleager Roman era Favonius Demetrius Dio Chrysostom Agathobulus Demonax Peregrinus Proteus Theagenes Oenomaus Pancrates Crescens Heraclius Asclepiades Maximus I of Constantinople Horus Sallustius Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 FAST National Germany United States Spain Netherlands Norway Poland Vatican Israel People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Menippus&oldid=1286640382 " Categories : 3rd-century BC Greek philosophers 3rd-century BC Phoenician people 3rd-century BC Greek poets Ancient Greek satirists Ancient Greek slaves and freedmen Cynic philosophers Hellenistic-era philosophers from Syria Phoenician philosophers Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Greek-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers Commons category link is on Wikidata Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 21 April 2025, at 03:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Menippus 27 languages Add topic

