Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Basics Toggle Basics subsection 2.1 Modelling as a substitute for direct measurement and experimentation 2.2 Simulation 2.3 Structure 2.4 Systems 2.5 Generating a model 2.6 Evaluating a model 2.7 Visualization 2.8 Space mapping 3 Types 4 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 4.1 Modelling and simulation 5 See also 6 References 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Scientific modelling 31 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Deutsch فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Кыргызча Lietuvių Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Português Русский தமிழ் ไทย Тоҷикӣ Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Scientific activity  that produces models Example scientific modelling. A schematic of chemical and transport processes related to atmospheric composition.

Part of a series on Research Research design Ethics Proposal Question Writing Argument Referencing Research strategy Interdisciplinary Multimethodology Qualitative Art-based Quantitative Philosophical schools Antipositivism Constructivism Critical rationalism Empiricism Fallibilism Positivism Postpositivism Pragmatism Realism Critical realism Subtle realism Methodology Action research Art methodology Critical theory Grounded theory Hermeneutics Historiography Human subject research Narrative inquiry Phenomenology Pragmatism Scientific method Methods Analysis Case study Content analysis Descriptive statistics Discourse analysis Ethnography Autoethnography Experiment Field experiment Social experiment Quasi-experiment Field research Historical method Inferential statistics Interviews Mapping Cultural mapping Phenomenography Secondary research Bibliometrics Literature review Meta-analysis Scoping review Systematic review Scientific modelling Simulation Survey Tools and software Argument technology GIS software LIS software Bibliometrics Reference management Science software Qualitative data analysis Simulation Statistics Philosophy portal v t e Scientific modelling is an activity that produces models representing empirical objects, phenomena, and physical processes, to make a particular part or feature of the world easier to understand , define , quantify , visualize , or simulate . It requires selecting and identifying relevant aspects of a situation in the real world and then developing a model to replicate a system with those features. Different types of models may be used for different purposes, such as conceptual models to better understand, operational models to operationalize , mathematical models to quantify, computational models to simulate, and graphical models to visualize the subject.

Modelling is an essential and inseparable part of many scientific disciplines, each of which has its own ideas about specific types of modelling.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] The following was said by John von Neumann .

[ 3 ] ... the sciences do not try to explain, they hardly even try to interpret, they mainly make models. By a model is meant a mathematical construct which, with the addition of certain verbal interpretations, describes observed phenomena. The justification of such a mathematical construct is solely and precisely that it is expected to work—that is, correctly to describe phenomena from a reasonably wide area.

There is also an increasing attention to scientific modelling [ 4 ] in fields such as science education , [ 5 ] philosophy of science , systems theory , and knowledge visualization . There is a growing collection of methods , techniques and meta- theory about all kinds of specialized scientific modelling.

Overview [ edit ] A scientific model seeks to represent empirical objects, phenomena, and physical processes in a logical and objective way. All models are in simulacra , that is, simplified reflections of reality that, despite being approximations, can be extremely useful.

[ 6 ] Building and disputing models is fundamental to the scientific enterprise. Complete and true representation may be impossible, but scientific debate often concerns which is the better model for a given task, e.g., which is the more accurate climate model for seasonal forecasting.

[ 7 ] Attempts to formalize the principles of the empirical sciences use an interpretation to model reality, in the same way logicians axiomatize the principles of logic . The aim of these attempts is to construct a formal system that will not produce theoretical consequences that are contrary to what is found in reality . Predictions or other statements drawn from such a formal system mirror or map the real world only insofar as these scientific models are true.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] For the scientist, a model is also a way in which the human thought processes can be amplified.

[ 10 ] For instance, models that are rendered in software allow scientists to leverage computational power to simulate, visualize, manipulate and gain intuition about the entity, phenomenon, or process being represented. Such computer models are in silico . Other types of scientific models are in vivo (living models, such as laboratory rats ) and in vitro (in glassware, such as tissue culture ).

[ 11 ] Basics [ edit ] Modelling as a substitute for direct measurement and experimentation [ edit ] Models are typically used when it is either impossible or impractical to create experimental conditions in which scientists can directly measure outcomes. Direct measurement of outcomes under controlled conditions (see Scientific method ) will always be more reliable than modeled estimates of outcomes.

Within modeling and simulation , a model is a task-driven, purposeful simplification and abstraction of a perception of reality, shaped by physical, legal, and cognitive constraints.

[ 12 ] It is task-driven because a model is captured with a certain question or task in mind. Simplifications leave all the known and observed entities and their relation out that are not important for the task. Abstraction aggregates information that is important but not needed in the same detail as the object of interest. Both activities, simplification, and abstraction, are done purposefully. However, they are done based on a perception of reality. This perception is already a model in itself, as it comes with a physical constraint. There are also constraints on what we are able to legally observe with our current tools and methods, and cognitive constraints that limit what we are able to explain with our current theories. This model comprises the concepts, their behavior, and their relations informal form and is often referred to as a conceptual model . In order to execute the model, it needs to be implemented as a computer simulation . This requires more choices, such as numerical approximations or the use of heuristics.

[ 13 ] Despite all these epistemological and computational constraints, simulation has been recognized as the third pillar of scientific methods: theory building, simulation, and experimentation.

[ 14 ] Simulation [ edit ] Climate models apply knowledge in various sciences to process extensive sets of input climate data, executing differential equations among grid elements in a three-dimensional model of Earth's climate system . The models produce simulated climates having an array of climatic and weather elements, such as heatwaves and storms. Each element may be described by several attributes, including intensity, frequency, and impacts. Climate models support adaptation to projected climate change , and enable extreme event attribution to explain specific weather events.

A simulation is a way to implement the model, often employed when the model is too complex for the analytical solution. A steady-state simulation provides information about the system at a specific instant in time (usually at equilibrium, if such a state exists).  A dynamic simulation provides information over time. A simulation shows how a particular object or phenomenon will behave. Such a simulation can be useful for testing , analysis, or training in those cases where real-world systems or concepts can be represented by models.

[ 15 ] Structure [ edit ] Structure is a fundamental and sometimes intangible notion covering the recognition, observation, nature, and stability of patterns and relationships of entities. From a child's verbal description of a snowflake, to the detailed scientific analysis of the properties of magnetic fields , the concept of structure is an essential foundation of nearly every mode of inquiry and discovery in science, philosophy, and art.

[ 16 ] Systems [ edit ] A system is a set of interacting or interdependent entities, real or abstract, forming an integrated whole. In general, a system is a construct or collection of different elements that together can produce results not obtainable by the elements alone.

[ 17 ] The concept of an 'integrated whole' can also be stated in terms of a system embodying a set of relationships which are differentiated from relationships of the set to other elements, and form relationships between an element of the set and elements not a part of the relational regime.  There are two types of system models: 1) discrete in which the variables change instantaneously at separate points in time and, 2) continuous where the state variables change continuously with respect to time.

[ 18 ] Generating a model [ edit ] Modelling is the process of generating a model as a conceptual representation of some phenomenon. Typically a model will deal with only some aspects of the phenomenon in question, and two models of the same phenomenon may be essentially different—that is to say, that the differences between them comprise more than just a simple renaming of components.

Such differences may be due to differing requirements of the model's end users, or to conceptual or aesthetic differences among the modelers and to contingent decisions made during the modelling process. Considerations that may influence the structure of a model might be the modeler's preference for a reduced ontology , preferences regarding statistical models versus deterministic models , discrete versus continuous time, etc. In any case, users of a model need to understand the assumptions made that are pertinent to its validity for a given use.

Building a model requires abstraction .  Assumptions are used in modelling in order to specify the domain of application of the model. For example, the special theory of relativity assumes an inertial frame of reference . This assumption was contextualized and further explained by the general theory of relativity . A model makes accurate predictions when its assumptions are valid, and might well not make accurate predictions when its assumptions do not hold. Such assumptions are often the point with which older theories are succeeded by new ones (the general theory of relativity works in non-inertial reference frames as well).

Evaluating a model [ edit ] See also: Models of scientific inquiry § Choice of a theory A model is evaluated first and foremost by its consistency to empirical data; any model inconsistent with reproducible observations must be modified or rejected. One way to modify the model is by restricting the domain over which it is credited with having high validity. A case in point is Newtonian physics, which is highly useful except for the very small, the very fast, and the very massive phenomena of the universe. However, a fit to empirical data alone is not sufficient for a model to be accepted as valid.  Factors important in evaluating a model include: [ citation needed ] Ability to explain past observations Ability to predict future observations Cost of use, especially in combination with other models Refutability, enabling estimation of the degree of confidence in the model Simplicity, or even aesthetic appeal People may attempt to quantify the evaluation of a model using a utility function .

Visualization [ edit ] Visualization is any technique for creating images, diagrams, or animations to communicate a message. Visualization through visual imagery has been an effective way to communicate both abstract and concrete ideas since the dawn of man. Examples from history include cave paintings , Egyptian hieroglyphs , Greek geometry , and Leonardo da Vinci 's revolutionary methods of technical drawing for engineering and scientific purposes.

Space mapping [ edit ] Space mapping refers to a methodology that employs a "quasi-global" modelling formulation to link companion "coarse" (ideal or low-fidelity) with "fine" (practical or high-fidelity) models of different complexities. In engineering optimization , space mapping aligns (maps) a very fast coarse model with its related expensive-to-compute fine model so as to avoid direct expensive optimization of the fine model. The alignment process iteratively refines a "mapped" coarse model ( surrogate model ).

Types [ edit ] Analogical modelling Assembly modelling Catastrophe modelling Choice modelling Climate model Computational model Continuous modelling Data modelling Discrete modelling Document modelling Econometric model Economic model Ecosystem model Empirical modelling Enterprise modelling Futures studies Geologic modelling Goal modeling Homology modelling Hydrogeology Hydrography Hydrologic modelling Informative modelling Macroscale modelling Mathematical modelling Metabolic network modelling Microscale modelling Modelling biological systems Modelling in epidemiology Molecular modelling Multicomputational model Multiscale modelling NLP modelling Phenomenological modelling Predictive intake modelling Predictive modelling Scale modelling Simulation Software modelling Solid modelling Space mapping Statistical model Stochastic modelling (insurance) Surrogate model System architecture System dynamics Systems modelling System-level modelling and simulation Water quality modelling Applications [ edit ] Modelling and simulation [ edit ] One application of scientific modelling is the field of modelling and simulation , generally referred to as "M&S".  M&S has a spectrum of applications which range from concept development and analysis, through experimentation, measurement, and verification, to disposal analysis.  Projects and programs may use hundreds of different simulations, simulators and model analysis tools.

Example of the integrated use of Modelling and Simulation in Defence life cycle management. The modelling and simulation in this image is represented in the center of the image with the three containers.

[ 15 ] The figure shows how modelling and simulation is used as a central part of an integrated program in a defence capability development process.

[ 15 ] See also [ edit ] Abductive reasoning – Inference seeking the simplest and most likely explanation All models are wrong – Aphorism in statistics Data and information visualization – Visual representation of data Heuristic – Problem-solving method Inverse problem – Process of calculating the causal factors that produced a set of observations Scientific visualization – Interdisciplinary branch of science concerned with presenting scientific data visually Statistical model – Type of mathematical model References [ edit ] ^ Cartwright, Nancy. 1983.

How the Laws of Physics Lie . Oxford University Press ^ Hacking, Ian. 1983.

Representing and Intervening. Introductory Topics in the Philosophy of Natural Science . Cambridge University Press ^ von Neumann, J. (1995), "Method in the physical sciences", in Bródy F., Vámos, T. (editors), The Neumann Compendium , World Scientific , p. 628; previously published in The Unity of Knowledge , edited by L. Leary (1955), pp. 157-164, and also in John von Neumann Collected Works , edited by A. Taub, Volume VI, pp. 491-498.

^ Frigg and Hartmann (2009) state: "Philosophers are acknowledging the importance of models with increasing attention and are probing the assorted roles that models play in scientific practice". Source: Frigg, Roman and Hartmann, Stephan , "Models in Science", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2009 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), ( source ) ^ Namdar, Bahadir; Shen, Ji (2015-02-18). "Modelling-Oriented Assessment in K-12 Science Education: A synthesis of research from 1980 to 2013 and new directions".

International Journal of Science Education .

37 (7): 993– 1023.

Bibcode : 2015IJSEd..37..993N .

doi : 10.1080/09500693.2015.1012185 .

ISSN 0950-0693 .

S2CID 143865553 .

^ Box, George E.P. & Draper, N.R. (1987). [Empirical Model-Building and Response Surfaces.] Wiley . p. 424 ^ Hagedorn, R.

et al.

(2005) http://www.ecmwf.int/staff/paco_doblas/abstr/tellus05_1.pdf [ permanent dead link ] Tellus 57A:219–33 ^ Leo Apostel (1961). "Formal study of models". In: The Concept and the Role of the Model in Mathematics and Natural and Social . Edited by Hans Freudenthal . Springer. pp. 8–9 ( Source )], ^ Ritchey, T.  (2012) Outline for a Morphology of Modelling Methods: Contribution to a General Theory of Modelling ^ C. West Churchman , The Systems Approach , New York: Dell Publishing, 1968, p. 61 ^ Griffiths, E. C. (2010) What is a model?

^ Tolk, A. (2015). Learning something right from models that are wrong – Epistemology of Simulation. In Yilmaz, L. (Ed.) Concepts and Methodologies in Modelling and Simulation.

Springer–Verlag. pp. 87–106 ^ Oberkampf, W. L., DeLand, S. M., Rutherford, B. M., Diegert, K. V., & Alvin, K. F. (2002). Error and uncertainty in modelling and simulation.

Reliability Engineering & System Safety 75(3): 333–57.

^ Ihrig, M. (2012). A New Research Architecture For The Simulation Era. In European Council on Modelling and Simulation . pp. 715–20).

^ a b c Systems Engineering Fundamentals.

Archived 2007-09-27 at the Wayback Machine Defense Acquisition University Press, 2003.

^ Pullan, Wendy (2000).

Structure . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-78258-9 .

^ Fishwick PA. (1995). Simulation Model Design and Execution: Building Digital Worlds. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

^ Sokolowski, J.A., Banks, C.M.(2009). Principles of Modelling and Simulation. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons.

Further reading [ edit ] Nowadays there are some 40 magazines about scientific modelling which offer all kinds of international forums. Since the 1960s there is a strongly growing number of books and magazines about specific forms of scientific modelling. There is also a lot of discussion about scientific modelling in the philosophy-of-science literature. A selection: Rainer Hegselmann, Ulrich Müller and Klaus Troitzsch (eds.) (1996).

Modelling and Simulation in the Social Sciences from the Philosophy of Science Point of View . Theory and Decision Library . Dordrecht: Kluwer.

Paul Humphreys (2004).

Extending Ourselves: Computational Science, Empiricism, and Scientific Method . Oxford: Oxford University Press .

Johannes Lenhard, Günter Küppers and Terry Shinn (Eds.) (2006) "Simulation: Pragmatic Constructions of Reality", Springer Berlin.

Tom Ritchey (2012). "Outline for a Morphology of Modelling Methods:  Contribution to a General Theory of Modelling". In: Acta Morphologica Generalis , Vol 1. No 1. pp. 1–20.

William Silvert (2001). "Modelling as a Discipline". In: Int. J. General Systems.

Vol. 30(3), pp. 261.

Sergio Sismondo and Snait Gissis (eds.) (1999).

Modeling and Simulation. Special Issue of Science in Context 12.

Eric Winsberg (2018) "Philosophy and Climate Science" Cambridge: Cambridge University Press Eric Winsberg (2010) "Science in the Age of Computer Simulation" Chicago: University of Chicago Press Eric Winsberg (2003). "Simulated Experiments: Methodology for a Virtual World". In: Philosophy of Science 70: 105–125.

Tomáš Helikar, Jim A Rogers (2009). " ChemChains : a platform for simulation and analysis of biochemical networks aimed to laboratory scientists".

BioMed Central .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Scientific modelling .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Scientific modeling .

Models . Entry in the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Models in Science . Entry in the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy The World as a Process: Simulations in the Natural and Social Sciences , in: R. Hegselmann et al. (eds.), Modelling and Simulation in the Social Sciences from the Philosophy of Science Point of View, Theory and Decision Library. Dordrecht: Kluwer 1996, 77-100.

Research in simulation and modelling of various physical systems Modelling Water Quality Information Center, U.S. Department of Agriculture Ecotoxicology & Models A Morphology of Modelling Methods . Acta Morphologica Generalis, Vol 1. No 1. pp. 1–20.

v t e Scientific modelling Biological Cellular model Chemical process modeling Ecosystem model Infectious disease model Metabolic network modelling Modelling biological systems Protein structure prediction Environmental Atmospheric model Chemical transport model Climate model Geologic modelling Groundwater model Hydrological model Hydrological transport model Modular Ocean Model Wildfire modeling Sustainability Energy modeling Integrated assessment modelling Population model Social Biopsychosocial model Business process modelling Catastrophe modeling Construction and management simulation Crime mapping Economic model Input–output model Related topics Data visualization List of computer simulation software Mathematical modeling Systems theory Systems thinking Visual analytics v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐8t9b5
Cached time: 20250817233627
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.579 seconds
Real time usage: 0.768 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2827/1000000
Revision size: 22206/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 70033/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3244/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 48221/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.369/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22390551/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  640.646      1 -total
 25.81%  165.367      7 Template:Annotated_link
 18.03%  115.521      1 Template:Reflist
 13.46%   86.204      1 Template:Research
 12.96%   83.056      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.92%   76.349      1 Template:Cite_journal
 10.58%   67.754      1 Template:Short_description
  8.57%   54.893      2 Template:Sister_project
  8.31%   53.227      2 Template:Side_box
  6.54%   41.908      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:3224795:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817233627 and revision id 1300251463. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Scientific_modelling&oldid=1300251463 " Categories : Scientific modelling Conceptual modelling Epistemology of science Interpretation (philosophy) Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from May 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from August 2016 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2008 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 13 July 2025, at 05:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Scientific modelling 31 languages Add topic

