Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Personal life 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents James M. Bardeen 14 languages العربية Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Português Русский தமிழ் 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American physicist (1939–2022) James M. Bardeen Bardeen in 1980 Born James Maxwell Bardeen May 9, 1939 Minneapolis, Minnesota , U.S.

Died June 20, 2022 (2022-06-20) (aged 83) Seattle, Washington , U.S.

Education Harvard University ( BS ) California Institute of Technology ( PhD ) Known for Laws of black hole thermodynamics Scientific career Fields Physics Institutions University of Washington Perimeter Institute Thesis Stability and Dynamics of Spherically Symmetric Masses in General Relativity (1965) Doctoral advisor Richard Feynman William A. Fowler James Maxwell Bardeen (May 9, 1939 – June 20, 2022) was an American physicist, well known for his work in general relativity , particularly his role in formulating the laws of black hole mechanics . He also discovered the Bardeen vacuum, an exact solution of the Einstein field equation .

Early life and education [ edit ] Bardeen was born in Minneapolis , Minnesota , on May 9, 1939.

[ 1 ] His father, John Bardeen , won the Nobel Prize in Physics twice for inventing the transistor and formulating the theory of superconductivity; [ 1 ] [ 2 ] his mother, Jane Maxwell Bardeen, worked as a zoologist and a high school teacher.  During his childhood, Bardeen resided in Washington, D.C.

, Summit, New Jersey , and Chicago as part of his father's employment.  He attended the University Laboratory High School in Urbana, Illinois.  He then studied physics at Harvard University , even though his father wanted him to go into biology.

[ 1 ] After graduating in 1960, he undertook graduate studies at the California Institute of Technology under the direction of Richard Feynman and William Alfred Fowler .

[ 1 ] [ 3 ] Bardeen was awarded a Doctor of Philosophy in 1965.

[ 1 ] Career [ edit ] Bardeen first worked at Caltech and the University of California, Berkeley , in postdoctoral positions.  He became a part of the astronomy department of the University of Washington in 1967.  He subsequently joined Yale University in 1972.  That same year, he co-authored the watershed paper "The Four Laws of Black Hole Mechanics" with Stephen Hawking and Brandon Carter during a meeting held at the École de physique des Houches . Later that year, Bardeen theorized the doughnut shape and size of a black hole’s "shadow", which was later popularized by the observations of Messier 87 by the Event Horizon Telescope .

[ 1 ] Bardeen returned to the University of Washington in 1976, remaining there until his retirement in 2006. Together with Michael S. Turner and Paul Steinhardt , he published a paper in 1982 detailing the way submicroscopic fluctuations in the density of matter and energy in the early universe would bring about the arrangement of galaxies seen in the present day.

[ 1 ] Bardeen was also a distinguished visiting research fellow [ 4 ] at Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics . In 2012, he was elected to the U.S.

National Academy of Sciences .

[ 5 ] Personal life [ edit ] Bardeen married Nancy Thomas in 1968.  They met the year before in Paris while he was attending a conference, and remained married until his death. Together, they had two children, William and David.

[ 1 ] Bardeen's brother, William A. Bardeen , was also a physicist.

[ 1 ] His sister, Elizabeth, was married to Thomas Greytak , a physicist at MIT .  In a 2020 interview given to Federal University of Pará in Brazil, Bardeen recalls his journey as a physicist, his father's influences on him, his experiences as a doctoral student of Richard Feynman, and working with Stephen Hawking .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Bardeen died on June 20, 2022, at a retirement home in Seattle .  He was 83, and suffered from cancer prior to his death.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Biographies portal Physics portal Bardeen–Petterson effect Cosmological perturbation theory Post-Newtonian expansion References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j Overbye, Dennis (July 3, 2022).

"James Bardeen, an Expert on Unraveling Einstein's Equations, Dies at 83" .

The New York Times . Retrieved July 3, 2022 .

^ Hoddeson, Lillian; Daitch, Vicki (2002).

True genius: the life and science of John Bardeen : the only winner of two Nobel Prizes in physics . Joseph Henry Press. p. 93.

ISBN 978-0-309-08408-6 .

^ "Bardeen, James Maxwell – CaltechTHESIS" . Archived from the original on June 27, 2021 . Retrieved August 27, 2019 .

^ "James Bardeen" .

Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics . Archived from the original on April 21, 2016 . Retrieved January 12, 2016 .

^ "James Maxwell Bardeen" .

Physics History Network . Retrieved July 4, 2022 .

^ Interview with Prof. James Bardeen – Part I . Federal University of Pará. 2020.

Archived from the original on December 21, 2021.

^ Interview with Prof. James Bardeen – Part II . Federal University of Pará. 2020.

Archived from the original on December 21, 2021.

^ Interview with Prof. James Bardeen – Part III . Federal University of Pará. 2020.

Archived from the original on December 21, 2021.

External links [ edit ] James Bardeen, Perimeter Institute homepage Publications of James Maxwell Bardeen in the SPIRES database arXiv.org preprints for J. Bardeen Search on author James Bardeen from Google Scholar v t e Relativity Special relativity Background Principle of relativity ( Galilean relativity Galilean transformation ) Special relativity Doubly special relativity Fundamental concepts Frame of reference Speed of light Hyperbolic orthogonality Rapidity Maxwell's equations Proper length Proper time Proper acceleration Relativistic mass Formulation Lorentz transformation Textbooks Phenomena Time dilation Mass–energy equivalence (E=mc 2 ) Length contraction Relativity of simultaneity Relativistic Doppler effect Thomas precession Ladder paradox Twin paradox Terrell rotation Spacetime Light cone World line Minkowski diagram Biquaternions Minkowski space General relativity Background Introduction Mathematical formulation Fundamental concepts Equivalence principle Riemannian geometry Penrose diagram Geodesics Mach's principle Formulation ADM formalism BSSN formalism Einstein field equations Linearized gravity Post-Newtonian formalism Raychaudhuri equation Hamilton–Jacobi–Einstein equation Ernst equation Phenomena Black hole Event horizon Singularity Two-body problem Gravitational waves : astronomy detectors ( LIGO and collaboration Virgo LISA Pathfinder GEO ) Hulse–Taylor binary Other tests : precession of Mercury lensing (together with Einstein cross and Einstein rings ) redshift Shapiro delay frame-dragging / geodetic effect ( Lense–Thirring precession ) pulsar timing arrays Advanced theories Brans–Dicke theory Kaluza–Klein Quantum gravity Solutions Cosmological: Friedmann–Lemaître–Robertson–Walker ( Friedmann equations ) Lemaître–Tolman Kasner BKL singularity Gödel Milne Spherical: Schwarzschild ( interior Tolman–Oppenheimer–Volkoff equation ) Reissner–Nordström Axisymmetric: Kerr ( Kerr–Newman ) Weyl−Lewis−Papapetrou Taub–NUT van Stockum dust discs Others: pp-wave Ozsváth–Schücking Alcubierre Ellis In computational physics: Numerical relativity Scientists Poincaré Lorentz Einstein Hilbert Schwarzschild de Sitter Weyl Eddington Friedmann Lemaître Milne Robertson Chandrasekhar Zwicky Wheeler Choquet-Bruhat Kerr Zel'dovich Novikov Ehlers Geroch Penrose Hawking Taylor Hulse Bondi Misner Yau Thorne Weiss others Category Authority control databases International VIAF Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project Scopus zbMATH MathSciNet Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=James_M._Bardeen&oldid=1306403937 " Categories : 1939 births 2022 deaths 20th-century American physicists 21st-century American physicists American cosmologists American relativity theorists California Institute of Technology alumni Deaths from cancer in Washington (state) Fellows of the American Association for the Advancement of Science Harvard College alumni Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences Scientists from Minneapolis Sloan Research Fellows University of Washington faculty Fellows of the American Physical Society Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from July 2022 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from July 2022 Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 15:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents James M. Bardeen 14 languages Add topic

