Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Pakistan 2 Swaziland 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Illicit financial flows 6 languages Español Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Македонски Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Form of illegal capital flight Illicit financial flows , in economics , are a form of illegal capital flight that occurs when money is illegally earned, transferred, or spent. This money is intended to disappear from any record in the country of origin, and earnings on the stock of illicit financial flows outside a country generally do not return to the country of origin.

Illicit financial flows can be generated in a variety of ways that are not revealed in national accounts or balance of payments figures, including trade mispricing , bulk cash movements, hawala transactions, and smuggling .

[ 1 ] There are several economic models used to provide estimates of illicit financial flows and capital flight. The two most common methods are the World Bank Residual Model and the DOTS-based Trade Mispricing Model, which uses the IMF 's Direction of Trade Statistics (DOTS) database to analyze discrepancies in trade statistics between partner countries.  Another way to estimate trade mispricing is with the IPPS-based model, which was developed by John Zdanowicz of Florida International University . This method uses individual import and export transactions of the United States with the rest of the world to find inconsistencies in export and import prices. Economists also use hot money (Narrow) Method and the Dooley Method in these estimates.

A 2013 paper, authorized by Raymond W. Baker , Director of the Global Financial Integrity estimated illicit financial flows "out of developing countries are approximately $1 trillion a year". This study also found that China , Russia , and Mexico accounted for the three largest shares of worldwide illicit financial flows.

[ 2 ] The  United Nations Sustainable Development Goal 16 has a target to significantly reduce illicit financial flows and strengthen recovery and return of stolen assets by 2030.

[ 3 ] Pakistan [ edit ] Estimates of illicit financial flows in Pakistan are estimated to be at over $10 billion as escaping taxation and being siphoned off outside the country. This is with nearly one third of the population living below the poverty line.

[ 4 ] Swaziland [ edit ] Swaziland lost approximately $556 million to illicit financial flows in 2012 and a record of $1.139 billion in 2007.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Capital flight Money laundering Task Force on Financial Integrity and Economic Development Tax evasion References [ edit ] ^ CSIS and GFI Conference: Illicit Financial Flows: The Missing Link in Development; Panel 1 — What is Known About Illicit Financial Flows (.m3u format) ^ Kar, Dev; LeBlanc, Brian (2011).

"Illicit Financial Flows From Developing Countries: 2002-2011" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2018-04-04.

^ Doss, Eric.

"Sustainable Development Goal 16" .

United Nations and the Rule of Law . Retrieved 2020-09-25 .

^ Haq, Dr Ikramul.

"Hunt for black money" .

tns.thenews.com.pk/ . Archived from the original on 19 April 2015 . Retrieved 26 April 2015 .

^ Zwane, Teetee.

"Sd loses about 11.8% of its gross domestic product" .

observer.org.sz . Archived from the original on 26 May 2015 . Retrieved 25 May 2015 .

v t e Globalization Journals Outline Studies Aspects Alter-globalization Anti-globalization movement Cultural globalization Deglobalization Democratic globalization Economic globalization Economic integration Complete Environmental globalization Financial integration Fiscal union Global citizenship education Global financial system Global governance Global health Global migration Global politics Global workforce Globality Harmonisation of law History of archaic early modern Military globalization Political globalization Trade bloc Trade globalization Issues Global Balance of trade Capital outflow Capital flight Climate change Climate justice Criticisms Disease COVID-19 pandemic Digital divide Labor arbitrage Monetary sovereignty Multilingualism Population Tariff engineering Tax havens Offshore financial centres Tax inversions Water crisis Other Brain drain reverse Care drain Development aid Economic inequality Endangered languages Fair trade Forced displacement Human rights Illicit financial flows Imperialism academic cultural linguistic media scientific social Invasive species Investor-state disputes McDonaldization New international division of labour North–South divide Offshoring Race to the bottom pollution havens Reverse discrimination Transnational crime Westernization World war Theories Capital accumulation Dependency Development Earth system Fiscal localism Modernization ecological history of Primitive accumulation Social change World history World-systems Notable scholars Economics David Autor Richard Baldwin Ravi Batra Jagdish Bhagwati Robert Brenner Jayati Ghosh Michael Hudson Branko Milanović Kevin O'Rourke Thomas Piketty Dani Rodrik Jeffrey Sachs Amartya Sen Joseph Stiglitz Political economy Samir Amin Giovanni Arrighi Robert W. Cox Andre Gunder Frank Stephen Gill Barry K. Gills Peter Gowan David Harvey Ronen Palan Susan Strange Robert Wade Politics/ sociology Arjun Appadurai Daniele Archibugi K. Anthony Appiah Ulrich Beck Walden Bello Jean Baudrillard Zygmunt Bauman Manuel Castells Christopher Chase-Dunn Alfred Crosby Nancy Fraser Susan George Anthony Giddens Michael Hardt David Held Paul Hirst L. H. M. Ling Antonio Negri George Ritzer Saskia Sassen John Urry Immanuel Wallerstein Non–academic Noam Chomsky Thomas Friedman Naomi Klein John R. Saul Vandana Shiva Category Business portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Illicit_financial_flows&oldid=1305010735 " Categories : Economic globalization Imperialism studies International finance International trade Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 14:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Illicit financial flows 6 languages Add topic

