Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Etymology 3 Distinction between carnelian and sard 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Carnelian 54 languages Afrikaans العربية Башҡортса Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kaszëbsczi Кыргызча Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Yellow-red chalcedony variety "Cornelian" redirects here. For other uses, see Cornelian (disambiguation) .

"Sard" redirects here. For other uses, see Sard (disambiguation) .

Carnelian General Category Tectosilicate minerals , quartz group , chalcedony variety Formula SiO 2 ( silicon dioxide ) Crystal system Trigonal ( quartz ), monoclinic ( moganite ) Identification Formula mass 60 g/mol Color Reddish, orange, brownish Cleavage Absent Fracture Uneven, splintery, conchoidal Mohs scale hardness 6.5–7.0 Luster Waxy to resinous Streak White Diaphaneity Translucent to opaque Specific gravity 2.58–2.64 Optical properties Uniaxial + Refractive index 1.535–1.539 Birefringence 0.003–0.009 References [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Carnelian (also spelled cornelian ) [ 3 ] is a brownish-red mineral commonly used as a semiprecious stone . Similar to carnelian is sard , which is generally harder and darker; the difference is not rigidly defined, and the two names are often used interchangeably. Both carnelian and sard are varieties of the silica mineral chalcedony colored by impurities of iron oxide . The color can vary greatly, ranging from pale orange to an intense almost-black coloration. Significant localities include Yanacodo ( Peru ); Ratnapura ( Sri Lanka ); and Thailand .

[ 2 ] It has been found in Indonesia , Brazil , India , Iran , Russia ( Siberia ), and Germany .

[ citation needed ] In the United States , the official State Gem of Maryland is also a variety of carnelian called Patuxent River stone .

[ 4 ] Maryland carnelian, also called " Patuxent River Stone", cut and illuminated to display colors and structure.

History [ edit ] Polish signet ring in light-orange carnelian intaglio showing Korwin coat of arms The red variety of chalcedony has been known to be used as beads since the Early Neolithic in Bulgaria. The first faceted (with constant 16+16=32 facets on each side of the bead) carnelian beads are described from the Varna Chalcolithic necropolis (middle of the 5th millennium BC).

[ 5 ] The bow drill was used to drill holes into carnelian in Mehrgarh in the 4th–5th millennium BC.

[ 6 ] Carnelian was recovered from Bronze Age Minoan layers at Knossos on Crete in a form that demonstrated its use in decorative arts; [ 7 ] this use dates to approximately 1800 BC . Carnelian was used widely during Roman times to make engraved gems for signet or seal rings for imprinting a seal with wax on correspondence or other important documents, as hot wax does not stick to carnelian.

[ 8 ] Sard was used for Assyrian cylinder seals , Egyptian and Phoenician scarabs , and early Greek and Etruscan gems.

[ 9 ] The Hebrew odem (also translated as sardius ), was the first stone in the High Priest's breastplate , a red stone, probably sard but perhaps red jasper .

[ 9 ] In Revelation 4:3 , the One seated on the heavenly throne seen in the vision of John the Apostle is said to "look like jasper and σαρδίῳ ( sardius transliterated)." And likewise it is in Revelation 21:20 as one of the precious stones in the foundations of the wall of the heavenly city.

[ 10 ] Carnelian intaglio with a Ptolemaic queen, Hellenistic artwork, Cabinet des Médailles , BnF Museum , Paris There is a Neo-Assyrian seal made of carnelian in the Western Asiatic Seals collection of the British Museum that shows Ishtar - Gula as a star goddess. She is holding a ring of royal authority and is seated on a throne. She is shown with the spade of Marduk (his symbol), Sibbiti (seven) gods, the stylus of Nabu and a worshiper. An 8th century BC carnelian seal from the collection of the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford shows Ishtar-Gula with her dog facing the spade of Marduk and his red dragon.

[ 11 ] Etymology [ edit ] Although now the more common term, "carnelian" is a 16th-century corruption of the 14th-century word "cornelian" (and its associated orthographies corneline and cornalyn).

[ 12 ] Cornelian, cognate with similar words in several Romance languages , comes from the Mediaeval Latin corneolus , itself derived from the Latin word cornum , the cornel cherry , [ 13 ] whose translucent red fruits resemble the stone. The Oxford English Dictionary calls "carnelian" a perversion of "cornelian," by subsequent analogy with the Latin word caro, carnis ("flesh"). According to Pliny the Elder , sard derived its name from the city of Sardis in Lydia from which it came, and according to others, may ultimately be related to the Persian word سرد ( sered , "yellowish-red").

[ 9 ] Another possible derivation is from the Greek σάρξ ( sarx , "flesh"); compare the surer etymology of onyx , which comes from Greek ὄνυξ ( onyx , "claw, fingernail"), presumably because onyx with flesh-colored and white bands can resemble a fingernail.

[ 14 ] Distinction between carnelian and sard [ edit ] The names carnelian and sard are often used interchangeably, but they can also be used to describe distinct subvarieties. The general differences are as follows: [ 9 ] Comparison of carnelian and sard Aspect Carnelian Sard Color Lighter, with shades ranging from orange to reddish brown Darker, with shades ranging from a deep reddish brown to almost black Hardness Softer Harder and tougher Fracture Uneven, splintery and conchoidal Like carnelian, but duller and more hackly (having the appearance of something that has been hacked, i.e. jagged) All of these properties vary across a continuum, so the boundary between carnelian and sard is inherently blurry.

Necklace with gold beads and carnelian beads, Cypriot artwork with Mycenaean inspiration, c. 1400–1200 BC.

[ citation needed ] From Enkomi .

British Museum .

Indian carnelian beads, white design etched with acid, imported to Susa in 2600–1700 BC. Found in the tell of the Susa acropolis.

Louvre Museum , reference Sb 17751.

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] These beads are identical with beads found in the Indus Civilization site of Dholavira .

[ 18 ] Egyptian necklace with biconical carnelian beads, rolled strips of sheet gold, and ten amulets.

[ 19 ] The Walters Art Museum , Baltimore .

See also [ edit ] Carnelian (color) List of minerals References [ edit ] ^ Rudolf Duda and Lubos Rejl: Minerals of the World (Arch Css, 1990) ^ a b Carnelian on Gemdat.org ^ Agnes, Michael, ed. (2001).

Webster's New World College Dictionary (4th ed.).

^ "Maryland State Gemstone: Patuxent River Stone (Agate)" .

^ Kostov & Pelevina (2008) .

^ Kulke, Hermann & Rothermund, Dietmar (2004).

A History of India . Routledge. 22.

ISBN 0-415-32920-5 .

^ C. Michael Hogan, Knossos fieldnotes , Modern Antiquarian (2007) ^ Section 12 of the translation of Weilue - a 3rd-century Chinese text by John Hill under "carnelian" and note 12.12 (17) ^ a b c d Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Sard" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

^ Revelation 4:3 ^ Dalley, Stephanie (29 November 2007).

Esther's Revenge at Susa: From Sennacherib to Ahasuerus . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199216635 . Retrieved 24 August 2019 .

^ "Cornelian" .

Oxford English Dictionary . Oxford University Press . Retrieved 14 February 2012 .

^ Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911).

"Carnelian" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press.

^ "onyx" .

etymonline.com . Retrieved 2019-09-26 .

^ "Site officiel du musée du Louvre" .

cartelfr.louvre.fr .

^ Guimet, Musée (2016).

Les Cités oubliées de l'Indus: Archéologie du Pakistan (in French). FeniXX réédition numérique. pp.

354– 355.

ISBN 9782402052467 .

^ Art of the first cities: the third millennium B.C. from the Mediterranean to the Indus . p.

395 .

^ Nandagopal, Prabhakar (2018).

Decorated Carnelian Beads from the Indus Civilization Site of Dholavira (Great Rann of Kachchha, Gujarat) . Archaeopress Publishing Ltd.

ISBN 978-1-78491-917-7 .

^ "Egyptian - Necklace" .

The Walters Art Museum .

Further reading [ edit ] Allchin, B . 1979. "The agate and carnelian industry of Western India and Pakistan". – In: South Asian Archaeology 1975. E. J. Brill, Leiden, 91–105.

Beck, H. C. 1933. "Etched carnelian beads". – The Antiquaries Journal , 13, 4, 384–398.

Bellina, B. 2003. "Beads, social change and interaction between India and South-east Asia". – Antiquity , 77, 296, 285–297.

Brunet, O. 2009. "Bronze and Iron Age carnelian bead production in the UAE and Armenia: new perspectives". – Proceedings of the Seminar for Arabian Studies , 39, 57–68.

Carter, A. K., L. Dussubieux. 2016. "Geologic provenience analysis of agate and carnelian beads using laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (LA-ICP-MS): A case study from Iron Age Cambodia and Thailand". – J. Archeol. Sci.: Reports , 6, 321–331.

Cornaline de l'Inde.

Des pratiques techniques de Cambay aux techno-systèmes de l'Indus (Ed. J.-C. Roux). 2000. Éditions de la Maison des sciences de l'homme, Paris, 558 pp.

Glover, I. 2001. "Cornaline de l'Inde. Des pratiques techniques de Cambay aux techno-systèmes de l'Indus (sous la direction de V. Roux). – Bulletin de l'École française d'Extrême-Orient , 88, 376–381.

Inizan, M.-L. 1999. "La cornaline de l’Indus à la Mésopotamie, production et circulation: la voie du Golfe au IIIe millénaire". – In: Cornaline et pierres précieuses. De Sumer à l'Islam (Ed. by F. Tallon), Musée du Louvre, Paris, 127–140.

Insoll, T., D. A. Polya, K. Bhan, D. Irving, K. Jarvis. 2004. "Towards an understanding of the carnelian bead trade from Western India to sub-Saharan Africa: the application of UV-LA-ICP-MS to carnelian from Gujarat, India, and West Africa". – J. Archaeol. Sci.

, 31, 8, 1161–1173.

Kostov, R. I.; Pelevina, O. (2008). "Complex faceted and other carnelian beads from the Varna Chalcolithic necropolis: archaeogemmological analysis".

Proceedings of the International Conference "Geology and Archaeomineralogy". Sofia, 29–30 October 2008 . Sofia: Publishing House "St. Ivan Rilski": 67– 72.

Mackay, E. 1933. "Decorated carnelian beads". – Man , 33, Sept., 143–146.

Theunissen, R. 2007. "The agate and carnelian ornaments". – In: The Excavations of Noen U-Loke and Non Muang Kao (Eds. C. Higham, A. Kijngam, S. Talbot). The Thai Fine Arts Department, Bangkok, 359–377.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Carnelian at Wikimedia Commons v t e Jewellery Forms Anklet Barrette Belly chain Belt buckle Bindi Bolo tie Bracelet Brooch Chain Chatelaine Collar pin Crown Cufflink Earring Ferronnière Lapel pin Necklace Neck ring Pectoral Pendant Permanent jewellery Ring Tiara Tie chain Tie clip Tie pin Toe ring Watch pocket strap Making People Bench jeweler Clockmaker Goldsmith Jewellery designer Lapidarist Silversmith Watchmaker Processes Carving Casting centrifugal lost-wax vacuum Enameling Engraving Filigree Foldforming Jewelry model Metal clay Plating Polishing Repoussé and chasing Soldering Stonesetting Wire sculpture Wire wrapped jewelry Tools Draw plate File Hammer Mandrel Pliers Materials Precious metals Gold Palladium Platinum Rhodium Silver Precious metal alloys Britannia silver Colored gold Crown gold Electrum Shakudō Shibuichi Sterling silver Argentium Tumbaga Base metals Brass Bronze Copper Mokume-gane Nickel silver (alpacca) : Niobium Pewter Pinchbeck Stainless steel Titanium Tungsten Mineral gemstones Agate Amazonite Amethyst Aventurine Beryl ( red ) Carnelian Chrysoberyl Chrysocolla Citrine Diamond Diopside Emerald Fluorite Garnet Howlite Jade Jasper Kyanite Labradorite Lapis lazuli Larimar Malachite Marcasite Moonstone Obsidian Onyx Opal Peridot Prasiolite Quartz ( smoky ) Ruby Sapphire Sodalite Spinel Sunstone Tanzanite Tiger's eye Topaz Tourmaline Turquoise Variscite Zircon Organic gemstones Abalone Amber Ammolite Copal Coral Black Precious Ivory Jet Nacre Operculum Pearl Tortoiseshell Other natural objects Bezoar Bog-wood Ebonite (vulcanite) Gutta-percha Hair Shell Spondylus shell Toadstone Terms Art jewelry Carat (mass) Carat (purity) Finding Fineness Related topics Body piercing Fashion Gemology Metalworking Phaleristics Wearable art v t e Silica minerals Crystalline Coesite Cristobalite Keatite Moganite Quartz Seifertite Stishovite Tridymite Cryptocrystalline Chalcedony Chert Flint Jasper Amorphous Fulgurite Lechatelierite Opal Miscellaneous Tiger's eye Aqeeq Notable varieties Chalcedony Agate Carnelian Chrome chalcedony Chrysoprase Heliotrope Moss agate Onyx Opal Fiorite Geyserite Quartz Amethyst Ametrine Herkimer diamond Citrine Smoky quartz Shocked quartz Prasiolite Minerals portal Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Carnelian&oldid=1289963132 " Categories : Chalcedony Trigonal minerals Quartz gemstones Hidden categories: All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1 French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with unsourced statements from November 2021 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Persian-language text Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 11 May 2025, at 23:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Carnelian 54 languages Add topic

