Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 Discussion 3 Examples of extant piscivores Toggle Examples of extant piscivores subsection 3.1 Arachnids 3.2 Birds 3.3 Fish 3.4 Mammals 3.5 Reptiles 4 Extinct and prehistoric piscivores Toggle Extinct and prehistoric piscivores subsection 4.1 Fish 4.2 Reptiles 5 References Toggle the table of contents Piscivore 21 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska עברית Malti Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Русский Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Organism that eats mostly or exclusively fish tissue Not to be confused with Pescetarian .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Piscivore" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( June 2011 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Look up piscivore in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Northern water snake ( Nerodia sipedon ) eating a catfish An Atlantic puffin with a mouth full of lesser sand eels A piscivore ( / ˈ p ɪ s ɪ v ɔːr / ) is a carnivorous animal that primarily eats fish . Fish were the diet of early tetrapod evolution (via water-bound amphibians during the Devonian period); insectivory came next; then in time, the more terrestrially adapted reptiles and synapsids evolved herbivory .

[ 1 ] Almost all predatory fish (most sharks , tuna , billfishes , pikes etc.) are obligated piscivores. Some non-piscine aquatic animals , such as whales , sea lions , and crocodilians , are not completely piscivorous; often also preying on invertebrates , marine mammals , waterbirds and even wading land animals in addition to fish, while others, such as the bulldog bat and gharial , are strictly dependent on fish for food. Some creatures, including cnidarians , octopuses , squid , cetaceans , spiders , grizzly bears , jaguars , wolves , snakes , turtles and sea gulls , may have fish as significant if not dominant portions of their diets.

Humans can live on fish-based diets , as can their carnivorous domesticated pets such as dogs and cats .

Etymology [ edit ] The name piscivore is derived from Latin piscis ' fish ' and vorō ' to devour ' . Piscivore is equivalent to the Greek -derived word ichthyophage , both of which mean "fish eater".

Discussion [ edit ] The ecological effects of piscivores can extend to other food chains . In a study of cutthroat trout stocking, researchers found that the addition of this piscivore can have noticeable effects on non-aquatic organisms, in this case bats feeding on insects emerging from the water with the trout.

[ 2 ] Another study done on lionfish removal to maintain low densities used piscivore densities as a biological indicator for coral reef success.

[ 3 ] There exist classifications of primary and secondary piscivores. Primary piscivores, also known as "specialists", shift to this habit in the first few months of their lives. Secondary piscivores will move to eating primarily fish later in their lifetime. It is hypothesized that the secondary piscivores' diet change is due to an adaptation to maintain efficiency in their use of energy while growing.

[ 4 ] Examples of extant piscivores [ edit ] Arachnids [ edit ] Fishing spider Birds [ edit ] Bald eagle Merganser Osprey Penguin Fish [ edit ] African tigerfish Alligator gar Arapaima Barracuda Bluefish [ 4 ] Giant trevally Kidako moray Lemon shark [ 5 ] Lionfish Piranha [ 4 ] Silver arowana Mammals [ edit ] Amazon river dolphin American mink Aquatic genet Bottlenose dolphin Bulldog bat Eurasian otter Fish-eating bat Fishing cat Flat-headed cat Fur seal Giant otter Harbor seal North American river otter Orca Otter shrew Sea lion Tiger Reptiles [ edit ] Asian water monitor Gharial Green anaconda Komodo dragon Yellow anaconda Yellow-bellied sea snake Extinct and prehistoric piscivores [ edit ] Numerous extinct and prehistoric animals are hypothesized to have been primarily piscivorous due to anatomy and/or ecology. Furthermore, some have been confirmed to be piscivorous through fossil evidence. This list includes specialist piscivores, such as Laganosuchus , as well as generalist predators, such as Baryonyx and Spinosaurus , found to have or assumed to have eaten fish: Specimen of Diplomystus swallowing another fish Fish [ edit ] Diplomystus (a small relative of the herring , numerous fossils of individuals that died while trying to swallow other fishes, including smaller individuals of the same species , are known) Thyrsocles (fossil specimen found with the stomach stuffed with the extinct herring Xyne grex ) [ 6 ] Xiphactinus (a 4-meter-long specimen was found with a perfectly preserved skeleton of its relative, Gillicus , in its stomach) Reptiles [ edit ] Baryonyx (an opportunistic predator that had a crocodile-like skull, and scales of the lepidotid fish Scheenstia have been found in a skeleton where the stomach should be) [ 7 ] Elasmosaurus (long neck, stereoscopically positioned eyes, and long teeth are thought to be adaptations for stalking and trapping fish and other schooling animals) Laganosuchus (flattened head suggests that it passively waited for fish to swim near its mouth in order to engulf them) [ 8 ] Ornithocheirus (hypothesized to be piscivorous due to anatomy of its jaws and dentition) Pteranodon (remains of fish found in the beaks and stomach cavities of some specimens) Spinosaurus (close relative of Baryonyx , is hypothesized to have preyed on fish because of giant coelacanthids found in the same environment, and due to anatomical features, including a pressure-sensitive snout that could have detected movements of swimming prey) [ 7 ] [ 9 ] Titanoboa (multiple cranial and biochemical characteristics suggest it was primarily piscivorous) [ 10 ] References [ edit ] ^ Lua error in Module:Citation/CS1/Configuration at line 2123: attempt to index a boolean value.

^ Lua error in Module:Citation/CS1/Configuration at line 2123: attempt to index a boolean value.

^ Lua error in Module:Citation/CS1/Configuration at line 2123: attempt to index a boolean value.

^ a b c Lua error in Module:Citation/CS1/Configuration at line 2123: attempt to index a boolean value.

^ Lua error in Module:Citation/CS1/Configuration at line 2123: attempt to index a boolean value.

[ page needed ] ^ David, Lore Rose. January 10, 1943.

Miocene Fishes of Southern California The Society p 104–115 ^ a b Lua error in Module:Citation/CS1/Configuration at line 2123: attempt to index a boolean value.

^ Lua error in Module:Citation/CS1/Configuration at line 2123: attempt to index a boolean value.

[ dead link ] ^ Lua error in Module:Citation/CS1/Configuration at line 2123: attempt to index a boolean value.

^ Lua error in Module:Citation/CS1/Configuration at line 2123: attempt to index a boolean value.

v t e Feeding behaviours Carnivores adult Arachnophagy Avivore Corallivore Durophagy Egg predation Entomophagy Hematophagy Insectivore Lepidophagy Man-eating animal Molluscivore Mucophagy Myrmecophagy Ophiophagy Piscivore Spongivore Vermivore reproductive Oophagy Paedophagy Placentophagy Breastfeeding Weaning cannibalistic Human cannibalism Autocannibalism Sexual cannibalism Herbivores Folivore Florivore Frugivore Graminivore Seed predation Nectarivore Mellivory Palynivore Xylophagy Osteophagy Cellular Phagocytosis Myzocytosis Others Microbivory Bacterivore Fungivore Coprophagia Detritivore Geophagia Omnivore Planktivore Saprophagy Xenophagy Lithotroph Plastivore Pica Methods Predation Ambush predator Apex predator Egg predator Intraguild predator Pursuit predator Aquatic predation Lunge feeder Pivot feeder Ram feeder Suction feeder Bait balls Bottom feeder Feeding frenzy Filter feeder Browsing Cattle feeding Fodder Grazing Forage Hypercarnivore Hypocarnivore Mesocarnivore Parasitism Kleptoparasitism Scavenger Surplus killing Trophallaxis Antipredator adaptation Carnivorous plant Carnivorous fungus Carnivorous protist Category:Eating behaviors Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX This ecology -related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Piscivore&oldid=1304337116 " Categories : Carnivory Animals by eating behaviors Ecology stubs Hidden categories: Pages with script errors Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from March 2016 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from September 2024 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from June 2011 All articles needing additional references All stub articles This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 12:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Piscivore 21 languages Add topic

