Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Works 3 References 4 Notes Toggle the table of contents John Sergeant (priest) 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia English Roman Catholic priest, controversialist and theologian John Sergeant (1621–1707 or 1710) was an English Roman Catholic priest, controversialist and theologian.

Life [ edit ] He was a son of William Sergeant, a yeoman in Barrow-upon-Humber , Lincolnshire , and was admitted in 1639 as a sub- sizar at St John's College, Cambridge , graduating in 1643.

[ 1 ] On the recommendation of William Beale he was appointed secretary to Thomas Morton , the Anglican Bishop of Durham , time he spent on transcriptions of the Church Fathers .  A year or so later, he converted to Catholicism as result of his studies.

[ 2 ] He subsequently moved to the English College, Lisbon . He studied theology and in 1650 was ordained as a Catholic priest.  He subsequently taught at the college until 1652, when he became procurator and prefect of studies. From 1653 to 1654, he worked as a priest in England before returning to Lisbon where he resumed his earlier work and taught philosophy. In 1655 he was elected canon and appointed as secretary. For the next twenty years he was actively engaged in controversy, both with Anglicans such as the bishops Edward Stillingfleet and John Tillotson , and Catholics who differed from Thomas White .

At the time of the Oates Plot he entered into communication with the Privy Council which greatly scandalized the Catholics. This arose from his opposition to Jesuit influence in the English Catholic Church.  He avoided arrest by passing as a physician under the names of Dodd, Holland, and Smith. There is an original painting of him at Ushaw College , in Durham.

Works [ edit ] He was reportedly difficult to work with, saying and writing many things that offended even his co-religionists.

[ 3 ] He was a voluminous writer, leaving over fifty works, either published or in manuscript.

His three philosophical works, written late in life, were: 1.

The Method to Science . London, 1696.

2.

Solid Philosophy Asserted, Against the Fancies of the Ideists: or, The Method to Science Farther Illustrated. With Reflexions on Mr. Locke's Essay Concerning Human Understanding . London, 1697.

3.

Transnatural Philosophy, or Metaphysicks: Demonstrating the Essences and Operations of all Beings whatever, which gives the Principles to all other Sciences. And shewing the perfect Conformity of Christian Faith to Right Reason, and the Unreason ableness of Atheists, Deists, Anti-trinitarians, and other Sectaries . London, 1700.

References [ edit ] Dorothea Crook, John Sergeant And His Circle – A Study Of Three Seventeenth Century English Aristotelians , EJ Brill, 1993. Describes his work and philosophy.

Journal of the House of Commons : volume 9: 1667–1687 (1802), pp. 710–712 . Accessed 23 July 2009.

Notes [ edit ] ^ "Sergeant, John (SRGT639J)" .

A Cambridge Alumni Database . University of Cambridge.

^ "Sergeant, John" .

Dictionary of National Biography . London: Smith, Elder & Co. 1885–1900.

^ Burton, Edwin (1913).

"John Sergeant" . In Herbermann, Charles (ed.).

Catholic Encyclopedia . New York: Robert Appleton Company.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Australia Netherlands Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Academics CiNii People Trove Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX This article about a British Roman Catholic cleric is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=John_Sergeant_(priest)&oldid=1206192661 " Categories : 1623 births 18th-century deaths Alumni of St John's College, Cambridge Converts to Roman Catholicism from Anglicanism English College, Lisbon alumni People from Barrow upon Humber 17th-century English Roman Catholic priests 18th-century English Roman Catholic priests People associated with the Popish Plot British Roman Catholic clergy stubs Hidden categories: Articles incorporating Cite DNB template Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 All stub articles This page was last edited on 11 February 2024, at 13:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents John Sergeant (priest) 1 language Add topic

