Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview Toggle Overview subsection 1.1 Principles 1.2 Factions or subgroups 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Classical liberalism 2.2 Early to mid 20th century 2.3 Reagan era 2.4 Ross Perot 2.5 Clinton era 2.6 Modern fiscal conservatism 3 Rest of the world 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Fiscal conservatism 19 languages العربية Čeština Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano Latviešu Lombard پښتو Português Română Русский Simple English Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Political and economic philosophy This article is about the economic ideology within conservatism in the United States. For the overlapping economic philosophy in Europe and elsewhere, see Economic liberalism .

This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e This article is part of a series on Liberalism in the United States Schools Classical Conservative Economic Modern Neoclassical Progressive Third Way Principles Civil rights Due process Economic freedom Economic progressivism Egalitarianism Equal opportunity Environmentalism Fiscal conservatism Freedom of the press Freedom of religion Freedom of speech Free market Harm Principle Individualism Internationalism Legal egalitarianism Mixed economy Republicanism Rule of law Separation of church and state Social equality Social justice Social welfare Unalienable rights Welfare state History American Revolutionary War Civil rights movement Fair Deal Gilded Age Great Society Jacksonian democracy Jeffersonian democracy New Deal New Deal coalition Progressive Era Young America movement Intellectuals Abbott Addams Carson Commager Dewey Douglass Dworkin Emerson Frank (Thomas) Franklin Friedan Friedman Galbraith Garrison Hofstadter Ingersoll Ireland James Jefferson King (Coretta) King (Martin) Krugman Maddow McCarthy McGovern Mott Murray Nozick Nussbaum Paine Pinker Rawls Reich Rorty Rush Schlesinger Sharpton Skinner Smith Sontag Stanton Steinem Sumner Trilling Trotter Thoreau Truth Vidal Ward Wells Wellstone Politicians Abzug Adams Aguilar Anthony Baker Biden Booker Brown Bryan Buttigieg Carter Chisholm Clark Cleveland Clinton (Bill) Clinton (Hillary) Clyburn Cuomo Dean Dukakis Eisenhower Farmer Frank Gillibrand Glasser Gompers Gore Hamer Harris Hays Hoyer Huerta Humphrey Jackson (Andrew) Jackson (Jesse) Javits Jefferson Johnson Jordan Kefauver Kennedy (John) Kennedy (Joseph) Kennedy (Robert) Kennedy (Ted) Kerry King (Coretta) King (Martin) La Follette La Guardia Lewis Lincoln Lindsay Madison Markey McCarthy McGovern Milk Mondale Murphy Murray Nelson Newsom O'Neill Obama Pelosi Powell Pritzker Randolph Reid Reuther Rockefeller Roosevelt (Eleanor) Roosevelt (Franklin) Roosevelt (Theodore) Rush Schumer Shapiro Shriver Smith Stevenson Truman Van Buren Wallace Walz Wellstone Wilson Yarborough Commentators Boghossian Bonnell Bouie Carville Chait Coates Cohen Colbert Croly Dowd Friedman Gay Goldberg Haidt Hayes Howe Huffington Kimmel Klein Maddow Maher Marshall Meyers Moore Moyers Noah O'Brien O'Donnell Olbermann Oliver Pakman Polgreen Singal Smith Stewart Sullivan Thompson Withers Yglesias Jurists Blackmun Brandeis Brennan Breyer Cardozo Darrow Douglas Dworkin Ginsburg Harlan Houston K. B. Jackson Kagan T. Marshall Sotomayor Souter Stevens Tribe Warren Literature A Summary View of the Rights of British America (1774) Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms (1775) Common Sense (1775-1776) The American Crisis (1776-1783) United States Declaration of Independence (1776) United States Bill of Rights (1789) Rights of Man (1791) The Age of Reason (1793) Agrarian Justice (1797) Jefferson Bible (1804-1820) Essays: First Series (1841) Essays: Second Series (1844) Resistance to Civil Government (1849) The Vital Center (1946) A Nation of Immigrants (1958) A Theory of Justice (1971) The Imperial Presidency (1973) Movements Mercantilism Age of Enlightenment American Revolution Abolitionism Classical liberalism Progressivism Labor rights Women's suffrage Social liberalism Cold War liberal Civil rights movement Second-wave feminism LGBT rights Environmentalism Neoliberalism Third Way Net neutrality in the United States Third-wave feminism Modern liberalism in the United States Internet privacy Occupy Wallstreet Fourth-wave feminism Black Lives Matter The Resistance Parties Anti-Federalist Party Democratic Party Democratic-Republican Party Liberal Republican Party National Democratic Party People's Party Bull Moose Party Progressive Party (1924) Progressive Party (1948) Republican Party ( historically, factions ) Half-Breeds Radical Republicans Rockefeller Republicans Roosevelt Republicans Moderate Republicans Mugwumps Rhode Island Suffrage Party Whig Party (factions) Think tanks Center for American Progress Center for Budget and Policy Priorities Roosevelt Institute Other organizations AFL–CIO American Civil Liberties Union American Constitution Society American Humanist Association Americans United for Separation of Church and State Brennan Center For Justice Equal Justice Works Human Rights Campaign NAACP National Organization for Women People for the American Way NARAL Southern Christian Leadership Conference Southern Center for Human Rights SNCC National Urban League Media The American Prospect The Atlantic CNN HuffPost Last Week Tonight with John Oliver Mother Jones MSNBC NPR The Daily Show The Nation The New Republic The New York Times The Problem with Jon Stewart Rolling Stone Salon Sojourners Talking Points Memo ThinkProgress The Washington Post Vox (website) See also Liberal bias in academia Liberal bias in the media The Liberal Imagination (1950) Modern liberalism in the United States American Left Liberalism portal United States portal v t e In American political theory , fiscal conservatism or economic conservatism [ 1 ] is a political and economic philosophy regarding fiscal policy and fiscal responsibility with an ideological basis in capitalism , individualism , limited government , and laissez-faire economics.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Fiscal conservatives advocate tax cuts , reduced government spending , free markets , deregulation , privatization , free trade , and minimal government debt .

[ 4 ] Fiscal conservatism follows the same philosophical outlook as classical liberalism . This concept is derived from economic liberalism .

[ 5 ] The term has its origins in the era of the American New Deal during the 1930s as a result of the policies initiated by modern liberals , when many classical liberals started calling themselves conservatives as they did not wish to be identified with what was passing for liberalism in the United States .

[ 6 ] In the United States, the term liberalism has become associated with the welfare state and expanded regulatory policies created as a result of the New Deal and its offshoots from the 1930s onwards.

[ 7 ] Fiscal conservatives formed one of the three legs of the traditional American conservative movement that had emerged during the 1950s, together with social conservatism and national defense conservatism.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Many Americans who are classical liberals also tend to identify as libertarian , [ 10 ] holding more cultural liberal views and advocating a non-interventionist foreign policy while supporting lower taxes and less government spending .

[ 8 ] As of 2020, 39% of Americans polled considered themselves "economically conservative".

[ 11 ] Because of its proximity to the United States, the term has entered the lexicon in Canada.

[ 12 ] In many other countries, economic liberalism or simply liberalism is used to describe what Americans call fiscal conservatism.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Part of a series on Capitalism Concepts Austerity Business Business cycle Businessperson Capital Capital accumulation Capital markets Company Corporation Competition Competition law Definitions Economic interventionism Economic liberalism Economic surplus Entrepreneurship Fictitious capital Financial market Free price system Free market Goods and services Investor Invisible hand Visible hand Liberalization Marginalism Money Private property Privatization Profit Rent seeking Supply and demand Surplus value Value Wage labour Economic systems Anglo-Saxon Authoritarian Corporate Dirigist Free-market Humanistic Laissez-faire Liberal Libertarian Market Mercantilist Mixed Monopoly National Neoliberal Nordic Private Raw Regulated market Regulatory Rhine Social Political State State-sponsored Welfare Economic theories American Austrian Chartalism MMT Chicago Classical Institutional Keynesian Neo- New Post- Market monetarism Critique of political economy Critique of work Marxist Monetarist Neoclassical New institutional Supply-side Ideologies Anarcho Authoritarian Classical liberalism Democratic Dirigisme Eco Gladstonian Humanistic Inclusive Liberal Liberalism Libertarian Neo Neoliberalism Objectivism Ordoliberalism Privatism Right-libertarianism Third Way Origins Age of Enlightenment Capitalism and Islam Commercial Revolution Feudalism Industrial Revolution Mercantilism Primitive accumulation Physiocracy Simple commodity production Development Advanced Consumer Community Corporate Crony Finance Global Illiberal Late Marxist Merchant Progressive Rentier State monopoly Technological Intellectuals Smith Bentham Malthus Say Ricardo Mill (James) Bastiat Mill (John Stuart) Marx Walras Marshall Pareto Veblen Weber von Mises Schumpeter Keynes Hayek Rand Weaver Coase Friedman Rothbard Sowell Becker Hoppe Related topics Anti-capitalism Capitalist propaganda Capitalist realism Capitalist state Consumerism Crisis theory Criticism of capitalism Critique of political economy Critique of work Cronyism Culture of capitalism Evergreening Exploitation of labour Globalization History History of theory Market economy Periodizations of capitalism Perspectives on capitalism Post-capitalism Speculation Spontaneous order Venture philanthropy Wage slavery Capitalism portal Business portal Economics portal v t e Overview [ edit ] Principles [ edit ] Part of a series on Neoliberalism Ideas Austerity Balanced budget Denationalization Deregulation Economic integration Economic interdependence Economic liberalization Foreign direct investment Free markets Free trade ( area ) Globalization Intellectual property Laffer curve Marketization Market economy Mundell–Fleming model Privatization Public–private partnership Shock therapy Single market Structural Adjustment Programme Supranationalism Tax cuts Economics Monetarism Neoclassical Supply-side Trickle-down Movements Economic liberalism Fiscal conservatism Fujimorism Thatcherism Reaganomics Rogernomics Third Way Governance Association of Southeast Asian Nations Bank for International Settlements European Central Bank European Union Federal Reserve Greater Arab Free Trade Area International Monetary Fund MERCOSUR North American Free Trade Agreement Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership World Bank World Trade Organization Organizations World Economic Forum Third Way People Clinton Fujimori Douglas Greenspan Lippmann Nakasone Pinochet Reagan Rougier Thatcher Related topics Anti-capitalism Anti-globalization Alter-globalization Authoritarian capitalism Blatcherism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of intellectual property Market fundamentalism Capitalism portal Economics portal Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Fiscal conservatism is the economic philosophy of prudence in government spending and debt. The principles of capitalism , limited government , and laissez-faire economics form its ideological foundation.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Fiscal conservatives advocate the avoidance of deficit spending , the lowering of taxes , and the reduction of overall government spending and national debt whilst ensuring balanced budgets . In other words, fiscal conservatives are against the government expanding beyond its means through debt, but they will usually choose debt over tax increases.

[ 15 ] They strongly believe in libertarian principles such as individualism and free enterprise , and advocate deregulation , privatization , and free trade .

[ 4 ] In his Reflections on the Revolution in France , Edmund Burke argued that a government does not have the right to run up large debts and then throw the burden on the taxpayer, writing "it is to the property of the citizen, and not to the demands of the creditor of the state, that the first and original faith of civil society is pledged. The claim of the citizen is prior in time, paramount in title, superior in equity. The fortunes of individuals, whether possessed by acquisition or by descent or in virtue of a participation in the goods of some community, were no part of the creditor's security, expressed or implied. ... [T]he public, whether represented by a monarch or by a senate, can pledge nothing but the public estate; and it can have no public estate except in what it derives from a just and proportioned imposition upon the citizens at large".

[ 16 ] Factions or subgroups [ edit ] Although all fiscal conservatives generally agree on a smaller and less expensive government, there are disagreements over priorities.

[ 8 ] There are three main factions or subgroups, each advocating for a particular emphasis.

Deficit hawks emphasize balancing government budgets and reducing the size of government debt, viewing government debt as economically damaging and morally dubious since it passes on obligations on to future generations who have played no part in present-day tax and spending decisions.

[ 8 ] Deficit hawks are willing to consider tax increases if the additional revenue is used to reduce debt rather than increase spending.

[ 8 ] A second group put their main emphasis on tax cuts rather than spending cuts or debt reduction. Many embrace supply-side economics , arguing that as high taxes discourage economic activity and investment, tax cuts would result in economic growth, leading in turn to higher government revenues.

[ 8 ] According to them, these additional government revenues would reduce the debt in the long term. They also argue for reducing taxes even if it were to lead to short-term increases in the deficit.

[ 8 ] Some supply-siders have advocated that the increases in revenue through tax cuts make drastic cuts in spending unnecessary.

[ 8 ] However, the Congressional Budget Office has consistently reported that income tax cuts increase deficits and debt and do not pay for themselves. For example, the CBO estimated that the Bush tax cuts added about $1.5 trillion to deficits and debt from 2002 to 2011 [ 17 ] and it would have added nearly $3 trillion to deficits and debt over the 2010–2019 decade if fully extended at all income levels.

[ 18 ] A third group makes little distinction between debt and taxes. This group emphasizes reduction in spending rather than tax policy or debt reduction.

[ 19 ] They argue that the true cost of government is the level of spending, not how that spending is financed.

[ 8 ] Every dollar that the government spends is a dollar taken from workers, regardless of whether it is from debt or taxes. Taxes simply redistribute purchasing power; it does so in a particularly inefficient manner, reducing the incentives to produce or hire, and borrowing simply forces businesses and investors to anticipate higher taxes later on.

[ 19 ] History [ edit ] Classical liberalism [ edit ] Classical liberalism in the United States forms the historical foundation for modern fiscal conservatism. Kathleen G. Donohue argues that classical liberalism in the 19th-century United States was distinct from its counterpart in Britain: [A]t the center of classical liberal theory [in Europe] was the idea of laissez-faire . To the vast majority of American classical liberals, however, laissez-faire did not mean no government intervention at all. On the contrary, they were more than willing to see the government provide tariffs, railroad subsidies, and internal improvements, all of which benefited producers. What they condemned was intervention on behalf of consumers.

[ 20 ] Economic liberalism owes its ideological creation to the classical liberalism tradition in the vein of Adam Smith , Friedrich Hayek , Milton Friedman , Ayn Rand , and Ludwig von Mises .

[ 20 ] They provided moral justifications for free markets. Liberals of the time, in contrast to modern ones, disliked government authority and preferred individualism . They saw free market capitalism as the preferable means of achieving economic ends.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Early to mid 20th century [ edit ] In the early 20th century, fiscal conservatives were often at odds with progressives who desired economic reform. During the 1920s, Republican President Calvin Coolidge 's pro-business economic policies were credited for the successful period of economic growth known as the Roaring Twenties . However, his actions may have been due more to a sense of federalism than fiscal conservatism as Robert Sobel notes: "As Governor of Massachusetts, Coolidge supported wages and hours legislation, opposed child labor, imposed economic controls during World War I, favored safety measures in factories, and even worker representation on corporate boards".

[ 21 ] Herbert Hoover addresses a large crowd in his 1932 presidential campaign.

Contrary to popular opinion, then-Republican President Herbert Hoover was not a fiscal conservative. He promoted government intervention during the early Great Depression , a policy that his successor, Democratic President Franklin D. Roosevelt , continued and increased [ 22 ] despite campaigning to the contrary.

[ 23 ] Coolidge's economic policies are often popularly contrasted with the New Deal deficit spending of Roosevelt and Republican Party opposition to Roosevelt's government spending was a unifying cause for a significant caucus of Republicans through even the presidencies of Harry S. Truman and Dwight D. Eisenhower .

Barry Goldwater was a famous champion of both the socially and fiscally conservative Republicans.

[ 24 ] In 1977, Democratic President Jimmy Carter appointed Alfred E. Kahn , a professor of economics at Cornell University , to be chair of the Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB). He was part of a push for deregulation of the industry, supported by leading economists, leading think tanks in Washington, a civil society coalition advocating the reform (patterned on a coalition earlier developed for the truck-and-rail-reform efforts), the head of the regulatory agency, Senate leadership, the Carter administration and even some in the airline industry. This coalition swiftly gained legislative results in 1978.

[ 25 ] The Airline Deregulation Act ( Pub.L.

95–504 ) was signed into law by President Carter on October 24, 1978. The main purpose of the act was to remove government control over fares, routes, and market entry of new airlines from commercial aviation . The CAB's powers of regulation were to be phased out, eventually allowing market forces to determine routes and fares. The Act did not remove or diminish the Federal Aviation Administration 's regulatory powers over all aspects of airline safety.

[ 26 ] In 1979, Carter deregulated the American beer industry by making it legal to sell malt , hops , and yeast to American home brewers for the first time since the effective 1920 beginning of Prohibition in the United States . This Carter deregulation led to an increase in home brewing over the 1980s and 1990s that by the 2000s had developed into a strong craft microbrew culture in the United States, with 3,418 micro breweries, brewpubs and regional craft breweries in the United States by the end of 2014.

[ 27 ] Jimmy Carter , who reduced the debt-to-GDP ratio in the 1970s Public debt as a percentage of GDP fell rapidly in the post-World War II period and reached a low in 1974 under Richard Nixon .

Debt as a share of GDP has consistently increased since then, except under Carter and Bill Clinton . The United States national debt rose during the 1980s as Ronald Reagan cut tax rates and increased military spending. The numbers of public debt as a percentage of GDP are indicative of the process: [ 28 ] [ 29 ] Public Debt (as % of GDP) Year 0 20 40 60 80 100 120 1910 1930 1950 1970 1990 2010 Public Debt (as % of GDP) US public debt (as % of GDP) by year raw data Reagan era [ edit ] Main article: Reaganomics Ronald Reagan spent the most of any recent President (Carter to Obama) as measured by annual average percentage of the GDP.

[ 30 ] Fiscal conservatism was rhetorically promoted during the presidency of Republican Ronald Reagan (1981–1989). During Reagan's tenure, the top personal income tax bracket dropped from 70% to 28% [ 31 ] while payroll taxes and the effective tax rates on the lower two income quintiles increased.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] Reagan cut the maximum capital gains tax from 28% to 20%, though in his second term he raised it back up to 28%. He successfully increased defense spending, but conversely, liberal Democrats blocked his efforts to cut domestic spending.

[ 34 ] Real GDP growth recovered strongly after the 1982 recession, growing at an annual rate of 3.4% for the rest of his time in office.

[ 35 ] Unemployment dropped after peaking at over 10.7% percent in 1982, and inflation decreased significantly. Federal tax receipts nearly doubled from $517 billion in 1980 to $1,032 billion in 1990. Employment grew at about the same rate as the population.

[ 36 ] According to a United States Department of the Treasury nonpartisan economic study, the major tax bills enacted under Reagan caused federal revenue to fall by an amount equal to roughly 1% of GDP.

[ 37 ] Although Reagan did not offset the increase in federal government spending or reduce the deficit, his accomplishments are more notable when expressed as a percent of the gross domestic product. Federal spending fell from 22.2% of the GDP to 21.2%.

[ 38 ] By the end of Reagan's second term, the national debt held by the public increased by almost 60% and the total debt equalled $2.6 trillion. In fewer than eight years, the United States went from being the world's largest creditor nation to the world's largest debtor nation.

[ 39 ] Ross Perot [ edit ] Main article: 1992 Ross Perot presidential campaign In the 1992 presidential election, Ross Perot , a successful American businessman, ran as a third-party candidate. Despite significant campaign stumbles and the uphill struggles involved in mounting a third-party candidacy, Perot received 18.9% of the popular vote (the largest percentage of any third-party candidate in modern history), largely based on his central platform plank of limited-government, balanced-budget fiscal conservatism.

[ 40 ] Clinton era [ edit ] Main article: Clintonomics This table shows that Bill Clinton 's Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 which increased the average federal tax rates for the top 1% while lowering average tax rates for the middle class was followed by President Barack Obama starting in 2013 through the partial expiration of the Bush tax cuts and that both tax increases lowered deficits relative to Congressional Budget Office policy baselines without them.

While the mantle of fiscal conservatism is most commonly claimed by Republicans and libertarians , it is also claimed in some ways by many centrist or moderate Democrats who often refer to themselves as New Democrats . Although not supportive of the wide range tax cut policies that were often enacted during the Reagan and Bush administrations, [ 41 ] [ 42 ] the New Democrat coalition's primary economic agenda differed from the traditional philosophy held by liberal Democrats and sided with the fiscal conservative belief that a balanced federal budget should take precedence over some spending programs.

[ 42 ] Former President Bill Clinton , who was a New Democrat and part of the somewhat fiscally conservative Third Way advocating Democratic Leadership Council , is a prime example of this as his administration along with the Democratic-majority congress of 1993 passed on a party-line vote the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 which cut government spending, created a 36% individual income tax bracket, raised the top tax bracket which encompassed the top 1.2% earning taxpayers from 31% to 39.6% and created a 35% income tax rate for corporations.

[ 43 ] The 1993 Budget Act also cut taxes for fifteen million low-income families and 90% of small businesses. Additionally during the Clinton years, the PAYGO (pay-as-you-go) system originally introduced with the passing of the Budget Enforcement Act of 1990 (which required that all increases in direct spending or revenue decreases be offset by other spending decreases or revenue increases and was very popular with deficit hawks ) had gone into effect and was used regularly until the system's expiration in 2002.

[ 44 ] In the 1994 midterm elections , Republicans ran on a platform that included fiscal responsibility drafted by then-Congressman Newt Gingrich called the Contract with America which advocated such things as balancing the budget, providing the President with a line-item veto and welfare reform . After the elections gave the Republicans a majority in the House of Representatives , newly minted Speaker of the House Gingrich pushed aggressively for reduced government spending which created a confrontation with the White House that climaxed in the 1995–1996 government shutdown . After Clinton's re-election in 1996, they were able to cooperate and pass the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 , which lowered the top capital gains tax rate from 28% to 20% and the 15% rate to 10%.

[ 44 ] After this combination of tax hikes and spending reductions, the United States was able to create budget surpluses from fiscal years 1998–2001 (the first time since 1969) and the longest period of sustained economic growth in United States history.

[ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] Modern fiscal conservatism [ edit ] Comparison of annual federal deficits (CBO 10-year forecast from before inauguration vs. the actual amount) during the Obama and Bush presidencies showcasing how George W. Bush added far more to the debt relative to the CBO 2001 forecast than Obama added relative to the CBO 2009 forecast American businessman, politician, and former Mayor of New York City Michael Bloomberg considers himself a fiscal conservative and expressed his definition of the term at the 2007 British Conservative Party Conference, stating: To me, fiscal conservatism means balancing budgets – not running deficits that the next generation can't afford. It means improving the efficiency of delivering services by finding innovative ways to do more with less. It means cutting taxes when possible and prudent to do so, raising them overall only when necessary to balance the budget, and only in combination with spending cuts. It means when you run a surplus, you save it; you don't squander it. And most importantly, being a fiscal conservative means preparing for the inevitable economic downturns – and by all indications, we've got one coming.

[ 48 ] While the term "fiscal conservatism" would imply budget deficits would be lower under conservatives (i.e., Republicans), this has not historically been the case. Economists Alan Blinder and Mark Watson reported in 2016 reported that budget deficits since WW2 tended to be smaller under Democratic Party presidents, at 2.1% potential GDP versus 2.8% potential GDP for Republican presidents, a difference of about 0.7% GDP. They wrote that higher budget deficits should theoretically have boosted the economy more for Republicans, and therefore cannot explain the greater GDP growth under Democrats.

[ 49 ] By the 2020s, the Republican Party had largely abandoned fiscal conservatism as an ideological cornerstone.

[ 50 ] Rest of the world [ edit ] As a result of the expansion of the welfare state and increased regulatory policies by the Roosevelt administration beginning in the 1930s, in the United States, the term liberalism has today become associated with modern rather than classical liberalism.

[ 7 ] In Western Europe, the expanded welfare states created after World War II were created by socialist or social-democratic parties such as the British Labour Party rather than liberal parties.

[ 7 ] Many liberal parties in Western Europe tend to adhere to classical liberalism , with the Free Democratic Party in Germany being one example.

[ 7 ] The Liberal Democrats in the United Kingdom have a classical liberal and a social liberal wing of the party. In many countries, liberalism or economic liberalism is used to describe what Americans call fiscal conservatism.

[ 13 ] [ 7 ] [ 51 ] Fiscal conservatism in the United Kingdom was arguably most popular during the premiership of Conservative Margaret Thatcher . After a number of years of deficit spending under the previous Labour government, Thatcher advocated spending cuts and selective tax increases to balance the budget. As a result of the deterioration in the United Kingdom's public finances—according to fiscal conservatives caused by another spate of deficit spending under the previous Labour government, the late-2000s recession and by the European sovereign debt crisis —the Cameron–Clegg coalition (Conservative–Liberal Democrats) embarked on an austerity programme featuring a combination of spending cuts and tax rises in an attempt to halve the deficit and eliminate the structural deficit over the five-year parliament.

[ 52 ] In Canada, the rise of the socialist Co-operative Commonwealth Federation pushed the Liberal Party to create and expand the welfare state before and after World War II.

[ 7 ] Fiscal conservatism in Canada is generally referred to as blue Toryism when it is present within the Conservative Party of Canada .

[ 53 ] In Alberta, fiscal conservatism is represented by the United Conservative Party .

[ 54 ] In Ontario, fiscal conservatism is represented by the Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario .

[ 53 ] The term is sometimes used in South Korea, where left-liberal Democratic Party of Korea (DPK) and conservative People Power Party (PPP) are the two main parties.

[ 55 ] Fiscal conservatism is mainly represented by PPP.

[ 56 ] South Korea's former president, Yoon Suk-yeol , is known as a "fiscal conservative".

[ 57 ] See also [ edit ] Balance of payments – Difference between the inflow and outflow of money to a country at a given time Balance of trade – Difference between the monetary value of exports and imports Capitalism – Economic system based on private ownership Citizens Against Government Waste – Fiscally conservative watchdog group Classical liberalism – Ideology supporting both civil and economic liberties Concord Coalition – American think tank focused on the federal budget Criticism of welfare – Social philosophy Economic freedom – Freedom to make economic decisions Economic liberalism – Political and economic ideology Market economy – Type of economic system Minarchism – Government with minimal intervention Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Republican Main Street Partnership – Republican Party (United States) nonprofit organization Right-wing politics – Political ideologies favoring social hierarchy Trickle-down economics – Pejorative economic and political term Notes [ edit ] ^ Everett, Jim A. C. (December 11, 2013).

"The 12 Item Social and Economic Conservatism Scale (SECS)" .

PLOS ONE .

8 (12): e82131.

Bibcode : 2013PLoSO...882131E .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0082131 .

PMC 3859575 .

PMID 24349200 .

^ a b c Hudelson, Richard (1999).

Modern Political Philosophy (1999), Richard Hudelson, pp. 37–38 . M.E. Sharpe.

ISBN 9780765600219 .

Archived from the original on February 1, 2015 . Retrieved November 23, 2021 .

^ a b c M. O. Dickerson et al., An Introduction to Government and Politics: A Conceptual Approach (2009), p. 129.

^ a b Coates 2012 , p. 392.

^ Ghosh 2006 , p. 56.

^ Grigsby 2004 , p. 99.

^ a b c d e f Fujii 2013 , p. 541.

^ a b c d e f g h i Coates 2012 , p. 393.

^ Ashbee, Edward; Waddan, Alex (December 13, 2023). "US Republicans and the New Fusionism".

The Political Quarterly .

95 : 148– 156.

doi : 10.1111/1467-923X.13341 .

ISSN 1467-923X .

S2CID 266282896 .

^ Grigsby 2004 , p. 100.

^ Brenan, Megan (May 20, 2020).

"Americans Remain More Liberal Socially than Economically" . Gallup.

Archived from the original on June 26, 2020 . Retrieved August 19, 2020 .

^ Farney & Rayside 2013 , p. 12.

^ a b Johnston 2011 , p. 210.

^ Fujii 2013 , pp. 541–542.

^ Freeman, Robert M. (1999).

Correctional Organization and Management: Public Policy Challenges, Behavior, and Structure . Elsevier. p. 109.

ISBN 978-0-7506-9897-9 .

^ Burke, Edmund (1965).

Reflections on the Revolution in France . New York: Arlington House.

^ "CBO Changes in CBO's Baseline Projections Since January 2001" . CBO. June 7, 2012.

Archived from the original on June 4, 2020 . Retrieved July 13, 2019 .

^ "CBO Budget and Economic Outlook 2009–2019" . CBO. January 7, 2009.

Archived from the original on November 12, 2016 . Retrieved July 13, 2019 .

^ a b Coates 2012 , p. 394.

^ a b Kathleen G. Donohue (2005).

Freedom from Want: American Liberalism and the Idea of the Consumer . Johns Hopkins University Press. p. 2.

ISBN 9780801883910 .

^ Sobel, Robert (1988).

"Coolidge and American Business" . Coolidge Foundation.

Archived from the original on May 12, 2016 . Retrieved July 13, 2019 .

^ "Herbert Hoover: Father of the New Deal" .

Cato Institute . September 29, 2011.

Archived from the original on April 23, 2021 . Retrieved April 23, 2021 .

^ "Campaign Address on the Federal Budget at Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania | The American Presidency Project" .

www.presidency.ucsb.edu .

Archived from the original on September 6, 2021 . Retrieved April 23, 2021 .

^ Paul S. Boyer; et al. (2007).

The Enduring Vision: A History of the American People . Cengage Learning. p. 934.

ISBN 978-0618801596 .

^ Vietor, Richard H. K.

Contrived Competition: Regulation and Deregulation in America . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-43679-4 .

OCLC 897163998 .

^ Cannon, James R.; Richey, Franklin D. (2012). Practical Applications in Business Aviation Management. Government Institutes.

ISBN 978-1605907703 .

^ "Small and Independent Brewers See Sustained Growth in 2017" Archived May 10, 2021, at the Wayback Machine . Brewers Association. March 27, 2018. Retrieved February 16, 2019.

^ "Combined Gross Public Debt United States 1900–2020" .

US Government Spending . 2020.

Archived from the original on July 31, 2020 . Retrieved June 28, 2020 .

^ "Federal Debt: Total Public Debt as Percent of Gross Domestic Product [GFDEGDQ188S]" .

FRED, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis . Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis and U.S. Office of Management and Budget. May 3, 2020.

Archived from the original on February 20, 2017 . Retrieved May 4, 2020 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: others ( link ) ^ "CBO Historical Budget Data April 2018" Archived November 17, 2018, at the Wayback Machine . Retrieved June 25, 2018.

^ Mitchell, Daniel J. (July 19, 1996).

"The Historical Lessons of Lower Tax Rates" . The Heritage Foundation. Archived from the original on May 30, 2007 . Retrieved July 13, 2019 .

^ "Social Security and Medicare Tax Rates" . Social Security Administration. July 10, 2007.

Archived from the original on April 10, 2021 . Retrieved July 13, 2019 .

^ "Effective Federal Tax Rates: 1979–2001" . Bureau of Economic Analysis. July 10, 2007.

Archived from the original on May 9, 2007 . Retrieved July 13, 2019 .

^ Steven F. Hayward, The Age of Reagan: The Conservative Counterrevolution 1980–1989 (2009), p. 477.

^ "Gross Domestic Product" . Bureau of Economic Analysis. May 31, 2007. Archived from the original on August 26, 2009 . Retrieved July 13, 2019 .

^ Ronald Reagan . Microsoft Corporation. 2007. Archived from the original on October 28, 2009 . Retrieved July 27, 2007 .

^ "Revenue Effects of Major Tax Bills" (PDF) .

2003, Rev. Sept 2006 .

United States Department of the Treasury . Working Paper 81, Table 2. Archived from the original (PDF) on November 22, 2010 . Retrieved July 13, 2019 .

Revised September 2006 edition Archived February 25, 2020, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Chris Edwards, "Reagan's Budget Legacy," CATO Institute June 8, 2004 Archived December 6, 2010, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Reagan Policies Gave Green Light to Red Ink" .

The Washington Post . June 9, 2004.

Archived from the original on June 14, 2018 . Retrieved July 13, 2019 .

^ Rapoport, Ronald B.; Stone, Walter J. (December 21, 2007).

Three's a Crowd: The Dynamics of Third Parties, Ross Perot, and Republican Resurgence . University of Michigan Press.

ISBN 978-0-472-03099-6 .

^ Chapman, Stephen (July 22, 1993).

"Clinton Won't Restore Punitive Taxation-not Today" .

Chicago Tribune .

Archived from the original on March 28, 2014 . Retrieved July 13, 2019 .

^ a b Nolan, Timothy (October 17, 2012).

"A Brief History Of "Trickle-Down Government" " .

The Christian Science Monitor .

Archived from the original on May 2, 2021 . Retrieved July 13, 2019 .

^ Steve Schifferes (January 15, 2001).

"Bill Clinton's economic legacy" . London. BBC News.

Archived from the original on February 8, 2019 . Retrieved July 13, 2019 .

^ a b Troy, Gil (2015).

The Age of Clinton: America in the 1990s . Thomas Dunne Books.

ISBN 9781250063724 .

^ Wallace, Kelly (September 27, 2000).

"President Clinton announces another record budget surplus" . CNN.

Archived from the original on October 13, 2021 . Retrieved July 13, 2019 .

^ King, John (May 1, 2000).

"President Clinton announces record payment on national debt" . CNN.

Archived from the original on October 13, 2021 . Retrieved July 13, 2019 .

^ Jackson, Brooks (February 3, 2008).

"The Budget and Deficit Under Clinton" .

FactCheck .

Archived from the original on December 7, 2021 . Retrieved July 13, 2019 .

^ "Mayor Bloomberg Delivers Remarks At 2007 Conservative Party Conference" . New York City Government. September 30, 2007. Archived from the original on December 14, 2012 . Retrieved July 13, 2019 .

^ Blinder, Alan S.; Watson, Mark W. (April 2016).

"Presidents and the U.S. Economy: An Econometric Exploration" .

American Economic Review .

106 (4): 1015– 1045.

doi : 10.1257/aer.20140913 .

S2CID 32188412 .

^ Rappeport, Alan (June 19, 2025).

"Record Debt Limit Increase Would Break Republican Precedent" .

The New York Times . Retrieved June 20, 2025 .

This year, the party of fiscal conservatism is poised to discard that philosophy as Republicans prepare to press ahead with domestic policy legislation that combines nearly $4 trillion in tax cuts with a $5 trillion increase to the debt limit. An increase of that magnitude would be a record and underscore the ideological flexibility that many Republicans are willing to embrace when they are in power.

^ Fujii 2013 , p. 542.

^ Rice, Nick (June 22, 2010).

"Budget: Structural deficit to be balanced by 2015" . Fund Strategy. Archived from the original on July 13, 2010 . Retrieved November 22, 2010 .

^ a b Wolak, Arthur (2014).

The Development of Managerial Culture: A Comparative Study of Australia and Canada . Springer. p. 199.

^ Kleiss, Karen (April 9, 2012).

"Alberta election pits PC's 'red' versus Wildrose's 'blue' conservatives, experts say" .

National Post . Retrieved July 13, 2019 .

^ "전 정부 '확장재정'은 착시?···코로나19 일시 지출 빼면 이미 윤 정부 건전성 목표 달성" .

Kyunghyang Shinmun . August 1, 2022.

전문가들은 국가재정이 보수, 진보 정권 할 것 없이 관료 주도로 보수적으로 운용해 왔다고 지적했다. 하준경 한양대 경제학부 교수는 "정권마다 접근법의 차이가 있어도 기본적으로 기획재정부 주도의 재정 보수주의 가 국내 재정 정책을 지배해왔다"며 "코로나19 대응과 물가 상승 상황에서의 취약 계층 지원, 기술 패권 경쟁에 따른 정부의 역할 확대 등을 고려하면 긴축재정은 시대적 과제에 대응하기 어렵다"고 말했다.

^ "South Korea votes in presidential election with inequality key concern" .

France 24 . September 9, 2022.

The two parties are ideologically poles apart, and analysts say the key question is whether voters will kick out Moon's dovish Democratic Party and usher in a new hawkish, fiscally-conservative regime under opposition People Power party's Yoon.

^ "Samsung commits $356 billion in investments with 80,000 new jobs" .

The Jakarta Post . May 27, 2022.

The two parties are ideologically poles apart, and analysts say the key question is whether voters will kick out Moon's dovish Democratic Party and usher in a new hawkish, fiscally-conservative regime under opposition People Power party's Yoon.

References [ edit ] Clark, Barry Stewart (1998).

Political Economy: A Comparative Approach . Greenwood Publishing Group.

ISBN 0-275-95869-8 .

Coates, David (2012).

The Oxford Companion to American Politics . Vol. 2. Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-976431-0 .

Farney, James; Rayside, David (2013). "Introduction: The Meanings of Conservatism".

Conservatism in Canada . University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 978-1-442-61456-7 .

Fujii, George (2013). "Liberalism".

Encyclopedia of the Cold War . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-135-92311-2 .

Ghosh, Peter (2006). Lawrence Goldman (ed.).

Politics and Culture in Victorian Britain: Essays in Memory of Colin Matthew . OUP Oxford.

ISBN 9780191514449 .

Hence the emphasis today on the study of political economy, and the identification of Gladstone with 'fiscal liberalism', defined above all as the liberalism of free trade.

Lloyd, Gordon; Davenport, David (2013).

The New Deal & Modern American Conservatism: A Defining Rivalry . Hoover Press.

ISBN 978-0-817-91686-2 .

Grigsby, Ellen (2004).

Analyzing Politics . Cengage Learning.

ISBN 0-534-63077-4 .

Johnston, Larry (2011).

Politics: An Introduction to the Modern Democratic State . University of Toronto Press.

ISBN 978-1-4426-0533-6 .

Further reading [ edit ] Barber, William J. (1985).

From New Era to New Deal: Herbert Hoover, the Economists, and American Economic Policy . Cambridge University Press.

Beito, David (1989).

Taxpayers in Revolt: Tax Resistance During the Great Depression.

University of North Carolina Press.

Brownlee, W. Elliot (1996).

Federal Taxation in America: A Short History.

Cambridge University Press.

Kenneth R., Hoover (April 1987).

"The Rise of Conservative Capitalism: Ideological Tensions within the Reagan and Thatcher Governments" .

Comparative Studies in Society and History .

29 (2). Cambridge University Press: 245– 268.

doi : 10.1017/S0010417500014493 .

S2CID 145076916 .

Archived from the original on April 3, 2020 . Retrieved February 24, 2020 .

Kimmel, Lewis (1959).

Federal Budget and Fiscal Policy, 1789–1958 . Brookings Institution Press.

Left, Mark (September 1983). "Taxing the 'forgotten man': The politics of Social Security finance in the New Deal".

Journal of American History . 70: 359–81. Online in JSTOR.

Morgan, Iwan W. (1995) Deficit Government: Taxing and Spending in Modern America . Ivan Dee.

Sargent, James E. (Winter 1980) "Roosevelt's Economy Act: Fiscal conservatism and the early New Deal".

Congressional Studies . 7: 33–51.

Savage, James D. (1988) Balanced Budgets and American Politics.

Cornell University Press.

Herbert Stein (1994).

Presidential Economics, 3rd Edition: The Making of Economic Policy From Roosevelt to Clinton .

Julian E. Zelizer (2000). "The Forgotten Legacy of the New Deal: Fiscal Conservatism and the Roosevelt Administration, 1933–1938".

Presidential Studies Quarterly .

30 (2): pp. 331.

Online .

v t e Liberalism Ideas Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history Schools Classical Economic Fiscal Neo Equity feminism Georgist Radical Anti-clerical Civic nationalism Republican Utilitarian Whig Physiocratic Encyclopaedist Conservative Liberal conservatism National Ordo Social Green Liberal feminism Ecofeminism Liberal socialism Social democracy Progressivism Third Way Other Constitutional Constitutional patriotism Cultural Corporate International Libertarianism Left-libertarianism Geolibertarianism Neoclassical liberalism Paleolibertarianism Right-libertarianism Radical centrism Religious Christian Islamic Secular Techno By region Africa Egypt Nigeria Senegal South Africa Tunisia Zimbabwe Asia China Hong Kong India Iran Israel Japan South Korea Anti- Chinilpa Centrist reformist Progressive Philippines Turkey Europe Albania Armenia Austria Belgium Bulgaria Croatia Cyprus Czech lands Denmark Estonia Finland France Orléanist Georgia Germany Greece Hungary Italy Berlusconism Liberism Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Macedonia Moldova Montenegro Netherlands Norway Portugal Romania Russia Serbia Slovakia Slovenia Spain Sweden Switzerland Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Gladstonian Libertarian Manchester Muscular Radical Whiggist Latin America and the Caribbean Bolivia Brazil Lulism Chile Colombia Cuba Ecuador Honduras Mexico Nicaragua Panama Paraguay Peru Uruguay North America Canada United States Jacksonian Jeffersonian Libertarian Modern Progressive Oceania Australia Small-l New Zealand Philosophers Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organisations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism Portal v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Libertarian Moderate Movement Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Progressive Social Traditionalist Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian nationalism Classical liberalism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Gender essentialism Complementarianism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Militarism Moral absolutism Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Protectionism Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Tradition People Presidents Adams (John) Adams (John Quincy) G. H. W. Bush G. W. Bush Cleveland Coolidge Harding Hoover McKinley Nixon Reagan W. H. Taft Trump Washington Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan II Kavanaugh Kennedy O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft Thomas Vermeule Yoo Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Buckley Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eastman Eliot Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hazony Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kendall Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lasch Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet O'Connor Ong Ransom Rieff Santayana Sowell Strauss Viereck Voegelin Washington Weaver Yarvin Other figures Ailes Atwater Beck Breitbart Carlson Cheney Coulter Cruz DeSantis Dilling Elder Falwell Gingrich Giuliani Goldwater Hannity Ingraham Levin Limbaugh Lindbergh Lodge Lovecraft McCain McCarthy McConnell Novak O'Reilly Palin Rand Paul Ron Paul Pence Perot Quayle Romney Rove Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Schlafly Shapiro Stone Robert A. Taft Booker T. Washington Parties American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party of New York State Constitution Party Republican Party Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Movements Alt-right Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Dark Enlightenment Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBT Libertarian Republicans Militia movement Patriot movement Christian Radical Right Reactionary feminism Tea Party movement Trumpism Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Historical factions Bourbon Democrats Dixiecrats Loyalists Old Right Redeemers Southern Agrarians Other organizations 1789 Capital ATR FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Rockbridge Network Tea Party Patriots USCC Literature Democracy in America (1835–1840) Democracy and Leadership (1924) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) Losing Ground (1984) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Bell Curve (1994) A Republic, Not an Empire (1999) Hillbilly Elegy (2017) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) See also American nationalism Bibliography of conservatism in the United States List of American conservatives National conservatism Southern strategy Conservatism portal v t e Neoliberalism Ideas Austerity Balanced budget Denationalization Deregulation Economic integration Economic interdependence Economic liberalization Foreign direct investment Free markets Free trade ( area ) Globalization Intellectual property Laffer curve Marketization Mundell–Fleming model Privatization Public–private partnership Single market Supranationalism Tax cuts Economics Neoclassical Monetarism Reaganomics Rogernomics Trickle-down Supply-side Movements Fiscal conservatism Thatcherism Third Way New Democrats Governance Association of Southeast Asian Nations Bank for International Settlements European Central Bank European Union Federal Reserve Greater Arab Free Trade Area International Monetary Fund MERCOSUR North American Free Trade Agreement Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership World Bank World Economic Forum World Trade Organization Organizations Third Way People Augusto Pinochet Margaret Thatcher Ronald Reagan Alan Greenspan Bill Clinton Related topics Anti-capitalism Anti-globalization Alter-globalization Authoritarian capitalism Criticism of capitalism Criticism of intellectual property Market fundamentalism NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐9b85n
Cached time: 20250817094234
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.542 seconds
Real time usage: 1.866 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 10697/1000000
Revision size: 47405/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 490818/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11470/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 15/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 275327/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.883/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22053157/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1348.270      1 -total
 25.59%  345.027      1 Template:Reflist
 16.00%  215.660      6 Template:Navbox
 13.58%  183.107     14 Template:Annotated_link
 10.79%  145.496      1 Template:Liberalism
 10.39%  140.122      5 Template:Excerpt
  9.25%  124.726      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  7.69%  103.655     27 Template:Sfn
  7.27%   98.055     17 Template:Cite_book
  7.01%   94.478     18 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4032505:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817094234 and revision id 1303358899. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fiscal_conservatism&oldid=1303358899 " Categories : Fiscal conservatism Capitalism Classical liberalism Conservatism Conservative liberalism Conservatism in the United States Criticisms of welfare Economic liberalism Fiscal policy Political theories Hidden categories: Pages using the Chart extension Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: others CS1: unfit URL Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from July 2022 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Articles with excerpts Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 14:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fiscal conservatism 19 languages Add topic

