Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Accounting 2 Business Toggle Business subsection 2.1 Financial statements 2.2 Invoices 2.2.1 International trade 3 Law 4 Government Toggle Government subsection 4.1 Westminster system 4.2 United States 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Pro forma 12 languages العربية Deutsch Español Français Italiano Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Suomi Svenska Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Latin for "as a matter of form" or "for the sake of form" This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this article. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Pro forma" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Admiralty and maritime law History Code of Hammurabi Corpus Juris Civilis Digesta Ordinamenta et consuetudo maris Amalfian Laws Hanseatic League Features Fishing Illegal Fisheries law Maritime transport Shipping / ferry Cargo Freight Shipbuilding Merchant marine Cargo ship Passenger ship Mortgage Registration Marine insurance Act of God Cargo Collision General average Seaworthiness Total loss Maritime security Letter of marque Drugs Piracy Pollution Smuggling Wartime prizes Contract of carriage / charterparty Affreightment Agency Barratry Bill of lading Brokerage Chartering Consignment Demurrage Force majeure Invoice Commercial Pro forma Laytime Lien Maritime Manifest Packing list Proof of delivery Salvage Law Terms International Waybill Parties Agent Factor Freight forwarder Captain (Master) The captain goes down with the ship Carrier Charterer Freight company Manager Consignee Consignor Principal Owner Seaman Mutiny Stevedore Judiciaries Admiralty court Vice admiralty court International organizations International Maritime Organization Comité Maritime International London Maritime Arbitrators Association International Association of Classification Societies ( Lloyd's Register ) International conventions Hague-Visby Rules Hamburg Rules Rotterdam Rules Maritime Labour Convention International Convention on Salvage United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) International piracy law SOLAS Convention MARPOL Convention Ballast Water Management Convention Anti-fouling Convention International Convention on Load Lines International Regulations for Preventing Collisions at Sea SAR Convention Athens Convention Convention on Facilitation of International Maritime Traffic International Codes IMDG Code ISM Code ISPS Code Polar Code IGC Code IBC Code TDC Code IS Code International Grain Code IMSBC Code INF Code v t e The term pro forma ( Latin for "as a matter of form" or "for the sake of form") is most often used to describe a practice or document that is provided as a courtesy or satisfies minimum requirements, conforms to a norm or doctrine and tends to be performed perfunctorily or is considered a formality . The term is used in legal and business fields to refer to various types of documents that are generated as a matter of course.

Accounting [ edit ] The pro forma accounting is a statement of the company's financial activities while excluding "unusual and nonrecurring transactions " when stating how much money the company actually made. Examples of expenses often excluded from pro forma results are company restructuring costs, a decline in the value of the company's investments, or other accounting charges, such as adjusting the current balance sheet to fix faulty accounting practices in previous years.

There was a boom in the reporting of pro forma results in the US starting in the late 1990s, with many dot-com companies using the technique to recast their losses as profits , or at least to show smaller losses than the US GAAP accounting showed. The U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission requires publicly traded companies in the United States to report US GAAP-based financial results, and has cautioned companies that using pro forma results to obscure US GAAP results would be considered fraud if used to mislead investors .

Business [ edit ] Financial statements [ edit ] Further information: Financial modeling § Accounting In business , pro forma financial statements are prepared in advance of a planned transaction , such as a merger, an acquisition, a new capital investment, or a change in capital structure such as incurrence of new debt or issuance of stock .

The pro forma models the anticipated results of the transaction, with particular emphasis on the projected cash flows , net revenues and taxes. 
Consequently, pro forma statements summarize the projected future status of a company, based on the current financial statements.

[ 1 ] Pro forma figures should be clearly labeled as such and the reason for any deviation from reported past figures clearly explained.

For example, when a transaction with a material effect on a company's financial condition is contemplated, the finance department will prepare, for management and board review, a business plan containing pro forma financial statements demonstrating the expected effect of the proposed transaction on the company's financial viability. Lenders and investors will require such statements to structure or confirm compliance with debt covenants such as debt service reserve coverage and debt to equity ratios . Similarly, when a new corporation is envisioned, its founders will prepare pro forma financial statements for the information of prospective investors. Also, banks will request pro forma statements in lieu of tax returns for a start up business in order to verify cash flow before issuing a loan or line of credit .

Invoices [ edit ] In trade transactions, a pro forma invoice is a document that states a commitment from the seller to sell goods to the buyer at specified prices and terms. It is used to declare the value of the trade. It is not a true invoice because it is not used to record accounts receivable for the seller and accounts payable for the buyer.

Simply, a " pro forma invoice" is a "confirmed purchase order " where buyer and supplier agree on detail and cost of the product to be shipped to the buyer. A pro forma invoice is generally raised when the seller is ready for dispatching the material but they want to ensure that the payment is being sent before dispatch. And similarly, the customer also wants to know which components are included in the pro forma invoice to avoid disagreements later.

A sales quote is prepared in the form of a pro forma invoice, which is different from a commercial invoice . It is used to create a sale and is sent in advance of the commercial invoice . The content of a pro forma invoice is almost identical to a commercial invoice and is usually considered a binding agreement , but because a pro forma invoice is not a legally-binding document, the price may change in advance of the final sale.

A pro forma invoice can also be used for shipments containing items that are not being bought or sold, such as gifts, samples and personal belongings, whereas a commercial invoice is used when the commodities shipped are being bought or sold.

[ 2 ] However, it is best to use a customs invoice or declaration as border officials require values for the export declaration.

[ 3 ] A Customs Invoice or declaration is commonly used in New Zealand for air parcel post shipments.

[ 4 ] International trade [ edit ] A pro forma invoice is the same as a commercial invoice, which, when used in international trade, represents the details of an international sale to customs authorities. A pro forma invoice is presented in the place of a commercial invoice when there is no sale between the sender and the importer (for example, in the case of an RMA for replacement goods), or if the terms of the sale between the seller and the buyer are such that a commercial invoice is not yet available at the time of the international shipment. A pro forma invoice is required to state the same facts that the commercial invoice would and the content is prescribed by the governments who are a party to the transaction.

In some countries, customs may accept a pro forma invoice (generated by the importer and not the exporter ) if the required commercial invoice is not available at the time when filing entry documents at the port of entry to get goods released from customs. The U.S. Customs and Border Protection , for example, uses pro forma invoices to assess duty and examine goods, but the importer on record is required to post a bond and produce a commercial invoice within 120 days from the date of entry. If the required commercial invoice is needed for statistical purposes, the importer has to produce the commercial invoice within 50 days from the date Customs releases the goods to the importer.

Law [ edit ] In law , pro forma court rulings are intended merely to facilitate the legal process (indeed to move matters along).

Government [ edit ] Westminster system [ edit ] In certain Commonwealth nations with a Westminster system , such as the United Kingdom , Canada, and Australia , pro forma bills are introduced immediately before consideration of the speech from the throne .

Pro forma bills are incomplete pieces of legislation and undergo only the first reading stage. They symbolize the authority of the parliament to discuss matters other than those specified by the head of state , for which ostensibly parliament was summoned. After first reading, the bill is never considered further. The pro forma bill was first introduced in the House of Commons of England in 1558.

[ 5 ] In the Parliament of the United Kingdom , the equivalents are the Outlawries Bill in the House of Commons and the Select Vestries Bill in the House of Lords . In the Parliament of Canada , such bills are titled Bill C-1, An Act respecting the Administration of Oaths of Office, and Bill S-1, An Act relating to Railways in the House of Commons of Canada and Senate of Canada , respectively. In the Australian House of Representatives , a new bill (known as the "formal" or "privilege bill") is drafted at the start of each parliamentary term (e.g. in the 47th Parliament this was the Customs Amendment Bill 2022 ) and presented by the Prime Minister. The bill is read the first time and is printed (published), but, unlike normal bills, the second reading is not moved and remains on the agenda indefinitely.

[ 6 ] However, departing from British and Canadian tradition, the contents of the bills do address the matters referred to in its title, and could theoretically be enacted like any other normal bill. This practice does not extend to the Australian Senate ; instead other formal business is conducted (such as question time and procedural motions) before consideration of the governor-general's speech.

United States [ edit ] This section has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This section is written like a personal reflection, personal essay, or argumentative essay that states a Wikipedia editor's personal feelings or presents an original argument about a topic.

Please help improve it by rewriting it in an encyclopedic style .

( November 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) In the federal government of the United States, either house of the Congress (the House of Representatives or the Senate ) can hold a pro forma session at which no formal business is expected to be conducted.

[ 7 ] This is usually to fulfill the obligation under the Constitution "that neither chamber can adjourn for more than three days without the consent of the other." [ 8 ] Pro forma sessions can also be used to prevent the president from pocket-vetoing bills, or calling the Congress into special session .

[ 9 ] They have also been used to prevent presidents from making recess appointments .

[ 10 ] In 2012 President Barack Obama attempted to make four appointments during a pro forma session, [ 11 ] calling the practice of blocking recess appointments into question.

[ 12 ] However, in 2014 the Supreme Court of the United States in NLRB v. Noel Canning determined that the President had improperly used his presidential power to make these appointments, stating that while the Senate was in recess punctuated by pro forma sessions the period of time between the sessions was not long enough to invoke such power.

[ 13 ] In April 2020, President Donald Trump claimed that the president's constitutional power under Article II, Section 3 empowered him to suspend both houses of Congress (overriding the pro forma procedure), thus enabling him to make appointments to vacant government positions while Congress is suspended.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Article II, Section 3 enables the president to "convene or adjourn Congress" ... "on extraordinary occasions", [ 16 ] a power that has never been used to adjourn Congress, though it has been used on rare occasions to convene Congress.

[ 17 ] The suggestion was condemned by former Clinton Press Secretary Joe Lockhart and quickly shot down by the Republican Senate leader Mitch McConnell .

[ 15 ] [ 18 ] In addition, the president's constitutional power to adjourn either or both houses of Congress is limited to situations in which the "Time of Adjournment" is disagreed upon between the House and Senate, creating a "Case of Disagreement", which implicates Article I, Section 5, of the Constitution. This section prohibits either house of Congress from adjourning for more than three days without the consent of the other house of Congress.

[ 19 ] [ non-primary source needed ] Similar practices exist in the state legislatures , and for similar reasons; for example, in Minnesota , legislative bodies have the same every-three-days meeting requirement that Congress has.

Pro forma sessions are held to meet this requirement.

[ 20 ] See also [ edit ] Buzzword Choice architecture Customer service Demand chain Point of sale Retailing Sales (accounting) Sales Incentive Plan Sales process engineering Sales management Sales territory Sales variance Selling Trade Transaction Vendor References [ edit ] ^ Ross, Stephen; Wasterfield, Randolph W. (2008).

Corporate Finance . McGraw-Hill. p. 64.

ISBN 978-0-07-310590-1 .

^ "DHL Help: Invoice Type" .

DHL . Archived from the original on March 24, 2016 . Retrieved May 16, 2012 .

^ [Wood A.NZ Maritime School ^ "Error" .

support.nzpost.co.nz .

^ "The Library of Parliament's research tool for finding information on legislation" .

Library of Parliament . January 28, 2010. Archived from the original on February 2, 2010.

^ "The Opening of Parliament" . Parliament of Australia . Retrieved August 18, 2022 .

^ "Debate over FEMA funding continues in Irene aftermath" . CNN. August 31, 2011.

Archived from the original on March 5, 2012 . Retrieved January 4, 2019 .

^ "pro forma session" .

Senate Glossary .

United States Senate . Archived from the original on February 8, 2006 . Retrieved February 21, 2014 .

^ Bresnahan, John (February 18, 2008).

"Democrats set pro forma sessions to avoid 'special session' on FISA" .

The Crypt .

Politico . Retrieved July 18, 2008 .

^ Barrett, Ted; Kilaru, Vandana (December 26, 2007).

"Webb opens, closes vacant Senate session" .

CNN . Retrieved October 26, 2019 .

^ Orol, Ronald (January 4, 2012).

"Obama recess appoints Cordray to CFPB" . MarketWatch . Retrieved January 4, 2012 .

^ Barnes, Robert (June 24, 2013).

"Supreme Court to weigh in on Obama's recess appointments" .

The Washington Post .

^ "NRLB vs Noel Canning" (PDF) .

Supreme Court of the United States . Archived from the original (PDF) on June 27, 2014 . Retrieved June 26, 2014 .

^ Lesniewski, Niels (April 15, 2020).

"Trump threatens to force Congress to adjourn so he can make recess appointments during coronavirus crisis" .

Roll Call . Retrieved January 9, 2025 .

^ a b Fandos, Nicholas (April 16, 2020).

"Trump Threatens to Adjourn Congress to Install Nominees. McConnell Demurs" .

The New York Times . Retrieved January 9, 2025 .

^ "Article II Section 3" .

Congress.gov . Library of Congress . Retrieved January 9, 2025 .

^ "The President's Legislative Role" .

Congress.gov . Library of Congress . Retrieved January 9, 2025 .

^ Knott, Matthew (April 16, 2020).

" 'Banana Republic': Trump Threatens to Unilaterally Suspend Congress" .

SMH.com.au . Sydney, Australia: The Sydney Morning Herald . Retrieved November 19, 2024 .

^ Jackson, William, Secretary (and Signatories) (2024) [September 17, 1787].

"Constitution of the United States, Article 1, Section 5, Clauses 1–4" .

Government of the United States . Ithaca, NY: Cornell Law School LII . Retrieved November 19, 2024 – via Legal Information Institute (LII), Cornell Law School .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "State Constitution" (PDF) . Minnesota House of Representatives Public Information Services.

Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐ctqj2
Cached time: 20250812014954
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.529 seconds
Real time usage: 0.654 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2205/1000000
Revision size: 19146/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 95624/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9496/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 89511/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.353/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7418200/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  573.108      1 -total
 34.09%  195.376      1 Template:Reflist
 15.32%   87.797      1 Template:Admiralty_law
 15.02%   86.092      1 Template:Sidebar
 13.02%   74.647      1 Template:Cite_book
 12.08%   69.249     13 Template:Cite_web
 11.71%   67.111      1 Template:Short_description
 10.85%   62.167      1 Template:Authority_control
 10.62%   60.857      2 Template:More_citations_needed
 10.15%   58.194      3 Template:Ambox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:373987:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812014954 and revision id 1297122369. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pro_forma&oldid=1297122369 " Categories : Financial statements Latin words and phrases Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from February 2025 Articles needing additional references from September 2008 All articles needing additional references Articles needing additional references from November 2024 Wikipedia articles with style issues from November 2024 All articles with style issues Articles with multiple maintenance issues All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from November 2024 This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 07:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pro forma 12 languages Add topic

