Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Secretary and diplomat 3 Works and thought 4 Later works, life, and influence 5 Memorials 6 See also 7 Citations 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Giovanni Botero 17 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español Esperanto Français Italiano مصرى Монгол Piemontèis Polski Português Русский Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian scholar and diplomat Giovanni Botero Born 1544 Bene Vagienna , Savoyard state Died 23 June 1617 (aged 72–73) Turin , Savoyard state Resting place Chiesa dei Santi Martiri Education Education Roman College University of Padua Philosophical work Era Baroque philosophy Region Western philosophy Italian philosophy Notable works The Reason of State Notable ideas Reason of state National interest Giovanni Botero (c. 1544 – 23 June 1617) was an Italian thinker, priest , poet , and diplomat , author of Della Ragion di Stato (The Reason of State) , [ 1 ] in ten chapters, printed in Venice in 1589, and of Universal Relations , (Rome, 1591), addressing the world geography and ethnography .

[ 2 ] With his emphasis that the wealth of cities was caused by adding value to raw materials, Botero may be considered the ancestor of both Mercantilism [ 3 ] and Cameralism .

[ 4 ] Early life [ edit ] Born around 1544 in Bene Vagienna , in the northern Italian principality of Piedmont , Botero was sent to the Jesuit college in Palermo at the age of 15. A year later, he moved to the Roman College , he was introduced to the teaching of some of the most influential Catholic thinkers of the sixteenth century, including Juan de Mariana , who, in his On the King and the Education of the King , would argue for the popular overthrow of tyrannical rulers.

[ 5 ] In 1565, Botero was sent to teach philosophy and rhetoric at the Jesuit colleges in France, first in Billom , and then in Paris. The second half of the sixteenth century saw the kingdom dramatically, and often violently divided by the French Wars of Religion . Paris especially was heating up during Botero's stay there from 1567 to 1569, and he was recalled to Italy after getting too caught up in the excitement, apparently for his involvement in an anti-Spanish protest.

Botero spent the 1570s drifting from one Jesuit college to another, Milan , Padua , Genoa , and then back in Milan. After a doctrinally incorrect sermon he gave questioning the Pope's temporal power , he was discharged from the Jesuit order in 1580.

[ 6 ] Secretary and diplomat [ edit ] Botero's life took a major turn at this time when he was commissioned by Bishop Carlo Borromeo of Milan as a personal assistant. Borromeo introduced Botero to the practical side of Church administration, often socializing with the nobility of northern Italy, most notably Charles Emmanuel I, Duke of Savoy . When the Bishop died in 1584, Botero continued his service to the family as assistant to Carlo Borromeo's nephew, Federico .

[ 7 ] Before his work with Federico began, however, Botero took part in a diplomatic mission to France on behalf of Charles Emmanuel. For most of 1585, Botero was in Paris, discussing affairs of the day, and perhaps overhearing the conspiratorial debate on whether the pope would grant licence for the French Duke of Guise , assisted by the Duke of Savoy and Philip II of Spain , to kill the French King , so they could then launch a massive offensive against the French and Swiss Calvinists . The license was never granted, and the offensive was postponed and made more modest, but this conspiracy tells of what kind of political debate was being had, and just what kind of trouble there was in 1580s France.

Works and thought [ edit ] Della ragion di stato , 1589 By the late 1580s, Botero had already published a few works, most notably an epic-style poem dedicated to Henry III of France in 1573 and a Latin commentary on Hebrew Scriptures titled On Kingly Wisdom in 1583, but his most important works were yet to come. In 1588, Botero first published his Delle cause della grandezza delle città (On the Causes of the Greatness of Cities). Foreshadowing the work of Thomas Malthus , here Botero outlines the generative and nutritive virtues of a city, the former being the rate of human reproduction, and the latter being the ability of the products of the city and its countryside to maintain the people. Cities grow when their nutritive virtue is greater than the generative, but at the inevitable point when these virtues are inverted, the city begins to die.

[ 8 ] In 1589, Botero completed his most famous work, Della ragion di Stato (The Reason of State). In this work, Botero argues that a prince's power must be based on some form of consent of his subjects, and princes must make every effort to win the people's affection and admiration. This differed from Machiavelli's philosophy in that it is not sufficient to seem like a just prince, for one's true nature will always shine through; one must actually be a just prince by the advice Botero lays out.

[ 9 ] Botero's idea of justness came from his exposure to Thomist thought and natural law circulating the Jesuit college system, which had been greatly influenced by the work of Dominican theologians Francisco de Vitoria and Domingo de Soto of the School of Salamanca . Thomas Aquinas had argued that God infused each individual with certain natural rights, and by the use of reason, human beings could come together to create just societies. Politically, Aquinas imagined that the people would decide on a suitable king, and invest him with certain powers to protect them and allow their prosperity. If the king turned tyrant, Aquinas argued, the people were within their natural rights to depose him. This was in direct opposition to the ideas on the God-given absolute sovereignty of kings that were being proffered by Protestant theologians in the early sixteenth century, and by political thinkers like the French jurist Jean Bodin at the end of the century.

[ 10 ] Jean Bodin's influential Six Books of the Republic was an important influence on Botero's writing of the Reason of State , even if, as with Machiavelli's Prince, much of that influence was negative. While Botero disagrees with Bodin's thought on sovereignty, preferring something more popularly based, he does agree with some of Bodin's economic ideas. Nonetheless, Botero's overall conception of political economy is again more 'liberal' than that of Bodin, who argued for active participation by kings in the economy of the country, including mercantilist policies that would be enacted wholeheartedly in early modern France by Louis XIV and Colbert . Bodin cautioned kings only against trading with their own subjects; all other economic activity was allowed. Botero, on the other hand, argued that there were only three cases where the prince could take part in trade: 1) if no private citizen could afford it, 2) if a single private citizen would grow too powerful by the profits of it, or 3) there were some shortfall in supply whereby the prince would have to aid in the distribution of goods. Ultimately, Botero argued that economic activity was unbecoming a prince, and that the people were to be the prime economic mover in the state.

[ 11 ] Murray Rothbard argued that the differences between Machiavelli's and Botero's formulations of the reason of state were only nominally different, describing Botero's criticism of Machiavelli as 'merely a ritualistic cover for Botero's adoption of the essence of Machiavellian thought.' [ 12 ] Later works, life, and influence [ edit ] Through the 1590s, Botero continued in the employ of Federico Borromeo , who would become Archbishop of Milan in 1595. Botero mixed in the high society of Rome and Milan in these years, and published another work for which he was to become quite well known, the Relazioni Universali . Released in four volumes between 1591 and 1598 (a fifth volume was finally published in the late nineteenth century), the 'relations' of the title referred to those of the 'universal' (Catholic) church in various parts of the world, a treatise on "The Strength of all the Powers of Europe and Asia", and even includes the Americas. The work marks the beginning of demographic studies .

[ 13 ] Finishing his employment with Federico Borromeo in 1599, Botero returned to the House of Savoy , to be tutor to three sons of Charles Emmanuel. He would tour Spain with his three charges from 1603 to 1607, no doubt associating with the closest of Philip III 's advisors, from whom his ideas would be passed on to Philip IV 's most trusted policy-maker, the Count-Duke of Olivares .

[ citation needed ] Here is where Botero's work began to have an influence. Olivares seems to have used Botero's Reason of State to outline the strategy for preserving the Spanish Empire in his famous Memorial on the Union of Arms . There is also evidence that Duke Maximilian of Bavaria , one of the staunchest political supporters of Catholic reform and a leading figure of the Thirty Years' War , had discussed the Reason of State with his advisors. Thus, Botero's thought was able to shape at least some of the policies among the European states of the very troubled seventeenth century.

[ 14 ] Botero's work would also influence the next generation of political and economic thinkers.

Thomas Mun 's liberal mercantilist treatise England's Treasure by Foreign Trade , written in 1624, but not published until 1664, owes something to the Reason of State , and there is evidence that the great Belgian thinker Justus Lipsius read the Reason of State .

[ 15 ] Botero died in Turin in 1617.

[ 16 ] Memorials [ edit ] In the 18th century, in his honour, a monument was built in Bene Vagienna in the so-called Piazza Botero , [ 17 ] a central square located in front of the Church of Santa Maria Assunta ( Chiesa di Santa Maria Assunta ) and surrounded by historic buildings, such as the town hall Comune di Bene Vagienna .

Likewise, in honour of Botero, streets bearing his name were built in the cities of Turin , [ 18 ] Rome [ 19 ] and Rimini , in Italy.

See also [ edit ] Botero (surname) . Italian surname Citations [ edit ] ^ Botero, Giovanni, Pamela Waley, Daniel Philip Waley, and Robert Peterson. 1956. The Reason of State / The Greatness of Cities / Transl. by Robert Peterson 1606. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.

^ Botero, Giovanni, and Robert Johnson. 1601. The Vvorlde, or an Historicall Description of the Most Famous Kingdomes and Common-Weales Therein. Imprinted at London: By Edm. Bollifant, for Iohn Iaggard.

^ Perrotta, Cosimo (2012).

"Botero, Giovanni - Il Contributo italiano alla storia del Pensiero – Economia" .

Treccani Enciclopedia Italiana (in Italian). Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana fondata da Giovanni Treccani S.p.A . Retrieved 24 February 2022 .

^ Reinert, Erik S., and Fernanda A. Reinert. 2019. “33 Economic Bestsellers Published before 1750.” The European Journal of the History of Economic Thought 1–58. doi: 10.1080/09672567.2018.1523211, p.1212.

^ Miglietti, Sara (14 June 2016).

"Botero, Giovanni" . In Sgarbi, Marco (ed.).

Encyclopedia of Renaissance Philosophy . Springer Nature Switzerland AG.

doi : 10.1007/978-3-319-02848-4 .

hdl : 10278/3726814 .

ISBN 978-3-319-02848-4 . Retrieved 24 February 2022 .

^ Firpo, Luigi (1971).

"Botero, Giovanni - Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani" .

Enciclopedia Italiana Treccani (in Italian). Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana fondata da Giovanni Treccani S.p.A . Retrieved 24 February 2022 .

^ Perrotta, Cosimo (2012).

"Botero, Giovanni - Il Contributo italiano alla storia del Pensiero – Economia" .

Enciclopedia Italiana Treccani (in Italian). Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana fondata da Giovanni Treccani S.p.A . Retrieved 25 February 2022 .

^ Continisio, Chiara (2012).

"Botero, Giovanni - Il Contributo italiano alla storia del Pensiero – Diritto" .

Enciclopedia Italiana Treccani (in Italian). Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana fondata da Giovanni Treccani S.p.A . Retrieved 25 February 2022 .

^ Reinert, Erik S. (April 2020).

"Industrial policy: A long-term perspective and overview of theoretical arguments" (PDF) .

ucl.ac.uk/iipp . UCL Institute for Innovation and Public Purpose . Retrieved 25 February 2022 .

^ Ghiringhelli, Robertino (2012).

"Botero, Giovanni - Il Contributo italiano alla storia del Pensiero – Filosofia" .

Enciclopedia Italiana Treccani (in Italian). Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana fondata da Giovanni Treccani S.p.A . Retrieved 25 February 2022 .

^ Bireley, Robert (2017).

Botero: The Reason of State . Cambridge University Press.

doi : 10.1017/9781316493953.002 .

ISBN 9781107141827 . Retrieved 25 February 2022 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ kanopiadmin (2010-03-24).

"Giovanni Botero: The First Malthusian" .

Mises Institute . Retrieved 2023-03-25 .

^ Perrotta, Cosimo (2012).

"Botero, Giovanni - Il Contributo italiano alla storia del Pensiero – Economia" .

Enciclopedia Italiana Treccani (in Italian). Istituto della Enciclopedia Italiana fondata da Giovanni Treccani S.p.A . Retrieved 25 February 2022 .

^ "Botero, Giovanni" .

Encyclopedia of Population . Retrieved 25 February 2022 .

^ Reinert, Erik S. (April 2020).

"Industrial policy: A long-term perspective and overview of theoretical arguments" (PDF) .

ucl.ac.uk/iipp . UCL Institute for Innovation and Public Purpose . Retrieved 25 February 2022 .

^ Pantaleoni, Matteo.

"Botero - Faculty of Social Sciences" .

socialsciences.mcmaster.ca . Retrieved 25 February 2022 .

^ "Piazza Botero" .

fondoambiente.it.

(in Italian). Milano . Retrieved 19 January 2022 .

^ "Via Giovanni Botero, Torino" .

Tutto Città (in Italian) . Retrieved 18 January 2022 .

^ "Via Giovanni Botero, Roma" .

Tutto Città (in Italian) . Retrieved 18 January 2022 .

References [ edit ] Aquinas, St. Thomas, On Law, Morality, and Ethics . Edited, with an introduction by William J. Baumgarth and Richard S. Regan. Indianapolis, 1988.

Bireley, Robert , The Counter-Reformation Prince: Anti-Machiavellianism or Catholic Statecraft in Early Modern Europe . Chapel Hill, 1990.

Botero, Giovanni, The Reason of State , translated by P.J. Waley and D.P. Waley, with notes by D.P. Waley. New Haven, 1956.

Brodrick, James, The Economic Morals of the Jesuits . New York, 1972.

Grice-Hutchinson, Marjorie , The School of Salamanca: Readings in Spanish Monetary Theory, 1544 - 1605 . Oxford, 1952.

Hamilton, Bernice, Political Thought in Sixteenth Century Spain . Oxford, 1963.

O'Malley, John W., The First Jesuits . Cambridge, 1993.

Skinner, Quentin, The Foundations of Modern Political Thought, Vol. I: The Renaissance; Vol. II: The Age of Reformation . Cambridge, 1978.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Giovanni Botero .

Firpo, Luigi (1971).

"BOTERO, Giovanni" .

Dizionario Biografico degli Italiani , Volume 13: Borremans–Brancazolo (in Italian). Rome: Istituto dell'Enciclopedia Italiana .

ISBN 978-88-12-00032-6 .

Works by or about Giovanni Botero at the Internet Archive The Greatness of Cities - Full English Text (in Italian) Relationi vniuersali di Giouanni Botero Benese diuise in quattro parti , Vicenza, 1595.

The Earthly Structures of Divine Ideas , master's thesis on the influences on Botero's political and economic theory v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Greece Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Academics CiNii Artists ULAN People Trove Italian People DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Giovanni_Botero&oldid=1294777493 " Categories : 1540s births 1617 deaths 16th-century Italian Jesuits People from Bene Vagienna Italian political scientists Mercantilists Jesuit philosophers Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 errors: periodical ignored Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Pages using infobox philosopher with unknown parameters All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2023 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with Italian-language sources (it) Articles containing French-language text Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 9 June 2025, at 19:11 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Giovanni Botero 17 languages Add topic

