Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Physical facilities 2 Collection 3 Governance 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′35″N 71°06′58″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3765°N 71.1161°W ﻿ / 42.3765; -71.1161 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Museum collection at Harvard University Harvard Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments A universal compass sundial from Stockholm c.

1650 – 1679, on display in the Putnam Gallery Harvard Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments Location within Boston Show map of Boston Harvard Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments Harvard Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments (Massachusetts) Show map of Massachusetts Harvard Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments Harvard Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments (the United States) Show map of the United States Coordinates 42°22′35″N 71°06′58″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3765°N 71.1161°W ﻿ / 42.3765; -71.1161 Accreditation AAM Collection size 20,000 Owner Harvard University Public transit access Harvard ( MBTA Red Line ) Harvard University 's Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments ( CHSI ), [ 1 ] established 1948, is "one of the three largest university collections of its kind in the world".

[ 2 ] Waywiser, the online catalog of the collection, lists over 60% of the collection's 20,000 objects as of 2014 [update] .

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The collection was originally curated by Mr. David P Wheatland in his office to prevent obsolete equipment from being cannibalized for its component parts and materials.

[ 5 ] Physical facilities [ edit ] A selection of instruments and artifacts from the collection comprise the exhibition Time, Life, & Matter: Science in Cambridge . This permanent display can be found in the Putnam Gallery on the first floor of the Harvard Science Center , which is free and open to the public during regularly scheduled hours, Sunday through Friday. In addition, rotating collaborative exhibitions drawn in part from the collection are shown in the Special Exhibitions Gallery on the second floor, as well as the more modest Foyer Gallery on the third floor.

[ 1 ] The physical facilities in the Science Center were expanded in 2004, by replacing a one-story wing of the building with a four-story "townhouse"-style structure with offices, classrooms, and a fully-glazed internal stairway. The new wing houses the Department of the History of Science as well as public display spaces for CHSI. The modifications to the Science Center (originally by Josep Lluís Sert ) were designed by Leers Weinzapfel Associates of Boston.

[ 6 ] Collection [ edit ] The CHSI includes a number of scientific instruments and demonstration apparatus purchased circa 1765 under the advice of Benjamin Franklin , to replace original equipment which had been lost in a disastrous fire which also destroyed the university's library in the original Harvard Hall .

[ 7 ] This display includes apparatus for experimenting with electricity , as well as demonstrating the laws of physics as they were understood in the late 18th century.

Other highlights of the permanent exhibit include a fine assemblage of sundials (part of the largest private collection in North America) [ citation needed ] , a geometrical compass designed by Galileo Galilei , and the control console from the former Harvard Cyclotron Laboratory .

One of the larger items in the collection is the Harvard Mark I , a historic room-sized electromechanical computer commissioned in 1944,  which was exhibited next to the central stairwell in the main lobby of the Science Center, and has since been moved to the Harvard John A. Paulson School of Engineering and Applied Sciences .

[ 8 ] Governance [ edit ] The collection continues to be expanded, under the guidance of David P. Wheatland Curator Sara J. Schechner . Originally a part of the Harvard Library system, the CHSI is now presented under the auspices of Harvard's Department of the History of Science, and is one of the four Harvard Museums of Science and Culture.

[ 9 ] The CHSI is also affiliated with the American Alliance of Museums .

[ 3 ] A strategic plan has been developed to expand the CHSI's missions of preservation, education, research, and display, including expanded educational outreach and higher-profile public exhibitions.

[ 3 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b "CHSI - The Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments, Harvard University" .

chsi.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2016-01-25 .

^ "Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments | Harvard Library" .

library.harvard.edu . Harvard University . Retrieved 2016-08-09 .

^ a b c "Strategic Plan: 2014-2019" (PDF) .

Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments . Harvard University . Retrieved 2016-08-09 .

^ "eMuseum" .

waywiser.rc.fas.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2016-01-25 .

^ "CHSI History" .

Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments . Harvard University . Retrieved 2016-07-14 .

^ "Science Center Expansion" .

Leers Weinzapfel Associates . Retrieved 2023-09-07 .

^ Tomase, Jennifer (June 1, 2006).

" 'A How-To Guide' explores Ben Franklin's 'can-do' legacy" .

Harvard University Gazette . Retrieved 2016-08-09 .

^ Powell, Alvin (23 July 2021).

"Harvard's Mark 1 finds its new home" .

Harvard Gazette . Retrieved 2023-08-17 .

^ "CHSI Affiliations" .

Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments . Harvard University . Retrieved 2016-07-14 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Authority control databases International VIAF 2 National Czech Republic Israel Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_Collection_of_Historical_Scientific_Instruments&oldid=1257524624 " Categories : Harvard University museums Scientific instruments History museums in Massachusetts Science museums in Massachusetts Institutions accredited by the American Alliance of Museums Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2014 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from September 2023 This page was last edited on 15 November 2024, at 10:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard Collection of Historical Scientific Instruments Add languages Add topic

