Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Writings 3 Philosophy 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Philo the Dialectician 11 languages Català Deutsch Eesti Español Français مصرى Polski Português Русский Suomi Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philo the Dialectician ( Greek : Φίλων ; fl.

300 BC) was a Greek philosopher of the Megarian (Dialectical) school .

[ 1 ] He is sometimes called Philo of Megara although the city of his birth is unknown. He is most famous for the debate he had with his teacher Diodorus Cronus concerning the idea of the possible and the criteria of the truth of conditional statements .

Life [ edit ] Little is known about the life of Philo. He was a disciple of Diodorus Cronus , and was a friend of Zeno , the founder of Stoicism .

Diogenes Laërtius states that Zeno "used to dispute very carefully with Philo the logician and study along with him—hence Zeno, who was the junior, had as great an admiration for Philo as his master Diodorus." [ 2 ] Jerome refers to Philo as the teacher of Carneades , which is chronologically impossible.

[ 3 ] Diogenes Laërtius mentions a (presumably different) Philo who was a disciple of Pyrrho .

[ 4 ] Writings [ edit ] One of Philo's works was called Menexenus in which he mentioned the five daughters of Diodorus who were all distinguished dialecticians.

[ 5 ] Two of Chrysippus ' logical works were responses to books by Philo, one was directed at "Philo's Work on Meanings", [ 6 ] and the other at "Philo's Work on Moods".

[ 7 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Philo disputed with Diodorus respecting the idea of the possible and the criteria of the truth of conditional statements .

In regards to things possible, Diodorus maintained that possible was identical with necessary, i.e. that possible is "that which either is or will be true".

[ 8 ] Philo instead defined possible as "that which is capable of being true by the proposition's own nature", [ 8 ] thus a statement like "this piece of wood can burn" is possible, even if it spent its entire existence on the bottom of the ocean.

[ 9 ] Both Philo and Diodorus sought for criteria for the correct form of conditional propositions, and each of them did so in a manner corresponding to what he maintained respecting the idea of the possible. Philo regarded a conditional as true unless it has both a true antecedent and a false consequent . Precisely, let T 0 and T 1 be true statements, and let F 0 and F 1 be false statements; then, according to Philo, each of the following conditionals is a true statement, because it is not the case that the consequent is false while the antecedent is true (it is not the case that a false statement is asserted to follow from a true statement): If T 0 , then T 1 If F 0 , then T 0 If F 0 , then F 1 The following conditional does not meet this requirement, and is therefore a false statement according to Philo: If T 0 , then F 0 Indeed, Sextus says "According to [Philo], there are three ways in which a conditional may be true, and one in which it may be false." [ 10 ] Philo's criterion of truth is what would now be called a truth-functional definition of "if ... then"; it is the definition used in modern logic .

In contrast, Diodorus allowed the validity of conditionals only when the antecedent clause could never lead to an untrue conclusion.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] [ 12 ] A century later, the Stoic philosopher Chrysippus attacked the assumptions of both Philo and Diodorus.

References [ edit ] ^ "Philo the Dialectician (late 4th–early 3rd centuries BC) - Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

www.rep.routledge.com . Retrieved 2021-09-11 .

^ Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 16 ^ Jerome, Contra Jovinianum , i. 42 ^ Diogenes Laërtius, ix. 67, 69 ^ Clement of Alexandria, Stromata , iv. 19; cf. Jerome, Contra Jovinianum , i. 42 ^ Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 191 ^ Diogenes Laërtius, vii. 194 ^ a b Bobzien, Susanne.

"Ancient Logic" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Alexander of Aphrodisias, Nat. Qual.

i. 14., In An. Pr.

183-4 ^ a b Sextus Empiricus, Adv. Math.

viii, Section 113 ^ Sextus Empiricus, Hypotyp.

ii. 110, comp.

^ Cicero, Academica , ii. 47, de Fato , 6.

External links [ edit ] Bobzien, Susanne.

"Dialectical School" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Selected Bibliography on the "Master Argument" in Diodorus Cronus and Philo the Dialectician with a bibliography on the problem of future contingents This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870). "Philon the Megarian or Dialectician".

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology . Vol. III. p. 312-313.

v t e Megarian philosophy Philosophers Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus Pasicles Clinomachus Stilpo Nicarete Bryson Simmias of Syracuse Eubulides Alexinus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Panthoides Aristotle the Dialectician Concepts Dialectic Eristic Future contingents Master argument Liar paradox Sorites paradox Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philo_the_Dialectician&oldid=1253526953 " Categories : Hellenistic-era philosophers 4th-century BC Greek philosophers Megarian philosophers Ancient Greek logicians Hidden categories: Articles containing Greek-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM with no wstitle or title parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM This page was last edited on 26 October 2024, at 13:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Philo the Dialectician 11 languages Add topic

