Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Methodology 2 Units 3 Differences from geochronology 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Chronostratigraphy 26 languages Afrikaans العربية Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Magyar Nederlands Polski Português Русский Seeltersk Српски / srpski Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch of stratigraphy that studies the ages of rock strata in relation to time Chronostratigraphy is the branch of stratigraphy that studies the ages of rock strata in relation to time .

The ultimate aim of chronostratigraphy is to arrange the sequence of deposition and the time of deposition of all rocks within a geological region, and eventually, the entire geologic record of the Earth .

The standard stratigraphic nomenclature is a chronostratigraphic system based on palaeontological intervals of time defined by recognised fossil assemblages ( biostratigraphy ). The aim of chronostratigraphy is to give a meaningful age date to these fossil assemblage intervals and interfaces.

[ 1 ] Methodology [ edit ] Chronostratigraphy relies heavily upon isotope geology and geochronology to derive hard dating of known and well defined rock units which contain the specific fossil assemblages defined by the stratigraphic system. In practice, as it is very difficult to isotopically date most fossils and sedimentary rocks directly, inferences must be made in order to arrive at an age date which reflects the beginning of the interval.

The methodology used is derived from the law of superposition and the principles of cross-cutting relationships .

Because igneous rocks occur at specific intervals in time and are essentially instantaneous on a geologic time scale, and because they contain mineral assemblages which may be dated more accurately and precisely by isotopic methods, the construction of a chronostratigraphic column relies heavily upon intrusive and extrusive igneous rocks.

Metamorphism , often associated with faulting , may also be used to bracket depositional intervals in a chronostratigraphic column. Metamorphic rocks can occasionally be dated, and this may give some limitations to the age in which a bed could have been laid down. For example, if a bed containing graptolites overlies crystalline basement at some point, dating the crystalline basement will give a maximum age of that fossil assemblage.

This process requires a considerable degree of effort and checking of field relationships and age dates. For instance, there may be many millions of years between a bed being laid down and an intrusive rock cutting it; the estimate of age must necessarily be between the oldest cross-cutting intrusive rock in the fossil assemblage and the youngest rock upon which the fossil assemblage rests.

Units [ edit ] Chronostratigraphic units, with examples: [ 2 ] eonothem – Phanerozoic erathem – Paleozoic system – Ordovician series – Upper Ordovician stage – Ashgill Differences from geochronology [ edit ] It is important not to confuse geochronologic and chronostratigraphic units.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Chronostratigraphic units are geological material, so it is correct to say that fossils of the species Tyrannosaurus rex have been found in the Upper Cretaceous Series.

[ 5 ] Geochronological units are periods of time and take the same name as standard stratigraphic units but replacing the terms upper/lower with late/early. Thus it is also correct to say that Tyrannosaurus rex lived during the Late Cretaceous Epoch.

[ 6 ] Chronostratigraphy is an important branch of stratigraphy because the age correlations derived are crucial in drawing accurate cross sections of the spatial organization of rocks and in preparing accurate paleogeographic reconstructions.

See also [ edit ] Biostratigraphy Chronozone Geochronology Geologic record Geologic time scale List of geochronologic names Tectonostratigraphy References [ edit ] ^ Subcommission on Quaternary Stratigraphy (2002).

"Chronostratigraphy" .

International Commission on Stratigraphy (ICS).

Archived from the original on 28 July 2018.

^ Jackson, Juia A., ed. (1997).

Glossary of Geology (4th ed.). Alexandria, Virginia: American Geological Institute.

ISBN 978-0-922152-34-6 .

^ Schoch, Robert M. (1989).

Stratigraphy: Principles and Methods . New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold. p. 351.

ISBN 978-0-442-28021-5 .

^ Fastovsky, David E.; Weishampel, David B. (1996).

The Evolution and Extinction of the Dinosaurs . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. pp.

22– 23.

ISBN 978-0-521-44496-5 .

^ Smith, Joshua B.; Lamanna, Matthew C.; Lacovara, Kenneth J.; Dodson, Peter Jr.; Poole, Jason C.; Smith, Jennifer R.; Giegengack, Robert; Attia, Yousry (2001).

"A Giant Sauropod Dinosaur from an Upper Cretaceous Mangrove Deposit in Egypt" (PDF) .

Science .

292 (5522): 1704– 1706.

Bibcode : 2001Sci...292.1704S .

doi : 10.1126/science.1060561 .

ISSN 1095-9203 .

PMID 11387472 .

S2CID 33454060 .

^ Salvador, Amos, ed. (1994). "Chapter 9. Chronostratigraphic Units".

Stratigraphic Guide (Second (abridged) ed.). International Commission on Stratigraphy.

Archived from the original on 12 June 2020.

v t e Chronology Key topics Archaeology Astronomy Geology History Big History Paleontology Time Periods Eras Epochs Calendar eras Human Era Ab urbe condita Anno Domini / Common Era Anno Mundi Bosporan era Bostran era Byzantine era Seleucid era Era of Caesar (Iberia) Before Present Hijri Egyptian Sothic cycle Hindu units of time ( Yuga ) Mesoamerican Long Count Short Count Tzolkʼin Haabʼ Regnal year Anka year Canon of Kings English and British regnal year Lists of kings Limmu Era names Chinese Japanese Korean Vietnamese Calendars Pre-Julian / Julian Pre-Julian Roman Original Julian Proleptic Julian Revised Julian Gregorian Gregorian Proleptic Gregorian Old Style and New Style dates Adoption of the Gregorian calendar Dual dating Astronomical Lunisolar ( Hebrew , Hindu ) Solar Lunar ( Islamic ) Astronomical year numbering Others Chinese sexagenary cycle Geologic Calendar Iranian ISO week date Mesoamerican Maya Aztec Winter count New Earth Time Astronomic time Cosmic Calendar Ephemeris Galactic year Metonic cycle Milankovitch cycles Geologic time Concepts Deep time Geological history of Earth Geological time units Standards Global Standard Stratigraphic Age (GSSA) Global Boundary Stratotype Section and Point (GSSP) Methods Chronostratigraphy Geochronology Isotope geochemistry Law of superposition Luminescence dating Samarium–neodymium dating Chronological dating Absolute dating Amino acid racemisation Archaeomagnetic dating Dendrochronology Ice core Incremental dating Lichenometry Paleomagnetism Radiometric dating Lead–lead Potassium–argon Radiocarbon Uranium–lead Tephrochronology Luminescence dating Thermoluminescence dating Relative dating Fluorine absorption Nitrogen dating Obsidian hydration Seriation Stratigraphy Genetic methods Molecular clock Linguistic methods Glottochronology Related topics Chronicle New Chronology Synchronoptic view Timeline Year zero Floruit Terminus post quem ASPRO chronology Authority control databases : National Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chronostratigraphy&oldid=1211470962 " Categories : Chronostratigraphy Geochronological dating methods Stratigraphy Geologic time scales of Earth Geology terminology Subfields of paleontology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 2 March 2024, at 19:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chronostratigraphy 26 languages Add topic

