Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Poetry 3 On the Plague 4 Death 5 List of works 6 Bibliography 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Ibn al-Khatib 22 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano മലയാളം مصرى 日本語 Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русский Suomi Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 34°03′45″N 4°59′9.8″W ﻿ / ﻿ 34.06250°N 4.986056°W ﻿ / 34.06250; -4.986056 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Andalusi polymath, poet and historian (1313–1374) Ibn al-Khatib ابن الخطيب An inscription in the Court of the Myrtles of the Alhambra , where poetry by Ibn al-Khatib is inscribed.

[ 1 ] Born November 16, 1313 Rajab 26 713 AH Loja , Emirate of Granada Died 1374 AD, 776 AH Fes , Marinid Sultanate Cause of death Strangulation Resting place Bab Mahruq 34°03′45″N 4°59′9.8″W ﻿ / ﻿ 34.06250°N 4.986056°W ﻿ / 34.06250; -4.986056 Alma mater Madrasa Yusufiyya Occupation(s) Poet , historian , statesman , physician Era Islamic golden age Ibn al-Khatib studied at the Madrasa of Granada .

[ 2 ] Lisan ad-Din Ibn al-Khatib [ note 1 ] ( Arabic : لسان الدين ابن الخطيب ; 16 November 1313 – 1374) was an Arab [ 3 ] Andalusi polymath , [ 4 ] poet , writer , historian , philosopher , physician and politician from Emirate of Granada .

[ 5 ] Being one of the most notable poets from Granada , his poems decorate the walls of the palace of Alhambra . He is known for composing the muwashshaḥāt " Jadaka al-Ghaithu " and possibly " Lamma Bada Yatathanna ." Ibn al-Khatib memorial Ibn Al-Khatib is highly esteemed both as a historian and as a poet. He was a contemporary and acquaintance of Ibn Khaldun .

[ 6 ] His most significant historical work, The Complete Source on the History of Granada ( الإحاطة في أخبار غرناطة ), [ 7 ] [ 8 ] written in 1369 AD, which includes his autobiography, has yet to be translated into English.

Biography [ edit ] Ibn al-Khatib was born at Loja, Granada .

[ 6 ] Shortly after his birth, his father was appointed to a high post at the court of Emir Ismail I in Granada .

[ 6 ] After his father and older brother were killed in the Battle of Río Salado in 1340, Ibn al-Khatib was hired to work as a secretary for his former teacher Ibn al-Jayyab , vizier to Emir Yusuf I .

[ 6 ] Following Ibn al-Jayyab's early death from the plague , Ibn al-Khatib became vizier and head of the emiri chancery, serving also in diplomatic roles in the courts of Andalusi and Maghrebi rulers.

[ 6 ] Bab Mahrouk in Fes , where Ibn al-Khatib was buried, in 1982.

For much of his life he was vizier at the court of the Sultan of Granada, Muhammed V .  He spent two periods in exile in the Marinid empire (between 1360 and 1362 and 1371–74). He resided variously at Ceuta , Tlemcen and Fes ). In 1374, he was imprisoned for zandaqa ("heresy") and was sentenced to death by suffocation. Earlier and modern historians have speculated that his many private and political feuds with the Emirs of Granada belonging to the Nasrid dynasty were probably the main factors in his treatment and execution. His body was burned before being buried at Bab Mahruq , a city gate in Fes .

[ 9 ] Poetry [ edit ] His poetry was influenced by court poets from the Mashriq , or Islamic east, especially Abū Nuwās , Abū Tammām , and al-Mutanabbī .

[ 6 ] Ibn al-Khatib was a master of saj' ( سجع , rhymed prose), especially in his maqamāt.

[ 6 ] On the Plague [ edit ] In his treatise about the plague ( Muqni'at al-Sā'il 'an al-Maraḍ al-Hā'il , c. 753/1362), ibn al-Khatib explores the idea of transmission of disease through contagion centuries before Louis Pasteur conducted his experiments in Europe. The original Arabic text is preserved in the Zaydani Library at El Escorial , MS Arabic 1785.

[ 10 ] Of the estimated deaths due to the outbreak of bubonic plague , known as the "Black Death", which swept through al-Andalus in the 14th century, the numbers range to as high as a third of the Muslim population worldwide.

[ 11 ] In his treatise On the Plague , Ibn al-Khatib writes: [ 12 ] "The existence of contagion is established by experience [and] by trustworthy reports on transmission by garments, vessels, ear-rings; by the spread of it by persons from one house, by infection of a healthy sea-port by an arrival from an infected land [and] by the immunity of isolated individuals." Although this discovery is generally credited to al-Khatib's insight, the well-known plague hadith found in both Sahih al-Bukhari and Sahih Muslim appears to have already documented this observation (Sahih al-Bukhari 5728 ): Narrated Saud: The Prophet (ﷺ) said, "If you hear of an outbreak of plague in a land, do not enter it; but if the plague breaks out in a place while you are in it, do not leave that place." A similar narration can be found in Sahih Muslim 2218c .

Death [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( April 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A detailed account of his demise was written down by Ibn Khaldun , a friend and admirer of his.

[ 13 ] As a loyal courtier of Muhammed V of Granada , Ibn al-Khatib was arrested in the wake of a 1359 coup by Muhammed's half-brother Ismail, and had his property confiscated. He was soon released due to interference by the Marinid sultan of Morocco. He joined a host of Andalusi refugees in Morocco, settling in the Atlantic town of Salé . He immersed himself in Sufi mysticism and writing. During this stay in Morocco, he first met Ibn Khaldun and other important North African intellectuals such as ibn Marzuq .

In 1362, the former emir of Granada, Muhammed V, was able to regain the throne with help from the Moroccan sultan. This allowed Ibn al-Khatib to return to Granada and resume the office of Great Vizier ( dhu al-wizaratayn , i.e. 'possessor of the two vizierates', meaning 'head of both the civil and military authority'). He soon ran afoul of severe political intrigue. He eventually strengthened his position while organizing the expulsion of several of his North African political rivals from Granada. His political successes caused friction within Granada between supporters of the expelled North Africans and the politically savvy Ibn al-Khatib. When Ibn Khaldun had some diplomatic success at Granada's court, Ibn al-Khatib, fearing him as a rival, organized his expulsion.

His intrigues had made him an unpopular figure in some circles, causing two of his students, ibn Zamrak and ibn Farkun, to join hands with his most powerful enemy in Granada, the Grand Qadi al-Nubahi, a man who had long held a grudge against Ibn al-Khatib. More importantly, emir Muhammed V had grown distrustful of Ibn al-Khatib for his overbearing control of the Granadan state and his strict loyalty to the Marinids of Morocco. Feeling the heat rise, in 1371, Ibn al-Khatib left for North Africa , where he was well received by the Marinid sultan Abu Faris Abd al-Aziz I . During his refuge, the Grand Qadi al-Nubahi issued a fatwa in which Ibn al-Khatib's work on Sufism and philosophy was branded heretical and his work was ordered burned. The ad hominem nature of al-Nubahi's legal decision strongly suggests that he had a personal grudge against Ibn al-Khatib. Ibn al-Khatib wrote a refutation of the fatwa, in which he harshly attacked al-Nubahi. Numerous attempts by Granada to get Ibn al-Khatib either deported or executed were fruitless, as the Sultan refused to do so. Though Abu Faris Abd al-Aziz I soon died, ibn al-Khatib was then protected by ibn Ghazi, Morocco's main vizier.

Ibn al-Khatib's future turned bleak when a Granada-supported coup removed ibn Ghazi from office and brought a new sultan to power, Abu al-Abbas Ahmad al-Mustansir . Indebted to Granada, the new sultan ordered Ibn al-Khatib to be arrested and a trial be held in the Moroccan capital city of Fes, in which a Granadan group of emissaries, including his former student Ibn Zamrak, was actively involved. Despite intimidation and torture, Ibn al-Khatib kept protesting his innocence throughout the trial and denied the accusations of heresy. The final vote was far from unanimous, and a council of Islamic scholars could not reach a conclusive decision. Ibn al-Khatib was said to have been strangled on the night of his trial, as the people couldn't reach a conclusion on his alleged heresy and thus didn't want him to receive an unjust verdict. On the following day, his body was buried near Fes' Bab al-Mahruq city gate. Unsatisfied, his enemies ordered his body dug up and thrown in a bonfire.

List of works [ edit ] The Appearance of a Ghost During a Trip of Winter and Summer (خطرة الطيف في رحلة الشتاء والصيف): a description of a 21-day journey from Granada to Almería with Yusuf I, Sultan of Granada , composed in rhyming couplets [ 14 ] The Measurement of Choice in the Conditions of Places and Buildings (معيار الاختيار في ذكر المعاهد والديار): a muqama in which Ibn al-Khatib describes 34 Andalusi cities, including Malaga, Granada, and Ronda, comparing them to the Moroccan cities Tangier , Meknes , Fes , and Sebta , which he visited while exiled in Morocco [ 14 ] The Shaking of the Bag for Entertainment While Abroad (نفاضة الجراب في علالة الاغتراب): a collection of praise poetry , writings on history and geography, and personal narrative on his journey from the High Atlas back to Al-Andalus [ 14 ] The Badr View in the Nasirian State – Al-Lamhat al-Badriya fi al-Dawla al-Nasriya , ed. Arab and Latin transl. M.Casiri, Biblioteca arabico-hispana escurialensis, II, Madrid 1770.

Compendium on Granada (in 5 vols.) – Al'Ihatat fi 'Akhbar Ghurnata (Arabic) [ 15 ] Muqni'at al-Sā'il 'an al-Maraḍ al-Hā'il ( مقنعة السائل عن المرض الهائل ), a treatise on the Black Death and contagion , Zaydani Collection at the Biblioteca del Real Monasterio de El Escorial , MS Arabic 1785.

[ 10 ] The Scholars' Recitations of Dreams of the Kings of Islam Biographies, Dates and Connections – ' Awsaf an-Naas fi al-Tawarikh wa'l-Salaat (Arabic) [ 16 ] A Clerk after the People Move (Politics of Granada and Morocco) – Kanasat al-Dukan baad Intaqal as-Sakan [ 17 ] Kitab a'mal al-a'lam fi man buyi'a qabl al-ihtilam (Deeds of the Great: On Those Who Came to the Throne before Reaching Maturity) Calibrate Selection in Institutes of Mind Views of Sanseddin Ben Khatib in Morocco and Andalusia Malaga and Sala The Masterpiece of the Book and the Purity of the Elect Magic and Poetry The Book of Rehana and the sorrow of the Creator Garden Definition of Sharif Love [ 18 ] A Message in Politics Bibliography [ edit ] Jaysh Al-Tawshih of Lisan Al-Din Ibn Al-Khatib (Arabic), An Anthology of Andalusian Arabic Muwashshahat , Alan Jones (Editor), 1997 – ISBN 978-0-906094-42-6 Lisan ad-Din Ibn al-Khatib, Tarikh Isbaniya Al Islamiya (history of Muslim Spain), ed. by Levi-Provençal, new edition, Cairo, 2004 Lisan ad-Din Ibn al-Khatib, Awsaf Al Nas (description of peoples), Cairo, 2002 Lisan ad-Din Ibn al-Khatib, Khaṭrat al-ṭayf : riḥlāt fī al-Maghrib wa-al-Andalus, 1347–1362, 2003 Lisan ad-Din Ibn al-Khatib, Nafadhat al-jirab (the Ashtray of the Socks) Lisan al-Din ibn al-Khatib homme de lettres et historien, by Abdelbaqui Benjamaa, (French) thesis, Universite de la Sorbonne Nouvelle Paris III, 1992 (microform).

See also [ edit ] Ibn abd al-Malik al-Murrakushi Notes [ edit ] ^ Arabic : لسان الدين ابن الخطيب , romanized : Lisān ad-Dīn Ibn al-Khaṭīb , full name in Arabic: محمد بن عبد الله بن سعيد بن عبد الله بن سعيد بن علي بن أحمد السّلماني , romanized: Muḥammad ibn ʿAbdallāh ibn Saʿīd ibn ʿAbdallāh ibn Saʿīd ibn ʿAlī ibn Aḥmad as-Salmānī References [ edit ] ^ "Travelers of Al-Andalus, Part VI: The Double Lives of Ibn al-Khatib - AramcoWorld" .

www.aramcoworld.com . November 2015 . Retrieved 2021-04-21 .

^ Antonio Santo Orcero, Ibn al-Jatib , Diverso Variable, p. 5. Undated. Accessed online 2010-01-24. "al-Jatib" is the Spanish transliteration of "al-Khatib".

^ Farhad Daftary, The Assassin Legends: Myths of the Isma'ilis , (I.B.Tauris, 1994), 160.

^ Alexander Knysh, Ibn 'Arabi in the Later Islamic Tradition , SUNY Press (1999), p. 172 ^ Encyclopedia of Medieval Iberia, ed. Michael Gerli. (New York: Routledge, 2003), 416–417 ^ a b c d e f g Knysh, Alexander (2000-08-31), "Ibn al-Khaṭīb" , The Literature of Al-Andalus , Cambridge University Press, pp.

358– 372, doi : 10.1017/chol9780521471596.023 , ISBN 978-0-521-47159-6 , retrieved 2021-04-21 ^ ed. Muhammad Abd Allah Inan (Cairo: Maktabat al-Khanji, 1978) ^ "الإحاطة في أخبار غرناطة - المجلد الأول" – via Internet Archive.

^ Awasaf an-Nas fi Tawarikh wa Silat, pp19, Mohamed Kamal Chabana ^ a b M. W. Dols, The black death in the Middle East , New Jersey, 1977, 322. M. Aguiar Aguilar, "Aproximación al léxico árabe medieval de la epidemia y de la peste", Medicina e Historia (2014) http://issuu.com/fundacionuriach/docs/m_h_2_2014_v7_r ^ Kadri, Sadakat (2012).

Heaven on Earth: A Journey Through Shari'a Law from the Deserts of Ancient Arabia ...

macmillan. p. 185.

ISBN 9780099523277 .

^ Byrne, Joseph P. (2012-01-31).

Encyclopedia of the Black Death . ABC-CLIO. p.

182 .

ISBN 978-1598842531 .

^ cf. Ober, William B.,  and Nabil Alloush, " Plague at Granada, 1348-1349: Ibn al-Khatib and Ideas of Contagion .", pp.175 ^ a b c "Travelers of Al-Andalus, Part VI: The Double Lives of Ibn al-Khatib - AramcoWorld" .

www.aramcoworld.com . Retrieved 2019-04-08 .

^ "الإحاطة في أخبار غرناطة - لسان الدين بن الخطيب - تحقيق: بوزياني الدراجي" . 28 September 2013.

^ "أوصاف الناس في التواريخ و الصلات - لسان الدين بن الخطيب - نسخة منسقة -" .

^ "كناسة الدكان - لسان الدين بن الخطيب" – via Internet Archive.

^ "النسخة المعتمدة من كتاب روضة التعريف بالحب الشريف - لسان الدين ابن الخطيب تحقيق محمد الكتاني" – via Internet Archive.

External links [ edit ] Arabic Wikisource has original text related to this article: Ibn al-Khatib Poem by Ibn al-Khatib sung by Fairuz [1] (click on the oval above the poem) Ibn al-Jatib (second part of the page is in English) [2] Website Ibn Kahldun: Ibn al-Khatib, retrieved on feb. 2, 2008 [3] Encyclopedia of medieval Iberia, Ibn al-Khatib, retrieved on feb. 2, 2008 [4] Ibn al-Khatib. Polymath Virtual Library, Fundación Ignacio Larramendi v t e Islamic medicine Physicians 7th century Abu Hafsa Yazid Al-Harith ibn Kalada Bukhtishu Ibn Abi Ramtha al-Tamimi Ibn Uthal Masarjawaih Nafi ibn al-Harith Rufaida Al-Aslamia Zaynab al-Awadiya 8th century Bukhtishu Ja'ar al-Sadiq 9th century Al-Kindi Al-Ruhawi Albubather Ali al-Ridha Ali ibn Sahl Rabban al-Tabari Bukhtishu Hunayn ibn Ishaq Ishaq ibn Hunayn Jabir ibn Hayyan Jabril ibn Bukhtishu Masawaiyh Salmawaih ibn Bunan Shapur ibn Sahl Yahya ibn Sarafyun Yuhanna ibn Bukhtishu Yusuf al-Khuri 10th century 'Ali ibn al-'Abbas al-Majusi Aayon Ibn Aayon Abu Bakr Rabee Ibn Ahmad Al-Akhawyni Bokhari Abu Bakr al-Razi Abu Sahl 'Isa ibn Yahya al-Masihi Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu al-Hasan al-Tabari Abu al-Qasim Muqane'i Abu al-Qasim al-Zahrawi Abu ul-Ala Shirazi Al-Kaŝkarī Al-Natili Al-Tamimi, the physician Eutychius of Alexandria Ibn Abi al-Ashʿath Ibn Juljul Ibn al-Jazzar Ibrahim ibn Baks Isaac Israeli ben Solomon Mohammed ibn Abdun al-Jabali Muvaffak Qumri Qusta ibn Luqa 11th century Abdollah ibn Bukhtishu Abu 'Ubayd al-Juzjani Abu al-Hakam al-Kirmani Al-Biruni Ali ibn Isa al-Kahhal Ali ibn Ridwan Ali ibn Yusuf al-Ilaqi Ammar ibn Ali al-Mawsili Avicenna Badi' al-Asturlabi Ibn Abi Sadiq Ibn Al-Thahabi Ibn Butlan Ibn Hindu Ibn Jazla Ibn al-Haytham Ibn al-Kattani Ibn al-Wafid Jonah ibn Janah Masawaih 12th century Abu Jafar ibn Harun al-Turjali Abu al-Bayan ibn al-Mudawwar Abu al-Majd ibn Abi al-Hakam Abu'l-Barakāt al-Baghdādī Ahmad ibn Farrokh Al-Samawal al-Maghribi Avempace Averroes Ibn Habal Ibn Jumay‘ Ibn Tufayl Ibn Zuhr Ibn al-Tilmīdh Moshe ben Maimon Muhammad ibn Aslam Al-Ghafiqi Serapion the Younger Ya'qub ibn Ishaq al-Israili Zayn al-Din Gorgani 13th century Abd al-Latif al-Baghdadi Abraham ben Moses ben Maimon Al-Dakhwar Al-Shahrazuri Amin al-Din Rashid al-Din Vatvat As-Suwaydi Da'ud Abu al-Fadl Hussam al-Din al-Jarrahi Ibn Abi Usaibia Ibn Tumlus Ibn al-Baitar Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Quff Ibn al‐Raqqam Joseph ben Judah of Ceuta Najib ad-Din Samarqandi Qutb al-Din al-Shirazi Rashidun al-Suri Sa'ad al-Dawla Zakariya al-Qazwini 14th century Al-Nagawri Aqsara'i Ibn Shuayb Ibn al-Akfani Ibn al-Khatib Jaghmini Mansur ibn Ilyas Mas‘ud ibn Muhammad Sijzi Muhammad ibn Mahmud Amuli Najm al-Din Mahmud ibn Ilyas al-Shirazi Nakhshabi Rashid-al-Din Hamadani Sadid al-Din al-Kazaruni Yusuf ibn Ismail al-Kutubi Zayn-e-Attar 15th century Abu Sa'id al-Afif Burhan-ud-din Kermani Husayni Isfahani Muhammad Ali Astarabadi Muhammad ibn Yusuf al-Harawi Nurbakhshi Shaykh Muhammad ibn Thaleb Şerafeddin Kadir 16th century Rostam Gorgani ʽImad Shirazi Abul Qasim ibn Mohammed al-Ghassani Dawud al-Antaki Hakim-e-Gilani Sultan Ali Khorasani Taqi al-Din Muhammad ibn Ma'ruf 17th century Qiwam al-Din Muhammad al-Hasani Abd El Razzaq Al-Jazaïri Qurayshi al-Shirazi Tunakabuni Maqsud-Ali Tabrizi 18th century Al-Khurasani al-Shirazi Concepts Ophthalmology Psychology Works Al-Risalah al-Dhahabiah The Canon of Medicine Tacuinum Sanitatis Anatomy Charts of the Arabs The Book of Healing Book of the Ten Treatises of the Eye De Gradibus Al-Tasrif Zakhireye Khwarazmshahi Adab al-Tabib Kamel al-Sanaat al-Tibbyya Al-Hawi Commentary on Anatomy in Avicenna's Canon Lives of the Physicians Centers Al-'Adudi Hospital Bimarestan Nur al-Din Bimaristan Influences Ancient Greek medicine Ancient Iranian medicine Ayurveda Influenced Ibn Sina Academy Learned medicine Medical Renaissance Medieval medicine v t e Arabic literature Old Namara inscription Pre-Islamic Arabic inscriptions Pre-Islamic Abu Layla al-Muhalhel Adi ibn Zayd Afira bint 'Abbad Al-Fāriʿah bint Shaddād Al-Hujayjah Al-Ḥurqah Al-Khirniq bint Badr Al-Shanfara Al-Nu'man ibn Humaydah 'Alqama ibn 'Abada 'Amir ibn al-Tufayl Amr ibn Kulthum Antarah ibn Shaddad Al-A'sha Harith ibn Hilliza Al-Yashkuri Hatim al-Tai Labīd Laila bint Lukaiz Mahd al-Aadiyya Mu'aqqir Al-Nabigha Imru' al-Qais Samaw'al ibn 'Adiya Tarafa Uthman ibn al-Huwayrith Zuhayr bin Abi Sulma Zuhayr ibn Janab Aktham ibn Saifi Al-Munakhal Classical Early Islamic Al-Akhtal al-Taghlibi Al-Farazdaq Abd al-Hamid al-Katib Fadl Ashsha'ira Hassan ibn Thabit Ibn Abi Hasina Maysun bint Bahdal Jamil ibn Ma'mar Suraqa bin Malik Jarir ibn Atiyah Ka'b bin Zuhayr Al-Khansa Kuthayyir Layla al-Akhyaliyya Suraqah al-Bariqi Qutayla ukht al-Nadr Waddah al-Yaman Yunus al-Katib al-Mughanni Zufar ibn al-Harith al-Kilabi Dhu Jadan al-Himyari Dorayd bin Al Soma Qatari ibn al-Fuja'a al-Mufaddal Abbasid era Bint al-Mahdī Ibn al-Ahnaf Ibn al-Mu'tazz Abu Firas al-Hamdani Abu Tammam Al-Mudabbir Abu'l-Qasimbal-Maghribi Arib al-Ma'muniyya Al-Asma'i Ahmad al-Tifashi Abu al-Atahiya ibn al-'Amid Al-Hamadani Baha' al-din Zuhair Bashshar ibn Burd Buhturi Al-Busiri Al-Isfahani Al-Fath ibn Khaqan Al-Hariri of Basra Ibn al-Farid Ibn al-Rumi Ibn Duraid al-Zajjaj Abu Mansur al-Azhari ibn al-Mahdi ibn al-Mudabbir Al-Ma'arri Marwan ibn Abi Hafsa Marwan ibn Abi al-Janub Al-Mutanabbi Abu Nuwas Al-Jahiz Shāriyah Al-Armanazi Aban al-Lahiqi Imad ad-Din al-Isfahani Rabia of Basra Yunus ibn Habib Abu Nasr al-Jawhari Al-Farahidi Al-Shafi'i Ibn al-Muqaffa' Al-Mubarrad Ibn Abi Tahir Tayfur Safiyya al-Baghdadiyya Al-Zahiri Abu Muhammad al-Anbari Ibn al-Anbari Al-Qasabani Ibn Qutaybah Dik al-Jinn ‘Inān Abu Ahmad Monajjem Ibn Bakkar Al-Sarī al-Raffā’ Al-Suli Niftawayh Al-Tughrai Laylā bint Ṭarīf Al-Tha'alibi Al-Daylami al-Tawhīdī Al-Sharif al-Radi Ibn Hayyus Al-Raghib al-Isfahani Sharif al-Murtaza Al Uyuni Yaqut al-Hamawi Al Suhrawardi Al-Hallaj Usama ibn Munqidh Ibn al-Qatta' al-Siqilli Ibn al-Shajari Ibn al-Nafis Ibn 'Adlan Al-Andalus and Maghreb Abu Ja'far Al-Rumaikiyya Maria Alphaizuli Ibn Ammar Buthaina Al-Rukuniyya Hamda bint Ziyad al-Muaddib Ibn Hamdis Ibn Abd Rabbih Ibn al-Abbar Ibn al-Zaqqaq Ibn Amira Ibn Baqi Ibn Bassam Ibn Juzayy Ibn Khafaja Ibn al-Khatib Ibn Quzman Ibn Sahl Ibn Zamrak Ibn Zaydún Lubna of Córdoba Al-Mu'tamid ibn Abbad ibn Hani al-Azdi Muhya Nazhun Qasmuna Al-Tutili Umm Al-Kiram Yusuf III Yusuf III Ibn Hazm Ibn Arabi al-Shushtari Abu Madyan al-Rundi Ibn al-Arif Ibn Wahbun Ibn Abdun Avempace al-Baji al-Fazazi Ibn al-Yayyab Ibn Jubayr Ibn al-Kattani Ibn Tufayl Ibn Abi al-Khisal Mamluk era Ahmad ibn Arabshah Al-Busiri Ibn Manzur Ibn Battuta 'A'isha al-Ba'uniyya Ibn al-Wardi Hamdallah Mustawfi Ibn Nubata al-Nafzawi Ibn Khaldun Al-Qalqashandi Ottoman era Al-Nabulsi Fuzûlî Abdul Qadir al-Baghdadi Hanna Diyab Ibn al-Wannan Ahmed Ben Triki Modern Nahda El Baroudy Maruf al Rusafi Nasif al-Yaziji Ibrahim al-Yaziji Jamil Sidqi al-Zahawi Ahmad Faris Shidyaq Naoum Mokarzel Ahmad Rida Ameen Rihani Qustaki al-Himsi al-Kawakibi Suleyman al-Boustani Butrus al-Bustani Ahmad Zaki Pasha Rifa'a al-Tahtawi Abdallah Marrash Francis Marrash Maryana Marrash Hafez Ibrahim Ahmed Shawqi Mikhail Naimy Kahlil Gibran Farah Antun Jurji Zaydan May Ziadeh Taha Hussein Tawfiq al-Hakim Contemporary Nawal El Saadawi Naguib Mahfouz Yusuf Idris Sonallah Ibrahim Ahlam Mosteghanemi Mahmoud Darwish Adunis Ahmad Abd al-Ghafur Attar Abdur Rahman Kashgari Muhammad al-Maghut Nizar Qabbani Abbās al-Aqqād Mustafa Wahbi al-Tal Said Akl Fayeq Abdul-Jaleel Sinan Antoon Ibrahim Tuqan Emile Habibi Ghassan Kanafani Ghada al-Samman Abdul Rahman Munif al-Gosaibi Echebbi Hanna Mina Colette Khoury Saadallah Wannous Zakaria Tamer Tayeb Salih Leila Aboulela Ihsan Abdel Quddous al-Aswany Mohamed Choukri Leila Abouzeid Mohammed Bennis Abdellatif Laabi Mohamed Said Raihani Waciny Laredj Tahar Djaout Alifa Rifaat Ali Douagi Youssef Rzouga Salah Jahin Amal Donqol Ahmed Zaki Abu Shadi Hasan Tawfiq al-Mazini al-Jawahiri Safa Khulusi Nazik Al-Malaika Ahmed Matar Al-Bayati al-Sayyab Saadi Yousef Ibrahim Nasrallah Elia Abu Madi Omar Abu Risha Yusuf al-Khal Mourid Barghouti Jabra Ibrahim Jabra al-Qasim Fadwa Tuqan Nuri Ayyub National literatures of Arab states Algeria Bahrain Comoros Djibouti Egypt Copto-Arabic Iraq Jordan Kuwait Lebanon Libya Mauritania Morocco Oman Palestine Qatar Saudi Arabia Somalia Sudan Syria Tunisia U.A.E.

Yemen Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Spain Netherlands Sweden Vatican Israel Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐zttch
Cached time: 20250817065526
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.577 seconds
Real time usage: 0.779 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3291/1000000
Revision size: 20971/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 152571/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3883/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 72059/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.352/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24305193/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  615.906      1 -total
 16.37%  100.832      1 Template:Infobox_person
 14.41%   88.752      1 Template:NoteTag
 14.27%   87.860      3 Template:Langx
 12.57%   77.413      2 Template:Reflist
 11.85%   72.995      4 Template:Navbox
 11.25%   69.316      1 Template:Islamic_medicine
 10.83%   66.727      1 Template:Short_description
  9.58%   59.026      1 Template:Wikisourcelang
  9.08%   55.938      1 Template:Wikisource/outer_core Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:14950599:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817065526 and revision id 1292042164. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ibn_al-Khatib&oldid=1292042164 " Categories : 1313 births 1374 deaths People from the Province of Granada 14th-century Arabic-language poets Poets from al-Andalus 14th-century physicians Physicians from al-Andalus Philosophers from al-Andalus 14th-century historians from al-Andalus Scholars of the Nasrid period Viziers of the Emirate of Granada Encyclopedists of the medieval Islamic world Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles containing Arabic-language text Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Coordinates not on Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles needing additional references from April 2021 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 21:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ibn al-Khatib 22 languages Add topic

