Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Theoretical strategies 2 Historical macrosociology 3 Linking micro- and macro-sociology 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Macrosociology 17 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Қазақша Nederlands Polski Simple English Svenska Türkçe Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Sociological theories and approaches that focus on large-scale aspects of society Part of a series on Sociology History Outline Index Key themes Society Globalization Human behavior Human environmental impact Identity Industrial revolutions 3 / 4 / 5 Popularity Social complexity Social environment Social equality Social equity Social power Social stratification Social structure Social cycle theory Perspectives Conflict theory Critical theory Structural functionalism Positivism Social constructionism Social darwinism Symbolic interactionism Branches Aging Architecture Art Astrosociology Body Criminology Consciousness Culture Death Demography Deviance Disaster Economic Education Emotion ( Jealousy ) Environmental Family Feminist Fiscal Food Gender Generations Health Historical Immigration Industrial Internet Jewry Knowledge Language Law Leisure Literature Marxist Mathematic Medical Military Music Peace, war, and social conflict Philosophy Political Public Punishment Race and ethnicity Religion Rural Science ( History of science ) Social movements Social psychology Sociocybernetics Sociology Space Sport Technology Terrorism Urban Utopian Victimology Visual Methods Quantitative Qualitative Comparative Computational Ethnographic Conversation analysis Historical Interview Mathematical Network analysis Social experiment Survey Major theorists 1700s: Comte · Sieyès 1800s: Martineau · Tocqueville · Marx · Spencer · Le Bon · Ward · Pareto · Tönnies · Veblen · Simmel · Durkheim · Addams · Mead · Weber · Du Bois · Mannheim · Elias 1900s: Fromm · Adorno · Gehlen · Aron · Merton · Nisbet · Mills · Bell · Schoeck · Goffman · Bauman · Foucault · Luhmann · Habermas · Baudrillard · Bourdieu · Giddens Lists Bibliography Terminology Journals Organizations People Timeline By country Society portal v t e Macrosociology is a large-scale approach to sociology , emphasizing the analysis of social systems and populations at the structural level , often at a necessarily high level of theoretical abstraction.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Though macrosociology does concern itself with individuals, families, and other constituent aspects of a society , it does so in relation to larger social system of which such elements form a part. The macrosociological approach can also analyze generalized collectivities (such as " the city " or " the church ").

[ 3 ] In contrast, micro sociology focuses on the individual social agency . Macrosociology, however, deals with broad societal trends that can later be applied to smaller features of society, or vice versa . To differentiate, macrosociology deals with issues such as war as a whole; 'distress of Third-World countries'; poverty on a national/international level; and environmental deprivation, whereas microsociology analyses issues such as (for example) the individual features of war (e.g.

camaraderie , one's pleasure in violence, etc.); the role of women in third-world countries; poverty's effect on "the family "; and how immigration impacts a country's environment.

[ 4 ] A "society" can be considered as a collective of human populations that are politically autonomous , in which members engage in a broad range of cooperative activities.

[ 4 ] The people of Germany , for example, can be deemed "a society", whereas people with German heritage as a whole, including those who populate other countries, would not be considered a society per se .

[ 4 ] Theoretical strategies [ edit ] There are a number of theoretical strategies within contemporary macrosociology, though four approaches, in particular, have the most influence: Idealist Strategy : Attempts to explain the basic features of social life by reference to the creative capacity of the human mind. "Idealists believe that human uniqueness lies in the fact that humans attach symbolic meanings to their actions." [ 5 ] Materialist Strategy : Attempts to explain the basic features of human social life in terms of the practical, material conditions of their existence, including the nature of a physical environment; the level of technology; and the organization of an economic system.

[ 4 ] Functionalist Strategy (or structural functionalism ): Functionalism essentially states that societies are complex systems of interrelated and interdependent parts, and each part of a society significantly influences the others. Moreover, each part of society exists because it has a specific function to perform in contributing to the society as a whole. As such, societies tend toward a state of equilibrium or homeostasis, and if there is a disturbance in any part of the society then the other parts will adjust to restore the stability of the society as a whole.

[ 4 ] Conflict Theoretical Strategy (or conflict theory ): Rejects the idea that societies tend toward some basic consensus of harmony in which the features of society work for everyone's good. Rather, the basic structure of society is determined by individuals and groups acquiring scarce resources to satisfy their own needs and wants, thus creating endless conflicts.

[ 4 ] Historical macrosociology [ edit ] Historical macrosociology can be understood as an approach that uses historical knowledge to try to solve some of the problems seen in the field of macrosociology.

[ 4 ] As globalization has affected the world, it has also influenced historical macrosociology, leading to the development of two distinct branches: Comparative and historical sociology (CHS): a branch of historical macrosociology that bases its analysis on states, searching for "generalizations about common properties and principles of variation among instances across time and space." [ 6 ] As of recently, [ when?

] it has been argued that globalization poses a threat to the CHS way of thinking because it often leads to the dissolution of distinct states.

[ 4 ] Political Economy of the World-Systems (PEWS): a branch of historical macrosociology that bases its analysis on the systems of states, searching for "generalizations about interdependencies among a system's components and of principles of variation among systemic conditions across time and space." [ 4 ] Historical macrosociologists include: [ 4 ] Charles Tilly : developed theory of CHS, in which analysis is based on national states.

Immanuel Wallerstein : developed world systems theory, in which analysis is based on world capitalist systems.

Linking micro- and macro-sociology [ edit ] Perhaps the most highly developed integrative effort to link micro- and macro-sociological phenomena is found in Anthony Giddens 's theory of structuration , in which "social structure is defined as both constraining and enabling of human activity as well as both internal and external to the actor." [ 7 ] Attempts to link micro and macro phenomena are evident in a growing body of empirical research. Such work appears to follow Giddens' view of the constraining and enabling nature of social structure for human activity and the need to link structure and action. "It appears safe to say that while macrosociology will always remain a central component of sociological theory and research, increasing effort will be devoted to creating workable models that link it with its microcounterpart." [ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Society portal Base and superstructure Cliodynamics General systems theory Modernization theory Sociocybernetics Structure and agency Systems philosophy References [ edit ] ^ Calhoun, Craig, ed. 2002. "Macrosociology." Dictionary of the Social Sciences . New York: Oxford University Press .

^ Bottomore, Tom (1975).

"Competing Paradigms in Macrosociology" .

Annual Review of Sociology .

1 : 191– 202.

ISSN 0360-0572 .

^ Scott, John, and Gordon Marshall, eds. 2000.

Dictionary of Sociology . New York: Oxford University Press .

^ a b c d e f g h i j Lenski, Gerhard . 1982.

Human societies: An Introduction to Macrosociology . McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 0-07-037176-8 .

^ Sanderson, Stephen K. 1988.

Macrosociology: An Introduction to Human Societies.

Harper & Row .

^ Arrighi, Giovanni. 2000. Globalization and Historical Macrosociology.

Sociology for the Twenty-First Century.

pp. 117–33.

^ a b Borgatta, Edgar F. 1992.

Encyclopedia of Sociology 3.

Simon & Schuster Macmillan .

Further reading [ edit ] Tilly, Charles . 1995. " Macrosociology Past and Future ." In Newsletter of the Comparative & Historical Sociology 8(1&2):1,3–4.

American Sociological Association .

Francois, P., J. G. Manning, Harvey Whitehouse , Rob Brennan, et al. 2016. "A Macroscope for Global History. Seshat Global History Databank: A Methodological Overview." Digital Humanities Quarterly Journal 4(26).

Authority control databases National Czech Republic Spain Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Macrosociology&oldid=1302930029 " Category : Methods in sociology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from April 2022 This page was last edited on 28 July 2025, at 05:17 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Macrosociology 17 languages Add topic

