Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types Toggle Types subsection 1.1 Location 1.2 Cause and behavior 1.3 Size and shape 2 Research using lesions Toggle Research using lesions subsection 2.1 Research with humans 2.2 Research with animals 3 Notable lesions 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Lesion 31 languages العربية Bosanski Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Қазақша Magyar Bahasa Melayu Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wiktionary Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Abnormality in the tissue of an organism Medical condition Lesion Specialty Pathology A lesion is any damage or abnormal change in the tissue of an organism , usually caused by injury or diseases . The term Lesion is derived from the Latin laesio meaning "injury".

[ 1 ] Lesions may occur in both plants and animals.

Types [ edit ] There is no designated classification or naming convention for lesions. Because lesions can occur anywhere in the body and their definition is so broad, the varieties of lesions are virtually endless. Generally, lesions may be classified by their patterns, sizes, locations, or causes. They can also be named after the person who discovered them. For example, Ghon lesions , which are found in the lungs of those with tuberculosis , are named after the lesion's discoverer, Anton Ghon.

[ 1 ] The characteristic skin lesions of a varicella zoster virus infection are called chickenpox . Lesions of the teeth are usually called dental caries , or "cavities".

Location [ edit ] Lesions are often classified by their tissue types or locations. For example, "skin lesions" or " brain lesion " are named for the tissue where they are found. If there is an added significance to regions within the tissue—such as in neural injuries where different locations correspond to different neurological deficits—they are further classified by location. For example, a lesion in the central nervous system is called a central lesion, and a lesion in the peripheral nervous system is called a peripheral lesion .

[ 1 ] A myocardial lesion results from damage to the heart muscle, and a coronary lesion is a subtype that describes a lesion in the coronary arteries . Coronary lesions are then further classified according to which side of the heart is affected and the diameter of the artery in which they form.

[ 2 ] Cause and behavior [ edit ] If a lesion is caused by a tumor , it can be classified as malignant or benign after analysis of a biopsy . A benign lesion that is evolving into a malignant lesion is called "premalignant".

[ 1 ] Cancerous lesions are sometimes classified by their growth kinetics, such as the Lodwick classification, which characterizes classes of bone lesions.

[ 3 ] Another type is an excitotoxic lesion, which can be caused by excitatory amino acids like kainic acid that kill neurons through overstimulation.

Size and shape [ edit ] Lesion size may be specified as gross , meaning it is visible to the unaided eye, or histologic , meaning a microscope is needed to see it.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] A space-occupying lesion , as the name suggests, has a recognizable volume and may impinge on nearby structures, whereas a non space-occupying lesion is simply a hole in the tissue, such as a small area of the brain that has turned to fluid following a stroke .

[ 1 ] Lesions may also be classified by the shape they form, as is the case with many ulcers , which can have a bullseye or 'target' appearance. A coin lesion seen in an X-ray has the appearance of a coin sitting on the patient's chest.

[ 1 ] Research using lesions [ edit ] Brain lesions may help researchers understand brain function. Research involving lesions relies on two assumptions: that brain damage can affect different aspects of cognition independently, and that a locally damaged brain functions identically to a normal brain in its "undamaged" parts.

[ 6 ] Sham lesion is the name given to a control procedure during a lesion experiment. In a sham lesion, an animal may be placed in a stereotaxic apparatus and electrodes inserted as in the experimental condition, but no current is passed, so damage to the tissue should be minimal.

Research with humans [ edit ] Humans with brain lesions are often subjects of research with the goal of establishing the function of the area where their lesion occurred.

[ 7 ] A drawback to the use of human subjects is the difficulty in finding subjects who have a lesion to the area the researcher wishes to study. As such, transcranial magnetic stimulation is often used in cognition and neuroscience-related tests to imitate the effect.

[ 8 ] Research with animals [ edit ] Using animal subjects gives researchers the ability to study lesions in specific body parts, allowing them to quickly acquire a large group of subjects. An example of such a study is the lesioning of rat hippocampi to establish the role of the hippocampus in object recognition and object recency.

[ 9 ] Notable lesions [ edit ] Soft-tissue lesions Morel-Lavallee lesion Bankart lesion Perthes Lesion Stener lesion SLAP lesion Diabetes-associated lesions Armanni-Ebstein lesion Blumenthal lesion Bone lesions Non-ossifying fibroma ALPSA lesion Hill–Sachs lesion Osteoporosis circumscripta Osteolytic lesion Brain lesions Olney's lesions Skin lesions Melanocytic nevus Skip lesion Osler's node Keratoderma blennorrhagicum Dermatosis papulosa nigra Leukemid Janeway lesion Kaposi's sarcoma Nevus spilus Chronic scar keratosis Gastrointestinal lesions Dieulafoy's lesion Cameron lesions Endodermal lesions Melanocytic oral lesion Endometrial intraepithelial neoplasia Misc. disease-associated lesions Ghon focus Benign lymphoepithelial lesion Multiple sclerosis lesions Herpes labialis Tropical ulcer Herpetic whitlow See also [ edit ] Ablation References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f "Lesion...What Does The Doctor Mean?" .

MedicineNet . Archived from the original on March 27, 2003 . Retrieved 2016-03-03 .

^ Farooq, Vasim; Brugaletta, Salvatore; Serruys, Patrick W. (2011-12-01). "Contemporary and evolving risk scoring algorithms for percutaneous coronary intervention".

Heart .

97 (23): 1902– 1913.

doi : 10.1136/heartjnl-2011-300718 .

ISSN 1468-201X .

PMID 22058284 .

S2CID 23254704 .

^ Bennett, D. Lee; El-Khoury, Georges H. (6 May 2004).

"General approach to lytic bone lesions" .

Appliedradiology.com . Retrieved 2016-03-03 .

^ Leeson, Thomas S.; Leeson, C. Roland (1981).

Histology (Fourth ed.). W. B. Saunders Company. p. 600.

ISBN 978-0-7216-5704-2 .

^ Stedman's medical dictionary (27th ed.). Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. 2006.

ISBN 068340007X .

^ Kosslyn, Stephen M.; Intriligator, James M. (1992).

"Is Cognitive Neuropsychology Plausible? The Perils of Sitting on a Juan-Legged Stool" .

Journal of Cognitive Neuroscience .

4 (1): 96– 105.

doi : 10.1162/jocn.1992.4.1.96 .

PMID 23967860 .

S2CID 15557071 .

^ Adolphs, Ralph (2016-06-15).

"Human Lesion Studies in the 21st Century" .

Neuron .

90 (6). Pubmed Central: 1151– 1153.

doi : 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.05.014 .

PMC 5656290 .

PMID 27311080 .

^ Sliwinska, M. W., Vitello, S., & Devlin, J. T. (2014). Transcranial magnetic stimulation for investigating causal brain-behavioral relationships and their time course. Journal of visualized experiments : JoVE, (89), 51735.

doi : 10.3791/51735 ^ Albasser, Amin, Lin, Iordanova, Aggelton. Evidence That the Rat Hippocampus Has Contrasting Roles in Object Recognition Memory and Object Recency Memory External links [ edit ] Lesion at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Classification D Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lesion&oldid=1292284284 " Categories : Lesions Anatomical pathology Medical signs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 05:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lesion 31 languages Add topic

