Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Writings 3 See also 4 Notes 5 Citations 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Zhuang Zhou 69 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Български བོད་ཡིག Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Malagasy مصرى 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Mirandés Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Piemontèis Polski Português Русский Sakizaya Sardu Scots Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Vahcuengh Tiếng Việt Volapük Walon 文言 Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Chinese philosopher (c.369 – c.286 BC) This article is about the Chinese philosopher. For his eponymous text, see Zhuangzi (book) .

Zhuangzi ( 莊子 ) Zhuang Zhou ( 莊周 ) Born c.

369 BC Died c.

286 BC (aged c. 82 – 83) Philosophical work Era Ancient philosophy Region Eastern philosophy Chinese philosophy School Taoism Philosophical skepticism Notable works Zhuangzi Zhuangzi "Zhuangzi" in seal script (top), Traditional (middle), and Simplified (bottom) Chinese characters Traditional Chinese 莊子 Simplified Chinese 庄子 Hanyu Pinyin Zhuāngzǐ Literal meaning "Master Zhuang " Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Zhuāngzǐ Bopomofo ㄓㄨㄤ   ㄗˇ Gwoyeu Romatzyh Juangtzyy Wade–Giles Chuang 1 Tzu 3 Yale Romanization Jwāngdž IPA [ʈʂwáŋ.tsɹ̩̀] Wu Romanization Tzaõ-tzy Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Jōngjí Jyutping Zong1 zi2 IPA [tsɔŋ˥.tsi˧˥] Southern Min Tâi-lô Tsong-tsú; Tsng-tsú Eastern Min Fuzhou BUC Cŏng-cṳ̄ Middle Chinese Middle Chinese tʂjang-tzí Old Chinese Baxter–Sagart (2014) *[ts]raŋ tsəʔ Zhuang Zhou Traditional Chinese 莊 周 Simplified Chinese 庄 周 Hanyu Pinyin Zhuāng Zhōu Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Zhuāng Zhōu Bopomofo ㄓㄨㄤ   ㄓㄡ Gwoyeu Romatzyh Juang Jou Wade–Giles Chuang 1 Chou 1 Yale Romanization Jwāng Jōu IPA [ʈʂwáŋ ʈʂóʊ] Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Jōng Jāu Jyutping Zong1 Zau1 IPA [tsɔŋ˥ tsɐw˥] Southern Min Tâi-lô Tsong Tsiu Middle Chinese Middle Chinese tʂjang tʃjuw Old Chinese Baxter–Sagart (2014) *[ts]raŋ tiw Part of a series on Taoism Outline History Concepts Taoist philosophy Tao De Wuji Taiji Yin and yang Bagua Wuxing (five phases) Bianhua Fan (reversal) Wu wei (non-action) Wu xin (no-mind) Ziran Xian (immortal) Zhenren True form Three Treasures Jing Qi Shen Hun and po Practices Three Treasures (virtues) Five Precepts Ten Precepts Meditation Alchemy Neidan Waidan Bugang Chu Diet ( Bigu ) Sexual practices Art Fulu Priesthood Texts I Ching Tao Te Ching Zhuangzi Huainanzi Taipingjing Xiang'er Liezi Sanhuangjing Huahujing Qingjing Jing Baopuzi Daozang Theology Hongjun Laozu Three Pure Ones Yuanshi Tianzun Lingbao Tianzun Daode Tianzun Four heavenly ministers Jade Emperor Ziwei Emperor Tianhuang Emperor Houtu Queen Mother of the West King Father of the East Three Great Emperor-Officials Eight Immortals Chang'e Three Sovereigns and Five Emperors Yellow Emperor Guan Yu Li Hong Body god People Laozi Zhuang Zhou Lie Yukou Heshang Gong Wei Boyang Zhang Daoling Gan Ji Zhang Jue Zhang Lu Ge Xuan He Yan Wang Bi Seven Sages of the Bamboo Grove Guo Xiang Sun Hanhua Wei Huacun Ge Hong Bao Jingyan Kou Qianzhi Lu Xiujing Tao Hongjing Cheng Xuanying Chen Tuan Zhang Boduan Sun Bu'er Wang Chongyang Qiu Chuji Zhang Guoxiang Zhang Sanfeng Zhu Quan Fangshi Schools Huang–Lao Way of the Taiping Xuanxue Shangqing School Way of the Li Family Lingbao School Chongxuan School Quanzhen School Dragon Gate Wuliupai Way of the Celestial Masters Way of the Five Pecks of Rice The Southern Celestial Masters The Northern Celestial Masters Zhengyi Dao Chinese ritual mastery traditions Yao Taoism Sacred places Grotto-heavens Sacred Mountains of China Wudang Mountains Mount Penglai Mount Kunlun Taoist temple White Cloud Temple Louguantai Cebu Taoist Temple Taoist Temple (Hanford, California) Institutions and organizations Chinese Taoist Association Celestial Masters Taoist priests Category v t e Zhuang Zhou ( / dʒ u ˈ ɑː ŋ ˈ dʒ oʊ / ), [ 1 ] commonly known as Zhuangzi ( / ˈ dʒ w ɑː ŋ ˈ d z ʌ / ; [ 2 ] Chinese : 莊子 ; literally "Master Zhuang "; also rendered in the Wade–Giles romanization as Chuang Tzu ), [ a ] was an influential Chinese philosopher who lived around the 4th century BCE during the Warring States period , a period of great development in Chinese philosophy , the Hundred Schools of Thought . He is credited with writing—in part or in whole—a work known by his name, the Zhuangzi , which is one of two foundational texts of Taoism , alongside the Tao Te Ching .

Life [ edit ] See also: Zhuangzi (book) § History The only account of the life of Zhuangzi is a brief sketch in chapter 63 of Sima Qian 's Records of the Grand Historian , [ 3 ] and most of the information it contains seems to have simply been drawn from anecdotes in the Zhuangzi itself.

[ 4 ] In Sima's biography, he is described as a minor official from the town of Meng (in modern Anhui ) in the state of Song , living in the time of King Hui of Liang and King Xuan of Qi (late fourth century BC).

[ 5 ] Sima Qian writes that Zhuangzi was especially influenced by Laozi , and that he turned down a job offer from King Wei of Chu , because he valued his personal freedom.

[ 6 ] His existence has been questioned by Russell Kirkland, who asserts that "there is no reliable historical data at all" for Zhuang Zhou, and that most of the available information on the Zhuangzi comes from its third-century commentator, Guo Xiang .

[ 7 ] Writings [ edit ] Main article: Zhuangzi (book) Zhuangzi is traditionally credited as the author of at least part of the work bearing his name, the Zhuangzi .

[ 8 ] This work, in its current shape consisting of 33 chapters, is traditionally divided into three parts: the first, known as the "Inner Chapters", consists of the first seven chapters; the second, known as the "Outer Chapters", consist of the next 15 chapters; the last, known as the "Mixed Chapters", consist of the remaining 11 chapters. The meaning of these three names is disputed: according to Guo Xiang, the "Inner Chapters" were written by Zhuangzi, the "Outer Chapters" written by his disciples, and the "Mixed Chapters" by other hands; the other interpretation is that the names refer to the origin of the titles of the chapters—the "Inner Chapters" take their titles from phrases inside the chapter, the "Outer Chapters" from the opening words of the chapters, and the "Mixed Chapters" from a mixture of these two sources.

[ 9 ] Further study of the text does not provide a clear choice between these alternatives. On the one side, as Martin Palmer points out in the introduction to his translation, two of the three chapters Sima Qian cited in his biography of Zhuangzi, come from the "Outer Chapters" and the third from the "Mixed Chapters". "Neither of these are allowed as authentic Chuang Tzu chapters by certain purists, yet they breathe the very spirit of Chuang Tzu just as much as, for example, the famous 'butterfly passage' of chapter 2." [ 10 ] This passage encapsulates Zhuangzi’s radical questioning of reality and identity. As noted in La Pléiade’s edition of “Taoist Philosophies Volume I”,  it’s placement at the end of the chapter is noteworthy, given that the tension between dream and reality is introduced earlier (e.g., sections 49–50) and revisited elsewhere in the text (e.g., Chapter 6, 21). The passage emphasises the Zhuangzian solipsistic dilemma: existence is confined to the present moment of self-awareness, yet the self is paradoxically a flux of identities—perceived as fragmented by others but synthesized into a cohesive, multiform, and multitemporal whole.

[ 11 ] On the other hand, chapter 33 has been often considered as intrusive, being a survey of the major movements during the "Hundred Schools of Thought" with an emphasis on the philosophy of Hui Shi . Further, A.C. Graham and other critics have subjected the text to a stylistic analysis and identified four strains of thought in the book: a) the ideas of Zhuangzi or his disciples; b) a "primitivist" strain of thinking similar to Laozi in chapters 8–10 and the first half of chapter 11; c) a strain very strongly represented in chapters 28–31 which is attributed to the philosophy of Yang Zhu ; and d) a fourth strain which may be related to the philosophical school of Huang-Lao .

[ 12 ] In this spirit, Martin Palmer wrote that "trying to read Chuang Tzu sequentially is a mistake. The text is a collection, not a developing argument." [ 13 ] Zhuangzi was renowned for his brilliant wordplay and use an original form of gōng'àn (Chinese: 公案) or parables to convey messages. His critiques of Confucian society and historical figures are humorous and at times ironic.

See also [ edit ] Dream argument Goblet word Liezi Tao Te Ching Notes [ edit ] ^ Other romanizations include Zhuang Tze , Chuang Tsu , Chuang-tzu , Chouang-Dsi , Chuang Tse , and Chuangtze .

Citations [ edit ] ^ "Zhou" .

Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary .

^ "Chuang-tzu" .

Random House Webster's Unabridged Dictionary .

^ "Daoism Series 23: 荘子 Zhuang Zi" .

Purple Cloud . 2020-08-30 . Retrieved 2020-11-24 .

^ Mair (1994) , p. xxxi-xxxiii.

^ Ziporyn (2009) , p. vii.

^ Horne (1917) , pp. 397–398.

^ Kirkland (2004) , pp. 33–34.

^ Klein (2010) , pp. 306–309.

^ Roth (1993) , pp. 56–57.

^ Palmer (1996) , p. xix.

^ Philosophies taoïstes , La Pléiade , p. 186.

^ Schwartz (1985) , p. 216.

^ Palmer (1996) , p. x.

References [ edit ] Ames, Roger T. (1991), 'The Mencian Concept of Ren Xing: Does it Mean Human Nature?' in Chinese Texts and Philosophical Contexts, ed. Henry Rosemont, Jr. LaSalle, Ill.: Open Court Press.

Ames, Roger T. (1998) ed. Wandering at Ease in the Zhuangzi. Albany: State University of New York Press.

Bruya, Brian (translator). (2019).

Zhuangzi: The Way of Nature . Princeton: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-17974-2 .

Chan, Wing-Tsit (1973) [1963].

A Source Book In Chinese Philosophy . USA: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-691-01964-9 .

Chang, Chung-yuan (1963).

Creativity and Taoism: A Study of Chinese Philosophy, Art, and Poetry . New York: Julian Press.

Graham A.C, Chuang-Tzû, the seven inner chapters , Allen & Unwin , London, 1981 Chuang-tzu: The Inner Chapters and other Writings from the Book of Chuang-tzu (London: Unwin Paperbacks, 1986) Creel, Herrlee G. (1982).

What is Taoism?: and other studies in Chinese cultural history . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 0-226-12047-3 .

Hansen, Chad (2003). "The Relatively Happy Fish," Asian Philosophy 13:145-164.

Herbjørnsrud, Dag (2018). " A Sea for Fish on Dry Land ," the blog of the Journal of History of Ideas.

Horne, Charles F., ed. (1917).

The Sacred Books and Early Literature of the East, Volume XII: Medieval China . New York: Parke.

Kirkland, Russell (2004).

Taoism: The Enduring Tradition . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-26321-4 .

Klein, Esther (2010). "Were there "Inner Chapters" in the Warring States? A New Examination of Evidence about the Zhuangzi".

T'oung Pao .

96 (4/5). Leiden: Brill: 299– 369.

doi : 10.1163/156853210X546509 .

JSTOR 41354706 .

Mair, Victor H.

(1994).

Wandering on the Way: Early Taoist Tales and Parables of Chuang Tzu . New York: Bantam Books.

ISBN 0-553-37406-0 .

(Google Books) Merton, Thomas. (1969).

The Way of Chuang Tzu . New York: New Directions.

Palmer, Martin (1996).

The Book of Chuang Tzu . Penguin.

ISBN 978-0-14-019488-3 .

Roth, H. D. (1993). " Chuang tzu 莊子". In Loewe, Michael (ed.).

Early Chinese Texts: A Bibliographical Guide . Berkeley: Society for the Study of Early China; Institute of East Asian Studies, University of California Berkeley. pp.

56– 66.

ISBN 1-55729-043-1 .

Schwartz, Benjamin J. (1985).

The World of Thought in Ancient China . Cambridge: Belknap Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-96191-3 .

Shen, Tsing-song Vincent (2015).

"Evolutionism through Chinese Eyes: Yan Fu, Ma Junwu and their Translations of Darwinian Evolutionism" .

ASIANetwork Exchange .

22 (1): 49– 60.

doi : 10.16995/ane.135 .

ISSN 1943-9946 .

OCLC 8091685198 .

Waltham, Clae (editor). (1971).

Chuang Tzu: Genius of the Absurd . New York: Ace Books.

Watson, Burton (1962).

Early Chinese Literature . New York: Columbia University Press.

The complete work of Chuang Tzu , Columbia University Press, 1968 Watts, Alan; Huan, Al Chung-liang (1975).

Tao: The Watercourse Way . New York: Pantheon Books.

ISBN 0-394-73311-8 .

Ziporyn, Brook (2009).

Zhuangzi: The Essential Writings with Selections from Traditional Commentaries Hackett Classics Series . Hackett Publishing.

ISBN 978-1-60384-435-2 .

External links [ edit ] Chinese Wikisource has original text related to this article: Zhuangzi Wikiquote has quotations related to Zhuangzi .

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Zhuangzi .

Zhuangzi Bilingual Chinese-English version ( James Legge 's translation) - Chinese Text Project The Zhuangzi "Being Boundless" , Complete translation of Zhuangzi by Nina Correa Chuang Tzu at Taoism.net , Chuang Tzu's Stories and Teachings - translations by Derek Lin Zhuangzi , The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Zhuangzi , Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Selection from The Zhuangzi , translated by Patricia Ebrey Chuang-tzu at Taopage.org Zhuang Zi , chapter 1 Zhuang Zi , chapter 2 James Legge Complete Translation In English The Legge translation of the complete Chuang Tzu (Zhuangzi) updated Works by Zhuang Zhou at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) v t e Chinese philosophy Schools Agriculturalism Buddhism Confucianism Han learning Neo-Confucianism New Confucianism Huang–Lao Legalism Mohism Marxism School of Diplomacy School of Names Naturalism Taoism Daoxue Xuanxue Yangism Mixed School Nine Schools of Thought Hundred Schools of Thought Philosophers Eastern Zhou Bu Shang Chunyu Kun Confucius Deng Xi Duanmu Ci Gaozi Gongsun Long Guan Zhong Han Fei Hui Shi Laozi Li Kui Li Si Lie Yukou Mencius Mozi Shang Yang Shen Buhai Shen Dao Su Qin Sun Tzu Wu Qi Ximen Bao Xu Xing Xunzi Yang Zhu Yuan Xian Zhang Yi Zhuang Zhou Zichan Zisi Zou Yan Qin Han Ban Zhao Dong Zhongshu Dongfang Shuo Dou Wu Huan Tan Jia Yi Jia Kui Jing Fang Kong Anguo Liu An Lu Jia Liu Xiang Ma Rong Wang Chong Wang Fu Xun Yue Yang Xiong Three Kingdoms Jin Northern and Southern Bao Jingyan Fan Zhen Fan Ye Ge Hong Guo Xiang Fu Xuan He Yan Huiyuan Ji Kang Sengzhao Wang Su Wang Bi Xiahou Xuan Xie Daoyun Xun Can Yan Zhitui Zhi Dun Sui Tang Fu Yi Jizang Wang Tong Zhang Zhihe Han Yu Li Ao Liu Yuxi Liu Zongyuan Linji Yixuan Five Dynasties Ten Kingdoms Song Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Fan Zhongyan Hu Hong Lu Jiuyuan Shao Yong Shen Kuo Su Song Wang Anshi Wang Chongyang Wang Chuyi Ye Shi Zhang Zai Zhou Dunyi Zhu Xi Yuan Ming Chen Jiru Huang Zongxi Hong Zicheng Jiao Hong Jiao Yu Lai Zhide Li Zhi Liu Bowen Liu Zongzhou Luo Rufang Qian Dehong Wang Ji Wang Gen Wang Yangming Wu Cheng Xu Ai Zhan Ruoshui Qing Chen Hongmou Chen Menglei Dai Zhen Fang Bao Fang Lanfen Fang Quan Feng Guifen Gong Zizhen Gu Yanwu Hong Liangji Ji Yun Ma Qixi Lin Zexu Liu Yiming Pan Pingge Tan Sitong Tang Zhen Wang Fuzhi Wei Yuan Yan Yuan Yu Yue Yu Zhengxie Zhang Xuecheng Zhuang Cunyu Zeng Guofan 20th century Cai Yuanpei Carsun Chang P. C. Chang Chen Daqi Chen Duxiu Chung-ying Cheng Ch'ien Mu Chu Anping Fang Keli Feng Youlan Gan Yang Gu Su Gu Zhun He Guanghu Hu Qiaomu Hu Shih Hua Gang Ray Huang Jiang Qing Jin Yuelin Kang Youwei Lee Shui-chuen Li Shicen Li Zehou Liang Qichao Liang Shuming Lin Yutang Liu Xiaofeng Lu Xun Mao Zedong Mou Zongsan Qiu Renzong Sun Yat-sen Tang Chun-i Tang Yijie Tsang Lap Chuen Xiong Shili Xu Fuguan Yang Changji Yin Haiguang Yu Dunkang Zhang Dongsun Zhang Shenfu Zhou Guoping Zhou Zuoren Concepts Tao De Fa Jian'ai Jing Jing zuo Li Confucianism Neo-Confucianism Ming yun Qi Qing Ren Three teachings Shen Si Ti Tian Mandate of Heaven Wu wei Filial piety Xin Human nature Self-cultivation Yi Yin and yang Yong Zhengming Ziran Topics Logic Theology Metaphysics Politics Ethics Role ethics State consequentialism Ink wash Shan shui Society Epistemology Metaphilosophy Legitimacy v t e Philosophy of language Philosophers Confucius Gorgias Cratylus Plato Aristotle Eubulides Diodorus Chrysippus Zhuangzi Xunzi Averroes Ibn Khaldun Hobbes Wilkins Arnauld Lancelot Leibniz Berkeley Herder von Humboldt Mauthner Ricœur de Saussure Frege Boas Tillich Sapir Bloomfield Bergson Vygotsky Wittgenstein Russell Carnap Derrida Whorf Austin Chomsky Gadamer Kripke Ayer Anscombe Hintikka Dummett Davidson Grice Ryle Strawson Quine Putnam Lewis Searle Watzlawick Theories Causal theory of reference Contrast theory of meaning Contrastivism Conventionalism Cratylism Deconstruction Descriptivism Direct reference theory Dramatism Dynamic semantics Expressivism Inquisitive semantics Linguistic determinism Mediated reference theory Nominalism Non-cognitivism Phallogocentrism Relevance theory Semantic externalism Semantic holism Situation semantics Structuralism Supposition theory Symbiosism Theological noncognitivism Theory of descriptions ( Definite description ) Theory of language Unilalianism Verification theory Concepts Ambiguity Cant Class Concept Categories Family resemblance Intension Language Linguistic relativity Logical form Mental representation Metalanguage Modality (natural language) Presupposition Principle of compositionality Property Proposition Sense and reference Sentence Set Sign Speech act Statement Symbol Truth-bearer Use–mention distinction more...

Works Cratylus (n.d.) Port-Royal Grammar (1660) De Arte Combinatoria (1666) An Essay Towards a Real Character, and a Philosophical Language (1668) Alciphron (1732) " On Denoting " (1905) Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) Language, Truth, and Logic (1936) Two Dogmas of Empiricism (1951) Philosophical Investigations (1953) Of Grammatology (1967) Naming and Necessity (1980) Wittgenstein on Rules and Private Language (1982) Limited Inc (1988) Related articles Analytic philosophy Philosophy of information Philosophical logic Linguistics Pragmatics Rhetoric Scholasticism School of Names Semantics Formal semantics Semiotics Category Task Force Discussion v t e Philosophy of mind Philosophers G. E. M. Anscombe Aristotle Armstrong Thomas Aquinas J. L. Austin Alexander Bain George Berkeley Henri Bergson Ned Block Franz Brentano C. D. Broad Tyler Burge David Chalmers Patricia Churchland Paul Churchland Andy Clark Dharmakirti Donald Davidson Daniel Dennett René Descartes Fred Dretske Fodor Goldman Martin Heidegger David Hume Edmund Husserl William James Frank Cameron Jackson Immanuel Kant David Lewis (philosopher) John Locke Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz Maurice Merleau-Ponty Marvin Minsky Thomas Nagel Alva Noë Derek Parfit Plato Hilary Putnam Richard Rorty Gilbert Ryle John Searle Wilfrid Sellars Baruch Spinoza Alan Turing Michael Tye Vasubandhu Ludwig Wittgenstein Stephen Yablo Zhuangzi more...

Theories Behaviorism Biological naturalism Dualism Eliminative materialism Emergent materialism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Interactionism Naïve realism Neurophenomenology Neutral monism New mysterianism Nondualism Occasionalism Parallelism Phenomenalism Phenomenology Physicalism Type physicalism Property dualism Representational Solipsism Substance dualism Concepts Abstract object Animal machine Chinese room Creativity Cognition Cognitive closure Concept Consciousness Hard problem of consciousness Hypostatic abstraction Idea Identity Intelligence Artificial Human Intentionality Introspection Intuition Language of thought Mental event Mental image Mental process Mental property Mental representation Mind Mind–body problem Pain Problem of other minds Propositional attitude Qualia Tabula rasa Understanding Zombie Related Metaphysics Philosophy of artificial intelligence / information / perception / self Category Philosophers category Project Task Force Portals : China Biography Philosophy History Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 FAST WorldCat 2 National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Chile Greece Korea 2 Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Finland Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zhuang_Zhou&oldid=1305492606 " Categories : 360s BC births 280s BC deaths 4th-century BC Chinese people 4th-century BC Chinese philosophers 3rd-century BC Chinese people 3rd-century BC Chinese philosophers Metaphysicians Chinese ethicists Chinese logicians Guqin players People from Bozhou Asian people whose existence is disputed Philosophers from Anhui Philosophers of culture Philosophers of education Philosophers of language Philosophers of logic Chinese political philosophers Proto-anarchists Proto-evolutionary biologists Social philosophers Taoist immortals Zhou dynasty philosophers Zhou dynasty Taoists Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text Articles with hCards Articles containing traditional Chinese-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles with LibriVox links Year of birth uncertain Year of death uncertain This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 10:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Zhuang Zhou 69 languages Add topic

