Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Formats 3 Examples 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Graph paper 10 languages العربية Deutsch Ελληνικά Español فارسی 한국어 Nederlands 日本語 Simple English 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Writing paper with a grid Three styles of loose leaf graph paper: 10 squares per centimeter ("millimeter paper"), 5 squares per inch (“engineering paper"), 4 squares per inch (“quad paper") Graph paper , coordinate paper , grid paper , or squared paper is writing paper that is printed with fine lines making up a regular grid . It is available either as loose leaf paper or bound in notebooks or graph books.

It is commonly found in mathematics and engineering education settings, exercise books , and in laboratory notebooks .

The lines are often used as guides for mathematical notation , plotting graphs of functions or experimental data , and drawing curves .

History [ edit ] The Metropolitan Museum of Art owns a pattern book dated to around 1596 in which each page bears a grid printed with a woodblock . The owner has used these grids to create block pictures in black and white and in colour.

[ 1 ] The first commercially published "coordinate paper" is usually attributed to a Dr. Buxton of England, who patented paper printed with a rectangular coordinate grid, in 1794.

[ 2 ] A century later, E. H. Moore, a distinguished mathematician at the University of Chicago, advocated usage of paper or exercise books with "squared lines" by students of high schools and universities.

[ 3 ] The 1906 edition of Algebra for Beginners by H. S. Hall and S. R. Knight included a strong statement that "the squared paper should be of good quality and accurately ruled to inches and tenths of an inch. Experience shows that anything on a smaller scale (such as 'millimeter' paper) is practically worthless in the hands of beginners." [ 4 ] The term "graph paper" did not catch on quickly in American usage.

A School Arithmetic (1919) by H. S. Hall and F. H. Stevens had a chapter on graphing with "squared paper".

Analytic Geometry (1937) by W. A. Wilson and J. A. Tracey used the phrase "coordinate paper". The term "squared paper" remained in British usage for longer; for example it was used in Public School Arithmetic (2023) by W. M. Baker and A. A. Bourne published in London.

[ 4 ] Formats [ edit ] Quad paper , sometimes referred to as quadrille paper from French quadrillé, 'large square', [ 5 ] is a common form of graph paper with a sparse grid printed in light blue or gray and right to the edge of the paper. In the U.S.

and Canada , it often has two, four or five squares per inch for work not needing too much detail. In Europe , it usually has 5 mm by 5 mm squares. It is used in mathematical exercise books and Lab notebooks .

Dot grid paper uses dots at intersections instead of gridlines. It is often used for bullet journalling .

Engineering paper , or an engineer's pad , [ 6 ] is traditionally printed on light green or tan translucent paper. It may have four, five or ten squares per inch. The grid lines are printed on the back side of each page and show through faintly to the front side.  Each page has an unprinted margin.  When photocopied or scanned , the grid lines typically do not show up in the resulting copy, which often gives the work a neat, uncluttered appearance.  In the U.S. and Canada, some engineering professors require student homework to be completed on engineering paper.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Millimeter paper has ten squares per centimeter and is used for technical drawings .

Hexagonal paper shows regular hexagons instead of squares. These can be used to map geometric tiled or tesselated designs among other uses.

Isometric graph paper or 3D graph paper is a triangular graph paper which uses a series of three guidelines forming a 60° grid of small triangles. The triangles are arranged in groups of six to make hexagons. The name suggests the use for isometric views or pseudo-three-dimensional views. Among other functions, they can be used in the design of trianglepoint embroidery . It can be used to draw angles accurately.

Logarithmic paper has rectangles drawn in varying widths corresponding to logarithmic scales for semi-log plots or log-log plots .

Normal probability paper is another graph paper with rectangles of variable widths. It is designed so that "the graph of the normal distribution function is represented on it by a straight line", i.e. it can be used for a normal probability plot .

[ 8 ] Polar coordinate paper has concentric circles divided into small arcs or 'pie wedges' to allow plotting in polar coordinates .

Ternary (triangular) graph paper has an equilateral triangle, divided into smaller equilateral triangles with usually 10 or more divisions per edge. It is used to plot compositional percentages of in systems that have three constituents or three dimensions. (see ternary plot ) In general, graphs showing grids are sometimes called Cartesian graphs because the square can be used to map measurements onto a Cartesian coordinate system.

Examples [ edit ] Regular graphing paper Log-log graphing paper Semi-log graphing paper Normal Probability paper Isometric graphing paper Polar coordinate paper Engineering paper Ternary graph paper Squared exercise book used in Russian schools (12 and 18 sheets) Graph composition book used in the United States (80 sheets) Two styles of loose leaf graph paper See also [ edit ] Ruled paper Examination book References [ edit ] ^ John Boardley, 'The first fashion books, Renaissance pixel fonts & the invention of graph paper' , I Love Typography , 27 July 2019.

^ Friendly, Michael; Denis, Daniel J. (5 July 2006).

"Milestones in the history of thematic cartography, statistical graphics, and data visualization" (PDF) . York University. p. 13.

^ Borovik, Alexandre (7 August 2008).

"Graphed Paper" .

Mathematics under the Microscope . Retrieved 25 March 2017 .

^ a b Ballew, Pat (January 2011).

"Notes on the History of Graph Paper" .

www.academia.edu .

academia.edu . Retrieved 8 June 2020 .

^ "quadrille" .

Oxford Living Dictionaries . Oxford University Press. 2017. Archived from the original on 24 September 2016.

^ a b "The Preparation of Engineering Problem Sets" (PDF) . Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Technical Communications in Mechanical Engineering . Retrieved 25 March 2017 .

^ "Required Homework Format" (PDF) . Auburn University. Department of Chemical Engineering . Retrieved 25 March 2017 .

^ Prokhorov, A. V. (2011).

"Probability graph paper" .

Encyclopedia of Mathematics . Retrieved 18 January 2014 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Graph paper .

Graph paper downloads at Print-graph-paper.com v t e Paper Paper engineering / Papermaking History Battle of Talas Missal of Silos Originators Cai Lun Damjing Developers Matthias Koops Friedrich Gottlob Keller Charles Fenerty Scholars Timothy Barrett Thomas Francis Carter Dard Hunter Tsien Tsuen-hsuin Types Acid-free Air-laid Amate Asphalt Banana Bible Blotting Bond Bristol Carbon Cardboard Cardstock Cartridge Coated Construction Contact Copy Carbonless Correction Cotton (rag) Crêpe Display Dó Electrical insulation Filteration Genkō yōshi Glassine Graph Greaseproof Hemp India Inkjet Ingres Korean Kraft Butcher Laid Lokta Manila Mummy Newsprint Onionskin Origami Paperboard Parchment Photographic Plastic-coated Red rosin Rice Rolling Scritta Security Seed Stone Tar Thermal Tissue Tracing Transfer Tree-free Wallpaper Washi Wasli Waterproof Wax Wood-free Wove Writing Xuan Materials China clay Corrugated fiberboard Fiber crop Paper chemicals Papyrus Wood pulp Specifications Density Grammage Paper sizes Surface chemistry of paper Units of paper quantity Wet strength Manufacture and process Bleaching of wood pulp Calender Conical refiner Deinking Elemental chlorine free Environmental impact of paper Handmade paper Hollander beater Kraft process Organosolv Paper machine Paper recycling Papermaking Soda pulping Sulfite process Industry Paper industry Canada Europe India Indonesia Japan United States Paper mill List Uses Lined paper Paper towels Papier-mâché Cardboard Clothing Tissues Notebooks Watercolor paper Paper money Beverage cartons Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Graph_paper&oldid=1280531514 " Categories : Printing and writing paper Engineering equipment Technical drawing Mathematical tools Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2017 This page was last edited on 15 March 2025, at 03:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Graph paper 10 languages Add topic

