Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Work 3 Bibliography 4 See also 5 Notes 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Alexander Pruss 2 languages Deutsch Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher (born 1973) This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Alexander Pruss" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( May 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Alexander Pruss Born ( 1973-01-05 ) January 5, 1973 (age 52) Education Education University of Western Ontario (BSc, 1991) University of British Columbia (PhD, 1996) University of Pittsburgh (PhD, 2001) Theses Possible Worlds: What They Are Good For and What They Are (2001) Symmetrization, Green’s Functions, Harmonic Measures and Difference Equations (1996) Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Analytic philosophy Institutions Baylor University Main interests Metaphysics , philosophy of religion , applied ethics Notable ideas Gale–Pruss cosmological argument Alexander Robert Pruss ( / p r ʌ s / ; born January 5, 1973) is a Canadian philosopher and mathematician. He is currently a professor of philosophy and the co-director of graduate studies in philosophy at Baylor University in Waco, Texas .

His best known book is The Principle of Sufficient Reason: A Reassessment (2006).

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] He is also the author of the books, Actuality, Possibility and Worlds (2011), and One Body: An Essay in Christian Sexual Ethics (2012), and a number of academic papers on religion and theology.

[ 4 ] He maintains his own philosophy blog and contributed to the Prosblogion philosophy of religion blog. He is currently the Guinness World Record Holder for greatest vertical distance climbed on a climbing wall in one hour (individual) [ 5 ] and fastest mile on climbing wall (male).

[ 6 ] Biography [ edit ] Until age 9, Alexander Pruss lived in Poland. At the height of martial law, he emigrated to Canada with his dissident parents. He never finished high school, but instead went to the University of Western Ontario after completing grade 10, studying physics and mathematics, never writing a single paper over the three years of his undergraduate career.

[ 7 ] Pruss graduated from the University of Western Ontario in 1991 with a Bachelor of Science degree in mathematics and physics. While trying to figure out exactly what to do with the rest of his life, [ 8 ] he earned a Ph.D. in mathematics at the University of British Columbia with a dissertation on Symmetrization, Green’s Functions, Harmonic Measures and Difference Equations , under John J. F. Fournier in 1996, and published several papers in Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society and other mathematical journals, [ 4 ] . Afterwards, realizing that philosophy is the handmaiden of his true love, theology, [ 9 ] he began graduate work in philosophy at the University of Pittsburgh . He completed his dissertation, Possible Worlds: What They Are and What They Are Good For , under Nicholas Rescher in 2001.

Pruss began teaching philosophy at Georgetown University in 2001, earning tenure in 2006. In 2007, he moved to Waco, Texas to teach philosophy at Baylor University . He is now the director of graduate studies for the Baylor Philosophy Department. He  has taught various courses, including graduate seminars on the philosophy of time , metaphysics , the cosmological and ontological arguments for the existence of God , modality , free will , and history of philosophy .

[ 10 ] Work [ edit ] Pruss's philosophical thought reflects Christian orthodoxy . He is a Roman Catholic and a member of the Society of Christian Philosophers .

Pruss defends the principle of sufficient reason (PSR), claiming that it is self-evident, and arguing that the rejection of PSR creates problems in epistemology, modality, ethics, and even evolutionary theory.

[ 11 ] Pruss is a critic of David Lewis's "extreme modal realism," and instead gives "a combined account" of Leibnizian and Aristotelian modality, which integrates the "this-worldly capacities" of the Aristotelian view and Leibniz's account of possible worlds as thoughts in the mind of God.

[ 12 ] Bibliography [ edit ] The Principle of Sufficient Reason: A Reassessment ( Cambridge University Press , 2006) Actuality, Possibility and Worlds ( Bloomsbury Academic , 2011) One Body: An Essay in Christian Sexual Ethics ( University of Notre Dame Press , 2012) Necessary Existence with Joshua L. Rasmussen ( Oxford University Press , 2018) Infinity, Causation, and Paradox ( Oxford University Press , 2018) See also [ edit ] Society of Christian Philosophers Possible worlds Notes [ edit ] ^ Review by Joshua C Thurow, Religious Studies Review , 33, no. 3 (2007): 222-223 ^ Review, by D Rickles Philosophy In Review , 27, no. 5, (2007): 370-372 ^ Review by D Werther, Faith and philosophy : journal of the Society of Christian Philosophers.

27, no. 1, (2010): 94-97 ^ a b WorldCat author listing ^ "Greatest vertical distance climbed on a climbing wall in one hour (individual)" .

Guinness World Records . Retrieved 2023-04-17 .

^ "Fastest mile on a climbing wall (male)" .

Guinness World Records . Retrieved 2024-06-30 .

^ Pruss, Alexander.

"Bio" .

Right Reason . Retrieved 19 Jun 2025 .

^ Pruss, Alexander.

"Bio" .

Right Reason . Retrieved 19 Jun 2025 .

^ Pruss, Alexander.

"Bio" .

Right Reason . Retrieved 19 Jun 2025 .

^ Pruss, Curriculum Vitae ^ Pruss, "Leibnizian Cosmological Arguments" ^ Pruss, "The Actual and the Possible" References [ edit ] Pruss, Alexander.

Curriculum Vitae Accessed March 2013.

Pruss, Alexander. "Leibnizian Cosmological Arguments" in Blackwell Companion to Natural Theology , Oxford: Blackwell, 2009 Pruss, Alexander. "The Actual and the Possible" In Richard M. Gale (ed.), Blackwell Guide to Metaphysics , Oxford: Blackwell, 2002.

External links [ edit ] Pruss's Homepage , including CV, Selected Articles and Course Syllabi.

Personal Philosophy Blog .

The Website for the Baylor Department of Philosophy.

Alexander R. Pruss at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Alexander Robert Pruss at the Mathematics Genealogy Project v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Latvia Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project 2 Scopus zbMATH PhilPeople MathSciNet People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Alexander_Pruss&oldid=1305704379 " Categories : 1973 births Living people 20th-century American male writers 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century American philosophers 20th-century Roman Catholics 21st-century American male writers 21st-century American non-fiction writers 21st-century American philosophers 21st-century Roman Catholics American male non-fiction writers American metaphysicians American philosophers of religion American Roman Catholic writers Analytical Thomists Baylor University faculty Catholics from Texas Catholic philosophers Christian ethicists Philosophers from Texas University of British Columbia alumni University of Pittsburgh alumni University of Western Ontario alumni Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata BLP articles lacking sources from May 2013 All BLP articles lacking sources Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 16:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Alexander Pruss 2 languages Add topic

