Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Religious views 3 Books 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Abhay Ashtekar 17 languages تۆرکجه Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ മലയാളം मराठी مصرى Português Русский Svenska తెలుగు 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Indian-American theoretical physicist "Ashtekar" redirects here. For Ashtekar Surname, see Swakula Sali .

Abhay Vasant Ashtekar Born ( 1949-07-05 ) 5 July 1949 (age 76) Shirpur , Maharashtra, India [ 1 ] Alma mater University of Texas, Austin , University of Chicago Known for Ashtekar variables Loop quantum gravity Loop quantum cosmology Awards Member of National Academy of Sciences , first Gravity Prize by the Gravity Research Foundation , Massachusetts , Einstein Prize Scientific career Fields Theoretical physics Institutions Pennsylvania State University Doctoral advisor Robert Geroch Abhay Vasant Ashtekar (born 5 July 1949) is an Indian theoretical physicist who created Ashtekar variables and is one of the founders of loop quantum gravity and its subfield loop quantum cosmology .

[ 2 ] Ashtekar has also written a number of descriptions of loop quantum gravity that are accessible to non-physicists. He is an Evan Pugh Professor Emeritus of Physics and former Director of the Institute for Gravitational Physics and Geometry (now Institute for Gravitation and the Cosmos ) [ 3 ] and Center for Fundamental Theory [ 4 ] at Pennsylvania State University .

In 1999, Ashtekar and his colleagues were able to calculate the entropy for a black hole , matching a 1974 prediction by Stephen Hawking .

[ 5 ] Oxford mathematical physicist Roger Penrose has described Ashtekar's approach to quantum gravity as "The most important of all the attempts at 'quantizing' general relativity." [ 6 ] Ashtekar was elected member of the National Academy of Sciences in May 2016.

[ 7 ] Biography [ edit ] Abhay Ashtekar grew up in several cities, including Mumbai , in the state of Maharashtra , India. After completing his undergraduate education in India, Ashtekar enrolled in the graduate program for gravitation at the University of Texas at Austin .

[ 8 ] He went on to complete his PhD at the University of Chicago under the supervision of Robert Geroch in 1978 and held several appointments at Oxford , Paris , Syracuse before settling at Pennsylvania State University .

[ 9 ] He married Christine Clarke in 1986 [ 10 ] and the two have a son, Neil Ashtekar.

Religious views [ edit ] Abhay Ashtekar is an atheist , though he enjoys reading on Indian and other eastern philosophy, namely the Tao and the Zen traditions. Furthermore, he believes to be inspired from the Bhagavad Gita as regards his attitude towards work.

[ 10 ] Books [ edit ] A. Magnon and A. Ashtekar, Translation from French of Élie Cartan's work, "Sur les variétés à connexion affine et la théorie de la relativité généralisée" with a commentary and foreword by A. Trautman , Bibliopolis, Naples, 1986, 199 pages.

A. Ashtekar, Asymptotic Quantization. Bibliopolis, Naples, 1987, 107 pages.

A. Ashtekar, (with invited contributions) New Perspectives in Canonical Gravity. Bibliopolis, Naples, 1988, 324 pages.

A. Ashtekar and J. Stachel, Editors; Conceptual Problems of Quantum Gravity. Proceedings of the 1988 Osgood Hill Conference (Birkhauser, N. Y., 1991), 602 pages.

A. Ashtekar, Lectures on Non-perturbative Canonical Gravity, (Notes prepared in collaboration with R.S. Tate), (World Scientific Singapore, 1991), 334 pages.

A. Ashtekar, R.C. Cohen, D. Howard, J. Renn, S. Sarkar and A. Shimony (Editors), Revisiting the Foundations of Relativistic Physics, Festschrift in honor of John Stachel, Boston Studies in Philosophy of Science, Volume 234, (Kluwer Academic, 2003).

See also [ edit ] List of loop quantum gravity researchers Big Bounce Carlo Rovelli Lee Smolin Martin Bojowald References [ edit ] ^ "Watch: Episode 1 | Interview with Prof. Abhay Ashtekar | Early life, Realization of universality of Physics" (video) .

youtube.com .

Intellectual Rigour . 16 June 2025.

^ "Indian American professor Abhay Ashtekar wins Einstein prize, 7 facts about the physicist" .

^ "Institute for Gravitation and the Cosmos" . Retrieved 12 September 2024 .

^ "Center for Fundamental Theory" . Retrieved 12 September 2024 .

^ Glanz, James (20 April 1999).

"Science at work - page 3" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 23 April 2010 .

^ Glanz, James (20 April 1999).

"Science at work - page 1" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 23 April 2010 .

^ "May 3, 2016: NAS Members and Foreign Associates Elected" . Archived from the original on 6 May 2016 . Retrieved 4 May 2016 .

^ Glanz, James (20 April 1999).

"Science at work - page 2" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 23 April 2010 .

^ "Abhay Ashtekar - CV" .

^ a b "Dr. Abhay Ashtekar" . Rediff on the Net.

External links [ edit ] Oral History interview transcript for Abhay Ashtekar on 3 February 2021, American Institute of Physics, Niels Bohr Library and Archives Abhay Ashtekar at the Mathematics Genealogy Project Abhay Ashtekar's homepage Archived 23 December 2002 at the Wayback Machine Ashtekar's publication on ArXiv Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States 2 France BnF data Italy Australia Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii ORCID Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH PhilPeople MathSciNet People Trove DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abhay_Ashtekar&oldid=1300125918 " Categories : 20th-century Indian physicists American relativity theorists Loop quantum gravity researchers 1949 births Living people University of Chicago alumni Pennsylvania State University faculty American atheists Indian atheists Indian emigrants to the United States Members of the United States National Academy of Sciences American academics of Indian descent People from Kolhapur Syracuse University faculty Scientists from Maharashtra American scientists of Asian descent Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2019 Use Indian English from October 2018 All Wikipedia articles written in Indian English Articles with hCards Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 12 July 2025, at 11:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abhay Ashtekar 17 languages Add topic

