Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin and pronunciation 2 Characteristics 3 Aristotle on epideixis 4 Modern authors on epideixis 5 In poetry 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Epideictic 9 languages Български Deutsch Español فارسی Français Italiano Pälzisch Русский Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Branch or "eidē" of rhetoric Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e The epideictic oratory , also called ceremonial oratory or praise-and-blame rhetoric , is one of the three branches, or "species" (eidē), of rhetoric, as outlined in Aristotle 's Rhetoric , to be used to praise or blame, during ceremonies.

Origin and pronunciation [ edit ] The term's root has to do with display or show (δεῖξις deixis ). It is a literary or rhetorical term from the Greek ἐπιδεικτικός "for rhetorical effect".

[ 1 ] It is generally pronounced / ɛ p ɪ ˈ d aɪ k t ɪ k / .

[ 1 ] Characteristics [ edit ] This is rhetoric of ceremony , commemoration , declamation, demonstration, on the one hand, and of play, entertainment and display, including self-display.  It is also the rhetoric used at festivals, the Olympic games , state visits and other formal events like the opening and closing ceremonies, and celebrations of anniversaries of important events, including illustrious victories, births, deaths, and weddings.  Its major subject  is praise and blame, according to Aristotle in the limited space he provides for it in the Art of  Rhetoric (Freese translation).

This rhetoric deals with  goodness, excellence, nobility, shame,  honor, dishonor,  beauty, and matters  of virtue and vice. The  virtues  or the "components" of virtue  according to Aristotle,  were "justice, courage, self-control, magnificence, magnanimity, liberality, gentleness, practical and speculative wisdom"  or "reason". Vice  was the "contrary" of virtue.

In his book Rhetoric and Poetics in Antiquity , Jeffrey Walker claims that epideictic rhetoric predates the rhetoric of courts and politics, the study of which began in the 5th or 4th century BC with the Sophists . The other two kinds of public speech were deliberative or political speech, and forensic, judicial, or legal speech. Epideictic rhetoric  or style is according to Aristotle most appropriate for material that is written or read. In the Art of Rhetoric , Aristotle stated  that  "The epideictic style is especially suited to written compositions; for its function  is reading." (Book III, 12).

Aristotle on epideixis [ edit ] Main article: Rhetoric (Aristotle) Aristotle instructs that in creating a speech of praise or blame, the author should consider the attitude of their audience: Will they be moved to see his object of praise (be it a person or a thing) in a new light, or will he be wasting everyone's time by "preaching to the choir"? What values and behavior does this particular audience find praiseworthy? Whether the audience is sympathetic, hostile, or indifferent to their object of praise or blame determines how difficult the task is that lies before them. As Aristotle reminds the reader, "[F]or as Socrates used to say, it is not difficult to praise Athenians in Athens" ( Rhetoric , 1367b).

[ 2 ] According to Aristotle's conception of epideixis, “the present is the most important; for all speakers praise or blame in regard to existing qualities, but they often make use of other things, both reminding [the audience] of the past and projecting the course of the future” ( Rhet.

1358b). Epideixis is Aristotle's least favored and clearly defined topic.  Now considered to be the stuff of ceremonies with its exhortations, panegyrics , encomia , funeral orations and displays of oratorical prowess, epideictic rhetoric appears to most to be discourse less about depth and more attuned to style without substance. Still, the Art of Rhetoric is cited as an example of epideictic  work.

[ 3 ] Epideixis may not deserve the charge of lacking depth. The charge that this branch of rhetoric lacks depth can be countered by the recognition that it systematizes the successful attribution of value (to things, people, or concepts). Attributing value (whether in terms of "the good" and "the bad" or of "virtue" and "vice") to 1) perception, 2) emotions, 3) thought, 4) action, and 5) goals is the fundamental basis of relativistic conceptions of 1) aesthetics , 2) human character , 3) intelligence , 4) ethics , and 5) wisdom . For instance, applying epideixis to 'human perceptions' yields aesthetics, and its application to 'human action' yields fundamental relativistic ethics . Nevertheless, epideixis can always be reduced to simply the study of how best to preach the positive or negative characteristics of creatures, contraptions, concepts (etc.) to an audience. Epideictic rhetoric appeals to - and serves to sway - personal and cultural values, whereas pure deliberative and judicial rhetoric appeal to reason alone.

And, Lockwood,  also in The Reader's Figure ,  describes how readers are figured by their readings, and how readers figure their readings, and that readers can accept the readers' account, and forget  their  own account  of their present and past,   and that the rhetor's account is  produced by language.

[ clarification needed ] Modern authors on epideixis [ edit ] For centuries, epideictic oratory was a contested term, for it is clearly present in both forensic and deliberative forms, but it is difficult to clarify when it appears as a dominant discursive form. According to Chaïm Perelman and Lucy Olbrechts-Tyteca, “The speaker engaged in epidictic discourse is very close to being an educator . Since what he is going to say does not arouse controversy , since no immediate practical interest is ever involved, and there is no question of attacking or defending, but simply of promoting values that are shared in the community . . .” (52).

[ 4 ] Some of the defining terms for epideictic discourse include declamation, demonstration, praise or blame of the personal, and pleasing or inspiring to an audience.

Lawrence W. Rosenfield contends that epideictic practice surpasses mere praise and blame, and it is more than a showy display of rhetorical skill: “Epideictic’s understanding calls upon us to join with our community in giving thought to what we witness, and such thoughtful beholding in commemoration constitutes memorializing”.

[ 5 ] Epideictic rhetoric also calls for witnessing events, acknowledging temporality and contingency (140).  However, as Rosenfield suspects, it is an uncommon form of discourse because of the rarity of “its necessary constituents — openness of mind, felt reverence for reality, enthusiasm for life, the ability to congeal significant experiences in memorable language . . .” (150).

The philologist Ernst Curtius provides an account of its history, and many examples, in European Literature and the Latin Middle Ages . Praise and blame were "reduced" to praise by  Aristotle, he wrote; and recently another author called it a "blameless genre". He and Lockwood seem to say that what was in the past called rhetoric was later called literature. Curtius believed that misinterpretations  of medieval literature occur because so much of it is epideictic, and the epideictic is so alien to us today. During the Middle Ages it became a "school subject" as the sites for political activity diminished in the West, and as the centuries went on the word "praise" came to mean that which was written. During this period literature (more specifically histories, biographies, autobiographies, geographies) was called praise.

Ben Witherington III , writing from a biblical perspective on sacred exhortation, noted that "in general, epideictic rhetoric is highly emotional and meant to inspire the audience to appreciate something or someone, or at the other end of the spectrum, despise something or someone.  Epideictic rhetoric seeks to charm, or to cast odium." [ 6 ] Commendatory verse is a genre of epideictic writing.

[ 7 ] In the Renaissance and Early Modern European tradition, it glorified both its author and the person to whom it was addressed.

[ 8 ] Prefatory verses of this kind— e.g. those printed as preface to a book—became a recognised type of advertising in the book trade.

[ 9 ] In poetry [ edit ] A significant example of epideictic writing in Chinese poetry is the fu rhapsody that developed in the early Han dynasty .  This highly ornamented style was used for almost any subject imaginable, and often incorporated obscure language with extensive cataloguing of rare items, all in verse of varying rhyme and line length.

[ 10 ] See also [ edit ] Deictic – Words requiring context to understand their meaning Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets Deliberative rhetoric Forensic rhetoric Gratitude Praise Signifying Panegyric Encomium References [ edit ] ^ a b Merriam-Webster: epideictic ^ Aristotle.

On Rhetoric Trans. by George A. Kennedy. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1991.

^ Richard Lockwood, The Reader's Figure: Epideictic Rhetoric in. Plato, Aristotle, Bossuet, Racine and Pascal , Geneva: Droz, 1996.

^ Chaïm Perelman, Lucie Olbrechts-Tyteca, The new rhetoric: a treatise on argumentation , University of Notre Dame Press, 1969, p. 52 ^ "The Practical Celebration of Epideictic", in Eugene E. White (ed.), Rhetoric in Transition: Studies in the Nature and Uses of Rhetoric , University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 1980, p. 134.

^ Ben Witherington III, I & II Thessalonians: A Socio-Rhetorical Commentary - More Quotes on Epideixis Archived 2012-03-22 at the Wayback Machine ^ Quentin Skinner (1996).

Reason and Rhetoric in the Philosophy of Hobbes . Cambridge University Press. p. 57.

ISBN 978-0-521-55436-7 .

^ Marina Frasca-Spada; Nicholas Jardine (2000).

Books and the Sciences in History . Cambridge University Press. p. 121.

ISBN 978-0-521-65939-0 .

^ Ann Bermingham; John Brewer (2013).

The Consumption of Culture 1600-1800 . Routledge. p. 148.

ISBN 978-1-134-80840-3 .

^ David R. Knechtges , Wen Xuan: or Selections of Refined Literature . Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1984, Introduction.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Epideictic&oldid=1303194615 " Category : Rhetoric Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2009 Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 15:37 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Epideictic 9 languages Add topic

