Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Basis 2 Origin and usage 3 Criticism 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources Toggle the table of contents Five thousand years of Chinese civilization 1 language 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Assertion made about Chinese history Five thousand years of Chinese civilization Traditional Chinese 中華文明五千年 Simplified Chinese 中华文明五千年 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Zhōnghuá wénmíng wǔqiān nián Yue: Cantonese Jyutping Zung1waa4 man4ming4 ng5cin1 nin4 Five thousand years of Chinese civilization (or 5000 years of Chinese history [ 1 ] ) is an expression widely circulated since the late Qing dynasty that China has five thousand years of history or civilization. First disseminated by European missionaries in the 17th century, the expression is commonly found especially in the Chinese-speaking world by the early 20th century to show that China has a long-lasting history, although it is sometimes used by the governments and media as an instrument of Chinese nationalism .

[ 2 ] Even though the archaeological evidence for China's ancient history is not yet sufficient, the belief that the history of China is at least 5,000 years old, and that China is one of the Four Great Ancient Civilizations , is deeply ingrained in popular culture .

[ 3 ] Basis [ edit ] The Xia dynasty was the first hereditary dynasty of China to rule the Central Plains as recorded in traditional Chinese history books. According to the conclusion of the Xia–Shang–Zhou Chronology Project commissioned by China, the Xia dynasty began around 2070 BC. At the same time, most ancient Chinese documents placed the beginning of Chinese history in the era of the Five Emperors , and the Yellow Emperor , as the first of the five emperors, was nearly a thousand years before the Xia dynasty. According to the Records of Emperors and Kings written by Huangfu Mi of the Jin dynasty , it is believed that there were five emperors before Emperor Yao , which lasted 341 years in total, and the first year of the Yellow Emperor should be 2698 BC. According to this calculation, Chinese civilization has a history of nearly 5,000 years since the time of the Yellow Emperor. In addition, some scholars believe that before the Yellow Emperor, there was another era of a tribal leader named Yan Emperor , which became the beginning of Chinese civilization in the Chinese public consciousness (see Yan Huang Zisun ). In this way, whether it began with the Yellow Emperor or the Yan Emperor before it, "five thousand years of Chinese civilization" gradually became a conventional narrative among Chinese people, [ 4 ] implying that the Chinese civilization can be traced as an unbroken thread five thousands of years into the past.

Origin and usage [ edit ] The "China" section of the Manchu–Mongolian–Chinese Interlinear Trilingual Textbook published in the late Qing dynasty According to research, the first people to put forward the idea of a 5,000-year history of Chinese civilization were Jesuit missionaries in the early Qing dynasty . Around 1650s, during the reign of the Shunzhi Emperor of the Qing dynasty, Italian missionary Martino Martini was the first person to systematically introduce Chinese geography, culture, history and language to Europe . In his book Sinicæ Historiæ Decas Prima , he covered a wide range of Chinese subjects and was the first person to put forward the concept of five thousand years of Chinese history.

[ 5 ] By the late Qing dynasty, the concept of "5,000 years of Chinese culture" had been officially recognized and promoted by the Qing government . For example, the Chinese history textbook "Chinese History of the Present Dynasty" as approved by the Board of Education of the late Qing dynasty began with the statement "China was founded 5,000 years ago and has the longest history in the world. And its culture is the best among all the Eastern countries since ancient times...".

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Similarly, the "China" section of the trilingual textbook Manchu–Mongolian–Chinese Interlinear Trilingual Textbook published in 1909 during the late Qing dynasty also stated in three languages that "Our country China is located in the east of Asia, with mild climate, vast land and numerous people. Its culture was developed five thousand years ago, and it is the most famous ancient country on the earth...".

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] When Sun Yat-sen took office as the provisional President of the Republic of China in early 1912, following the 1911 Revolution , he sent delegated powers to all provinces, "taking the year 4609 of the Yellow Emperor as the first year of the Republic of China ", which was the first time in Chinese history that the "five thousand year history" theory was publicly acknowledged by a head of state of China. During this period, there was also a fever for the Yellow Emperor worship in China.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Since then, the concept of "five thousand years of Chinese civilization" has become more popular. Similar expressions such as "5000 years of Chinese history" have also emerged and become popular in China, including the People's Republic of China period. For example, the popular history books on Chinese history compiled by mainland Chinese writers Lin Handa and Cao Yuzhang were published under the title of " Five Thousand Years Up and Down ".

[ 5 ] In his political discourse, General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party Xi Jinping often highlights China's five thousand years of civilization.

[ 12 ] : 33 Xi frequently cites ancient historical examples in his political discourses, encouraging the Chinese people to develop "historical self-confidence" based on their "splendid civilization".

[ 12 ] : 32–33 Criticism [ edit ] Although "five thousand years of Chinese civilization" has become a common expression or narrative both inside and outside China, the concept is not universally accepted by scholars, especially in the Western academic world. Although there are many records about the Xia dynasty in traditional Chinese literature such as the Book of Documents , as they were not written contemporaneously and no recognized primary evidence of the existence of the Xia dynasty has yet been found, the historicity of the Xia dynasty unconfirmed. If counting from the beginning of the following Shang dynasty , China has approximately 3,700 years of recorded history.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Other archaeologists and scholars argue that instead of recorded history, the roots of Chinese civilization trace back to the various neolithic cultures of the Yellow and Yangtze River valleys. Many of these cultures, such as the Longshan and Liangzhu and Erlitou , are cited as examples of complex proto-states.

[ 15 ] Other scholars argue further that many of these ancient cultures were integrated into an embryonic "early cultural circle", therefore pushing the date back to 8,000 years.

[ 16 ] However, linking these cultures to the concept of a "Chinese civilization" remains contentious, as the concept of "civilization" is anachronistic to this era.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Chinese historiography Civilization state Cradle of civilization History of China Sinocentrism References [ edit ] ^ Kenneth James Hammond (2004).

From Yao to Mao: 5000 Years of Chinese History . Teaching Company Limited Partnership.

ISBN 9781565858695 .

^ "5,000 Years of History" . Retrieved 2024-06-20 .

^ Liu & He 2023 , p. v.

^ "为什么说"中华文明五千年"？" . Retrieved 2024-06-19 .

^ a b "很遗憾，第一个明确提出"中华五千年文明史"的，并不是中国人" .

www.sohu.com . Retrieved 2024-06-20 .

^ "清朝时期"中国"作为国家名称从传统到现代的发展" . Retrieved 2024-06-19 .

^ "中國歷史教科書（原名本朝史講義）第1页" . Retrieved 2024-06-19 .

^ 榮德 (1908).

满蒙漢三文合璧教科书 . pp.

39– 41.

^ "元朝和清朝是不是中国朝代？元清非中国历史的言论是哪来的？" .

Sohu . Retrieved 2024-08-16 .

^ Strand, David (2011).

An Unfinished Republic . University of California Press. p. 24.

ISBN 9780520948747 .

^ "徐宏：中国历史是五千年吗？" .

Sohu . Retrieved 2024-08-16 .

^ a b Shan, Patrick Fuliang (2024). "What Did the CCP Learn from the Past?". In Fang, Qiang; Li, Xiaobing (eds.).

China under Xi Jinping: A New Assessment .

Leiden University Press .

ISBN 9789087284411 .

^ "易中天称中华文明只有3700年，5000年文明不能再讲，他的话可信吗" . Retrieved 2024-08-16 .

^ "China's Five-Thousand Year History: Myth or Reality?" . 17 January 2022 . Retrieved 2024-08-16 .

^ "China's "5,000 Years of History": Fact or Fiction?" . Retrieved 2025-02-01 .

^ "中华文明的起源、形成及其长存之道" . Retrieved 2024-06-19 .

^ "China's "5,000 Years of History": Fact or Fiction?" . Retrieved 2025-02-01 .

Sources [ edit ] Liu, Q.; He, J. (2023).

A History of Un-fractured Chinese Civilization in Archaeological Interpretation . Springer Nature Singapore.

ISBN 978-981-19-3946-4 . Retrieved 2024-06-22 .

v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Five_thousand_years_of_Chinese_civilization&oldid=1298583148 " Categories : Historical controversies in China Historiography of China Ancient history Civilizations Chinese nationalism Chinese political catchphrases Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Chinese-language text This page was last edited on 3 July 2025, at 11:00 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Five thousand years of Chinese civilization 1 language Add topic

