Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Themes 2 Local and global 3 The threefold nature of social life 4 Land, labor and capital 5 Notes 6 External links Toggle External links subsection 6.1 Organizations 6.2 Books 6.3 Journals and articles Toggle the table of contents Associative economics 1 language 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Economic systems Major types Capitalism Socialism By ideology Associative Capitalist Corporate Democratic Laissez-faire Mercantilist Neo- Neoliberal Social market State Welfare Democratic Developmentalism Distributist Fascist Feminist Freiwirtschaft Georgist Green Nationalist Protectionist Religious Buddhist economics Christian Sabbath economics Islamic Socialist Communist Market socialist Mutualist Participatory Socialist market Socialist-oriented market State Syndicalist Social credit Traditionalist Corporatist Feudalism By coordination Closed (autarky) Decentralized Digital Dirigist Dual Gift Informal Market Mixed Natural Open Planned Robinson Crusoe Sharing Subsistence Underground Vertical archipelago Virtual By regional model Asian East Asian Chinese Singaporean Keralan European Anglo-Saxon German Nordic Dutch Rhenish Soviet Latin America Socialism of the 21st century Sectors Common ownership Private Public Voluntary Property types Collective ownership Commons ( Common ownership ) Private property State ownership Social ownership Transition Collectivization Communization Corporatization Demutualization Deregulation Expropriation Financialization Liberalization Marketization Municipalization Mutualization Nationalization Privatization Socialization Marxist Coordination Barter Market Free Open Regulated Planning In kind Cybernetics Indicative Material balancing Price Self-managed Peer-to-peer Sharing Open access Other types Attention Commons-based peer production Expeditionary Hunter-gatherer Inclusive Democracy Information Manorialism Newly industrialized Palace Plantation Plutonomy Post-capitalist Post-industrial Post-scarcity Resource-based Token Traditional Transition World Business portal Economics portal v t e Associative economics refers to the conscious cooperation of various components of the economy, such as labor and management or consumers, producers, and distributors.

The purpose of this co-operation would be to set priorities for what items should be produced and in what quantity, and how they should best be distributed. Further questions include the conditions and rights of workers, in particular their ability to be contributing agents to the development of the workplace. The goal of associative economics is to humanize economic relationships.

[ 1 ] The idea and term originates in the work of the philosopher and social thinker Rudolf Steiner .

[ 2 ] Themes [ edit ] Some of the themes central to/addressed by associative economics include the following: [ 3 ] how the three ways money can move (through gift, loan, or purchase) play roles in the economy; the factors of production and price formation; alternatives to pure market forces for setting prices; real and personal credit; land rights residing in the commonweal; balance of payments, banking in an associative economy.

The principles of associative economics have inspired community supported agriculture , ethical banking , social finance , community land trusts , and local currencies .

[ 3 ] Local and global [ edit ] Associative economics recognizes the central role of the individual entrepreneur and the inherent regulatory effect of face-to-face transactions between producers and consumers. At the same time, it sees that the economic organism has become truly global – has moved beyond national boundaries – so that when the economy is seen from a national perspective this is only partial and potentially harmful. Though within the context of a legislative and regulatory framework, the economy is best conducted not by the State but by those who are responsible for economic activities, potentially everyone working in association with one another rather than unto themselves. It has also been described as an "altruistic stakeholder-managed economy".

[ 4 ] This picture of an autonomously conducted economy belongs to Steiner's overall conception of the threefold nature of social life.

The threefold nature of social life [ edit ] In the early 20th century, Rudolf Steiner spoke in detail about the threefold nature of social life; not as an invention or theory, but as observable fact (also known as the "threefold social organism" or " social threefolding "). Central to this perception is the need for autonomy (separate yet conscious interaction) on the part of the three realms of social life: the economy, the rights life (including politics and law), and spiritual-cultural life, meaning the many worldviews that human beings cherish. Though historically premature, they see in the cry of the French Revolution ("Liberté, Égalité, Fraternité") three fundamental ideals of the modern human being, each of which can only find its proper place in one of these three spheres.

[ 5 ] Freedom and pluralism in the spiritual-cultural realm, including in education; uncoerced cooperation in the economic realm – where through the division of labor individuals come together to meet one another's needs; and democracy and equality in the political rights realm – where everyone comes together to sense and make agreements that are right for all.

Land, labor and capital [ edit ] Many things which today are considered commodities within the ‘free-market’ paradigm are differently understood within an associative paradigm. For example: land, labor, and capital. The so-called ‘factors of production’ are seen as 'factors of price formation', essentially matters of right which simply border the economic realm on all sides. However, in the associative paradigm, these 'factors of price formation' do not fall into the hands of the state.

Land is part of the commons. It is our common heritage, a resource that, in a wider sense, belongs to all (including future generations, but, again, not to the State), and which needs to be entrusted by voluntary groups and individuals to those whom such groups and individuals consider most capable of using it to meet current social needs.

[ 6 ] Steiner views labor as a form of "wagery," the remnant of serfdom and slavery (where once we sold our whole body, now we sell our ’labor power’). But it is also an economic untruth, an impossibility which we allow to persist: "[People] actually speak as though a kind of sale and purchase took place between the wage-earner who sells his labour and the man who buys it from him. But this sale and purchase is fictitious. It does not in reality take place... [In reality] it is values which are exchanged. The worker produces something directly; he delivers a product, and it is this product which the enterpriser [Unternehmer] really buys from him. In actual fact, down to the last farthing, the enterpriser pays for the products which the workers deliver to him. It is time we began to see these things in their right light." [ 2 ] Capital creates value by the application of intelligence to labor. It is the human spirit manifest in the economic process. An interesting analysis of this viewpoint is provided by Folkert Wilken in his book The Liberation of Capital .

[ 7 ] Often taking the form of money, it further frees and empowers the entrepreneur to apply their intelligence. The artist Joseph Beuys famously expressed this as "Art=Capital" (Kunst=Kapital), or alternatively, for his art piece in the 'Luna Luna' art fair in 1987, "Money is not CAPITAL at all. CAPACITY is CAPITAL." [ 8 ] Capital is therefore intimately linked to the individual, although it also owes much to our common heritage, especially the way we are educated.

In an associative economy, therefore, land, labor, and capital are understood as rights phenomena. Some interpret this to mean they are held in trust on behalf of the community (but not held by the state) and consequently managed by those with both the desire and capacity, but how precisely this idea is given practical expression is one of the key, and liveliest, areas of research in associative economics.

Land trusts, which remove land from the private market, but also keep it out of the hands of the state, have been developed for the protection of the environment and in order to make home ownership more accessible to low income people.

As for labor, many different kinds of efforts have been made to treat laborers not as a mere company expense or a mere factor of production, but as partners and associates in the business.  That entails profit sharing, and a number of profound changes in the way workers are involved in companies.

As for capital, the associative idea broadly speaking is that the buildup of capital is a social phenomenon due to many more stakeholders than are acknowledged under traditional capitalism.  As a social phenomenon, accumulations of capital by a company should be administered in a way that reflects social consideration among many stakeholders:  Not just investors, but workers, the local and to some extent global community and environment, and independent educational institutions, are the sources of profits and profitable ideas and capital, and should have some share in the company and in its profits.  An associative company would be set up so that it cannot be sold off by investors, since the company is not merely the creation of investors.  But many different arrangements are possible.

One example is the Mondragon Corporation (started by Catholic priest José Mª Arizmendiarrieta, who was not associated with Rudolf Steiner, but whose economic views overlapped in important ways with Steiner's economic views). By the end of 2011, the Mondragon Corporation [ 9 ] employed 83,869 people working in 256 companies [ 10 ] in four areas of activity: finance, industry, retail and knowledge.

In an associative enterprise, distant investors, if allowed to invest at all, might not be given any voting rights, or the ability to take control of the company and sell it unilaterally without regard to other stakeholders.  An emphasis might be placed on getting investment capital from a company's workers, who could be asked to invest part of their earnings or profits in a company investment fund to help expand the company and develop new offshoots.  When a worker leaves the company, he withdraws his invested capital, plus its earnings and interest, and some sort of pension given enough years of service.  The company is set up so that no one can amass company shares, and thus the company itself cannot be sold and remains a resource for the community, which after all has been a part of the company's success.  The company, while for-profit, might be held in trust by a non-profit board, which ensures the company remains as a resource for the community.  The broad guiding lines of associative economic enterprise are that economic life should not be owned or managed by the state (which however of course legislates and makes sure that laws and regulations are followed by companies, including basic rights for workers), nor should economic life be owned or managed merely by those who have lots of capital to invest; ownership should be spread among all the stakeholders, with an emphasis on those who work in a company, the local community, and independent schools.  Management of the company should be determined not by the state, but by talent, know-how, and success: i.e., whoever can manage the company profitably and for the benefit of all stakeholders, might be selected in various ways by various stakeholders, depending on circumstances.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Associative Economics , Goetheanum ^ a b Steiner, Rudolf Economics – The World As One Economy ^ a b Lamb, Gary.

Associative Economics: spiritual activity for the common good (Ghent, NY: AWSNA. 2010) 20, 145 ^ Karp, Robert.

Toward an Associative Economy in the Sustainable Food and Farming Movement (New Spirit Ventures. 2007) ^ Steiner, Rudolf.

Towards Social Renewal (Great Barrington: SteinerBooks. 1999) ^ in this, Steiner corroborates many notable thinkers including Chief Seattle Letter to President Pierce Archived 2011-04-14 at the Wayback Machine , 1855 and Thomas Jefferson ). Jefferson, Thomas "The Earth Belongs to the Living" – a letter to James Madison, Paris, 9/6/1789 ^ Wilken, Folkert.

The Liberation of Capital (London, England; George Allen & Unwin. 1982) ^ Beuys, Joseph.

What is Money?

(Forest Row, England; Clearview. 2010) 26 ^ "Yes, there is an alternative to capitalism: Mondragon shows the way | Richard Wolff" .

The Guardian . 2012-06-24.

Archived from the original on 2023-06-04.

^ "OpenIDEO - How might we inspire and enable communities to take more initiative in making their local environments better? - Inspiration - Learning from of Mondragón Corporation - Redesigning Work and Living" . Archived from the original on 2013-02-20 . Retrieved 2013-02-04 .

External links [ edit ] Organizations [ edit ] Centre for Associative Economics RSF Social Finance Books [ edit ] Rudolf Steiner, World Economy Rudolf Steiner, Towards Social Renewal "Rudolf Steiner, Economist / Rudolf Steiner and Christopher Houghton Budd" [ permanent dead link ] "A Human Response to Globalisation / Marc Desaules" [ permanent dead link ] "The Metamorphosis of Capitalism / Christopher Houghton Budd" [ permanent dead link ] Joseph Beuys, What is Money?

Gary Lamb, Associative Economics: Spiritual Activity for the Common Good John Bloom, The Genius of Money Richard Masters, Rudolf Steiner and Social Reform: Threefolding and Other Proposals Journals and articles [ edit ] Rudolf Steiner, "The International Economy and the Threefold Social Order" from the newspaper The Social Future Owen Barfield, "The Relation Between the Economics of C. H. Douglas and Those of Rudolf Steiner" Robert Karp, "Toward an Associative Economy in the Sustainable Food and Farming Movement" Sarah Hearn, "Money: Reclaiming the Power to Create" Gary Lamb, "The Transformation of the Competitive Market and Capitalism: A Necessity of the Twenty-First Century" Guido Giacomo Preparata, "Perishable Money in a Threefold Commonwealth: Rudolf Steiner and the Social Economics of an Anarchist Utopia." Review of Radical Economics 38/4 (Fall 2006) Associate!

a monthly digest by the Centre for Associative Economics v t e Anthroposophy Founding board members of the General Anthroposophical Society Rudolf Steiner Albert Steffen Marie Steiner-von Sivers Elisabeth Vreede Gunther Wachsmuth Ita Wegman Anthroposophists Hilma af Klint Henri Bortoft Georg Kühlewind Ehrenfried Pfeiffer Theodor Schwenk Emil Bock Bernard Lievegoed Edith Maryon Sergei O. Prokofieff Peter Selg Jens Bjørneboe Aasmund Brynildsen Daniel Nicol Dunlop Zviad Gamsakhurdia John Fentress Gardner Walter Burley Griffin Karl König Robert A. McDermott Arthur Zajonc Douglas M. Sloan Marjorie Spock Walter Johannes Stein Ernst Lehrs Herbert Witzenmann Massimo Scaligero Ross Rentea Rudolf Hauschka Oskar Schmiedel Hermann Poppelbaum Alfred Meebold Wilhelm Rath Herbert Hahn Francis Edmunds Thomas Weihs Cecil Harwood Daphne Olivier Marguerite Lundgren Valborg Werbeck-Svärdström Wilhelm Ernst Barkhoff John Davy Jakob Streit Alfred Rexroth Ernst Weissert Michael Henry Wilson Margaret Cross Fried Geuter Arnold Freeman Rudi Lissau Margaret Bennell Edith Rigby Bertram Keightley Arild Rosenkrantz Eileen Hutchins Eleanor Merry Paul Nordoff Clive Robbins Violetta Plincke Hans Schauder George Adams Kaufmann Liane Collot d'Herbois Egil Tynæs Else Klink Carlo Pietzner Marta Fuchs Wolfgang Schad Julian Sleigh Botho Sigwart zu Eulenburg Johannes Tautz Vydūnas Willem Zeylmans van Emmichoven Notable supporters Saul Bellow Owen Barfield Andrei Bely Joseph Beuys Russell Davenport Wassily Kandinsky Selma Lagerlöf Albert Schweitzer Andrei Tarkovsky Bruno Walter Ibrahim Abouleish Nicanor Perlas Jacques Lusseyran Millicent Mackenzie Margaret McMillan Cultural influences Anthroposophic medicine Biodynamic agriculture Camphill Movement Eurythmy Threefold social order The Christian Community Waldorf education Institutions and publications Anthroposophical Society in America Associação Comunitária Monte Azul Demeter International General Anthroposophical Society GLS Bank Goetheanum Harduf SEKEM Triodos Bank Weleda Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Associative_economics&oldid=1292356206 " Categories : Anthroposophy Rudolf Steiner Schools of economic thought Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from October 2016 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 26 May 2025, at 15:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Associative economics 1 language Add topic

