Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Pre-college 3 College and graduate studies 4 Marriages 5 Patronage and support 6 Academic appointments 7 Anthropological and folkloric fieldwork 8 Death and legacy 9 Literary career Toggle Literary career subsection 9.1 1930s 9.2 1940s and 1950s 9.3 Posthumous publications 9.4 Spiritual views 9.5 Public obscurity 9.6 Posthumous recognition 10 Political views 11 Criticism Toggle Criticism subsection 11.1 Integration 11.2 Research and representation 12 Selected bibliography 13 Film, television, and radio 14 See also 15 References Toggle References subsection 15.1 Notes 15.2 Citations 16 Further reading 17 External links Toggle External links subsection 17.1 Libraries and archives 17.2 Open-access repositories Toggle the table of contents Zora Neale Hurston 51 languages العربية Aragonés Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Bikol Central Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Fulfulde Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն Hrvatski Igbo Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Kiswahili Кыргызча Magyar Македонски മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Polski Português Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog తెలుగు Türkçe Українська Yorùbá 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American author, anthropologist, filmmaker (1891–1960) Zora Neale Hurston Hurston in 1946 Born ( 1891-01-07 ) January 7, 1891 Notasulga, Alabama , U.S.

Died January 28, 1960 (1960-01-28) (aged 69) Fort Pierce, Florida , U.S.

Education Howard University Barnard College ( BA ) Columbia University Occupations Author anthropologist filmmaker Spouses Herbert Sheen ​ ​ ( m.

1927; div.

1931) ​ Albert Price ​ ​ ( m.

1939; div.

1943) ​ James Howell Pitts ​ ​ ( m.

1944; div.

1944) ​ Writing career Period c.

1925 –1950 Literary movement The Harlem Renaissance Notable works Mules and Men , Their Eyes Were Watching God Signature Website zoranealehurston .com Zora Neale Hurston (January 7, 1891 [ 1 ] : 17 [ 2 ] : 5 – January 28, 1960) was an American writer, anthropologist , folklorist , and documentary filmmaker . She portrayed racial struggles in the early-20th-century American South and published research on Hoodoo and Caribbean Vodou .

[ 3 ] The most popular of her four novels is Their Eyes Were Watching God , published in 1937. She also wrote more than 50 short stories, plays, an autobiography, ethnographies, and many essays.

Hurston was born in Notasulga, Alabama , and moved with her family to Eatonville, Florida , in 1894. She later used Eatonville as the setting for many of her stories.
In her early career, Hurston conducted anthropological and ethnographic research as a scholar at Barnard College and Columbia University .

[ 4 ] She had an interest in African-American and Caribbean folklore, and how these contributed to the community's identity.

She also wrote about contemporary issues in the black community and became a central figure of the Harlem Renaissance . Her short satires, drawing from the African-American experience and racial division, were published in anthologies such as The New Negro and Fire!!

[ 5 ] After moving back to Florida, Hurston wrote and published her literary anthology on African-American folklore in North Florida, Mules and Men (1935), and her first three novels: Jonah's Gourd Vine (1934); Their Eyes Were Watching God (1937); and Moses, Man of the Mountain (1939).

[ 6 ] Also published during this time was Tell My Horse: Voodoo and Life in Haiti and Jamaica (1938), documenting her research on rituals in Jamaica and Haiti.

Hurston's works concerned both the African-American experience and her struggles as an African-American woman. Her novels went relatively unrecognized by the literary world for decades. In 1975, fifteen years after Hurston's death, interest in her work was revived after author Alice Walker published an article, "In Search of Zora Neale Hurston" (later retitled "Looking for Zora"), in Ms.

magazine.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] In 2001, Hurston's manuscript Every Tongue Got to Confess , a collection of folktales gathered in the 1920s, was published after being discovered in the Smithsonian archives. Her nonfiction book Barracoon: The Story of the Last "Black Cargo" (2018), about the life of Cudjoe Lewis (Kossola), one of the last survivors of slaves brought illegally to the US in 1860, was also published posthumously.

Early life [ edit ] Zora Neale Hurston was born in 1891, the fifth of eight children of John Hurston and Lucy Ann Hurston ( née Potts). All four of her grandparents had been born into slavery. Her father was a Baptist preacher and sharecropper , who later became a carpenter, and her mother was a school teacher. She was born in Notasulga, Alabama , on January 7, 1891. This was her father's hometown and her paternal grandfather was the preacher of a Baptist church.

[ 1 ] : 14–17, 439–440 [ 2 ] : 8 When she was three, her family moved to Eatonville, Florida . In 1887, it was one of the first all- black towns incorporated in the United States.

[ 9 ] Hurston said that Eatonville was "home" to her, as she was so young when she moved there. Sometimes she claimed it as her birthplace.

[ 1 ] A few years later in 1897, her father was elected as mayor of the town. In 1902 he was called to serve as minister of its largest church, Macedonia Missionary Baptist.

In 1901, some northern school teachers visited Eatonville and gave Hurston several books that opened her mind to literature. She later described this personal literary awakening as a kind of "birth".

[ 10 ] : 3–4 As an adult, Hurston often used Eatonville as a setting in her stories—it was a place where African Americans could live as they desired, independent of white society. Hurston grew up in Eatonville and described the experience in her 1928 essay, " How It Feels To Be Colored Me ". Eatonville now holds an annual "Zora! Festival" in her honor.

[ 11 ] Hurston's mother died in 1904. Her father married Mattie Moge in 1905.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] This was considered scandalous, as it was rumored that he had had sexual relations with Moge before his first wife's death.

[ 1 ] : 52 Hurston's father and stepmother sent her to a Baptist boarding school in Jacksonville, Florida , but she was dismissed after her parents stopped paying her tuition.

Pre-college [ edit ] In 1916, Hurston was employed as a maid by the lead singer of a touring Gilbert & Sullivan theatrical company.

[ 12 ] [ 14 ] In 1917, she resumed her formal education by attending night school at Morgan Academy, now known as Morgan State University , a historically black college in Baltimore , Maryland .

[ 15 ] [ 16 ] At this time, to qualify for a free high-school education, the 26-year-old Hurston began claiming 1901 as her year of birth.

[ 12 ] [ 17 ] She graduated from the high school in 1918.

[ 18 ] College and graduate studies [ edit ] In college, Hurston learned how to view life through an anthropological lens apart from Eatonville. One of her main goals was to show similarities between ethnicities.

[ 19 ] In 1918, Hurston began her studies at Howard University , a historically black college in Washington, DC.  She was a member of the Zeta Phi Beta sorority, founded by and for black women. She was also the first in her family to attend college, meaning that she was a first-generation college student .

[ 20 ] While at Howard, Hurston co-founded The Hilltop , the university's student newspaper.

[ 21 ] She took courses in Spanish , English , Greek , and public speaking , and earned an associate degree in 1920.

[ 10 ] : 4 In 1921, she wrote a short story, "John Redding Goes to Sea", that qualified her to become a member of Alain Locke 's literary club, The Stylus.

Before leaving Howard in 1924, Hurston helped publish the inaugural issue of the school newspaper.

[ 22 ] She also joined the Howard literary club, where she published her first two short stories. Despite this success, Hurston paid for school by working as a manicurist in the evenings [ 22 ] In 1925 Hurston was offered a scholarship by Barnard trustee Annie Nathan Meyer [ 23 ] to Barnard College of Columbia University . She was the sole Black student in this women's college.

[ 24 ] : 210 Hurston assisted Meyer in crafting the play Black Souls ; which is considered one of the first " lynching dramas" written by a white woman.

[ 25 ] She conducted ethnographic research with anthropologist Franz Boas of Columbia University and later studied with him as a graduate student. She also worked with Ruth Benedict and fellow anthropology student Margaret Mead .

[ 26 ] Hurston received her B.A. in anthropology in 1928.

[ 27 ] Documentary footage from Hurston's travels in the South Alain Locke recommended Hurston to Charlotte Osgood Mason , a philanthropist and literary patron who had supported Locke and other African-American authors, such as Langston Hughes ; however, she also tried to direct their work. Mason became interested in Hurston's work and supported her travel in the South for research from 1927 to 1932 [ 1 ] : 157 with a stipend of $200 per month. In return, she wanted Hurston to give her all the material she collected about Negro music , folklore , literature, hoodoo , and other forms of culture. Hurston's 1927-1932 travel in the South was also backed by the " Association for the Study of Negro Life " (nowadays known as the "Association for the Study of African American Life and History") and the " American Folklore Society ", which collectively granted her with up to $1,400.

[ 28 ] At the same time, Hurston needed to satisfy Boas as her academic adviser. Boas was a cultural relativist who wanted to overturn ideas about ranking cultures in a hierarchy of values.

[ 29 ] After graduating from Barnard, Hurston spent two years as a graduate student in anthropology, working with Boas at Columbia University.

[ 27 ] Living in Harlem in the 1920s, Hurston befriended writers including Langston Hughes and Countee Cullen . Her apartment, according to some accounts, was a popular spot for social gatherings. Around this time, Hurston had a few literary successes, placing in short-story and playwriting contests in Opportunity: A Journal of Negro Life , published by the National Urban League .

Marriages [ edit ] In 1927, Hurston married Herbert Sheen, a jazz musician and a former teacher at Howard. He later went to medical school and became a physician. Their marriage ended in 1931.

In 1935, Hurston was involved with Percy Punter, a graduate student at Columbia University. He inspired the character of Tea Cake in Their Eyes Were Watching God .

[ 30 ] [ 13 ] In 1939, while Hurston was working for the WPA in Florida, she married Albert Price. They separated after a few months, but did not divorce until 1943.

[ 24 ] : 211 The following year, Hurston married James Howell Pitts of Cleveland. That marriage, too, lasted less than a year.

[ 2 ] : 27 [ 1 ] : 373 Hurston twice lived in a cottage in Eau Gallie, Florida : in 1929 and again in 1951.

[ 31 ] Patronage and support [ edit ] When foundation grants ended during the Great Depression , Hurston and her friend Langston Hughes both relied on the patronage of philanthropist Charlotte Osgood Mason , a white literary patron.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] During the 1930s, Hurston was a resident of Westfield, New Jersey , a suburb of New York, where her friend Hughes was among her neighbors.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] Academic appointments [ edit ] In 1934, Hurston established a school of dramatic arts "based on pure Negro expression" at Bethune-Cookman College, a historically black college in Daytona Beach, Florida later to be known as Bethune-Cookman University .

[ 35 ] In 1956, Hurston received the Bethune-Cookman College Award for Education and Human Relations in recognition of her achievements. The English Department at Bethune-Cookman College remains dedicated to preserving her cultural legacy.

[ 36 ] For the 1939–1940 academic year, Hurston joined the Drama Department of the North Carolina College for Negroes (now known as North Carolina Central University ) in Durham .

[ 37 ] At the beginning of her tenure, Hurston published a new book, Moses, Man of the Mountain . She also separated from her second husband, Albert Price, at this time, although their divorce would not be finalized until 1943 (see Marriages section).

During her time in the Durham area, Hurston primarily participated in a variety of thespian activities, marking her lasting interest in Black folkloric theater and drama. On October 7, 1939, Hurston addressed the Carolina Dramatic Association, remarking that "our drama must be like us or it doesn't exist... I want to build the drama of North Carolina out of ourselves." [ 38 ] She noted that her students were largely supportive of this endeavor because many of the plays performed and viewed by them previously were not relatable to their own experiences and instead prioritized a "highbrow" view of society.

[ 38 ] She taught various courses at NCCU, but she also studied informally at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill with Pulitzer Prize-winning playwright Paul Green . She was also mentored by Frederick H. Koch , another faculty member at UNC and the founder of the Carolina Playmakers . She initially met both writers at the inaugural 1934 National Folk Festival in St. Louis, Missouri .

[ 39 ] She was persuaded by them to move to North Carolina for the prospect of collaboration with UNC faculty and students, [ 37 ] [ 39 ] despite the fact that UNC was still segregated and did not begin formally admitting Black students until 1951.

[ 40 ] Because her formal participation was limited, Hurston became a "secret student", participating in coursework and theater groups without enrolling in UNC.

[ 37 ] [ 41 ] The Daily Tar Heel , UNC'S student newspaper, even named Hurston as a student in one such course, which focused on radio production.

[ 42 ] Hurston left NCCU after one year to pursue a new fieldwork project in South Carolina. It is likely that her departure was partially due to her poor relationship with NCCU's president, James E. Shepard , to which she briefly alluded in her 1942 autobiography, Dust Tracks on a Road .

[ 43 ] To Shepard, Hurston's attire and lifestyle choices were inappropriate for an unmarried woman, leading to many disagreements; her severance was rumored to be "the only thing that [they] could apparently agree upon." [ 44 ] In 2015, UNC students called for Saunders Hall (named after former Ku Klux Klan leader William L. Saunders ) to be renamed "Hurston Hall" in recognition of Hurston's contributions to academic life in the Durham-Chapel Hill area.

[ 45 ] UNC Trustees controversially voted to name the building Carolina Hall instead, but it is still known informally by many students as Hurston Hall.

[ 46 ] Despite the brief nature of her residency in North Carolina, Hurston is still honored at a variety of events in the area, including readings of her work.

[ 47 ] In 2024, Bree L. Davis received funding from the Southern Documentary Fund to produce a podcast documenting Hurston's experiences in the Durham-Chapel Hill area (forthcoming).

[ 48 ] Anthropological and folkloric fieldwork [ edit ] Hurston traveled extensively in the Caribbean and the American South and immersed herself in local cultural practices to conduct her anthropological research. Based on her work in the South, sponsored from 1928 to 1932 by Charlotte Osgood Mason , a wealthy philanthropist, Hurston wrote Mules and Men in 1935.

[ 1 ] : 157 She was researching lumber camps in north Florida and commented on the practice of white men in power taking black women as concubines , including having them bear children. This practice later was referred to as " paramour rights ", based on the men's power under racial segregation and related to practices during slavery times. The book also includes much folklore. Hurston drew from this material as well in the fictional treatment she developed for her novels such as Jonah's Gourd Vine (1934).

[ 1 ] : 246–247 In 1935, Hurston traveled to Georgia and Florida with Alan Lomax and Mary Elizabeth Barnicle for research on African-American song traditions and their relationship to slave and African antecedent music. She was tasked with selecting the geographic areas and contacting the research subjects.

[ 49 ] [ failed verification ] Hurston playing a hountar, or mama drum, 1937 In 1936 and 1937, Hurston traveled to Jamaica and Haiti for research, with support from the Guggenheim Foundation . She drew from this research for Tell My Horse (1938), a genre-defying book that mixes anthropology, folklore, and personal narrative.

[ 50 ] In 1938 and 1939, Hurston worked for the Federal Writers’ Project (FWP) , part of the Works Progress Administration .

[ 1 ] Hired for her experience as a writer and folklorist, she gathered information to add to Florida's historical and cultural collection.

[ 1 ] Music makes up a significant portion of the material she collected for the FWP, [ 51 ] including: “Crow Dance,” a Bahamian-American dance song with West African roots; [ 52 ] the Gullah Geechee song, “Oh, the Buford Boat Done Come”; [ 53 ] and the folk song “ John Henry ,” performed by Gabriel Brown .

[ 54 ] From May 1947 to February 1948, Hurston lived in Honduras , in the north coastal town of Puerto Cortés . She had some hopes of locating either Mayan ruins or vestiges of an undiscovered civilization.

[ 1 ] : 375–387 While in Puerto Cortés, she wrote much of Seraph on the Suwanee , set in Florida. Hurston expressed interest in the polyethnic nature of the population in the region (many, such as the Miskito Zambu and Garifuna , were of mixed African and indigenous ancestry and had developed creole cultures).

Hurston in Florida on an anthropological research trip, 1935 During her last decade, Hurston worked as a freelance writer for magazines and newspapers. In the fall of 1952, she was contacted by Sam Nunn , editor of the Pittsburgh Courier , to go to Florida to cover the murder trial of Ruby McCollum . McCollum was charged with murdering the white Dr. C. Leroy Adams, who was also a state politician. McCollum said he had forced her to have sex and bear his child.

[ 55 ] Hurston recalled what she had seen of white male sexual dominance in the lumber camps in North Florida, and discussed it with Nunn. They both thought the case might be about such "paramour rights", and wanted to "expose it to a national audience".

[ 55 ] Upon reaching Live Oak, Hurston was surprised not only by the gag order the judge in the trial placed on the defense but by her inability to get residents in town to talk about the case; both blacks and whites were silent. She believed that might have been related to Dr. Adams' alleged involvement in the gambling operation of Ruby's husband Sam McCollum. Her articles were published by the newspaper during the trial. Ruby McCollum was convicted by an all-male, all-white jury , and sentenced to death. Hurston had a special assignment to write a serialized account, The Life Story of Ruby McCollum , over three months in 1953 in the newspaper.

[ 56 ] Her part was ended abruptly when she and Nunn disagreed about her pay, and she left.

[ 55 ] Unable to pay independently to return for the appeal and second trial, Hurston contacted journalist William Bradford Huie , with whom she had worked at The American Mercury , to try to interest him in the case. He covered the appeal and second trial, and also developed material from a background investigation. Hurston shared her material with him from the first trial, but he acknowledged her only briefly in his book, Ruby McCollum: Woman in the Suwannee Jail (1956), which became a bestseller.

[ 57 ] Hurston celebrated that "McCollum's testimony in her own defense marked the first time that a woman of African-American descent was allowed to testify as to the paternity of her child by a white man. Hurston firmly believed that Ruby McCollum's testimony sounded the death toll of 'paramour rights' in the Segregationist South." [ 55 ] Among other positions, Hurston later worked at the Pan American World Airways Technical Library at Patrick Air Force Base in 1956. She was fired in 1957 for being "too well-educated" for her job.

[ 58 ] She moved to Fort Pierce, Florida . Taking jobs where she could find them, Hurston worked occasionally as a substitute teacher. At age 60, Hurston had to fight "to make ends meet" with the help of public assistance. At one point she worked as a maid on Miami Beach's Rivo Alto Island .

Death and legacy [ edit ] During a period of financial and medical difficulties, Hurston was forced to enter St. Lucie County Welfare Home, where she had a stroke . She died of hypertensive heart disease on January 28, 1960, and was buried at the Garden of Heavenly Rest in Fort Pierce, Florida. Her remains were in an unmarked grave until 1973.

[ 59 ] Novelist Alice Walker and fellow Hurston scholar Charlotte D. Hunt found an unmarked grave in 1997 in the general area where Hurston had been buried; they decided to mark it as hers.

[ 60 ] Walker commissioned a gray marker inscribed with "ZORA NEALE HURSTON / A GENIUS OF THE SOUTH / NOVELIST FOLKLORIST / ANTHROPOLOGIST / 1901–1960." [ 61 ] The line "a genius of the south" is from Jean Toomer 's poem, "Georgia Dusk", which appears in his book Cane .

[ 61 ] Hurston was born in 1891, not 1901.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] After Hurston's death, a yardman, who had been told to clean the house, was burning Hurston's papers and belongings. A law officer and friend, Patrick DuVal, passing by the house where she had lived, stopped and put out the fire, thus saving an invaluable collection of literary documents.

[ 62 ] For two years, he stored them on his covered porch until he and a group of Hurston's friends could find an archive to take the material.

[ 63 ] The nucleus of this collection was given to the University of Florida libraries in 1961 by Mrs. Marjorie Silver, a friend, and neighbor of Hurston. Within the collection is a manuscript and photograph of Seraph on the Suwanee and an unpublished biography of Herod the Great . Luckily, she donated some of her manuscripts to the James Weldon Johnson Collection of Yale University .

[ 64 ] Other materials were donated in 1970 and 1971 by Frances Grover, daughter of E. O. Grover, a Rollins College professor and long-time friend of Hurston. In 1979, Stetson Kennedy of Jacksonville, who knew Hurston through his work with the Federal Writers' Project , added additional papers. (Zora Neale Hurston Papers, University of Florida Smathers Libraries, August 2008).

Literary career [ edit ] When Hurston arrived in New York City in 1925, the Harlem Renaissance was at its zenith , and she soon became one of the writers at its center. Shortly before she entered Barnard, Hurston's short story "Spunk" was selected for The New Negro , a landmark anthology of fiction, poetry, and essays focusing on African and African-American art and literature.

[ 65 ] In 1926, a group of young black writers including Hurston, Langston Hughes, and Wallace Thurman , calling themselves the Niggerati , produced a literary magazine called Fire!!

that featured many of the young artists and writers of the Harlem Renaissance.

In 1927, Hurston traveled to the Deep South to collect African-American folk tales. She also interviewed Cudjoe Kazzola Lewis , of Africatown, Alabama , who was the last known survivor of the enslaved Africans carried aboard Clotilda , an illegal slave ship that had entered the US in 1860, and thus the last known person to have been transported in the Transatlantic slave trade . The next year she published the article "Cudjoe's Own Story of the Last African Slaver" (1928). According to her biographer Robert E. Hemenway , this piece largely plagiarized the work of Emma Langdon Roche , [ 66 ] an Alabama writer who wrote about Lewis in a 1914 book. Hurston did add new information about daily life in Lewis' home village of Bantè .

[ 67 ] Hurston intended to publish a collection of several hundred folk tales from her field studies in the South. She wanted to have them be as close to the original as possible but struggled to balance the expectations of her academic adviser, Franz Boas, and her patron, Charlotte Osgood Mason. This manuscript was not published at the time. A copy was later found at the Smithsonian archives among the papers of anthropologist William Duncan Strong , a friend of Boas. Hurston's Negro Folk-tales from the Gulf States was published posthumously in 2001 as Every Tongue Got to Confess.

[ 68 ] In 1928, Hurston returned to Alabama with additional resources; she conducted more interviews with Lewis, took photographs of him and others in the community, and recorded the only known film footage of him—an African who had been trafficked to the United States through the slave trade. Based on this material, she wrote a manuscript, Barracoon , completing it in 1931. Hemenway described it as "a highly dramatic, semifictionalized narrative intended for the popular reader." [ 69 ] [ 70 ] It has also been described as a "testimonial text", more in the style of other anthropological studies since the late 20th century.

After this round of interviews, Hurston's literary patron, philanthropist Charlotte Osgood Mason, learned of Lewis and began to send him money for his support.

[ 70 ] Lewis was also interviewed by journalists for local and national publications.

[ 71 ] Hurston's manuscript Barracoon was eventually published posthumously on May 8, 2018.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] " Barracoon ", or barracks in Spanish, is where captured Africans were temporarily imprisoned before being shipped abroad.

[ 73 ] In 1929, Hurston moved to Eau Gallie, Florida, where she wrote Mules and Men .

It was published in 1935.

[ 74 ] 1930s [ edit ] By the mid-1930s, Hurston had published several short stories and the critically acclaimed Mules and Men (1935), a groundbreaking work of "literary anthropology" documenting African-American folklore from timber camps in North Florida. In 1930, she collaborated with Langston Hughes on Mule Bone: A Comedy of Negro Life , a play that they never staged. Their collaboration caused their friendship to fall apart.

[ 75 ] The play was first staged in 1991.

[ 27 ] Hurston adapted her anthropological work for the performing arts. Her folk revue The Great Day featured authentic African song and dance, and premiered at the John Golden Theatre in New York in January 1932.

[ 76 ] Despite positive reviews, it had only one performance.  The Broadway debut left Hurston in $600 worth of debt. No producers wanted to move forward with a full run of the show.

During the 1930s, Zora Neale Hurston produced two more musical revues, From Sun to Sun, which was a revised adaptation of The Great Day, and Singing Steel.

Hurston had a strong belief that folklore should be dramatized.

Hurston's first three novels were published in the 1930s: Jonah's Gourd Vine (1934); Their Eyes Were Watching God (1937), written during her fieldwork in Haiti and considered her masterwork; and Moses, Man of the Mountain (1939).

In 1937, Hurston was awarded a Guggenheim Fellowship to conduct ethnographic research in Jamaica and Haiti.

[ 77 ] Tell My Horse (1938) documents her account of her fieldwork studying spiritual and cultural rituals in Jamaica and vodoun in Haiti.

1940s and 1950s [ edit ] Neale Hurston in 1938, photographed by Carl Van Vechten In the 1940s, Hurston's work was published in such periodicals as The American Mercury and The Saturday Evening Post . Her last published novel, Seraph on the Suwanee , notable principally for its focus on white characters, was published in 1948. It explores images of " white trash " women. Jackson (2000) argues that Hurston's meditation on abjection, waste, and the construction of class and gender identities among poor whites reflects the eugenics discourses of the 1920s.

[ 78 ] In 1952, Hurston was assigned by the Pittsburgh Courier to cover the small-town murder trial of Ruby McCollum, the prosperous black wife of the local bolita racketeer, who had killed a racist white doctor. She also contributed to Ruby McCollum: Woman in the Suwannee Jail (1956), a book by journalist and civil rights advocate William Bradford Huie .

Posthumous publications [ edit ] Hurston's manuscript Every Tongue Got to Confess (2001), a collection of folktales gathered in the 1920s, was published posthumously after being discovered in Smithsonian archives.

[ 68 ] In 2008, The Library of America selected excerpts from Ruby McCollum: Woman in the Suwannee Jail (1956), to which Hurston had contributed, for inclusion in its two-century retrospective of American true crime writing.

Hurston's nonfiction book Barracoon was published in 2018.

[ 73 ] A barracoon is a type of barracks where slaves were imprisoned before being taken overseas.

[ 73 ] In February 2022, a collection of Hurston's non-fiction writings titled You Don't Know Us Negroes and Other Essays , edited and Henry Louis Gates, Jr , and Genevieve West, was published by HarperCollins .

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] On January 7, 2025, to coincide with Hurston's birthday, an unfinished novel about Herod the Great was published by HarperCollins.

[ 81 ] Spiritual views [ edit ] In Chapter XV of Dust Tracks on a Road , entitled "Religion", Hurston expressed disbelief in and disdain for both theism and religious belief.

[ 82 ] She states: Prayer seems to me a cry of weakness, and an attempt to avoid, by trickery, the rules of the game as laid down. I do not choose to admit weakness. I accept the challenge of responsibility. Life, as it is, does not frighten me, since I have made my peace with the universe as I find it, and bow to its laws.

[ 83 ] However, though clearly an atheist who firmly rejected the Baptist beliefs of her preacher father, she retained an interest in religion from anthropological and literary standpoints. She investigated voodoo , going so far as to participate in rituals alongside her research subjects. In another of her original uncensored notes for her autobiography shares her admiration for Biblical characters like King David : "He was a man after God's own heart, and was quite serviceable in helping God get rid of no-count rascals who were cluttering up the place." [ 84 ] Public obscurity [ edit ] Hurston's work slid into obscurity for decades, for both cultural and political reasons. The use of African-American dialect , as featured in Hurston's novels, became less popular. Younger writers felt that it was demeaning to use such dialect, given the racially charged history of dialect fiction in American literature. Also, Hurston had made stylistic choices in dialogue influenced by her academic studies. Thinking like a folklorist, Hurston strove to represent speech patterns of the period, which she had documented through ethnographic research.

[ 85 ] Several of Hurston's literary contemporaries criticized her use of dialect, saying that it was a caricature of African-American culture and was rooted in a post-Civil War, white racist tradition. These writers, associated with the Harlem Renaissance, criticized Hurston's later work as not advancing the movement.

Richard Wright , in his review of Their Eyes Were Watching God, said: The sensory sweep of her novel carries no theme, no message, no thought. In the main, her novel is not addressed to the Negro, but to a white audience whose chauvinistic tastes she knows how to satisfy. She exploits that phase of Negro life which is "quaint," the phase which evokes a piteous smile on the lips of the "superior" race.

[ 86 ] But since the late 20th century, there has been a revival of interest in Hurston.

[ 50 ] Critics have since praised her skillful use of idiomatic speech.

[ 87 ] During the 1930s and 1940s, when her work was published, the pre-eminent African-American author was Richard Wright, a former Communist.

[ 88 ] Unlike Hurston, Wright wrote in explicitly political terms. He had become disenchanted with Communism, but he used the struggle of African Americans for respect and economic advancement as both the setting and the motivation for his work. Other popular African-American authors of the time, such as Ralph Ellison , dealt with the same concerns as Wright albeit in ways more influenced by Modernism.

Hurston, who at times evinced conservative attitudes, was on the other side of the disputes over the promise of leftist politics for African Americans.

[ 89 ] In 1951, for example, Hurston argued that New Deal economic support had created a harmful dependency by African Americans on the government and that this dependency ceded too much power to politicians.

[ 90 ] Despite increasing difficulties, Hurston maintained her independence and a determined optimism. She wrote in a 1957 letter: But ... I have made phenomenal growth as a creative artist. ... I am not materialistic ... If I do happen to die without money, somebody will bury me, though I do not wish it to be that way.

[ 91 ] Posthumous recognition [ edit ] Zora Neale Hurston's hometown of Eatonville, Florida , celebrates her life annually in Zora Neale Hurston Festival of the Arts and Humanities.

[ 92 ] It is home to the Zora Neale Hurston Museum of Fine Arts , and a library named for her opened in January 2004.

The Zora Neale Hurston House in Fort Pierce has been designated as a National Historic Landmark . The city celebrates Hurston annually through various events such as Hattitudes , birthday parties, and the several-day event at the end of April known as Zora! Festival.

[ 11 ] [ 93 ] Author Alice Walker sought to identify Hurston's unmarked grave in 1973. She installed a grave marker inscribed with "A Genius of the South".

[ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] Alice Walker published "In Search of Zora Neale Hurston" in the March 1975 issue of Ms.

magazine, reviving interest in Hurston's work.

[ 97 ] [ 98 ] In 1991, Mule Bone: A Comedy of Negro Life , a 1930 play by Langston Hughes and Hurston, was first staged; it was staged in New York City by the Lincoln Center Theater .

In 1994, Hurston was inducted into the National Women's Hall of Fame .

[ 99 ] In 2002, scholar Molefi Kete Asante listed Zora Neale Hurston on his list of 100 Greatest African Americans .

[ 100 ] Barnard College dedicated its 2003 Virginia C. Gildersleeve Conference to Hurston.

'Jumpin' at the Sun': Reassessing the Life and Work of Zora Neale Hurston focused on her work and influence.

[ 101 ] Alice Walker's Gildersleeve lecture detailed her work on discovering and publicizing Hurston's legacy.

[ 102 ] The Zora Neale Hurston Award was established in 2008; it is awarded to an American Library Association member who has "demonstrated leadership in promoting African American literature".

[ 103 ] Hurston was inducted as a member of the inaugural class of the New York Writers Hall of Fame in 2010.

The novel Harlem Mosaics (2012) by Whit Frazier depicts the friendship between Langston Hughes and Hurston and tells the story of how their friendship fell apart during their collaboration on the 1930 play Mule Bone: A Comedy of Negro Life .

[ 75 ] On January 7, 2014, the 123rd anniversary of Hurston's birthday was commemorated by a Google Doodle .

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] She was one of twelve inaugural inductees to the Alabama Writers Hall of Fame on June 8, 2015.

[ 106 ] An excerpt from her autobiography Dust Tracks on a Road was recited in the documentary film August 28: A Day in the Life of a People , directed by Ava DuVernay , which debuted at the opening of the Smithsonian's National Museum of African American History and Culture in 2016.

[ 107 ] [ 108 ] [ 109 ] Hurston was honored in a play written and performed by students at Indian River Charter High School in October 2017, January 2018, and January 2019. The play was based on letters written between Hurston and Vero Beach entrepreneur, architect and pioneer Waldo E. Sexton .

[ 110 ] [ 111 ] She is the subject of the documentary film Zora Neale Hurston: Claiming A Space which first aired on American Experience on January 17, 2023.

[ 112 ] Zora's Daughters is a podcast hosted by Alyssa A.L. James and Brendane Tynes, who "follow in the legacy of Hurston and other Black women ethnographers".

[ 113 ] Political views [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Hurston was a Republican who aligned herself with the politics of the Old Right and she was also a supporter of Booker T. Washington . Although she once stated her support for the "complete repeal of All Jim Crow Laws ", she was a contrarian on civil rights activism and she generally lacked interest in being associated with it.

[ 114 ] In 1951, she criticized the New Deal by arguing that it had created a harmful dependency on the government among African Americans and she also argued that this dependency ceded too much power to politicians.

[ 90 ] She criticized communism in her 1951 essay titled Why the Negro won't Buy Communism and she also accused communists of exploiting African Americans for their own personal gain. In her 1938 review of Richard Wright's short-story collection Uncle Tom's Children , she criticized his communist beliefs and the Communist Party USA for supporting "state responsibility for everything and individual responsibility for nothing, not even feeding one's self".  Her views on communism, the New Deal, civil rights, and other topics contrasted with the views of many of her colleagues during the Harlem Renaissance, such as Langston Hughes , who was a supporter of the Soviet Union and praised it in several of his poems during the 1930s.

John McWhorter has called Hurston a conservative, stating that she is "America's favorite black conservative ".

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] David T. Beito and Linda Royster Beito have argued that she can be characterized as a libertarian , comparing her to Rose Wilder Lane and Isabel Paterson , two female libertarian novelists who were her contemporaries and are known as the "founding mothers" of American libertarianism.

[ 116 ] Russell A. Berman of the Hoover Institution described her as a " heterodox and staunchly libertarian thinker".

[ 117 ] The libertarian magazine Reason praised her, claiming: "What Hurston wanted, in both life and literature, was for everyone, of every race, for better or worse, to be viewed as an individual first." [ 118 ] In response to black writers who criticized her novel Their Eyes Were Watching God because it did not explore racial themes, she stated: "I am not interested in the race problem, but I am interested in the problems of individuals, white ones and black ones".

[ 119 ] She criticized what she described as "Race Pride and Race Consciousness", describing it as a "thing to be abhorred", stating: Suppose a Negro does something really magnificent, and I glory, not in the benefit to mankind, but in the fact that the doer was a Negro. Must I not also go hang my head in shame when a member of my race does something execrable? The white race did not go into a laboratory and invent incandescent light. That was Edison. If you are under the impression that every white man is an Edison, just look around a bit. If you have the idea that every Negro is a [George Washington] Carver , you had better take off plenty of time to do your searching.

[ 118 ] Although her personal quotes show disbelief of religion, Hurston did not negate spiritual matters as evidenced from her 1942 autobiography Dust Tracks on a Road : Prayer seems to be a cry of weakness, and an attempt to avoid, by trickery, the rules of the game as laid down. I do not choose to admit weakness. I accept the challenge of responsibility. Life, as it is, does not frighten me, since I have made my peace with the universe as I find it, and bow to its laws. The ever-sleepless sea in its bed, crying out "how long?" to Time; million-formed and never motionless flame; the contemplation of these two aspects alone, affords me sufficient food for ten spans of my expected lifetime. It seems to me that organized creeds are collections of words around a wish. I feel no need for such. However, I would not, by word or deed, attempt to deprive another of the consolation it affords. It is simply not for me. Somebody else may have my rapturous glance at the archangels. The springing of the yellow line of the morning out of the misty deep of dawn is glory enough for me. I know that nothing is destructible; things merely change forms. When the consciousness we know as life ceases, I know that I shall still be part and parcel of the world. I was a part before the sun rolled into shape and burst forth in the glory of change. I was when the earth was hurled out from its fiery rim. I shall return with the earth to Father Sun and still exist in substance when the sun has lost its fire and disintegrated into infinity to perhaps become a part of the whirling rubble of space. Why fear? The stuff of my being is the matter, ever-changing, ever-moving, but never lost; so what need of denominations and creeds to deny myself the comfort of all my fellow men? The wide belt of the universe does not need finger-rings. I am one with the infinite and need no other assurance.

[ 120 ] In 1952, Hurston supported the presidential campaign of Senator Robert A. Taft . Like Taft, Hurston was against Franklin D. Roosevelt 's New Deal policies. She also shared his opposition to Roosevelt and Truman 's interventionist foreign policy . In the original draft of her autobiography, Dust Tracks on a Road , Hurston compared the United States government to a "fence" in stolen goods and a Mafia -like protection racket. Hurston thought it ironic that the same "people who claim that it is a noble thing to die for freedom and democracy...  wax frothy if anyone points out the inconsistency of their morals...  We, too, consider machine gun bullets good laxatives for heathens who get constipated with toxic ideas about a country of their own." She was scathing about those who sought "freedoms" for those abroad but denied it to people in their home countries: Roosevelt "can call names across an ocean" for his Four Freedoms , but he did not have "the courage to speak even softly at home." [ 121 ] When Truman dropped the atomic bombs on Japan she called him "the Butcher of Asia".

[ 116 ] Hurston opposed the Supreme Court ruling in the Brown v. Board of Education case of 1954. She felt that if separate schools were truly equal (and she believed that they were rapidly becoming so), educating black students in physical proximity to white students would not result in better education. Also, she worried about the demise of black schools and black teachers as a way to pass on the cultural tradition to future generations of African Americans. She voiced this opposition in a letter, "Court Order Can't Make the Races Mix", that was published in the Orlando Sentinel in August 1955. Hurston had not reversed her long-time opposition to integration. Rather, she feared that the Court's ruling could become a precedent for an all-powerful federal government to undermine individual liberty on a broad range of issues in the future.

[ 122 ] Hurston also opposed preferential treatment for African Americans, saying: If I say a whole system must be upset for me to win, I am saying that I cannot sit in the game and that safer rules must be made to give me a chance. I repudiate that. If others are in there, deal me a hand and let me see what I can make of it, even though I know some in there are dealing from the bottom and cheating like hell in other ways.

[ 115 ] Criticism [ edit ] Integration [ edit ] Hurston appeared to oppose integration based on pride and her sense of independence. She would not "bow low before the white man", and claimed "adequate Negro schools" already existed in 1955.

[ 123 ] Hurston is described as a "trailblazer for black women's empowerment" because of her numerous individual achievements and her strong belief that black women could be "self-made". However, a common criticism of her work is that the vagueness of her racial politics in her writing, particularly about black feminism, makes her "a prime candidate for white intellectual idolatry." [ 124 ] Darwin T. Turner , an English professor and specialist in African-American literature, faulted Hurston in 1971 for opposing integration and for opposing programs to guarantee blacks the right to work.

[ 125 ] Research and representation [ edit ] Some authors criticized Hurston for her sensationalist representation of voodoo.

[ 126 ] In The Crisis magazine in 1943, Harold Preece criticized Hurston for her perpetuation of "Negro primitivism" in order to advance her own literary career.

[ 127 ] The Journal of Negro History complained that her work on voodoo was an indictment of African-American ignorance and superstition.

[ 128 ] Jeffrey Anderson states that Hurston's research methods were questionable and that she fabricated material for her works on voodoo. He observed that she admitted to inventing dialogue for her book Mules and Men in a letter to Ruth Benedict and described fabricating the Mules and Men story of rival voodoo doctors as a child in her later autobiography. Anderson believes that many of Hurston's other claims in her voodoo writings are dubious as well.

[ 129 ] Several authors have contended that Hurston engaged in significant plagiarism, and her biographer Robert Hemenway argues that the article "Cudjo's Own Story of the Last African Slaver" (1927) was approximately 25% original, the rest being plagiarized from Emma Langdon Roche 's Historic Sketches of the Old South .

[ 130 ] Hemenway does not claim that this undermines the validity of her later fieldwork: he states that Hurston "never plagiarized again; she became a major folklore collector".

[ 131 ] Selected bibliography [ edit ] "Journey's End" ( Negro World , 1922), poetry "Night" ( Negro World , 1922), poetry "Passion" ( Negro World , 1922), poetry Color Struck ( Opportunity: A Journal of Negro Life , 1925), play Muttsy (Opportunity: A Journal of Negro Life) 1926, short story.

" Sweat " (1926), short story " How It Feels to Be Colored Me " (1928), essay "Hoodoo in America" (1931) in The Journal of American Folklore " The Gilded Six-Bits " (1933), short story Jonah's Gourd Vine (1934), novel Mules and Men (1935), non-fiction Their Eyes Were Watching God (1937), novel Tell My Horse (1938), non-fiction Moses, Man of the Mountain (1939), novel Dust Tracks on a Road (1942), autobiography Seraph on the Suwanee (1948), novel "What White Publishers Won't Print" ( Negro Digest , 1950) I Love Myself When I Am Laughing... and Then Again When I Am Looking Mean and Impressive: A Zora Neale Hurston Reader ( Alice Walker , ed.; 1979) The Sanctified Church (1981) Spunk: Selected Stories (1985) Mule Bone: A Comedy of Negro Life (play, with Langston Hughes ; edited with introductions by George Houston Bass and Henry Louis Gates Jr.

; 1991) The Complete Stories (introduction by Henry Louis Gates Jr. and Sieglinde Lemke; 1995) Novels & Stories: Jonah's Gourd Vine, Their Eyes Were Watching God, Moses, Man of the Mountain, Seraph on the Suwanee, Selected Stories (Cheryl A. Wall, ed.; Library of America , 1995) ISBN 978-0-940450-83-7 Folklore, Memoirs, & Other Writings: Mules and Men, Tell My Horse, Dust Tracks on a Road, Selected Articles (Cheryl A. Wall, ed.; Library of America, 1995) ISBN 978-0-940450-84-4 Every Tongue Got to Confess: Negro Folk-tales from the Gulf States (2001) Zora Neale Hurston: A Life in Letters , collected and edited by Carla Kaplan (2003) Collected Plays (2008) Barracoon: The Story of the Last "Black Cargo" (2018) Hitting a Straight Lick with a Crooked Stick: Stories from the Harlem Renaissance (2020) You Don't Know Us Negroes and Other Essays (2022) The Life of Herod the Great:  A Novel (2025) Film, television, and radio [ edit ] In 1935 and 1936, Zora Neale Hurston shot documentary footage [ 132 ] as part of her fieldwork in Florida and Haiti. Included are rare ethnographic evidence of the Hoodoo and Vodou religion in the U.S. and Haiti.

Some footage claimed to be by Hurston from 1928 is accessible from the Internet Archive.

[ 133 ] In 1989, PBS aired a drama based on Hurston's life entitled Zora is My Name!.

The 1992–95 PBS children's television series Ghostwriter , which had an emphasis on reading and writing skills, featured the lead characters attending the fictitious Zora Neale Hurston Middle School in the Fort Greene neighborhood of Brooklyn , New York .

The 2004 film Brother to Brother , set in part during the Harlem Renaissance, featured Hurston (portrayed by Aunjanue Ellis ).

Their Eyes Were Watching God was adapted for a 2005 film of the same title by Oprah Winfrey 's Harpo Productions , with a teleplay by Suzan-Lori Parks . The film starred Halle Berry as Janie Starks.

[ 134 ] On April 9, 2008, PBS broadcast a 90-minute documentary, Zora Neale Hurston: Jump at the Sun , [ 135 ] written and produced by filmmaker Kristy Andersen, [ 136 ] as part of the American Masters series.

[ 137 ] In 2009, Hurston was featured in a 90-minute documentary about the WPA Writers' Project titled Soul of a People: Writing America's Story , [ 138 ] [ 139 ] which premiered on the Smithsonian Channel. Her work in Florida during the 1930s is highlighted in the companion book, Soul of a People: The WPA Writers' Project Uncovers Depression America .

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] In 2017, Jackie Kay presented a 30-minute BBC Radio 4 documentary about Hurston called A Woman Half in Shadow , first broadcast on April 17, and subsequently available as a podcast.

[ 142 ] [ 143 ] TLC 's Rozonda Thomas plays Hurston in the 2017 film Marshall .

[ 144 ] In January 2017, the documentary "Zora Neale Hurston: Claiming a Space" premiered on PBS.

[ 145 ] [ 146 ] See also [ edit ] United States portal Conservatism portal Biography portal Florida literature Kevin Brown (author) References [ edit ] Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l Boyd, Valerie (2003).

Wrapped in Rainbows: The Life of Zora Neale Hurston . New York: Scribner.

ISBN 978-0-684-84230-1 .

^ a b c d Hurston, Lucy Anne (2004).

Speak, so you can speak again : the life of Zora Neale Hurston (First ed.). New York: Doubleday .

ISBN 0-385-49375-4 .

^ Trefzer, Annette (2000). "Possessing the Self: Caribbean Identities in Zora Neale Hurston's Tell My Horse".

African American Review .

34 (2): 299– 312.

doi : 10.2307/2901255 .

JSTOR 2901255 .

^ Flynn, Elisabeth; Deasy, Caitlin; Ruah, Rachel.

"The Upbringing and Education of Zora Neale Hurston" .

social.rollins.edu . Archived from the original on September 25, 2017 . Retrieved June 21, 2017 .

^ Carpio, Glenda R.; Sollors, Werner (January 2, 2011).

"The Newly Complicated Zora Neale Hurston" .

The Chronicle of Higher Education .

ISSN 0009-5982 .

Archived from the original on June 26, 2017 . Retrieved June 21, 2017 .

^ Rae, Brianna (February 19, 2016).

"Black History Profiles – Zora Neale Hurston" .

The Madison Times .

Archived from the original on March 8, 2022 . Retrieved May 10, 2020 .

^ Miller, Monica (December 17, 2012).

"Archaeology of a Classic" .

News & Events . Barnard College. Archived from the original on July 15, 2014 . Retrieved June 14, 2014 .

^ Sarkar, Sohel (January 7, 2021).

"9 Fascinating Facts About Zora Neale Hurston" .

Mental Floss .

Archived from the original on October 15, 2022 . Retrieved June 6, 2022 .

^ Cave, Damien (September 28, 2008).

"In a Town Apart, the Pride and Trials of Black Life" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on August 2, 2018 . Retrieved August 1, 2018 .

^ a b Jones, Sharon L. (Sharon Lynette) (2009).

Critical companion to Zora Neale Hurston: a literary reference to her life and work . New York.

ISBN 978-0-8160-6885-2 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ a b "Zora! Festival Homepage" .

Zora! Festival .

Archived from the original on April 26, 2019 . Retrieved June 21, 2017 .

^ a b c About Zora Neale Hurston Archived April 16, 2009, at the Wayback Machine , Zora Neale Hurston official website, maintained by the Zora Neale Hurston Estate and HarperCollins.

^ a b "Chronology of Hurston's Life" .

University of Central Florida .

Archived from the original on August 2, 2018.

^ "Zora Neale Hurston" .

The Baltimore Literary Heritage Project . Archived from the original on May 14, 2015 . Retrieved August 21, 2019 .

^ Monitor, The Christian Science (January 17, 2023).

"How Zora Neale Hurston claimed her space in history" .

The Christian Science Monitor . Retrieved October 27, 2024 .

^ "Wrapped In Rainbows Summary PDF | Valerie Boyd" .

Wrapped In Rainbows Summary PDF | Valerie Boyd . Retrieved October 28, 2024 .

^ Kettler, Sara (January 6, 2016).

"Zora Neale Hurston: 7 Facts on Her 125th Birthday" .

Biography.com .

Archived from the original on April 21, 2019 . Retrieved April 22, 2019 .

^ Zora Neale Hurston Archived December 12, 2007, at the Wayback Machine , Women in History.

^ Staple, J. (2006). "Zora Neale Hurston's Construction of Authenticity through Ethnographic Innovation".

Western Journal of Black Studies .

S2CID 141415962 .

^ "The Changing Faces of First-Generation Barnard Women" .

Barnard College . Retrieved October 28, 2024 .

^ Shivonne Foster, Following Footsteps: Zora Neale Hurston Archived November 24, 2007, at the Wayback Machine , The Hilltop , November 20, 2007.

^ a b "Life Story: Zora Neale Hurston (1891–1960)" .

New-York Historical Society Museum and Library: Women and the American Story .

^ Meyer, Annie Nathan (1951).

It's Been Fun: An Autobiography . New York: H. Schuman.

^ a b Cheryl A, Wall L (2001). "Hurston, Zora Neale". In Andrews, William L; Foster, Frances Smith; Harris, Trudier (eds.).

The concise Oxford companion to African American literature . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-803175-8 .

^ Stephens, Judith L.; Perkins, JKathy A., eds. (1998).

Strange Fruit: Plays on Lynching by American Women .

Indiana University Press . pp. 10, 133.

ISBN 9780253211637 .

^ "A Century of Barnard Anthropology, The Early Period" . Archived from the original on January 14, 2009.

^ a b c Zora Neale Hurston at the Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ "Heading South with Zora Neale Hurston and Langston Hughes , Libro di Adriano Elia, Serena I. Volpi" .

libreriauniversitaria.it edizioni (in Italian) . Retrieved April 2, 2025 .

^ Hurston, Zora Neale (2009).

Every Tongue Got to Confess: Negro Folk-tales from the Gulf States . HarperCollins e-books. p. xxvi.

ISBN 978-0-06-174180-7 .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2024 . Retrieved April 14, 2019 .

^ Lamar, Jake (January 12, 2003).

"Folk Heroine" .

Washington Post .

Archived from the original on September 11, 2018 . Retrieved August 1, 2018 .

^ Scott, Megan K. (March 6, 2011).

"Zora Neale Hurston's real home was in Brevard County – Famed author, folklorist spent many productive years in Brevard" .

Florida Today . Melbourne. p. 1D.

Archived from the original on October 15, 2022 . Retrieved May 9, 2020 .

^ a b Taylor, Yuval (2019).

Zora and Langston . W.W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0393243918 .

^ a b Manuel, Carme (March 22, 2001).

"Mule Bone: Langston Hughes and Zora Neale Hurston's Dream Deferred of an African-American Theatre of the Black Word" .

African American Review .

35 (1): 77– 92.

doi : 10.2307/2903336 .

JSTOR 2903336 .

Archived from the original on April 12, 2019 . Retrieved March 5, 2011 .

In February 1930, Hurston headed north, settling in Westfield, New Jersey. Godmother Mason ( Mrs. Rufus Osgood Mason , their white protector) had selected Westfield, safely removed from the distractions of New York City, as a suitable place for both Hurston and Hughes to work.

^ a b Horner, Shirley.

"About Books" Archived November 12, 2016, at the Wayback Machine , The New York Times , February 16, 1986. Accessed March 5, 2011. "For many years, Hughes enjoyed the patronage of "an aged, well-preserved white dowager of enormous wealth and influence", Charlotte Mason..." and "Dr. [David Levering] Lewis said that his research 'points out that, thanks to Mrs. Mason's generosity, Hughes lived in the early 1930s in a one-family house in Westfield, where his neighbor was another of Harlem's luminaries, Zora Neale Hurston.'" ^ Porter, A. P. (1992).

Jump at de sun : the story of Zora Neale Hurston . Minneapolis: Carolrhoda Books. p. 66.

ISBN 0-87614-667-1 .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2024 . Retrieved May 9, 2020 .

^ Hurston, The Estate of Zora Neale.

"Zora Neale Hurston" . Archived from the original on March 6, 2013 . Retrieved February 3, 2013 .

^ a b c Hurston, Zora Neale (October 12, 1939).

"Letter to Edwin Osgood Grover" .

University of Florida Archives . Archived from the original on November 11, 2024 . Retrieved October 1, 2024 .

^ a b "Drama Group Concludes Meet; Zora Neale Hurston Featured" .

The Daily Tar Heel . October 8, 1939. pp.

1– 2 . Retrieved October 11, 2024 .

^ a b Moore, Cecilia (March 22, 2019).

THE SOUTH AS A FOLK PLAY: THE CAROLINA PLAYMAKERS, REGIONAL THEATRE AND THE FEDERAL THEATRE PROJECT . Chapel Hill, NC: University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. p. 154.

^ "Black History Month at Carolina | UNC-Chapel Hill" .

The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill . Retrieved October 11, 2024 .

^ " "Proving a Secret is Difficult": Zora Neale Hurston at UNC – For the Record" . April 16, 2019 . Retrieved October 11, 2024 .

^ "Sunday Night Radio Group to Outline Spring Program" .

The Daily Tar Heel . March 30, 1940. pp.

1– 2 . Retrieved October 1, 2024 .

^ Hurston, Zora Neale (1995).

Folklore, Memoirs and Other Writings . Library of America. p. 847.

^ Eubanks, Georgann (September 10, 2010).

"Women Writers of Hayti" .

Our State . Retrieved October 12, 2024 .

^ Svrluga, Susan (May 28, 2015).

"UNC takes on its past, renaming hall that has long honored a KKK leader" .

The Washington Post .

^ uncofthepeople (May 2, 2018).

"Omololu Babatunde on the invocation of Zora Neale Hurston Hall" .

Reclaiming the University of the People . Retrieved October 12, 2024 .

^ "Celebratory Evening of the Lives and Legacies of Zora Neale Hurston and Toni Morrison | North Carolina Central University" .

www.nccu.edu . Retrieved October 12, 2024 .

^ "QUEEN OF THE NIGGERATI: ZORA NEALE HURSTON'S CONJURING IN DURHAM, NC – Southern Documentary Fund" .

southerndocumentaryfund.org . Retrieved October 12, 2024 .

^ Hemenway, Robert (1995). "Edited and with an Introduction by".

Dust tracks on a road: an autobiography . By Hurston, Zora Neale (2nd ed.). Urbana: University of Illinois Press. p.

209 .

ISBN 0-252-01149-X .

OCLC 11091136 .

^ a b McFadden, Bernice L. (2021). "Zora Neale Hurston". In Kendi, Ibram X.

; Blain, Keisha N.

(eds.).

Four Hundred Souls: A Community History of African America, 1619–2019 . New York: One World. pp.

297– 300.

ISBN 978-0-593-13404-7 .

^ Choie, Dianne; posted by Alli Hartley-Kong (January 7, 2025).

"Her eyes were watching everything: Zora Neale Hurston at the Library of Congress | Minerva's kaleidoscope" . Archived from the original on April 17, 2025 . Retrieved May 13, 2025 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Hurston, Zora Neale [performer] (1939).

"Crow dance" .

Library of Congress . Archived from the original on February 3, 2025 . Retrieved May 13, 2025 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Hurston, Zora Neale [performer] (1939).

"Oh, the Buford Boat done come" .

Library of Congress . Archived from the original on February 7, 2025 . Retrieved May 13, 2025 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ Brown, Gabriel [performer] (1935).

"John Henry" .

Library of Congress . Archived from the original on January 14, 2025 . Retrieved May 13, 2025 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) ^ a b c d Dr. C. Arthur Ellis, Jr.

"New Florida-based Movie on Ruby McCollum Story Underscores Need for Black History Month" Archived June 28, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , PR Web, January 5, 2011, accessed March 18, 2014, ^ Hurston, Zora Neale. Series of articles covering the trial: Pittsburgh Courier , October 1952 – January 1953. Also, "The Life Story Of Ruby McCollum", Pittsburgh Courier , Jan–March 1953 ^ Boyd, Elizabeth, "Disquiet", Review of Tammy Evans, The Silencing of Ruby McCollum: Race, Class, and Gender in the South Archived March 18, 2014, at the Wayback Machine , H-Net Review, July 2008. Retrieved March 18, 2014, ^ Brotemarkle, Ben (February 4, 2014).

"Zora Neale Hurston fond of writing in Eau Gallie cottage" .

Florida Today . Melbourne, Florida. p. 9A.

Archived from the original on February 22, 2014 . Retrieved February 4, 2014 .

^ Walters, Tim (February 25, 2020).

"Black History Month: Zora Neale Hurston died alone, her belongings almost burned. Now there is a festival in her name" .

The Palm Beach Post .

Archived from the original on January 2, 2023 . Retrieved January 20, 2023 .

^ "Charlotte Hunt, renewed interest in author Hurston", Tallahassee Democrat , 25 March 25, 1997 ^ a b Plant, Deborah G. (2007).

Zora Neale Hurston: A Biography of the Spirit . Greenwood Publishing Group. p. 57.

ISBN 978-0-275-98751-0 .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2024 . Retrieved May 2, 2018 .

^ Walters, Tim (February 25, 2020).

"Black History Month: Zora Neale Hurston died alone, her belongings almost burned. Now there is a festival in her name" .

The Palm Beach Post . Retrieved February 15, 2025 .

^ Tawa, Renee (March 31, 2003).

"Hurston: The world stands corrected" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved February 15, 2025 .

^ "George A. Smathers Libraries: Dept. Of Special and Area Studies Collections. African American History in Special Collections" .

Archived from the original on June 14, 2023 . Retrieved June 8, 2023 .

^ Richard, A. Long (2001). "New Negro, The". In Andrews, William L; Foster, Frances Smith; Harris, Trudier (eds.).

The concise Oxford companion to African American literature . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-803175-8 .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2024 . Retrieved May 9, 2020 .

^ Hemenway, Robert E. (1980).

Zora Neale Hurston: A Literary Biography . Urbana and Chicago: University of Illinois Press. pp.

96–99 .

ISBN 978-0252008078 .

^ Hurston, Zora Neale (October 1927). "Cudjoe's Own Story of the Last African Slaver".

Journal of Negro History .

12 (4): 648– 663.

doi : 10.2307/2714041 .

JSTOR 2714041 .

S2CID 150096354 .

^ a b "The Largesse of Zora Neale Hurston" .

villagevoice.com . April 16, 2002.

Archived from the original on April 4, 2019 . Retrieved April 4, 2019 .

^ Hemenway, Robert E. (1977).

Zora Neale Hurston : a literary biography . Urbana: University of Illinois Press. pp.

100– 101.

ISBN 0-252-00652-6 .

^ a b Diouf, Sylviane A. (Sylviane Anna). (2007) Dreams of Africa in Alabama: The Slave Ship Clotilde and the Story of the Last Africans Brought to America.

New York: Oxford University Press.

p. 225 Archived January 7, 2024, at the Wayback Machine ISBN 978-0-19-531104-4 ^ Diouf, Sylviane A. (Sylviane Anna). (2007) Dreams of Africa in Alabama: The Slave Ship Clotilde and the Story of the Last Africans Brought to America.

New York: Oxford University Press.

p. 226 Archived January 7, 2024, at the Wayback Machine ISBN 978-0-19-531104-4 ^ Little, Becky (May 3, 2018).

"The Last Slave Ship Survivor Gave an Interview in the 1930s. It Just Surfaced" .

History .

Archived from the original on May 4, 2018 . Retrieved May 8, 2018 .

^ a b c d Halle Kiefer (December 18, 2017).

"New Zora Neale Hurston Book to Be Published in 2018" . Vulture.com.

Archived from the original on May 4, 2018 . Retrieved May 3, 2018 .

^ Brotemarkle, Ben (Fall–Winter 2011).

Indian River Journal . Brevard Historical Commission.

^ a b "Fiction Book Review: Harlem Mosaics" .

Publishers Weekly . April 28, 2018.

Archived from the original on December 29, 2019 . Retrieved December 29, 2019 .

^ Kraut, Anthea (Winter 2005).

"Everybody's Fire Dance: Zora Neale Hurston and American Dance History" .

S&F Online . Vol. 3, no. 2.

ISSN 1558-9404 .

Archived from the original on July 26, 2020 . Retrieved May 10, 2020 .

^ Henderson, Kali.

"Zora Neale Hurston" .

outhistory.org .

Archived from the original on October 3, 2020 . Retrieved May 10, 2020 .

^ Chuck Jackson, "Waste and Whiteness: Zora Neale Hurston and the Politics of Eugenics" Archived March 16, 2022, at the Wayback Machine , African American Review , 2000, 34(4): 639–660.

^ Jackson, Lauren Michele (February 15, 2022).

"The Zora Neale Hurston We Don't Talk About" .

The New Yorker .

Archived from the original on January 20, 2023 . Retrieved January 20, 2023 .

^ Grant, Colin (February 27, 2022).

"You Don't Know Us Negroes by Zora Neale Hurston review – fearless and dazzling essays" .

The Guardian .

^ Rodney, Isabelle (August 6, 2024).

"Unfinished Zora Neale Hurston novel to be published 65 years after her death" .

The Guardian . Retrieved July 1, 2025 .

^ " 'Religion' by Zora Neale Hurston" . August 24, 2018.

Archived from the original on March 18, 2021 . Retrieved December 23, 2020 .

^ "Zora Neale Hurston" .

Freedom From Religion Foundation . Archived from the original on June 12, 2021.

^ Hurston, Zora Neale (1991). "Seeing the world as it is".

Dust tracks on a Road (HarperPerennial ed.). p. 245.

ISBN 9780060921682 .

^ Duck, Leigh Anne (2001). " 'Go there to know there': Zora Neale Hurston and the Chronotype of the Folk".

American Literary History .

13 (2): 265– 294.

doi : 10.1093/alh/13.2.265 .

JSTOR 3054604 .

S2CID 145060987 .

^ Richard Wright , "Between Laughter and Tears", The New Masses , October 5, 1937.

^ Qashgari, Sawsan (2017). "Racism, Feminism, and Language in Zora Neale Hurston's Their Eyes Were Watching God".

AWEJ for Translation and Literary Studies .

1 : 10.

SSRN 2980166 .

^ Colville, Liz (September 4, 2010).

"Happy Birthday, Richard Wright, Groundbreaking Author of "Black Boy" and "Native Son" " .

findingdulcinea.com .

Archived from the original on January 25, 2010 . Retrieved January 27, 2010 .

^ Ward, Jerry Washington; Butler, Robert, eds. (2008). "Hurston, Zora Neale".

The Richard Wright encyclopedia . Westport, Conn.: Greenwood Press.

ISBN 978-0-313-35519-6 .

^ a b Olasky, Marvin (February 13, 2010).

"History turned right side up" .

World magazine . p. 22.

Archived from the original on June 15, 2010 . Retrieved August 1, 2010 .

^ Ottenberg, Eve (April 8, 2011).

"Zora Neale Hurston's Lost Decade" .

Archived from the original on November 18, 2016 . Retrieved November 17, 2016 – via In These Times.

^ "Zora Neale Hurston Festival – Festival of Arts and Humanities" . Archived from the original on May 28, 2007 . Retrieved May 8, 2007 .

^ Graham, Adam (March 31, 2010).

"Forgotten Florida, Through a Writer's Eyes" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on December 6, 2017 . Retrieved June 14, 2014 .

^ Ong, Geo (February 5, 2013).

"A Headstone for an Aunt: How Alice Walker Found Zora Neale Hurston" .

urchinmovement.com .

Archived from the original on May 8, 2018 . Retrieved May 7, 2018 .

^ "Zora Dust Tracks Heritage Marker 4" .

Dust Tracks Heritage Trail . St. Lucie County Online. Archived from the original on August 2, 2014 . Retrieved June 14, 2014 .

^ Grosvenor, Vertamae (April 26, 2004).

"Intersections: Crafting a Voice for Black Culture" .

National Public Radio .

Archived from the original on May 4, 2018 . Retrieved June 14, 2014 .

^ "Archaeology of a Classic: Celebrating Zora Neale Hurston '28" .

News & Events . Barnard College. December 12, 2012.

Archived from the original on July 15, 2014 . Retrieved June 14, 2014 .

^ Anderson, Christa Smith.

"Power of Prose – Hurston" .

pbs.org .

Archived from the original on October 1, 2017 . Retrieved June 21, 2017 .

^ "Zora Neale Hurston" .

National Women's Hall of Fame .

Archived from the original on November 21, 2018 . Retrieved November 21, 2018 .

^ Asante, Molefi Kete (2002).

100 Greatest African Americans: A Biographical Encyclopedia . Amherst, New York.

Prometheus Books .

ISBN 1-57392-963-8 .

^ Kadlecek, Jo.

"Conference Celebrates Legacy of Zora Neale Hurston" .

Barnard News Center . Barnard College. Archived from the original on June 4, 2004 . Retrieved June 14, 2014 .

^ Walker, Alice.

"Finding a World that I Thought Was Lost: Zora Neale Hurston and the People She Looked at Very Hard and Loved Very Much" .

S&F Online . Barnard College.

Archived from the original on October 8, 2014 . Retrieved July 7, 2014 .

^ "The Zora Neale Hurston Award" . American Library Association.

Archived from the original on August 20, 2016 . Retrieved July 30, 2016 .

^ Anika Myers Palm (January 7, 2014).

"Google doodle honors Eatonville's Zora Neale Hurston" Archived January 7, 2014, at the Wayback Machine .

Orlando Sentinel . Retrieved January 7, 2014.

^ Kerr, Dara (January 7, 2014).

"Google bestows author Zora Neale Hurston her own doodle" .

CNET .

Archived from the original on December 4, 2018 . Retrieved January 7, 2014 .

^ Cobb, Mark Hughes (May 25, 2015).

"Rick Bragg, Harper Lee will be among Alabama Writers' Forum's inductees" .

Tuscaloosa News . Retrieved May 10, 2020 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Davis, Rachaell (September 22, 2016).

"Why Is August 28 So Special To Black People? Ava DuVernay Reveals All In New NMAAHC Film" .

Essence .

Archived from the original on July 16, 2018 . Retrieved August 30, 2018 .

^ Keyes, Allison (2017).

"In This Quiet Space for Contemplation, a Fountain Rains Down Calming Waters" .

Smithsonian Magazine .

Archived from the original on March 11, 2018 . Retrieved March 10, 2018 .

^ Gooden, Tai (August 28, 2018).

"Ava Duvernay's 'August 28' Delves Into Just How Monumental That Date Is To Black History In America" . Bustle.com.

Archived from the original on August 30, 2018 . Retrieved August 30, 2018 .

^ "Unlikely friendship of Waldo Sexton, Zora Neale Hurston will come to life at Charter High" .

TCPalm .

Archived from the original on August 27, 2019 . Retrieved August 27, 2019 .

^ Krueger, Jessica (October 23, 2018).

"IRCHS Celebrates Vero Beach's 100th Year Anniversary" .

Indian River Charter High School . Archived from the original on August 27, 2019 . Retrieved August 27, 2019 .

^ Pendleton, Tonya. "Tracy Heather Strain's new film shows Zora Neale Hurston as anthropologist", United Press International (UPI), Tuesday, January 17, 2023.

Archived January 17, 2023, at the Wayback Machine Retrieved January 17, 2023.

^ "About" .

Archived from the original on November 25, 2023 . Retrieved November 25, 2023 .

^ a b McWhorter, John , "Thus Spake Zora" , Archived August 16, 2009, at the Wayback Machine City Journal , Summer 2009.

^ a b McWhorter, John (January 4, 2011) Why Zora Neale Hurston Was a Conservative Archived December 23, 2017, at the Wayback Machine , The Root ^ a b David T. Beito and Linda Royster Beito, "Isabel Paterson, Rose Wilder Lane, and Zora Neale Hurston on War, Race, the State, and Liberty" , Archived October 2, 2008, at the Wayback Machine Independent Review 12, Spring 2008.

^ "Juneteenth And The Freedom Writers" .

Hoover Institution .

Archived from the original on January 7, 2023 . Retrieved January 7, 2023 .

^ a b "Zora Neale Hurston's Inconvenient Individualism" . May 22, 2022.

Archived from the original on August 13, 2022 . Retrieved August 13, 2022 .

^ "Black History Month Beef: Zora Neale Hurston vs. Richard Wright" . February 15, 2019.

Archived from the original on May 17, 2022 . Retrieved August 13, 2022 .

^ Freedom From Religion Foundation "Zora Neale Hurston" Archived January 7, 2014, at the Wayback Machine ^ "Seeing the World As It Is", a chapter deleted at the insistence of the original publishers of Hurston's memoir Dust Tracks on a Road , but later included in the Library of America edition edited by Henry Louis Gates, Jr.

^ "Court Order Can't Make the Races Mix by Zora Neale Hurston" .

Archived from the original on June 22, 2015 . Retrieved February 2, 2016 .

^ Eriksen, John M.

Brevard County, Florida : A Short History to 1955 Archived December 1, 2017, at the Wayback Machine . Chapter 13. "Negro Writer Opposes Court Ruling", Titusville Star Advocate , September 30, 1955, p. 2.

^ Ikard, David (2009). "Ruthless Individuality and the Other(Ed) Black Women in Zora Neale Hurston's "Their Eyes Were Watching God" ".

CLA Journal .

53 (1): 1– 22.

ISSN 0007-8549 .

JSTOR 44395261 .

^ Turner, Darwin T. (1971).

In a Minor Chord: Three Afro-American Writers and Their Search for Identity . Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press.

ISBN 978-0809304813 .

OCLC 909407023 .

^ Brock, H. i (November 10, 1935).

"The Full, True Flavor of Life in a Negro Community; Mules and Men. By Zora Neale Hurston. With an Introduction by Franz Boas. Ten Illustrations by Miguel Covarrubias. Philadelphia: J.B. Lippincott Company. [Book review]" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 .

Archived from the original on March 16, 2022 . Retrieved May 10, 2020 .

^ Preece, Harold, "The Negro Folk Cult", Crisis , v. 43, no. 12, December 1936.

^ McNeill, B. C. (April 1936). "Zora Neale Hurston, with foreword by Franz Boas and illustrations by Miguel Covarrubias, Mules and Men".

The Journal of Negro History .

21 (2): 223– 225.

doi : 10.2307/2714574 .

ISSN 0022-2992 .

JSTOR 2714574 .

^ Jeffrey Anderson, "Voodoo" in Black and White , in Frank & Killbride (eds), Southern Character , 2011.

^ Robert Hemenway, "Zora Neale Hurston: A Literary Biography", pp. 73–78 , pp. 96–99 ^ Hemenway, Robert (1980).

Zora Neale Hurston: A Literary Biography . University of Illinois Press. p. 98.

^ "Zora Neale Hurston: Recordings, Manuscripts, and Ephemera in the Archive of Folk Culture and Other Divisions of the Library of Congress (The American Folklife Center, Library of Congress)" .

loc.gov .

Archived from the original on January 21, 2017 . Retrieved February 25, 2017 .

^ "Zora Neale Hurston's Fieldwork Footage" . Internet Archive . Retrieved March 25, 2024 .

^ Their Eyes Were Watching God [Full Movie] , December 16, 2012 , retrieved February 11, 2024 ^ "Bay Bottom News" .

baybottomnews.com .

Archived from the original on February 2, 2011 . Retrieved November 18, 2010 .

^ "About" .

baybottomnews.com . November 12, 2009.

Archived from the original on July 6, 2020 . Retrieved May 10, 2020 .

^ "Zora Neale Hurston – Jump at the Sun" .

pbs.org . August 26, 2008. Archived from the original on August 21, 2008 . Retrieved September 19, 2017 .

^ "Smithsonian Channel: Home" .

SmithsonianChannel.com . Archived from the original on September 12, 2012.

^ Jacobs, Rodger (September 3, 2009).

"Soul of a People: Writing America's Story" .

PopMatters .

Archived from the original on September 24, 2020 . Retrieved May 10, 2020 .

^ "Wiley: Soul of a People: The WPA Writers' Project Uncovers Depression America" . October 7, 2012. Archived from the original on October 7, 2012.

^ Sommer, B. W. (September 1, 2011). "Soul of a People: The WPA Writers' Project Uncovers Depression America".

Oral History Review .

38 (2): 437– 439.

doi : 10.1093/ohr/ohr078 .

ISSN 0094-0798 .

S2CID 144818716 .

^ A Woman Half in Shadow , BBC Radio 4.

Archived August 23, 2017, at the Wayback Machine .

^ "The death and rebirth of Zora Neale Hurston" , Seriously...

, BBC Radio 4.

Archived September 11, 2017, at the Wayback Machine .

^ "The True Story of 'Marshall': How Accurate are the Characters?" .

Hollywood Reporter .

Archived from the original on October 14, 2017 . Retrieved October 14, 2017 .

^ Vognar, Chris (January 18, 2023).

"How a new film captured Zora Neale Hurston's radical authenticity" .

Los Angeles Times .

Archived from the original on January 20, 2023 . Retrieved January 20, 2023 .

^ Craven, TinaMarie (January 11, 2023).

"Middletown filmmaker's Zora Neale Hurston film to air on PBS" .

CT Insider . Archived from the original on January 20, 2023 . Retrieved January 20, 2023 .

Citations [ edit ] 28th Zora Neale Hurston Festival of the Arts and Humanities. ZORA! Festival. The Association to Preserve the Eatonville Community, 2017. Web. 10 April 2017.

Abcarian, Richard, and Marvin Klotz. "Zora Neale Hurston". In Literature: The Human Experience , 9th edition. New York: Bedford/St. Martin's, 2006, pp. 1562–1563.

Anderson, Christa S. "African American Women". PBS. Public Broadcasting Service, 2005. Web. 9 April 2017.

Baym, Nina (ed.), "Zora Neale Hurston". In The Norton Anthology of American Literature , 6th edition, Vol. D. New York, W. W. Norton & Co.

, 2003, pp. 1506–1507.

Beito, David T. "Zora Neale Hurston", American Enterprise 6 (September/October 1995), pp. 61–63.

Beito, David T. and Beito, Linda Royster, " Isabel Paterson, Rose Wilder Lane, and Zora Neale Hurston on War, Race, the State, and Liberty Archived October 2, 2008, at the Wayback Machine ".

Independent Review 12 (Spring 2008).

Boyd, Valerie (2003).

Wrapped in Rainbows: The Life of Zora Neale Hurston . New York: Scribner.

ISBN 0-684-84230-0 .

Ellis, C. Arthur.

Zora Hurston And The Strange Case Of Ruby McCollum , 1st edition. Lutz, FL: Gadfly Publishing, 2009.

Estate of Zora Neale Hurston. "Zora Neale Hurston." The Official Website of Zora Neale Hurston.  Zora Neale Hurston Trust, 2015.  Web. 11 April 2017.

Flynn, Elisabeth, Caitlin Deasy, and Rachel Ruah. "The Upbringing and Education of Zora Neale Hurston". Project Mosaic: Hurston. Rollins College, 11 July 2011.  Web.  11 April 2017.

Harrison, Beth. "Zora Neale Hurston and Mary Austin: A Case Study in Ethnography, Literary Modernism, and Contemporary Ethnic Fiction. MELUS. 21.2 (1996) 89–106.

ISBN 978-0-9820940-0-6 .

Hemenway, Robert E.

Zora Neale Hurston: A Literary Biography . Urbana: University of Illinois Press , 1977.

ISBN 0-252-00807-3 .

Hemenway, Robert E. "Zora Neale Hurston." In Paul Lauter and Richard Yarborough (eds.), The Heath Anthology of American Literature , 5th edition, Vol. D. New York: Houghton Mifflin Co.

, 2006, pp. 1577–1578.

Jones, Sharon L.

A Critical Companion to Zora Neale Hurston: A Literary Reference to Her Life and Work (New York: Facts on File, 2009).

Kaplan, Carla (ed.).

Zora Neale Hurston:  A Life in Letters . New York: Random House, 2003.

Kraut, Anthea, "Between Primitivism and Diaspora: The Dance Performances of Josephine Baker , Zora Neale Hurston, and Katherine Dunham ", Theatre Journal 55 (2003), pp. 433–450.

Menefee, Samuel Pyeatt, "Zora Neale Hurston (1891–1960)." In Hilda Ellis Davidson and Carmen Blacker (eds.), Women and Tradition: A Neglected Group of Folklorists , Durham, NC: Carolina Academic Press, 2000, pp. 157–172.

Trefler, Annette.  "Possessing the Self: Caribbean Identities in Zora Neale Hurston's Tell My Horse." African American Review. 34.2 (2000): 299–312.

Tucker, Cynthia. "Zora! Celebrated Storyteller Would Have Laughed at Controversy Over Her Origins. She Was Born In Notasulga, Alabama but Eatonville Fla., Claims Her As Its Own"; article documents Kristy Andersen's research into Hurston's birthplace; Atlanta Journal-Constitution , January 22, 1995.

Visweswaran, Kamala.

Fictions of Feminist Ethnography.

Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press , 1994.

ISBN 0-8166-2336-8 Walker, Alice. "In Search of Zora Neale Hurston", Ms.

(March 1975), pp. 74–79, 84–89.

Further reading [ edit ] External videos Presentation by Valerie Boyd on Wrapped in Rainbows , January 15, 2003 , C-SPAN Boyd, Valerie (2003).

Wrapped in Rainbows: The Life of Zora Neale Hurston . Scribner.

ISBN 0684842300 .

Delbanco, Andrew, "The Political Incorrectness of Zora Neale Hurston", The Journal of Blacks in Higher Education , No. 18 (Winter 1997–1998), pp. 103–108.

Green, Sharony (2023).

The Chase and Ruins: Zora Neale Hurston in Honduras . Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 978-1421446660 .

Hemenway, Robert (1977).

Zora Neale Hurston: A Literary Biography . Urbana: University of Illinois Press.

ISBN 0252006526 .

Jones, Sharon Lynette (2009).

Critical Companion to Zora Neale Hurston: A Literary Reference to Her Life and Work .

Infobase Publishing .

ISBN 978-0816068852 .

Lucy Anne Hurston (her niece), Speak So You Can Speak Again .

Freeman Marshall, Jennifer L.

Ain't I An Anthropologist: Zora Neale Hurston Beyond the Literary Icon . University of Illinois Press, 2023.

Moylan VL.

Zora Neale Hurston's Final Decade . University Press of Florida; 2011.

ISBN 0813035783 Plant, Deborah G.

Zora Neale Hurston: A Biography of the Spirit . Praeger Publishers, 2007.

ISBN 978-0275987510 Norwood, Arlisha R.

"Zora Hurston" . National Women's History Museum. 2017 Zora Neale Hurston's "The Conscience of the Court" in The Saturday Evening Post External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Zora Neale Hurston .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Zora Neale Hurston .

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Author:Zora Neale Hurston Official website Zora Neale Hurston: Claiming a Space Zora Neale Hurston: Folklore and Hoodoo [ permanent dead link ] Zora Neale Hurston Archived November 22, 2001, at the Wayback Machine from the Concise Dictionary of American Literary Biography Zora Neale Hurston Festival of the Arts and Humanities (ZORA! Festival) Writings of Hughes and Hurston from C-SPAN 's American Writers: A Journey Through History Zora Neale Hurston Archived April 7, 2020, at the Wayback Machine at Women Film Pioneers Project at Columbia University Zora Neale Hurston at Find a Grave Zora Neale Hurston at IMDb Libraries and archives [ edit ] Zora Neale Hurston: 1891–1960 guide at Howard University Archived December 23, 2014, at the Wayback Machine Zora Neale Hurston at Library of Congress , with 67 library catalog records Project Mosaic: Zora Neale Hurston ( Rollins College ) Olin Library Special Collection and Archive Zora Neale Hurston Collection (Rollins College) Zora Neale Hurston Collection at the Schomburg Center for Research in Black Culture Sound recordings of Hurston in the 1930s at the State Library and Archives of Florida Zora Neale Hurston Digital Archive at the University of Central Florida University of Florida Digital Collections Archive at the University of Florida Zora Neale Hurston Collection Archived March 8, 2012, at the Wayback Machine . James Weldon Johnson Collection in the Yale Collection of American Literature, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library.

Voices from the Gap's biography – University of Minnesota Open-access repositories [ edit ] Works by Zora Neale Hurston at Project Gutenberg Works by Zora Neale Hurston at Faded Page (Canada) Works by or about Zora Neale Hurston at the Internet Archive Works by Zora Neale Hurston at LibriVox (public domain audiobooks) Works by Zora Neale Hurston at Open Library v t e Zora Neale Hurston Novels Jonah's Gourd Vine (1934) Their Eyes Were Watching God (1937) Moses, Man of the Mountain (1939) Seraph on the Suwanee (1948) Nonfiction " How It Feels to Be Colored Me " (1928) Mules and Men (1935) Dust Tracks on a Road (1942) Barracoon: The Story of the Last "Black Cargo" (2018) Plays Color Struck (1925) Mule Bone (1930, staged 1991) Short stories " Sweat " (1926) " The Gilded Six Bits " (1933) " Hitting a Straight Lick with a Crooked Stick: Stories from the Harlem Renaissance " (2020) Adaptations Spunk (1989) Their Eyes Were Watching God (2005) Related Zora Neale Hurston House Zora Neale Hurston Museum of Fine Arts Hurston/Wright Legacy Award v t e Florida Women's Hall of Fame Administered by the Florida Commission on the Status of Women 1980s 1982 Mary McLeod Bethune Helene S. Coleman Elaine Gordon Wilhelmina Celeste Goehring Harvey Paula Mae Milton Barbara Jo Palmer 1984 Roxcy O'Neal Bolton Barbara Landstreet Frye Lena B. Smithers Hughes Zora Neale Hurston Sybil Collins Mobley Helen Muir Gladys Pumariega Soler Julia DeForest Sturtevant Tuttle 1986 Annie Ackerman Rosemary Barkett Gwendolyn Sawyer Cherry Dorothy Dodd Marjory Stoneman Douglas Elsie Jones Hare Elizabeth McCullough Johnson Frances Bartlett Kinne Arva Moore Parks McCabe Marjorie Kinnan Rawlings Florence Barbara Seibert Marilyn K. Smith Eartha M. M. White 1990s 1992 Jacqueline Cochran Carrie P. Meek Ruth Bryan Owen 1993 Betty Skelton Frankman Erde Paulina Pedroso Janet Reno 1994 Nikki Beare Betty Mae Jumper Gladys Nichols Milton 1995 Evelyn Stocking Crosslin JoAnn Hardin Morgan Sarah Brooks Pryor 1996 Marjorie Harris Carr Betty Castor Ivy Julia Cromartie Stranahan 1997 Alicia Baro Carita Doggett Corse M. Athalie Range 1998 Helen Gordon Davis Mattie Belle Davis Christine Fulwylie-Bankston 1999 Althea Gibson Sister Jeanne O'Laughlin Dessie Smith Prescott 2000s 2000 Chris Evert Paula Fickes Hawkins Marianne Mathewson-Chapman 2001 Jessie Ball duPont Lenore Carrero Nesbitt Lynda Keever 2002 Victoria Joyce Ely Toni Jennings Frances Langford Stuart 2003 Sarah Ann Blocker Gloria Estefan Mary R. Grizzle 2005 Shirley D. Coletti Judith Kersey Marion Hammer 2006 Caridad Asensio Tillie Fowler Lucy W. Morgan 2007 Maryly VanLeer Peck Peggy A. Quince 2008 Barbara J. Pariente Pallavi Patel Ileana Ros-Lehtinen 2009 Louise H. Cortelis Gwen Margolis Betty Schlesinger Sembler 2010s 2010 Eugenie Clark Claudine Dianne Ryce Dara Grace Torres 2011 Mary Brennan Karl Anna I. Rodriguez 2012 Ruth H. Alexander Elizabeth "Budd" Bell Vicki Bryant Burke 2013 Clara C. Frye Aleene Pridgen Kidd MacKenzie Lillie Pierce Voss 2014 Susan Benton Louise Jones Gopher Dottie Berger MacKinnon 2015 Mary Lee Farrior Evelyn Cahn Keiser Charlotte Edwards Maguire 2016 Carol Jenkins Barnett Helen Aguirre Ferré Elmira Louise Leto 2017 Mary Lou Baker Kathleen Scott Robertson Katherine Fernandez Rundle 2018 Adela Hernandez Gonzmart Janet Petro Lee Bird Leavengood 2019 Doris Mae Barnes Judith A. Bense Mildred Wilborn Gildersleeve 2020s 2020 Alice Scott Abbott Alma Lee Loy E. Thelma Waters 2021 Virginia M. Hernandez Covington Barbara Nicklaus Beverly Yeager v t e Inductees to the National Women's Hall of Fame 1970–1979 1973 Jane Addams Marian Anderson Susan B. Anthony Clara Barton Mary McLeod Bethune Elizabeth Blackwell Pearl S. Buck Rachel Carson Mary Cassatt Emily Dickinson Amelia Earhart Alice Hamilton Helen Hayes Helen Keller Eleanor Roosevelt Florence Sabin Margaret Chase Smith Elizabeth Cady Stanton Helen Brooke Taussig Harriet Tubman 1976 Abigail Adams Margaret Mead Mildred "Babe" Didrikson Zaharias 1979 Dorothea Dix Juliette Gordon Low Alice Paul Elizabeth Bayley Seton 1980–1989 1981 Margaret Sanger Sojourner Truth 1982 Carrie Chapman Catt Frances Perkins 1983 Belva Lockwood Lucretia Mott 1984 Mary "Mother" Harris Jones Bessie Smith 1986 Barbara McClintock Lucy Stone Harriet Beecher Stowe 1988 Gwendolyn Brooks Willa Cather Sally Ride Mary Risteau Ida B. Wells-Barnett 1990–1999 1990 Margaret Bourke-White Barbara Jordan Billie Jean King Florence B. Seibert 1991 Gertrude Belle Elion 1993 Ethel Percy Andrus Antoinette Blackwell Emily Blackwell Shirley Chisholm Jacqueline Cochran Ruth Colvin Marian Wright Edelman Alice Evans Betty Friedan Ella Grasso Martha Wright Griffiths Fannie Lou Hamer Dorothy Height Dolores Huerta Mary Putnam Jacobi Mae Jemison Mary Lyon Mary Mahoney Wilma Mankiller Constance Baker Motley Georgia O'Keeffe Annie Oakley Rosa Parks Esther Peterson Jeannette Rankin Ellen Swallow Richards Elaine Roulet Katherine Siva Saubel Gloria Steinem Helen Stephens Lillian Wald Madam C. J. Walker Faye Wattleton Rosalyn S. Yalow Gloria Yerkovich 1994 Bella Abzug Ella Baker Myra Bradwell Annie Jump Cannon Jane Cunningham Croly Catherine East Geraldine Ferraro Charlotte Perkins Gilman Grace Hopper Helen LaKelly Hunt Zora Neale Hurston Anne Hutchinson Frances Wisebart Jacobs Susette La Flesche Louise McManus Maria Mitchell Antonia Novello Linda Richards Wilma Rudolph Betty Bone Schiess Muriel Siebert Nettie Stevens Oprah Winfrey Sarah Winnemucca Fanny Wright 1995 Virginia Apgar Ann Bancroft Amelia Bloomer Mary Breckinridge Eileen Collins Elizabeth Hanford Dole Anne Dallas Dudley Mary Baker Eddy Ella Fitzgerald Margaret Fuller Matilda Joslyn Gage Lillian Moller Gilbreth Nannerl O. Keohane Maggie Kuhn Sandra Day O'Connor Josephine St. Pierre Ruffin Pat Schroeder Hannah Greenebaum Solomon 1996 Louisa May Alcott Charlotte Anne Bunch Frances Xavier Cabrini Mary A. Hallaren Oveta Culp Hobby Wilhelmina Cole Holladay Anne Morrow Lindbergh Maria Goeppert Mayer Ernestine Louise Potowski Rose Maria Tallchief Edith Wharton 1998 Madeleine Albright Maya Angelou Nellie Bly Lydia Moss Bradley Mary Steichen Calderone Mary Ann Shadd Cary Joan Ganz Cooney Gerty Cori Sarah Grimké Julia Ward Howe Shirley Ann Jackson Shannon Lucid Katharine Dexter McCormick Rozanne L. Ridgway Edith Nourse Rogers Felice Schwartz Eunice Kennedy Shriver Beverly Sills Florence Wald Angelina Grimké Weld Chien-Shiung Wu 2000–2009 2000 Faye Glenn Abdellah Emma Smith DeVoe Marjory Stoneman Douglas Mary Dyer Sylvia A. Earle Crystal Eastman Jeanne Holm Leontine T. Kelly Frances Oldham Kelsey Kate Mullany Janet Reno Anna Howard Shaw Sophia Smith Ida Tarbell Wilma L. Vaught Mary Edwards Walker Annie Dodge Wauneka Eudora Welty Frances E. Willard 2001 Dorothy H. Andersen Lucille Ball Rosalynn Carter Lydia Maria Child Bessie Coleman Dorothy Day Marian de Forest Althea Gibson Beatrice A. Hicks Barbara Holdridge Harriet Williams Russell Strong Emily Howell Warner Victoria Woodhull 2002 Paulina Kellogg Wright Davis Ruth Bader Ginsburg Katharine Graham Bertha Holt Mary Engle Pennington Mercy Otis Warren 2003 Linda G. Alvarado Donna de Varona Gertrude Ederle Martha Matilda Harper Patricia Roberts Harris Stephanie L. Kwolek Dorothea Lange Mildred Robbins Leet Patsy Takemoto Mink Sacagawea Anne Sullivan Sheila E. Widnall 2005 Florence E. Allen Ruth Fulton Benedict Betty Bumpers Hillary Clinton Rita Rossi Colwell Mother Marianne Cope Maya Y. Lin Patricia A. Locke Blanche Stuart Scott Mary Burnett Talbert 2007 Eleanor K. Baum Julia Child Martha Coffin Pelham Wright Swanee Hunt Winona LaDuke Elisabeth Kübler-Ross Judith L. Pipher Catherine Filene Shouse Henrietta Szold 2009 Louise Bourgeois Mildred Cohn Karen DeCrow Susan Kelly-Dreiss Allie B. Latimer Emma Lazarus Ruth Patrick Rebecca Talbot Perkins Susan Solomon Kate Stoneman 2010–2019 2011 St. Katharine Drexel Dorothy Harrison Eustis Loretta C. Ford Abby Kelley Foster Helen Murray Free Billie Holiday Coretta Scott King Lilly Ledbetter Barbara A. Mikulski Donna E. Shalala Kathrine Switzer 2013 Betty Ford Ina May Gaskin Julie Krone Kate Millett Nancy Pelosi Mary Joseph Rogers Bernice Sandler Anna Schwartz Emma Willard 2015 Tenley Albright Nancy Brinker Martha Graham Marcia Greenberger Barbara Iglewski Jean Kilbourne Carlotta Walls LaNier Philippa Marrack Mary Harriman Rumsey Eleanor Smeal 2017 Matilda Cuomo Temple Grandin Lorraine Hansberry Victoria Jackson Sherry Lansing Clare Boothe Luce Aimee Mullins Carol Mutter Janet Rowley Alice Waters 2019 Gloria Allred Angela Davis Sarah Deer Jane Fonda Nicole Malachowski Rose O'Neill Louise Slaughter Sonia Sotomayor Laurie Spiegel Flossie Wong-Staal 2020–2029 2020 Aretha Franklin Barbara Hillary Barbara Rose Johns Henrietta Lacks Toni Morrison Mary Church Terrell 2022 Octavia E. Butler Judy Chicago Rebecca S. Halstead Mia Hamm Joy Harjo Emily Howland Katherine Johnson Indra Nooyi Michelle Obama 2024 Patricia Bath Ruby Bridges Elouise P. Cobell Kimberlé Crenshaw Peggy McIntosh Judith Plaskow Loretta Ross Sandy Stone Anna Wessels Williams Serena Williams Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists MusicBrainz Discography of American Historical Recordings FID People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐bnw57
Cached time: 20250817044120
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 2.301 seconds
Real time usage: 2.655 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 18896/1000000
Revision size: 119162/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 549359/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 24744/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 22/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 543935/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 1.337/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18151022/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2170.877      1 -total
 43.09%  935.411      1 Template:Reflist
 18.67%  405.303     69 Template:Cite_web
 15.87%  344.522      1 Template:Infobox_person
  9.83%  213.463     25 Template:Cite_book
  7.82%  169.773     21 Template:Pluralize_from_text
  5.08%  110.183     15 Template:Rp
  5.03%  109.276      1 Template:Ubl
  4.89%  106.101      3 Template:Marriage
  4.80%  104.219      1 Template:Conservatism_US Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:34452:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044120 and revision id 1301018397. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Zora_Neale_Hurston&oldid=1301018397 " Categories : Zora Neale Hurston 1891 births 1960 deaths 20th-century African-American scientists 20th-century African-American women writers 20th-century African-American writers 20th-century American anthropologists 20th-century American dramatists and playwrights 20th-century American journalists 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century American novelists 20th-century American scientists 20th-century American short story writers 20th-century American women journalists 20th-century American women scientists 20th-century American women writers 20th-century American writers African-American anthropologists African-American atheists African-American novelists African-American short story writers American atheists American folklorists African-American folklorists American humanists American libertarians American women anthropologists American women dramatists and playwrights American women folklorists American women non-fiction writers American women novelists American women short story writers Barnard College alumni Black conservatism in the United States Columbia University alumni Federal Writers' Project people Florida Republicans Harlem Renaissance Howard University alumni Individualist feminists Journalists from Alabama Oral historians People from Eatonville, Florida People from Eau Gallie, Florida People from Fort Pierce, Florida People from Macon County, Alabama People from Westfield, New Jersey Women film pioneers Writers from Florida Writers of American Southern literature African-American women novelists African-American women short story writers American Writers Association members Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Encyclopædia Britannica links CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1: unfit URL All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from December 2021 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from October 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from September 2019 Pages using embedded infobox templates with the title parameter Articles with hCards All articles with failed verification Articles with failed verification from March 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata Articles with dead external links from August 2023 Articles with Project Gutenberg links Articles with Internet Archive links Articles with LibriVox links Articles with Open Library links Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 17:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Zora Neale Hurston 51 languages Add topic

