Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Semantic field 2 Types of therapies Toggle Types of therapies subsection 2.1 By chronology, priority, or intensity 2.1.1 Levels of care 2.1.2 Lines of therapy 2.2 By intent 2.3 By intervention 2.4 By therapy composition 2.4.1 By matter 2.4.2 By energy 2.4.3 By procedure and human interaction 2.4.4 By animal interaction 2.4.5 By meditation 2.4.6 By reading 2.4.7 By creativity 2.4.8 By sleeping and waking 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Therapy 68 languages अंगिका العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская भोजपुरी Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego ГӀалгӀай 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ کٲشُر Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Magyar Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پښتو Polski Português Română Русский සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Twi Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Attempted medical remediation of a health problem For other uses, see Therapy (disambiguation) .

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Therapy" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Medical intervention Therapy Children undergoing physical therapy. ( polio ) MeSH D013812 [ edit on Wikidata ] A therapy or medical treatment is the attempted remediation of a health problem, usually following a medical diagnosis . Both words, treatment and therapy , are often abbreviated tx , Tx , or T x .

As a rule, each therapy has indications and contraindications .  There are many different types of therapy.  Not all therapies are effective .  Many therapies can produce unwanted adverse effects .

Treatment and therapy are often synonymous, especially in the usage of health professionals . However,  in the context of mental health , the term therapy may refer specifically to psychotherapy .

A therapist is a person who offers any modality of therapy. Therapist refers to trained professionals engaged in providing services any kind of treatment or rehabilitation.

[ 1 ] Semantic field [ edit ] The words care , therapy , treatment , and intervention overlap in a semantic field , and thus they can be synonymous depending on context . Moving rightward through that order, the connotative level of holism decreases and the level of specificity (to concrete instances) increases. Thus, in health-care contexts (where its senses are always noncount ), the word care tends to imply a broad idea of everything done to protect or improve someone's health (for example, as in the terms preventive care and primary care , which connote ongoing action), although it sometimes implies a narrower idea (for example, in the simplest cases of wound care or postanesthesia care , a few particular steps are sufficient, and the patient's interaction with the provider of such care is soon finished). In contrast, the word intervention tends to be specific and concrete, and thus the word is often countable ; for example, one instance of cardiac catheterization is one intervention performed, and coronary care (noncount) can require a series of interventions (count). At the extreme, the piling on of such countable interventions amounts to interventionism , a flawed model of care lacking holistic circumspection —merely treating discrete problems (in billable increments) rather than maintaining health.

Therapy and treatment , in the middle of the semantic field, can connote either the holism of care or the discreteness of intervention , with context conveying the intent in each use. Accordingly, they can be used in both noncount and count senses (for example, therapy for chronic kidney disease can involve several dialysis treatments per week ).

The words aceology and iamatology are obscure and obsolete synonyms referring to the study of therapies.

The English word therapy comes via Latin therapīa from Ancient Greek : θεραπεία and literally means "curing" or "healing".

[ 2 ] The term therapeusis is a somewhat archaic doublet of the word therapy .

Types of therapies [ edit ] Therapy as a treatment for physical or mental condition is based on knowledge usually from one of three separate fields (or a combination of them): conventional medicine (allopathic, Western biomedicine, relying on scientific approach and evidence-based practice), traditional medicine (age-old cultural practices), and alternative medicine (healthcare procedures "not readily integrated into the dominant healthcare model").

[ 3 ] By chronology, priority, or intensity [ edit ] Levels of care [ edit ] Levels of care classify health care into categories of chronology, priority, or intensity, as follows: Urgent care handles health issues that need to be handled today but are not necessarily emergencies; the urgent care venue can send a patient to the emergency care level if it turns out to be needed.

In the United States (and possibly various other countries), urgent care centers also serve another function as their other main purpose: U.S.

primary care practices have evolved in recent decades into a configuration whereby urgent care centers provide portions of primary care that cannot wait a month, because getting an appointment with the primary care practitioner is often subject to a waitlist of 2 to 8 weeks.

[ 4 ] Emergency care handles medical emergencies and is a first point of contact or intake for less serious problems, which can be referred to other levels of care as appropriate. This therapy is often given to patients before a definitive diagnosis is made.

[ 5 ] Intensive care , also called critical care , is care for extremely ill or injured patients. It thus requires high resource intensity, knowledge, and skill, as well as quick decision making .

Ambulatory care is care provided on an outpatient basis. Typically patients can walk into and out of the clinic under their own power (hence "ambulatory"), usually on the same day. This care type also involves surgery which, according to recent research, offers "generally superior 30-day outcomes relative to inpatient-based care".

[ 6 ] Home care is care at home, including care from providers (such as physicians, nurses, and home health aides) making house calls , care from caregivers such as family members, and patient self-care .

Primary care is meant to be the main kind of care in general, and ideally a medical home that unifies care across referred providers. The current trend in this area is digitalization aiming to ensure open access to information about therapy, issues, and recent progress on biomedical research.

[ 7 ] Secondary care is care provided by medical specialists and other health professionals who generally do not have first contact with patients, for example, cardiologists , urologists and dermatologists . A patient reaches secondary care as a next step from primary care , typically by provider referral although sometimes by patient self-initiative. According to a systematic review, fields for development secondary care from patients' viewpoint may be classified into four domains that should usefully guide future improvement of this care stage: "barriers to care, communication, coordination, and relationships and personal value".

[ 8 ] Tertiary care is specialized consultative care, usually for inpatients and on referral from a primary or secondary health professional, in a facility that has personnel and facilities for advanced medical investigation and treatment, such as a tertiary referral hospital .

Follow-up care is additional care during or after convalescence . Aftercare is generally synonymous with follow-up care. One of the key areas of development–Telehealth, including non-clinical services: provider training, administrative meetings, and continuing medical education–offers opportunities to improve access to care, increase provider and patient productivity through reduced travel, potential expenses savings, and the ability to expand services.

[ 9 ] End-of-life care is care near the end of one's life. It often includes the following: Palliative care is supportive care , most especially (but not necessarily) near the end of life.

Hospice care is palliative care very near the end of life when cure is very unlikely. Its main goal is comfort, both physical and mental. A systematic meta review showed that the most cost-efficient one relates to home-based end-of-life care, including reduced overall "resource use and improved patient and carer outcomes".

[ 10 ] Lines of therapy [ edit ] Treatment decisions often follow formal or informal algorithmic guidelines. Treatment options can often be ranked or prioritized into lines of therapy : first-line therapy , second-line therapy , third-line therapy , and so on.

First-line therapy (sometimes referred to as induction therapy , primary therapy , or front-line therapy ) [ 11 ] is the first therapy that will be tried. Its priority over other options is usually either: (1) formally recommended on the basis of clinical trial evidence for its best-available combination of efficacy, safety, and tolerability or (2) chosen based on the clinical experience of the physician. If a first-line therapy either fails to resolve the issue or produces intolerable side effects , additional (second-line) therapies may be substituted or added to the treatment regimen, followed by third-line therapies, and so on.

An example of a context in which the formalization of treatment algorithms and the ranking of lines of therapy is very extensive is chemotherapy regimens . Because of the great difficulty in successfully treating some forms of cancer, one line after another may be tried. In oncology the count of therapy lines may reach 10 or even 20.

Often multiple therapies may be tried simultaneously ( combination therapy or polytherapy). Thus combination chemotherapy is also called polychemotherapy, whereas chemotherapy with one agent at a time is called single-agent therapy or monotherapy. Single-agent therapy is a care algorithm that focuses on one specific drug or procedure. It utilizes a single therapeutic agent rather than combining multiple ones.

[ 12 ] Multiagent Therapy is a treatment by two or more drugs or procedures. Comprehensive therapy combines various forms of medical treatment to provide the most effective care for patients.

[ 13 ] Adjuvant therapy is therapy given in addition to the primary, main, or initial treatment, but simultaneously (as opposed to second-line therapy).

Neoadjuvant therapy is therapy that is begun before the main therapy. Thus one can consider surgical excision of a tumor as the first-line therapy for a certain type and stage of cancer even though radiotherapy is used before it; the radiotherapy is neoadjuvant (chronologically first but not primary in the sense of the main event).

Premedication is conceptually not far from this, but the words are not interchangeable; cytotoxic drugs to put a tumor "on the ropes" before surgery delivers the "knockout punch"  are called neoadjuvant chemotherapy, not premedication, whereas things like anesthetics or prophylactic antibiotics before dental surgery are called premedication.

[ citation needed ] Step therapy or stepladder therapy is a specific type of prioritization by lines of therapy. It is controversial in American health care because unlike conventional decision-making about what constitutes first-line, second-line, and third-line therapy, which in the U.S. reflects safety and efficacy first and cost only according to the patient's wishes, step therapy attempts to mix cost containment by someone other than the patient (third-party payers) into the algorithm.

[ citation needed ] Therapy freedom refers to prescription for use of an unlicensed medicine (without a marketing authorization issued by the licensing authority of the country) [ 14 ] and the negotiation between individual and group rights are involved. A comprehensive research in Australia, Czech Republic, India, Israel, Italy, Netherlands, Spain, Serbia, Sweden, UK, and USA showed that the rate of the unlicensed medicine prescription has been reported to range from 0.3 to 35% depending on the country.

[ 14 ] In many jurisdictions, therapy freedom is limited to cases of no treatment existing that is both well-established and more efficacious.

[ 15 ] By intent [ edit ] Therapy type Description abortive therapy A therapy that is intended to stop a medical condition from progressing any further.  A medication taken at the earliest signs of a disease, such as an analgesic taken at the first symptoms of a migraine headache to prevent it from getting worse, is an abortive therapy. Compare abortifacients , which abort a pregnancy.

bridge therapy A therapy that figuratively provides a bridge to another step or phase, crossing over some immediate chasm (challenge), in contrast with destination therapy , which is the final therapy in cases where clinically appropriate.

consolidation therapy A therapy given to consolidate the gains from induction therapy . In cancer, this means chasing after any malignant cells that may be left.

curative therapy A therapy with curative intent , that is, one that seeks to cure the root cause of a disorder. (also called etiotropic therapy) definitive therapy A therapy that may be final, superior to others, curative , or all of those.

destination therapy A therapy that is the final destination rather than a bridge to another therapy. Usually refers to ventricular assist devices to keep the existing heart going, not just until heart transplantation can occur, but for the rest of the patient's life expectancy.

empiric therapy A therapy given on an empiric basis; that is, one given according to a clinician's educated guess despite uncertainty about the illness's causative factors. For example, empiric antibiotic therapy administers a broad-spectrum antibiotic immediately on the basis of a good chance (given the history, physical examination findings, and risk factors present) that the illness is bacterial and will respond to that drug (even though the bacterial species or variant is not yet known).

gold standard therapy A therapy that is definitive , just as a gold standard diagnostic test is a definitive test.

investigational therapy An experimental therapy. Use of experimental therapies must be ethically justified, because by definition they raise the question of standard of care . Physicians have autonomy to provide empirical care (such as off-label care) according to their experience and clinical judgment, but the autonomy has limits that preclude quackery . Thus it may be necessary to design a clinical trial around the new therapy and to use the therapy only per a formal protocol . Sometimes shorthand phrases such as "treated on protocol" imply not just "treated according to a plan" but specifically "treated with investigational therapy".

maintenance therapy A therapy taken during disease remission to prevent relapse.

palliative therapy See supportive therapy for connotative distinctions.

preventive therapy (prophylactic therapy) A therapy that is intended to prevent a medical condition from occurring (also called prophylaxis). For example, many vaccines prevent infectious diseases.

salvage therapy (rescue therapy) A therapy tried after others have failed; it may be a "last- line " therapy.

stepdown therapy Therapy that tapers the dosage gradually rather than abruptly cutting it off. For example, a switch from intravenous to oral antibiotics as an infection is brought under control steps down the intensity of therapy.

supportive therapy A therapy that does not treat or improve the underlying condition, but rather increases the patient's comfort, also called symptomatic treatment (see there for more information).

[ 16 ] For example, supportive care for flu, colds, or gastrointestinal upset can include rest, fluids, and over-the-counter pain relievers; those things do not treat the cause, but they treat the symptoms and thus provide relief. Supportive therapy may be palliative therapy ( palliative care ). The two terms are sometimes synonymous, but palliative care often specifically refers to serious illness and end-of-life care . Therapy may be categorized as having curative intent (when it is possible to eliminate the disease) or palliative intent (when eliminating the disease is impossible and the focus shifts to minimizing the distress that it causes). The two are often contradistinguished (mutually exclusive) in some contexts (such as the management of some cancers ), but they are not inherently mutually exclusive; often therapy can be both curative and palliative simultaneously.

Supportive psychotherapy aims to support the patient by alleviating the worst of the symptoms, with the expectation that definitive therapy can follow later if possible.

systemic therapy A therapy that is systemic . In the physiological sense , this means affecting the whole body (rather than being local or locoregional), whether via systemic administration , systemic effect, or both.

Systemic therapy in the psychotherapeutic sense seeks to address people not only on the individual level but also as people in relationships, dealing with the interactions of groups.

By intervention [ edit ] Invasive therapy is achieved either through surgery or through the use of drugs.

[ 17 ] Medical invasive treatments can be divided into two main categories: pharmacotherapy and surgery.

[ 18 ] Noninvasive therapies are medical treatments that do not involve entry into the body. It can be classified into five main categories:  neurotherapy, physical therapy, occupational therapy, radiation therapy, and psychotherapy.

[ 19 ] The latest trend in noninvasive therapy is remote treatment, which is experiencing significant global growth via telecommunication technologies. Teletherapy encompasses three practices of remote treatment: telepsychiatry, telepsychology, and teleneurotherapy.

[ 20 ] This approach to medical treatment uses telecommunication technologies to provide exclusively mental [ 21 ] [ 22 ] or neurological therapy at a distance.

[ 20 ] [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] By therapy composition [ edit ] Treatments can be classified according to the method of treatment: By matter [ edit ] by drugs : pharmacotherapy , chemotherapy (also, medical therapy often means specifically pharmacotherapy) by medical devices : implantation cardiac resynchronization therapy by specific molecules : molecular therapy (although most drugs are specific molecules, molecular medicine refers in particular to medicine relying on molecular biology ) by specific biomolecular targets: targeted therapy molecular chaperone therapy by chelation : chelation therapy by specific chemical elements : by metals : by heavy metals : by gold : chrysotherapy (aurotherapy) by platinum -containing drugs: platin therapy by biometals by lithium : lithium therapy by potassium : potassium supplementation by magnesium : magnesium supplementation by chromium : chromium supplementation ; phonemic neurological hypochromium therapy by copper : copper supplementation by nonmetals : by diatomic oxygen : oxygen therapy , hyperbaric oxygen therapy ( hyperbaric medicine ) transdermal continuous oxygen therapy by triatomic oxygen ( ozone ): ozone therapy by fluoride : fluoride therapy by other gases: medical gas therapy by water : hydrotherapy aquatic therapy rehydration therapy oral rehydration therapy water cure (therapy) by biological materials ( biogenic substances , biomolecules , biotic materials , natural products ), including their synthetic equivalents: biotherapy by whole organisms by viruses : virotherapy by bacteriophages : phage therapy by animal interaction: see animal interaction section by constituents or products of organisms by plant parts or extracts (but many drugs are derived from plants, even when the term phytotherapy is not used) scientific type: phytotherapy traditional (prescientific) type: herbalism by animal parts: quackery involving shark fins, tiger parts, and so on, often driving threat or endangerment of species by genes : gene therapy gene therapy for epilepsy gene therapy for osteoarthritis gene therapy for color blindness gene therapy of the human retina gene therapy in Parkinson's disease by epigenetics : epigenetic therapy by proteins : protein therapy (but many drugs are proteins despite not being called protein therapy) by enzymes : enzyme replacement therapy by hormones : hormone therapy hormonal therapy (oncology) hormone replacement therapy estrogen replacement therapy androgen replacement therapy hormone replacement therapy (menopause) transgender hormone therapy feminizing hormone therapy masculinizing hormone therapy antihormone therapy androgen deprivation therapy by whole cells : cell therapy (cytotherapy) by stem cells : stem cell therapy by immune cells : see immune system products below by immune system products: immunotherapy , host modulatory therapy by immune cells : T-cell vaccination cell transfer therapy autologous immune enhancement therapy TK cell therapy by humoral immune factors : antibody therapy by whole serum : serotherapy, including antiserum therapy by immunoglobulins : immunoglobulin therapy by monoclonal antibodies : monoclonal antibody therapy by urine : urine therapy (some scientific forms; many prescientific or pseudoscientific forms) by food and dietary choices: medical nutrition therapy grape therapy (quackery) by salts (but many drugs are the salts of organic acids, even when drug therapy is not called by names reflecting that) by salts in the air by natural dry salt air: "taking the cure" in desert locales (especially common in prescientific medicine; for example, one 19th-century way to treat tuberculosis) by artificial dry salt air: low-humidity forms of speleotherapy negative air ionization therapy by moist salt air : by natural moist salt air: seaside cure (especially common in prescientific medicine) by artificial moist salt air: water vapor forms of speleotherapy by salts in the water by mineral water : spa cure ("taking the waters") (especially common in prescientific medicine) by seawater : seaside cure (especially common in prescientific medicine) by aroma : aromatherapy by other materials with mechanism of action unknown by occlusion with duct tape: duct tape occlusion therapy By energy [ edit ] by electric energy as electric current : electrotherapy , electroconvulsive therapy Transcranial magnetic stimulation Vagus nerve stimulation by magnetic energy : magnet therapy pulsed electromagnetic field therapy magnetic resonance therapy by electromagnetic radiation (EMR): by light : light therapy (phototherapy) ultraviolet light therapy PUVA therapy photodynamic therapy photothermal therapy cytoluminescent therapy blood irradiation therapy by darkness : dark therapy by lasers : laser therapy low level laser therapy by gamma rays : radiosurgery Gamma Knife radiosurgery stereotactic radiation therapy cobalt therapy by radiation generally: radiation therapy (radiotherapy) intraoperative radiation therapy by EMR particles : particle therapy proton therapy electron therapy intraoperative electron radiation therapy Auger therapy neutron therapy fast neutron therapy neutron capture therapy of cancer by radioisotopes emitting EMR: by nuclear medicine by brachytherapy quackery type: electromagnetic therapy (alternative medicine) by mechanical : manual therapy as massotherapy and therapy by exercise as in physical therapy inversion therapy by sound : by ultrasound : ultrasonic lithotripsy extracorporeal shockwave therapy sonodynamic therapy by music : music therapy by temperature by heat : heat therapy (thermotherapy) by moderately elevated ambient temperatures: hyperthermia therapy by dry warm surroundings: Waon therapy by dry or humid warm surroundings: sauna , including infrared sauna , for sweat therapy by cold : by extreme cold to specific tissue volumes: cryotherapy by ice and compression: cold compression therapy by ambient cold: hypothermia therapy for neonatal encephalopathy (in newborns) targeted temperature management (therapeutic hypothermia, protective hypothermia) by hot and cold alternation: contrast bath therapy By procedure and human interaction [ edit ] Surgery by counseling , such as psychotherapy ( see also: list of psychotherapies ) systemic therapy by group psychotherapy [ 26 ] by cognitive behavioral therapy by cognitive therapy by behaviour therapy by dialectical behavior therapy by cognitive emotional behavioral therapy by cognitive rehabilitation therapy by family therapy by education by psychoeducation by information therapy by speech therapy , physical therapy , occupational therapy , vision therapy , massage therapy, chiropractic or acupuncture by lifestyle modifications , such as avoiding unhealthy food or maintaining a predictable sleep schedule by coaching By animal interaction [ edit ] by pets , assistance animals , or working animals : animal-assisted therapy by horses : equine therapy , hippotherapy by dogs : pet therapy with therapy dogs , including grief therapy dogs by cats : pet therapy with therapy cats by fish : ichthyotherapy (wading with fish), aquarium therapy (watching fish) by maggots : maggot therapy by worms : by internal worms: helminthic therapy by leeches : leech therapy by immersion : animal bath By meditation [ edit ] by mindfulness : mindfulness-based cognitive therapy By reading [ edit ] by bibliotherapy By creativity [ edit ] by expression: expressive therapy by writing : writing therapy journal therapy by play : play therapy by art : art therapy sensory art therapy comic book therapy by gardening : horticultural therapy by dance : dance therapy by drama : drama therapy by recreation : recreational therapy by music : music therapy By sleeping and waking [ edit ] by deep sleep : deep sleep therapy [ 27 ] by sleep deprivation: wake therapy [ 28 ] See also [ edit ] Biophilia hypothesis Classification of Pharmaco-Therapeutic Referrals Compassion-focused therapy Emotionally focused therapy Greyhound therapy Inverse benefit law List of therapies Mature minor doctrine Medication Medicine Nutraceutical Prevention Psychedelic therapy Therapeutic inertia Therapeutic nihilism , the idea that treatment is useless Treatment as prevention References [ edit ] ^ "Therapist Vs. Psychologist | BetterHelp" . betterhelp.com. 26 May 2022 . Retrieved 12 June 2022 .

^ "therapy | Search Online Etymology Dictionary" .

www.etymonline.com .

^ Eskinazi, D., & Mindes, J. (2001). "Alternative medicine: definition, scope and challenges".

Asia-Pacific Biotech News , 5(01), 19-25.

^ Buttorff, C., Heins, S.E. & Al-Ibrahim, H. Comparison of definitions for identifying urgent care centers in health insurance claims. Health Serv Outcomes Res Method 21, 229–237 (2021).

https://doi.org/10.1007/s10742-020-00224-6 ^ Hansoti, B., Aluisio, A. R., Barry, M. A., Davey, K., Lentz, B. A., Modi, P., ... & Global Emergency Medicine Think Tank Clinical Research Working Group. (2017). Global health and emergency care: defining clinical research priorities. Academic Emergency Medicine, 24(6), 742–753.

^ Friedlander, David F.; Krimphove, Marieke J.; Cole, Alexander P.; Marchese, Maya; Lipsitz, Stuart R.; Weissman, Joel S.; Schoenfeld, Andrew J.; Ortega, Gezzer; Trinh, Quoc-Dien (May 2021). "Where Is the Value in Ambulatory Versus Inpatient Surgery?".

Annals of Surgery .

273 (5): 909– 916.

doi : 10.1097/SLA.0000000000003578 .

PMID 31460878 .

^ Senbekov, Maksut; Saliev, Timur; Bukeyeva, Zhanar; Almabayeva, Aigul; Zhanaliyeva, Marina; Aitenova, Nazym; Toishibekov, Yerzhan; Fakhradiyev, Ildar (3 December 2020).

"The Recent Progress and Applications of Digital Technologies in Healthcare: A Review" .

International Journal of Telemedicine and Applications .

2020 : 1– 18.

doi : 10.1155/2020/8830200 .

PMC 7732404 .

PMID 33343657 .

^ Sampson, Rod; Cooper, Jamie; Barbour, Rosaline; Polson, Rob; Wilson, Philip (October 2015).

"Patients' perspectives on the medical primary–secondary care interface: systematic review and synthesis of qualitative research" .

BMJ Open .

5 (10): e008708.

doi : 10.1136/bmjopen-2015-008708 .

PMC 4611413 .

PMID 26474939 .

^ Snoswell, Centaine L; Taylor, Monica L; Comans, Tracy A; Smith, Anthony C; Gray, Leonard C; Caffery, Liam J (19 October 2020).

"Determining if Telehealth Can Reduce Health System Costs: Scoping Review" .

Journal of Medical Internet Research .

22 (10): e17298.

doi : 10.2196/17298 .

PMC 7605980 .

PMID 33074157 .

^ Luta, Xhyljeta; Ottino, Baptiste; Hall, Peter; Bowden, Joanna; Wee, Bee; Droney, Joanne; Riley, Julia; Marti, Joachim (December 2021).

"Evidence on the economic value of end-of-life and palliative care interventions: a narrative review of reviews" .

BMC Palliative Care .

20 (1) 89.

doi : 10.1186/s12904-021-00782-7 .

PMC 8223342 .

PMID 34162377 .

^ National Cancer Institute > Dictionary of Cancer Terms > first-line therapy Retrieved July 2010 ^ Markham M. (2018). "Single Versus Multiagent Therapy: It's Time to Revisit the Choices." OncologyLive , 19(22), 1. online: https://www.onclive.com/view/single-versus-multiagent-therapy-its-time-to-revisit-the-choices ^ "Journal objective".

Comprehensive Therapy .

25 (1): 62. January 1999.

doi : 10.1007/BF02889838 .

^ a b Gore, Rajeshwari; Chugh, Preeta K.; Tripathi, Chakra D.; Lhamo, Yangshen; Gautam, Sandhya (8 June 2017). "Pediatric Off-Label and Unlicensed Drug Use and Its Implications".

Current Clinical Pharmacology .

12 (1).

doi : 10.2174/1574884712666170317161935 .

PMID 28322168 .

^ Derbyshire Medicines Management. "Prescribing and Guidelines". Retrieved online 20.03.2025: https://www.derbyshiremedicinesmanagement.nhs.uk/assets/Specials/Patient_Information/PIL_-_why_your_GP_has_not_prescribed_an_unlicensed_medicine.pdf ^ "CFIDS" . CFIDS. Archived from the original on 2012-02-13 . Retrieved 2012-01-09 .

^ Cousins, Sian; Blencowe, Natalie S; Blazeby, Jane M (July 2019).

"What is an invasive procedure? A definition to inform study design, evidence synthesis and research tracking" .

BMJ Open .

9 (7): e028576.

doi : 10.1136/bmjopen-2018-028576 .

PMC 6678000 .

PMID 31366651 .

^ Klein, Eran (September 2023).

"What does it mean to call a medical device invasive?" .

Medicine, Health Care and Philosophy .

26 (3): 325– 334.

doi : 10.1007/s11019-023-10147-x .

PMC 10425495 .

PMID 37131099 .

^ Davis, Nick J.; van Koningsbruggen, Martijn G. (2013).

" 'Non-invasive' brain stimulation is not non-invasive" .

Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience .

7 : 76.

doi : 10.3389/fnsys.2013.00076 .

PMC 3870277 .

PMID 24391554 .

^ a b Danilov, Igor Val; Medne, Dace; Mihailova, Sandra (3 July 2025).

"Natural Neurostimulation for Chronic Pain Management: A Case Series of 3 Patients with Dysmenorrhea and Menstrual Migraine" .

OBM Neurobiology .

09 (3): 1– 11.

doi : 10.21926/obm.neurobiol.2503290 .

^ "What is Telemental Health?". National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH). Retrieved 2025-07-05.

https://www.nimh.nih.gov/health/publications/what-is-telemental-health ^ "Telepsychology". apa.org. Retrieved 2025-07-05.

https://www.apa.org/research-practice/telepsychology ^ Danilov, Igor Val; Medne, Dace; Mihailova, Sandra (January 2025).

"Modulating neuroplasticity with acoustic photonic intellectual neurostimulation (APIN): a case study on neurodegenerative disorder" .

Brain Stimulation .

18 (1): 561.

doi : 10.1016/j.brs.2024.12.1005 .

^ Mihailova, Sandra; Medne, Dace; Danilov, Igor Val (January 2025).

"Acoustic photonic intellectual neurostimulation (APIN) in dysmenorrhea management: a case study on an adolescent" .

Brain Stimulation .

18 (1): 510.

doi : 10.1016/j.brs.2024.12.860 .

^ Medne, Dace; Danilov, Igor Val; Mihailova, Sandra (January 2025).

"The effect of acoustic and photonic intervention combined with mental load on chronic headaches: a case study" .

Brain Stimulation .

18 (1): 542– 543.

doi : 10.1016/j.brs.2024.12.955 .

^ Schwartz, Jeremy.

"5 Reasons to Consider Group Therapy" .

U.S. News & World Report .

Archived from the original on 22 July 2017 . Retrieved 12 April 2021 .

^ Shorter, Edward (January 1996). "The beginning of psychopharmacology: Deep-sleep therapies".

European Psychiatry .

11 : 236s.

doi : 10.1016/0924-9338(96)88707-4 .

S2CID 144323687 .

^ Minkel, Jared D.; Krystal, Andrew D.; Benca, Ruth M. (2017). "Unipolar Major Depression".

Principles and Practice of Sleep Medicine . pp. 1352–1362.e5.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-323-24288-2.00137-9 .

ISBN 978-0-323-24288-2 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Therapies .

The dictionary definition of therapy at Wiktionary "Chapter Nine of the Book of Medicine Dedicated to Mansur, with the Commentary of Sillanus de Nigris" is a Latin book by Rhazes , from 1483, that is known for its ninth chapter, which is about therapeutics v t e Medicine Specialties and subspecialties Surgery Cardiac surgery Cardiothoracic surgery Endocrine surgery Eye surgery General surgery Colorectal surgery Digestive system surgery Neurosurgery Oral and maxillofacial surgery Orthopedic surgery Hand surgery Otolaryngology ENT Pediatric surgery Plastic surgery Reproductive surgery Surgical oncology Transplant surgery Trauma surgery Urology Andrology Vascular surgery Internal medicine Allergy / Immunology Angiology Cardiology Interventional Endocrinology Gastroenterology Hepatology Geriatrics Hematology Hospital medicine Infectious diseases Nephrology Oncology Pulmonology Rheumatology Obstetrics and gynaecology Gynaecology Gynecologic oncology Maternal–fetal medicine Obstetrics Reproductive endocrinology and infertility Urogynecology Diagnostic Radiology Interventional radiology Neuroradiology Nuclear medicine Pathology Anatomical Clinical pathology Clinical chemistry Cytopathology Medical microbiology Transfusion medicine Other Addiction medicine Adolescent medicine Anesthesiology Obstetric anesthesiology Neurosurgical anesthesiology Aviation medicine Dermatology Disaster medicine Diving medicine Emergency medicine Mass gathering medicine Evolutionary medicine Family medicine / General practice Hospital medicine Intensive care medicine Medical genetics Narcology Neurology Clinical neurophysiology Occupational medicine Ophthalmology Oral medicine Pain management Palliative care Pediatrics Neonatology Phlebology Physical medicine and rehabilitation (PM&R) Preventive medicine Prison healthcare Psychiatry Addiction psychiatry Radiation oncology Reproductive medicine Sexual medicine Venereology Sleep medicine Sports medicine Transplantation medicine Tropical medicine Travel medicine Medical education Medical school Bachelor of Medicine, Bachelor of Surgery Bachelor of Medical Sciences Master of Medicine Master of Surgery Doctor of Medicine Doctor of Osteopathic Medicine MD–PhD Medical Scientist Training Program Related topics Allied health Molecular oncology Nanomedicine Personalized medicine Public health Rural health Therapy Veterinary medicine Physician Chief physician History of medicine Category Commons Wikiproject Portal Outline Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Latvia Poland Israel Other Yale LUX Index of articles associated with the same name This set index article includes a list of related items that share the same name (or similar names).

If an internal link incorrectly led you here, you may wish to change the link to point directly to the intended article.

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Therapy&oldid=1302830676 " Categories : Set index articles Therapy Drug discovery Health policy Medicinal chemistry Pharmaceutical sciences Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Commons category link is on Wikidata All set index articles This page was last edited on 27 July 2025, at 17:43 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Therapy 68 languages Add topic

