Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Writings Toggle Writings subsection 2.1 List of works 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Citations 3.2 Bibliography 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani 20 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français हिन्दी Italiano Kurdî پنجابی Português Русский کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe Українська اردو Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Arab Muslim geographer, chemist, poet, grammarian, historian and astronomer "Iklil" redirects here. For the star, see Rho Scorpii .

Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani أبو محمد الحسن الهمداني Born c.

893 Sanaa Died c.

945-947 Raydah , Amran , Yemen Other names Abu Al-Hasan Al-Hamdani Occupation(s) Geographer, poet, grammarian, historian, and astronomer Academic work Era Abbasid Main interests Geography , History , Astronomy , Writing Notable works Sifat Jazirat ul-Arab and Al-Iklīl Abū Muḥammad al-Ḥasan ibn Aḥmad ibn Yaʿqūb al-Hamdānī ( Arabic : أبو محمد الحسن بن أحمد بن يعقوب الهمداني , 279/280-333/334 A.H.

; c.

893 – 947;) was an Arab [ 1 ] Muslim geographer , chemist , poet , grammarian , historian , and astronomer , from the tribe of Banu Hamdan , western 'Amran , Yemen .

[ 2 ] He was one of the best representatives of Islamic culture during the last period of the Abbasid Caliphate . His work was the subject of extensive 19th-century Austrian scholarship.

Biography [ edit ] The biographical details of al-Hamdani's life are scant, despite his extensive scientific work. He was held in high repute as a grammarian, wrote much poetry, compiled astronomical tables and is said to have devoted most of his life to the study of the ancient history and geography of Arabia.

[ 3 ] Before he was born his family had lived in al-Marashi (المراشي). Then they moved to Sana'a (صنعاء), where al-Hamdani was born in the year 893.  His father had been a traveller and had visited Kufa , Baghdad , Basra , Oman and Egypt . At around the age of seven, al-Marashi started to talk about his desire to travel. Somewhat later he left for Mecca , where he remained and studied for more than six years, after which he departed for Sa'dah (صعدة). There he gathered information on Khawlan (خولان). Later, he went back to Sanaa and became interested in the land that was Himyar (حمْير), but was imprisoned for two years due to his political views. After his release from prison, he went to Raydah (ريدة) to live under the protection of his own tribe. He compiled most of his books while there and stayed on until his death in 945.

[ 4 ] Writings [ edit ] His Geography of the Arabian Peninsula ( Sifat Jazirat ul-Arab ) is by far the most important work on the subject, [ 3 ] where he describes the geography and the linguistic situation in the Arabian peninsula and Socotra .

[ 5 ] The manuscript was used by Austrian orientalist, Aloys Sprenger in his Post- und Reiserouten des Orients (Leipzig, 1864) and further in his Alte Geographie Arabiens (Bern, 1875), and was edited by D.H. Müller (Leiden, 1884; cf. Sprenger's criticism in Zeitschrift der deutschen morgenländischen Gesellschaft , vol. 45, pp. 361–394).

[ 6 ] His work has been the subject of extensive research and publications by the Austrian Arabist, Eduard Glaser , a specialist on ancient Arabia. The other great work of al-Hamdānī is his ten volume, al-Iklil (the Diadem ), concerning the genealogies of the Himyarites and the wars waged by their kings. Volume 8, on the citadels and castles of southern Arabia, has been translated into German, edited and annotated by David Heinrich Müller as Die Burgen und Schlösser Sudarabiens (Vienna, 1881).

[ 7 ] Other works said to have been written by al-Hamdani are listed in G. L. Flügel 's Die grammatischen Schulen der Araber (Leipzig, 1862), pp. 220–221.

[ 7 ] List of works [ edit ] Kitab al-Jawharatayn al-ʻatīqatayn - A book describing metals known at that time, including their physical and chemical properties as well as treatment and processing (such as gold , silver , and steel ).

[ 8 ] He is also considered the first person who explained gravity of Earth in a way similar to magnetic field behavior.

[ 9 ] Sifat Jazirat ul-Arab ( صفة جزيرة العرب ), Geography/Character of the Arabian Peninsula .

[ 10 ] Kitāb al-Iklīl min akhbār al-Yaman wa-ansāb Ḥimyar ( الإكليل من أخبار اليمن وأنساب حمير ); Crowns from the Accounts of al-Yemen and the genealogies of Ḥimyar .

al-Iklīl consists of ten volumes. However, only four volumes have been found (Vol.1, Vol.2, Vol.8 and Vol.10); the other volumes are missing.

[ 11 ] History of Sabaʾ .

Language of Himyar and Najran .

References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ O., Löfgren. "al-Hamdānī".

Encyclopaedia of Islam . Brill.

doi : 10.1163/1573-3912_islam_sim_2666 .

^ "أبو محمد الحسن الهمداني" [Abu Muhammed Al-Hasan al-Hamdani].

yemen-nic.info . Archived from the original on 7 March 2016 . Retrieved 8 March 2023 .

^ a b Thatcher 1911 , p. 875.

^ Biography of al-Hamdani .

^ Vitaly Naumkin (1989) Fieldwork in Socotra, British Society for Middle Eastern Studies. Bulletin, 16:2, 133-142.

^ Thatcher 1911 , pp. 875–876.

^ a b Thatcher 1911 , p. 876.

^ Description of metals (in Arabic) .

^ Kitāb al-Jawharatayn al-ʻatīqatayn al-māʼiʻatayn min al-ṣafrāʼ wa-al-bayḍāʼ : al-dhahab wa-al-fiḍḍah . Cairo : Maṭbaʻat Dār al-Kutub wa-al-Wathāʼiq al-Qawmīyah bi-al-Qāhirah (Arabic:كتاب الجوهرتين العتيقتين المائعتين من الصفراء والبيضاء : الذهب والفضة), 2004. pp.

43– 44, 87.

OCLC 607846741 .

^ Geography/Character of the Arabian Peninsula (in Arabic) Archived 24 September 2020 at the Wayback Machine .

^ Crowns from the Accounts of al-Yemen and the genealogies of Himyar (in Arabic) .

Bibliography [ edit ] "Hamdānī, Abū Muḥammad al- Ḥasan Ibn Aḥmad Ibn YaʿQūb al-".

Dictionary of Scientific Biography . New York: Charles Scribner's Sons. 1970–1980.

ISBN 978-0-684-10114-9 .

This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Thatcher, Griffithes Wheeler (1911). " Hamdānī ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 12 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

875– 876.

Britannica Nabih Amin Faris: The Antiquities of South Arabia being a Translation from the Arabic with Linguistic, Geographic and Historic Notes of the Eight Book of al-Hamdānī's al-Iklīl , Princeton, 1938 Yūsuf Muḥammad ʿAbd Allāh (Hrsg.): Al-Hamdani. A great Yemeni Scholar. Studies on the Occasion of his Millenial Anniversary.

Sanaa, 1986 Yūsuf Muḥammad ʿAbd Allāh: al-Ḥasan b. Aḥmad al-Hamdānī , In: Al-Mausūʿa al-Yamanīya, Sanaa, 2003, vol. 4, S. 3097ff.

Yūsuf Muḥammad ʿAbd Allāh: Die Personennamen in al-Hamdānī's al-Iklīl und ihre Parallel in den altsüdarabischen Inschriften , Dissertation, Universität Tübingen, 1975.

Jörn Heise: Die Gründung Sana'as – Ein orientalisch-islamischer Mythos?

Berlin, Klaus Schwarz Verlag, May 2010, ISBN 978-3-87997-373-6 (the fifth chapter is devoted to al-Hamdani's Biography ) O. Löfgren: Art. "al-Hamdānī" in The Encyclopaedia of Islam. New Edition vol. III, S. 124a-125a.

External links [ edit ] Toll, Christopher (2008) [1970-80].

"Al-Hamdānī, Abū Muḥammad Al-Ḥasan Ibn Aḥmad Ibn Yaʿqūb" .

Complete Dictionary of Scientific Biography .

Encyclopedia.com .

v t e Geography and cartography in the medieval Islamic world Geographers 9th century Al-Khwarizmi Abu Hanifa Dinawari Ya'qubi Sulaiman al-Tajir 10th century Ibn Khordadbeh Ahmad ibn Rustah Ahmad ibn Fadlan Abu Zayd al-Balkhi Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani Al-Masudi Istakhri Khashkhash Ibn Saeed Ibn Aswad Ibn Hawqal Ibn al-Faqih Al-Muqaddasi Buzurg ibn Shahriyar Qudama ibn Ja'far 11th century Al-Biruni Abu Saʿīd Gardēzī Al-Bakri Mahmud al-Kashgari Domiyat 12th century al-Zuhri Muhammad al-Idrisi Abu'l Abbas al-Hijazi 13th century Ibn Jubayr Saadi Shirazi Yaqut al-Hamawi Ibn Said al-Maghribi Ibn al-Nafis Ibn al-Mujawir 14th century Al-Dimashqi Abu'l-Fida Ibn al-Wardi Hamdallah Mustawfi Ibn Battuta Lin Nu 15th century Abd-al-Razzāq Samarqandī Ghiyāth al-dīn Naqqāsh Ahmad ibn Mājid Zheng He Ma Huan Fei Xin 16th century Sulaiman Al Mahri Piri Reis Mir Ahmed Nasrallah Thattvi Amīn Rāzī 17th century Evliya Çelebi Works Book of Roads and Kingdoms (al-Bakrī) Book of Roads and Kingdoms (ibn Khordadbeh) Tabula Rogeriana Kitab al-Rawd al-Mitar Mu'jam Al-Buldan Rihla The Meadows of Gold Piri Reis map Kitab al-Kharaj Influences Geography (Ptolemy) v t e Islam topics Outline of Islam Beliefs God in Islam Allah Tawhid Muhammad In Islam Prophets of Islam Angels Revelation Qadar Judgement Day Holiest sites Five Pillars Shahada Salah Sawm Zakat Hajj History Leaders Timeline of the history of Islam Succession to Muhammad Early conquests Golden Age Historiography Sahaba Ahl al-Bayt Shi'a Imams Caliphates Rashidun Umayyad Abbasid Córdoba Fatimid Almohad Sokoto Ottoman Religious texts Quran Hadith Tafsir Seerah Story of Prophets Denominations Sunni Ash'arism Atharism Maturidism Mu'tazili Salafi Wahhabism Sufi Shia Twelver Shi'ism Isma'ilism Alawites Alevism Bektashi Alevism Zaydism Muhakkima / Khawarij Azariqa Moderate Kharijites Ibadi Azzabas Nukkari Wahbi Sufri Najdat Nation of Islam Ahmadiyya Lahori Quranism Non-denominational Life Culture Animals Art Association football Calendar Children Clothing Flags Holidays Mosques Madrasas Moral teachings Music Peace Pacifism Philosophy Political aspects Democracy Petro-Islam Liberalism and progressivism Qurbani Science Social welfare Women LGBT Islam by country Law Jurisprudence Economics Banking Economic history Sukuk Takaful Murabaha Riba Hygiene Ghusl Miswak Najis Tayammum Toilet Wudu Family Marriage Sex Haya Marriage contract Mahr Mahram Nikah Nikah mut'ah Zina Other aspects Baligh Cleanliness Criminal Violence Domestic violence Islamic extremism Islamic terrorism Apostasy Blasphemy Death penalty Dhabiĥa Dhimmi Divorce Diet Ethics Etiquette Gambling Gender segregation Honorifics Hudud Inheritance Jizya Leadership Ma malakat aymanukum Military POWs Slavery Sources of law Theological Kalam Schools of islamic jurisprudence Islamic studies Arts Arabesque Architecture Calligraphy Carpets Gardens Geometric patterns Music Pottery Medieval science Alchemy and chemistry Astronomy Cosmology Geography and cartography Mathematics Medicine Ophthalmology Physics Philosophy Early Contemporary Eschatology Theological Other areas Astrology Creationism (evolution) Feminism Inventions Literature poetry Psychology Shu'ubiyya Conversion to mosques Other Other religions Christianity Catholicism Mormonism Protestantism Druzism Hinduism Jainism Judaism Sikhism Apostasy Apostasy in Islam by country Ex-Muslims List of former Muslims List of ex-Muslim organisations Related topics Criticism of Islam Muhammad Quran Cultural Muslim Islamism Criticism Post-Islamism Qutbism Islamophobia Islamic view of miracles Nursing Persecution of Muslims Minority Muslim Sectarian Quran and miracles Symbolism Islam portal Category Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Belgium People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Abu_Muhammad_al-Hasan_al-Hamdani&oldid=1304552357 " Categories : 890s births 945 deaths 10th-century Arab people 10th-century astronomers 10th-century geographers 10th-century historians from the Abbasid Caliphate Arab grammarians Medieval grammarians of Arabic Astronomers of the medieval Islamic world Yemeni astronomers Geographers of the medieval Islamic world Yemeni geographers People from Sanaa Yemeni Muslims Yemeni historians Yemeni people who died in prison custody Yemeni writers Banu Hamdan 10th-century Yemeni people 10th-century poets Yemeni poets Yemeni genealogists Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from March 2023 Articles with hCards Articles containing Arabic-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Year of birth uncertain This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 18:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Abu Muhammad al-Hasan al-Hamdani 20 languages Add topic

