Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career and death 3 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 3.1 The Republic of Plato 3.1.1 Critical reception 4 The Closing of the American Mind Toggle The Closing of the American Mind subsection 4.1 Critical reception 5 Love and Friendship 6 Personal life 7 Selected works 8 See also 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Allan Bloom 21 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español Français 한국어 עברית Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American philosopher, classicist, and academician (1930–1992) This article is about the American philosopher. For the British horticulturalist, see Alan Bloom .

Not to be confused with Harold Bloom .

Allan Bloom Bloom in 1989 Born Allan David Bloom ( 1930-09-14 ) September 14, 1930 Indianapolis , Indiana , U.S.

Died October 7, 1992 (1992-10-07) (aged 62) Chicago , Illinois , U.S.

Education Education University of Chicago ( BA , PhD ) École normale supérieure Thesis The Political Philosophy of Isocrates (1955) Doctoral advisor Leo Strauss Philosophical work Era 20th-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy Main interests Greek philosophy , history of philosophy , political philosophy , Renaissance philosophy , Nihilism , continental philosophy , French literature , Shakespeare Notable works The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Notable ideas The "openness" of relativism leads paradoxically to the great "closing" [ 1 ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Allan David Bloom (September 14, 1930 – October 7, 1992) was an American philosopher, classicist , and academician . He studied under David Grene , Leo Strauss , Richard McKeon , and Alexandre Kojève . He subsequently taught at Cornell University , the University of Toronto , Tel Aviv University , Yale University , the École normale supérieure , and the University of Chicago .

Bloom championed the idea of Great Books education and became famous for his criticism of contemporary American higher education , with his views being expressed in his bestselling 1987 book, The Closing of the American Mind .

[ 2 ] Characterized as a conservative in the popular media, [ 3 ] Bloom denied the label, asserting that what he sought to defend was the "theoretical life".

[ 4 ] Saul Bellow wrote Ravelstein , a roman à clef based on Bloom, his friend and colleague at the University of Chicago.

Early life and education [ edit ] Bloom was born in Indianapolis, Indiana , to second-generation Jewish parents who were both social workers . The couple had a daughter, Lucille, two years earlier. As a thirteen-year-old, Bloom read a Reader's Digest article about the University of Chicago and told his parents he wanted to attend; his parents thought it was unreasonable and did not encourage his hopes.

[ 5 ] Yet, when his family moved to Chicago in 1944, his parents met a psychiatrist and family friend whose son was enrolled in the University of Chicago's humanities program for gifted students. In 1946, Bloom was accepted to the same program, starting his degree at the age of fifteen, and spending the next decade of his life enrolled at the university in Chicago's Hyde Park neighborhood.

[ 5 ] This began his lifelong passion for the 'idea' of the university.

[ 6 ] In the preface to Giants and Dwarfs: Essays, 1960–1990 , he stated that his education "began with Freud and ended with Plato ". The theme of this education was self-knowledge, or self-discovery—an idea that Bloom would later write, seemed impossible to conceive of for a Midwestern American boy. He credits Leo Strauss as the teacher who made this endeavor possible for him.

[ 7 ] Bloom graduated from the University of Chicago with a bachelor's degree at the age of 18.

[ 8 ] Some of his notable college classmates included Seth Benardete , Richard Rorty , and Stanley Rosen .

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] For postgraduate studies, he enrolled in the University of Chicago's Committee on Social Thought , where he was assigned classicist David Grene as tutor. Bloom went on to write his thesis on Isocrates . Grene recalled Bloom as an energetic and humorous student completely dedicated to studying classics, but with no definite career ambitions.

[ 5 ] The committee was a unique interdisciplinary program that attracted a small number of students due to its rigorous academic requirements and lack of clear employment opportunities after graduation.

[ 5 ] Bloom earned his Ph.D. from the Committee on Social Thought in 1955. He subsequently studied under the influential Hegelian philosopher Alexandre Kojève in Paris , whose lectures Bloom would later introduce to the English-speaking world. While teaching philosophy at the École normale supérieure in Paris, he befriended Raymond Aron , amongst many other philosophers. Among the American expatriate community in Paris, his friends included writer Susan Sontag .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] [ 13 ] Career and death [ edit ] Bloom studied and taught in Paris (1953–55) at the École normale supérieure, [ 14 ] and Germany (1957). Upon returning to the United States in 1955, he taught adult education students at the University of Chicago with his friend Werner J. Dannhauser , author of Nietzsche's View of Socrates . Bloom went on to teach at Yale from 1960 to 1963, at Cornell until 1970, and at the University of Toronto until 1979, when he returned to the University of Chicago. Among Bloom's former students are prominent journalists, government officials and political scientists such as Francis Fukuyama , Robert Kraynak, Pierre Hassner, Clifford Orwin , Janet Ajzenstat , John Ibbitson , James Ceaser , and Thomas Pangle.

In 1963, as a professor at Cornell, Allan Bloom served as a faculty member of the Cornell Branch of the Telluride Association , an organization focused on intellectual development and self-governance. The students received free room and board in the Telluride House on the Cornell University campus and assumed the management of the house themselves. While living at the house, Bloom befriended former U.S. Secretary of Labor Frances Perkins .

[ 15 ] Bloom's first book was a collection of three essays on Shakespeare's plays, Shakespeare's Politics ; it included an essay from Harry V. Jaffa . He translated and commented upon Rousseau's " Letter to M. d'Alembert on the Theater ", bringing it into dialogue with Plato's Republic . In 1968, he published his most significant work of philosophical translation and interpretation, a translation of Plato's Republic . Bloom strove to achieve "translation ... for the serious student".  The preface opens on page xi with the statement, "this is intended to be a literal translation." [ 16 ] [ page needed ] Although the translation is not universally accepted, Bloom said he always conceptualized the translator's role as a matchmaker between readers and the texts he translated.

[ 17 ] [ page needed ] He repeated this effort as a professor of political science at the University of Toronto in 1978, translating Jean-Jacques Rousseau 's Emile . Among other publications during his years of teaching was a reading of Swift's Gulliver's Travels , titled "Giants and Dwarfs"; it became the title for a collection of essays on, among others, Raymond Aron, Alexandre Kojève, Leo Strauss, and liberal philosopher John Rawls . Bloom was an editor for the scholarly journal Political Theory as well as a contributor to History of Political Philosophy (edited by Joseph Cropsey and Leo Strauss).

After returning to Chicago, he befriended and taught courses with Saul Bellow. In 1987 Bellow wrote the preface to The Closing of the American Mind .

Bloom's last book, which he dictated while in the hospital dying, and which was published posthumously, was Love and Friendship , an offering of interpretations on the meaning of love. There is an ongoing controversy over Bloom's semi-closeted homosexuality, possibly culminating, as in Saul Bellow's thinly fictionalized account in Ravelstein , in his death in 1992 from AIDS .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Bloom's friends do not deny his homosexuality, but whether he actually died of AIDS remains disputed.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Bloom attempted to preserve a philosophical way of life for future generations through both scholarly and popular writing. His writings may be placed into two categories: scholarly (e.g., Plato's Republic ) and popular political commentary (e.g., The Closing of the American Mind ).

[ citation needed ] The Republic of Plato [ edit ] Bloom's translation and essay on the Republic is radically different in many important aspects from the previous translations and interpretations of the Republic . Most notable is Bloom's discussion of Socratic irony . In fact, irony is the key to Bloom's understanding of the Republic (see his discussion of Books II–VI of the Republic .) Allan Bloom says a philosopher is immune to irony because he can see the tragic as comic and comic as tragic. Bloom refers to Socrates, the philosopher par excellence, in his Interpretative Essay stating, "Socrates can go naked where others go clothed; he is not afraid of ridicule. He can also contemplate sexual intercourse where others are stricken with terror; he is not afraid of moral indignation. In other words he treats the comic seriously and the tragic lightly".

[ 22 ] Thus irony in the Republic refers to the "Just City in Speech", which Bloom looks at not as a model for future society , nor as a template for the human soul ; rather, it is a city presented ironically, an example of the distance between philosophy and every potential philosopher. Bloom follows Strauss in suggesting that the "Just City in Speech" is not natural ; it is man-made.

Critical reception [ edit ] Some reviewers, such as Norman Gulley, criticized the quality of both the translation and the essay itself.

[ 23 ] The Closing of the American Mind [ edit ] Main article: The Closing of the American Mind The Closing of the American Mind was published in 1987, five years after Bloom published an essay in National Review about the failure of universities to serve the needs of students.

[ 24 ] With the encouragement of Saul Bellow , his colleague at the University of Chicago , he expanded his thoughts into a book "about a life I've led", [ 5 ] that critically reflected on the current state of higher education in American universities. His friends and admirers imagined the work would be a modest success, as did Bloom, who recognized his publisher's modest advance to complete the project as a lack of sales confidence. Yet on the momentum of strong initial reviews, including one by Christopher Lehmann-Haupt in The New York Times and an op-ed piece by syndicated conservative commentator George Will titled, "A How-To Book for the Independent", [ 25 ] it became an unexpected best seller, eventually selling close to half a million copies in hardback and remaining at number one on The New York Times Bestseller List for nonfiction for four months.

[ 26 ] The book is a critique of the contemporary university and how Bloom sees it as failing its students. In it, Bloom criticizes the modern movements in philosophy and the humanities.  Philosophy professors involved in ordinary language analysis or logical positivism disregard important "humanizing" ethical and political issues and fail to pique the interest of students.

[ 27 ] Literature professors involved in deconstructionism promote irrationalism and skepticism of standards of truth and thereby dissolve the moral imperatives which are communicated through genuine philosophy and which elevate and broaden the intellects of those who engage with them.

[ 28 ] To a great extent, Bloom's criticism revolves around his belief that the "great books" of Western thought have been devalued as a source of wisdom. Bloom's critique extends beyond the university to speak to the general crisis in American society.

The Closing of the American Mind draws analogies between the United States and the Weimar Republic . The modern liberal philosophy, he says, enshrined in the Enlightenment thought of John Locke —that a just society could be based upon self-interest alone, coupled by the emergence of relativism in American thought—had led to this crisis.

For Bloom, this created a void in the souls of Americans, into which demagogic radicals as exemplified by 1960s student leaders could leap. (In the same fashion, Bloom suggests, the Nazi brownshirts once filled the gap created in German society by the Weimar Republic.) In the second instance, he argued, the higher calling of philosophy and reason understood as freedom of thought , had been eclipsed by a pseudo-philosophy, or an ideology of thought.

Relativism was one feature of modern liberal philosophy that had subverted the Platonic–Socratic teaching.

Bloom's critique of contemporary social movements at play in universities or society at large is derived from his classical and philosophical orientation. For Bloom, the failure of contemporary liberal education leads to the sterile social and sexual habits of modern students, and to their inability to fashion a life for themselves beyond the mundane offerings touted as success. Bloom argues that commercial pursuits had become more highly valued than love, the philosophic quest for truth, or the civilized pursuits of honor and glory.

In one chapter, in a style of analysis which resembles the work of the Frankfurt School , he examined the philosophical effects of popular music on the lives of students, placing pop music, or as it is generically branded by record companies "rock music", in a historical context from Plato's Republic to Nietzsche 's Dionysian longings. Treating it for the first time [ citation needed ] with genuine philosophical interest, he gave fresh attention to the industry, its target-marketing to children and teenagers, its top performers, its place in the late-capitalist bourgeois economy, and its pretensions to liberation and freedom .  Some critics, including the popular musician Frank Zappa , argued that Bloom's view of pop music was based on the same ideas that critics of pop "in 1950s held, ideas about the preservation of 'traditional' white American society".

[ 29 ] Bloom, informed by Socrates , Aristotle , Rousseau , and Nietzsche, explores music's power over the human soul. He cites the soldier who throws himself into battle at the urging of the drum corps , the pious believer who prays under the spell of a religious hymn , the lover seduced by the romantic guitar , and points towards the tradition of philosophy that treated musical education as paramount. He names the pop-star Mick Jagger as a cardinal representative of the hypocrisy and erotic sterility of pop-rock music. Pop music employs sexual images and language to enthrall the young and to persuade them that their petty rebelliousness is authentic politics, when, in fact, they are being controlled by the money-managers whom successful performers like Jagger quietly serve. Bloom claims that Jagger is a hero to many university students who envy his fame and wealth but are really just bored by the lack of options before them.

[ 30 ] Along with the absence of literature in the lives of the young and their sexual but often unerotic relationships, the first part of The Closing tries to explain the current state of education in a fashion beyond the purview of an economist or psychiatrist—contemporary culture's leading umpires.

Critical reception [ edit ] The book met with early critical acclaim including positive reviews in The New York Times , Time , Newsweek , the Chronicle of Higher Education , and The Washington Post . A second round of reviews was generally more critical.

[ 31 ] Martha Nussbaum , a political philosopher and classicist, and Harry V. Jaffa , a conservative, argued that Bloom was deeply influenced by 19th-century European philosophers, especially Friedrich Nietzsche .  Nussbaum wrote that, for Bloom, Nietzsche had been disastrously influential in modern American thought.

[ 32 ] In a passage of her review, Nussbaum wrote: "How good a philosopher, then, is Allan Bloom? The answer is, we cannot say, and we are given no reason to think him one at all." [ 32 ] The criticism of the book was continued by impassioned reviews of political theorist Benjamin Barber in Harper's ; Alexander Nehamas , a scholar of ancient philosophy and Nietzsche, in the London Review of Books ; and David Rieff in The Times Literary Supplement .

[ 33 ] David Rieff called Bloom "an academic version of Oliver North : vengeful, reactionary, antidemocratic". The book, he said, was one that "decent people would be ashamed of having written." The tone of these reviews led James Atlas in The New York Times Magazine to conclude that  "the responses to Bloom's book have been charged with a hostility that transcends the usual mean-spiritedness of reviewers." [ 5 ] One reviewer, the philosopher Robert Paul Wolff writing in the scholarly journal Academe , satirically reviewed the book as a work of fiction: he claimed that Bloom's friend Saul Bellow, who had written the introduction, had written a "coruscatingly funny novel in the form of a pettish, bookish, grumpy, reactionary complaint against the last two decades", with the "author" a "mid-fiftyish professor at the University of Chicago, to whom Bellow gives the evocative name 'Bloom.'" [ 33 ] Yet some reviewers tempered that criticism with an admission of the merits of Bloom's writing: for example, Fred Matthews, an historian from York University , began an otherwise relatively critical review in the American Historical Review with the statement that Bloom's "probes into popular culture" were "both amusing and perceptive" and that the work was "a rich, often brilliant, and disturbing book".

[ 34 ] Some critics embraced Bloom's argument.

Norman Podhoretz noted that the closed-mindedness in the title refers to the paradoxical consequence of the academic "open mind" found in liberal political thought—namely "the narrow and intolerant dogmatism" that dismisses any attempt, by Plato or the Hebrew Bible for example, to provide a rational basis for moral judgments. Podhoretz continued, "Bloom goes on to charge liberalism with vulgarizing the noble ideals of freedom and equality, and he offers brilliantly acerbic descriptions of the sexual revolution and the feminist movement, which he sees as products of this process of vulgarization." [ 35 ] In a 1989 article, Ann Clark Fehn discusses the critical reception of the book, noting that it had eclipsed other titles that year dealing with higher education— Ernest Boyer 's College and E. D. Hirsch 's Cultural Literacy —and quoting Publishers Weekly which had described Bloom's book as a "best-seller made by reviews." [ 36 ] Camille Paglia , a decade after the book's release, called it "the first shot in the culture wars".

[ 37 ] An early New York Times review by Roger Kimball called the book "an unparalleled reflection on the whole question of what it means to be a student in today's intellectual and moral climate." [ 38 ] In an article on Bloom for The New Republic in 2000, conservative commentator Andrew Sullivan wrote that "reading [Bloom] ... one feels he has not merely understood Nietzsche; he has imbibed him. But this awareness of the abyss moved Bloom, unlike Nietzsche, toward love and political conservatism. Love, whether for the truth or for another, because it can raise us out of the abyss. Political conservatism because it best restrains the chaos that modernity threatens".

[ 39 ] More recently, Bloom's book also received a more positive re-assessment from Jim Sleeper in The New York Times .

[ 3 ] Keith Botsford would later argue: Bloom was writing vigorous polemic at a time when America sought to ensure that the intellect could not (and would not be allowed to) rise above gender and race; the mind was to be defined by its melanin and genetic content, and by what lay between our legs; or, in the academe, the canon was to be re-read and re-defined so that it fitted the latest theorem of gender or race. Bloom would have none of it. He loved people who were first-rate with real love ...  Many profited. Others, mainly dwellers in the bas fonds of 'social studies', or those who seek to politicise culture, resented and envied.

[ 8 ] Love and Friendship [ edit ] Bloom's last book, which he dictated while partially paralyzed and in the hospital, and which was published posthumously, was Love and Friendship . The book offered interpretations on the meaning of love, through a reading of novels by Stendhal , Jane Austen , and Flaubert ; Tolstoy in light of Rousseau's influence on the Romantic movement ; plays by William Shakespeare; Montaigne's Essays ; and Plato's Symposium .

Describing its creation, Bellow wrote: Allan was an academic, but he was a literary man too — he had too much intelligence and versatility, too much humanity, to be confined to a single category ... He didn't like these helpful-to-the-sick cliches or conventional get-well encouragements ... [S]till partially paralyzed and unable even to sign his name, he dictated a book ... I mention this because it was a remarkable thing for a sick man and a convalescent to do and because it was equally remarkable that a political philosopher should choose at such a moment in his life to write about literature ... I like to think that his free and powerful intelligence, responding to great inner impulses under the stimulus of life-threatening sickness, turned to the nineteenth-century novel, to Shakespeare's love plays, and to the Platonic Eros, summoning us to the great poetry of affects and asking us to see what has happened to our own deepest feelings in this age of artificial euphorias.

[ 40 ] Of the work, Andrew Sullivan wrote that "you cannot read [Bloom] on Romeo and Juliet or Antony and Cleopatra without seeing those works in a new light. You cannot read his account of Rousseau's La nouvelle Heloise without wanting to go back and read it—more closely—again ... Bloom had a gift for reading reality—the impulse to put your loving face to it and press your hands against it".

[ 39 ] Recollecting his friend in an interview, Bellow said "Allan inhaled books and ideas the way the rest of us breathe air ... People only want the factual truth. Well, the truth is that Allan was a very superior person, great-souled. When critics proclaim the death of the novel, I sometimes think they are really saying that there are no significant people to write about. [But] Allan was certainly one." [ 41 ] Personal life [ edit ] Bloom was gay .

[ citation needed ] His last book, Love and Friendship , was dedicated to his companion, Michael Z. Wu.

[ citation needed ] Whether or not he died of AIDS is a subject of controversy.

[ 42 ] Selected works [ edit ] Bloom, Allan, and Harry V. Jaffa. 1964.

Shakespeare's Politics . New York: Basic Books.

Bloom, Allan. 1968 (2nd ed 1991).

The Republic of Plato . (translated with notes and an interpretive essay). New York: Basic Books.

Bloom, Allan, Charles Butterworth , Christopher Kelly (Edited and translated), and Jean-Jacques Rousseau. 1968.

Letter to d'Alembert on the theater in politics and the arts . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press; Agora ed.

Bloom, Allan, and Jean-Jacques Rousseau. 1979.

Emile (translator) with introduction. New York: Basic Books.

Alexandre Kojève (Raymond Queneau, Allan Bloom, James H. Nichols).

Introduction to the reading of Hegel . Cornell, 1980.

Bloom, Allan. 1987.

The Closing of the American Mind . New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 5-551-86868-0 .

Bloom, Allan, and Steven J. Kautz ed. 1991.

Confronting the Constitution: The challenge to Locke, Montesquieu, Jefferson, and the Federalists from Utilitarianism, Historicism, Marxism, Freudism . Washington, DC: American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research.

Bloom, Allan. 1991.

Giants and Dwarfs: Essays, 1960–1990 . New York: Touchstone Books.

Bloom, Allan. 1993.

Love and Friendship . New York: Simon & Schuster.

Bloom, Allan. 2000.

Shakespeare on Love & Friendship . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Plato, Seth Benardete, and Allan Bloom. 2001.

Plato's Symposium: A translation by Seth Benardete with commentaries by Allan Bloom and Seth Benardete . Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

See also [ edit ] American philosophy List of American philosophers References [ edit ] ^ Allan Bloom, The Closing of the American Mind , Simon and Schuster, 1987, p. 42.

^ Hitchens, Christopher (2002).

Unacknowledged Legislation: Writers in the Public Sphere . Verso. p. 226.

^ a b Sleeper, Jim (September 4, 2005).

"Allan Bloom and the Conservative Mind" .

The New York Times . Retrieved April 23, 2010 .

^ Bloom, Allan.

Giants and Dwarfs: Essays 1960–1990 , Simon & Schuster, 1990 pp. 17–18 ^ a b c d e f Atlas, James. "Chicago's Grumpy Guru: Best-Selling Professor Allan Bloom and the Chicago Intellectuals." New York Times Magazine .  January 3, 1988. 12.

^ Bloom, Allan (1987).

The Closing of the American Mind , p. 243. New York: Simon & Schuster ^ Bloom, Allan. 1991.

Giants and Dwarfs: Essays, 1960–1990 , p. 11. New York: Touchstone Books ^ a b Botsworth, Keith.

'Obituary: Professor Allan Bloom', The Independent , October 12, 1992 Archived August 25, 2017, at the Wayback Machine .

^ "Biography" .

Archived from the original on 2015-10-07 . Retrieved 2015-10-05 .

^ Rorty, Richard (1999).

Philosophy and Social Hope . New York: Penguin Books. p. 8 ^ E. Field, The Man Who Would Marry Susan Sontag , Wisconsin, 2005, pp. 158–70.

^ C. Rollyson and L. Paddock, Susan Sontag: The Making of an Icon , W. W. Norton, 2000, pp. 45–50.

^ Reborn: Journals and Notebooks 1947–1963 , ed. D. Rieff, Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2008, pp. 188–89.

^ Strauss had sent Bloom to Paris without sufficient funding, and when Bloom was broke he sold his books to Ernest Fortin , a young Catholic priest doing graduate studies there.  Father Fortin reported that this forced-purchase of Strauss' works was his introduction to Strauss.  J. Brian Benestad, ed., Human Rights, Virtue, and the Common Good: Untimely Meditations on Religion and Politics , at 317 (Rowman & Littlefield 1996).

^ Downey, Kirstin (2009).

The Woman Behind the New Deal: The Life of Frances Perkins, FDR's Secretary of Labor and His Moral Conscience . New York: Nan A. Talese/Doubleday. p.

384 .

ISBN 978-0-385-51365-4 .

^ Bloom, Allan. 1968 (2nd ed 1991).

The Republic of Plato . (translated, with notes and an interpretive essay, by Bloom). New York: Basic Books.

^ Bloom, Allan. 1991.

Giants and Dwarfs: Essays, 1960–1990 . New York: Touchstone Books ^ Jim Sleeper (September 4, 2005).

"Allan Bloom and the Conservative Mind" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on June 20, 2015 . Retrieved June 19, 2015 .

Far from being a conservative ideologue, Bloom, a University of Chicago professor of political philosophy who died in 1992, was an eccentric interpreter of Enlightenment thought who led an Epicurean, quietly gay life.

^ Donald Lazare (September 18, 2007).

" 'The Closing of the American Mind,' 20 Years Later" .

Inside Higher Ed .

Archived from the original on June 19, 2015 . Retrieved June 19, 2015 .

[Paul Wolfowitz said] in Bloom's Chicago circle when he was alive, 'It was sort of, Don't ask, don't tell.' But whether Bloom had AIDS is disputed.

^ D.T. Max.

"With Friends Like Saul Bellow" .

The New York Times Magazine .

Archived from the original on March 7, 2014 . Retrieved June 19, 2015 .

^ Joseph Epstein (2011).

Gossip: The Untrivial Pursuit . Houghton Mifflin Harcourt. p. 146.

ISBN 978-0-618-72194-8 .

No one ever said it aloud, but it was important to Bloom's friends, none of whom denied his homosexuality, that he died of an auto-immune disease rather than one associated with sexual promiscuity.

^ Bloom, Allan. 1968.

The Republic of Plato , "Interpretative Essay," p. 387. New York: Basic Books ^ Gulley, Norman (July 1970). "The REPUBLIC of Plato: Translated, with Notes and an Interpretive Essay".

Philosophical Quarterly .

20 (80): 269.

doi : 10.2307/2218401 .

JSTOR 2218401 .

^ Bloom, Allan (September 25, 2006).

"Our Listless Universities" .

National Review .

Archived from the original on September 1, 2021 . Retrieved September 1, 2021 .

^ Will, George F. (July 30, 1987).

"A How-To Book for the Independent" .

The Washington Post .

Archived from the original on May 2, 2020 . Retrieved August 8, 2020 .

^ Goldstein, William. "The Story behind the Best Seller: Allan Bloom's Closing of the American Mind." Publishers Weekly. July 3, 1987.

^ Bloom, Allan. 1987.

The Closing of the American Mind , p. 278. New York: Simon & Schuster.

^ Bloom, Allan. 1987.

The Closing of the American Mind , p. 279. New York: Simon & Schuster ^ Zappa, Frank (1987), "On Junk Food for the Soul" , New Perspective's Quarterly , archived from the original on 2006-12-08 ^ Bloom, Allan. "Music" pp. 68–81.

The Closing of the American Mind . New York: Simon & Schuster.

^ Ferguson, Andrew (April 9, 2012), "The Book That Drove Them Crazy" , The Weekly Standard , archived from the original on August 20, 2013 , retrieved May 19, 2013 ^ a b Nussbaum, Martha.

"Undemocratic Vistas" , The New York Review of Books 34, no. 17 (November 5, 1987).

^ a b Atlas, James (1988-01-03).

"Chicago's grumpy guru" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 2018-07-27 . Retrieved 2008-05-08 .

^ Matthews, Fred (Apr 1990), "The Attack on 'Historicism': Allan Bloom's Indictment of Contemporary American Historical Scholarship", The American Historical Review , 95 (2): 429– 447, doi : 10.2307/2163758 , JSTOR 2163758 ^ Podhoretz, Norman. "Conservative Book Becomes a Best-Seller." Human Events July 11, 1987: 5–6.

^ Fehn, Ann Clark (Summer 1989), "Focus: Literature since 1945", The German Quarterly , 62 (3) ^ Paglia, Camille (July 1997).

"Ask Camille" .

Salon.com . Archived from the original on 11 April 2008 . Retrieved 2008-05-09 .

^ Kimball, Roger (April 5, 1987), "The Groves of Ignorance" , The New York Times , archived from the original on November 13, 2013 , retrieved May 19, 2013 ^ a b Longing: Remembering Allan Bloom , The New Republic, April 17, 2000.

^ Saul Bellow, It All Adds Up (Penguin, 2007), pp. 277–279.

^ Wood, James (April 14, 2000), "The wordly mystic's late bloom" , The Guardian , UK, archived from the original on December 17, 2017 , retrieved May 19, 2013 ^ "The University of Chicago Magazine: June 2000, Campus News" .

Archived from the original on 2023-03-15 . Retrieved 2022-04-23 .

Further reading [ edit ] Atlas, James. "Chicago's Grumpy Guru: Best-Selling Professor Allan Bloom and the Chicago Intellectuals".

The New York Times Magazine . January 3, 1988.

"The Constitution in Full Bloom". 1990.

Harvard Law Review 104, no. 2 (December 1990): 645.

Bayles, Martha (1998). "Body and soul: the musical miseducation of youth".

Public Interest , no. 131, Spring 98: 36.

Beckerman, Michael (2000). "Ravelstein Knows Everything, Almost".

The New York Times (May 28, 2000).

Bellow, Adam (12/19/2005). "Opening the American Mind".

National Review 57, no. 23: 102.

Bellow, Saul (2000).

Ravelstein . New York: Penguin.

Butterworth, Charles E. "On Misunderstanding Allan Bloom: The Response to The Closing of the American Mind " .

Academic Questions 2, no. 4: 56.

Edington, Robert V. (1990). "Allan Bloom's message to the state universities".

Perspectives on Political Science ; 19, no. 3 Fulford, Robert. "Saul Bellow, Allan Bloom, and Abe Ravelstein." Globe and Mail , November 2, 1999.

Goldstein, William. "The Story behind the Best Seller: Allan Bloom's Closing of the American Mind ." Publishers Weekly . July 3, 1987.

Hook, Sidney. 1989. "Closing of the American Mind: An Intellectual Best Seller Revisited".

American Scholar 58, no. Winter: 123.

Iannone, Carol. 2003. "What's Happened to Liberal Education?".

Academic Questions 17, no. 1, 54.

Jaffa, Harry V. "Humanizing Certitudes and Impoverishing Doubts: A Critique of Closing of the American Mind." Interpretation . 16 Fall 1988.

Kahan, Jeffrey. 2002. "Shakespeare on Love and Friendship." Women's Studies 31, no. 4, 529.

Kinzel, Till. 2002.

Platonische Kulturkritik in Amerika. Studien zu Allan Blooms The Closing of the American Mind. Berlin: Duncker & Humblot.

Matthews, Fred. "The Attack on 'Historicism': Allan Bloom's Indictment of Contemporary American Historical Scholarship." American Historical Review 95, no. 2, 429.

Mulcahy, Kevin V. 1989. "Civic Illiteracy and the American Cultural Heritage." Journal of Politics 51, no. 1, 177.

Nussbaum, Martha. "Undemocratic Vistas," New York Review of Books 34, no.17 (November 5, 1987) Orwin, Clifford. "Remembering Allan Bloom." American Scholar 62, no. 3, 423.

Palmer, Michael, and Thomas Pangle ed. 1995.

Political Philosophy and the Human Soul: Essays in Memory of Allan Bloom . Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield Pub.

Rosenberg, Aubrey. 1981. "Translating Rousseau." University of Toronto Quarterly 50, no. 3, 339.

Schaub, Diana. 1994. "Erotic adventures of the mind." Public Interest , no. 114, 104.

Slater, Robert O (2005), "Allan Bloom", in Shook, John (ed.), The Dictionary of Modern American Philosophers (PDF) , vol. 1, Bristol, England: Thoemmes Press, archived from the original (PDF) on 2007-07-10 .

Sleeper, Jim. 2005. "Allan Bloom and the Conservative Mind".

New York Times Book Review (September 4, 2005): 27.

Wrightson, Katherine M. 1998. "The Professor as Teacher: Allan Bloom, Wayne Booth, and the Tradition of Teaching at the University of Chicago." Innovative Higher Education 23, no. 2, 103.

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Allan Bloom .

Keith Botsford, "Obituary: Professor Allan Bloom", The Independent , October 12, 1992 DePauw University News " Closing of the American Mind Author Allan Bloom Calls on DePauw Students to Seize Charmed Years ' " . Ubben Lecture Series: September 11, 1987, Greencastle, Indiana. Accessed May 16, 2007.

Patner, Andrew.

Chicago Sun-Times , "Allan Bloom, warts and all" April 16, 2000. Accessed May 16, 2007.

West, Thomas G.

The Claremont Institute , The Claremont Institute Blog Writings .

"Allan Bloom and America" . June 1, 2000. Accessed May 16, 2007.

A review of Political Philosophy & the Human Soul: Essays in Memory of Allan Bloom [ permanent dead link ] by Michael Palmer and Thomas L. Pangle, in Conference Journal .

Bloom's Lectures on Socrates, Aristotle, Machiavelli and Nietzsche at Boston University (1983) Allan Bloom in philosophical discussion Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Korea Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐vxvk5
Cached time: 20250817045341
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.824 seconds
Real time usage: 1.056 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6539/1000000
Revision size: 43176/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 160770/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 14866/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 108972/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.501/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 21672911/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  746.177      1 -total
 19.95%  148.897      1 Template:Reflist
 16.70%  124.614      1 Template:Infobox_philosopher
 14.34%  107.011      1 Template:Conservatism_US
  9.97%   74.388      1 Template:Lang
  7.30%   54.453      1 Template:Short_description
  7.29%   54.405      7 Template:Fix
  6.82%   50.884      1 Template:ISBN
  5.88%   43.867      1 Template:Authority_control
  5.45%   40.667      7 Template:Citation Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:84444:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817045341 and revision id 1305659981. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Allan_Bloom&oldid=1305659981 " Categories : 20th-century American historians 20th-century American non-fiction writers 20th-century American philosophers American philosophers of education Jewish American philosophers Jewish American academics Jewish American non-fiction writers American scholars of ancient Greek philosophy Philosophers from Indiana Philosophers from Illinois Cornell University faculty University of Chicago faculty Committee on Social Thought Academic staff of the University of Toronto University of Chicago alumni Writers from Indianapolis Writers from Chicago Gay Jews LGBTQ people from Indiana Plato scholars National Humanities Medal recipients American gay writers Gay academics Political scientists who studied under Leo Strauss American male non-fiction writers 20th-century American male writers Historians from Illinois John M. Olin Foundation Leo Strauss scholars American people of German-Jewish descent 1930 births 1992 deaths Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing French-language text Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2013 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 13 August 2025, at 10:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Allan Bloom 21 languages Add topic

