Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Structure Toggle Structure subsection 1.1 Subdivisions 1.1.1 Phrenicosplenic ligament 1.2 Blood supply 1.3 Development 2 Functions 3 Clinical significance Toggle Clinical significance subsection 3.1 Surgical removal 3.2 Omental flap 3.3 Use in brain surgery 4 History 5 Additional images 6 See also 7 Notes and references 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Greater omentum 17 languages العربية Català Deutsch Eesti Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Latina Lietuvių Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Fat sheath under abdominal wall Greater omentum The greater omentum and corresponding vasculature is visible covering the intestines (dissection image with liver held out of the way).

Label at bottom.

Details Precursor Dorsal mesentery Artery Right gastroepiploic artery Identifiers Latin omentum majus TA98 A10.1.02.201 TA2 3757 FMA 9580 Anatomical terminology [ edit on Wikidata ] The greater omentum (also the great omentum , omentum majus , gastrocolic omentum , epiploon , or, especially in non-human animals, caul ) is a large apron-like fold of visceral peritoneum that hangs down from the stomach. It extends from the greater curvature of the stomach , passes in front of the small intestines, and doubles back to ascend to the transverse colon before reaching to the posterior abdominal wall .  The greater omentum is larger than the lesser omentum , which hangs down from the liver to the lesser curvature . The common anatomical term "epiploic" derives from "epiploon", from Greek epipleein ' to float or sail on ' , since the greater omentum appears to float on the surface of the intestines. It is the first structure observed when the abdominal cavity is opened anteriorly (from the front).

[ 1 ] Structure [ edit ] Greater and lesser omentum The greater omentum is the larger of the two peritoneal folds. It consists of a double sheet of peritoneum, folded on itself so that it has four layers.

[ 2 ] The two layers of the greater omentum descend from the greater curvature of the stomach and the beginning of the duodenum .

[ 2 ] They pass in front of the small intestines , sometimes as low as the pelvis , before turning on themselves, and ascending as far as the transverse colon , where they separate and enclose that part of the intestine .

[ 2 ] These individual layers are easily seen in the young, but in the adult they are more or less inseparably blended.

The left border of the greater omentum is continuous with the gastrosplenic ligament ; its right border extends as far as the beginning of the duodenum .

The greater omentum is usually thin, and has a perforated appearance. It contains some adipose tissue , which can accumulate considerably in obese people. It is highly vascularised .

[ 3 ] Subdivisions [ edit ] Horizontal disposition of the peritoneum in the upper part of the abdomen (phrenicolienal ligament labeled at bottom left) Diagram to show the lines along which the peritoneum leaves the wall of the abdomen to invest the viscera (phrenicosplenic ligament labeled at center right) The greater omentum is often defined to encompass a variety of structures. Most sources include the following three: [ 4 ] [ 5 ] Gastrophrenic ligament —extends to the underside of the left dome of the diaphragm Gastrocolic ligament (occasionally on its own considered synonymous with "greater omentum" [ 4 ] )—extends to the transverse colon Gastrosplenic (or Gastrolineal) ligament —extends to the spleen , overlying the kidney The splenorenal ligament (or lienorenal ligament ) (from the left kidney to the spleen ) is occasionally considered part of the greater omentum.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] It is derived from the peritoneum , where the wall of the general peritoneal cavity comes into contact with the lesser sac between the left kidney and the spleen ; the splenic artery and vein pass between its two layers. It contains the tail of the pancreas , the only intraperitoneal portion of the pancreas, and splenic vessels.

One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text in the public domain from  the 20th edition of Gray's Anatomy (1918) Phrenicosplenic ligament [ edit ] The phrenosplenic ligament ( lienophrenic ligament or phrenicolienal ligament ) is a double fold of peritoneum that connects the thoracic diaphragm and spleen .

[ 8 ] The phrenicosplenic ligament is part of the greater omentum. Distinctions between the phrenicosplenic ligament and adjacent ligaments, such as the gastrophrenic, gastrosplenic and splenorenal ligaments, which are all part of the same mesenteric sheet, are often nebulous.

[ 8 ] Blood supply [ edit ] The right and left gastroepiploic arteries (also known as gastroomental) provide the sole blood supply to the greater omentum. Both are branches  of the celiac trunk . The right gastroepiploic artery is a branch of the gastroduodenal artery , which is a branch of the common hepatic artery , which is a branch of the celiac trunk. The left gastroepiploic artery is the largest branch of the splenic artery , which is a branch of the celiac trunk. The right and left gastroepiploic arteries anastomose within the two layers of the anterior greater omentum along the greater curvature of the stomach.

Development [ edit ] Two of the stages in the development of the digestive tube and its mesentery. The arrow indicates the entrance to the bursa omentalis The greater omentum develops from the dorsal mesentery that connects the stomach to the posterior abdominal wall. During its development, the stomach undergoes its first 90° rotation along the axis of the embryo, so that posterior structures are moved to the left and structures anterior to the stomach are shifted to the right. As a result, the dorsal mesentery folds over on itself, forming a pouch with its blind end on the left side of the embryo. A second approximately 90° rotation of the stomach, this time in the frontal plane , moves structures inferior if they were originally to the left of the stomach, and superior if they were originally to the stomach's right. Consequently, the blind-ended sac (also called the lesser sac ) formed by the dorsal mesentery is brought inferiorly, where it assumes its final position as the greater omentum. It grows to the point that it covers the majority of the small and large intestine.

Functions [ edit ] The functions of the greater omentum are: Fat deposition , having varying amounts of adipose tissue [ 9 ] Immune contribution , having milky spots of macrophage collections [ 9 ] Infection and wound isolation ; It may also physically limit the spread of intraperitoneal infections.

[ 9 ] The greater omentum can often be found wrapped around areas of infection and trauma.

Clinical significance [ edit ] Surgical removal [ edit ] Omentectomy refers to the surgical removal of the omentum, a relatively simple procedure with no documented major side effects, that is performed in cases where there is concern that there may be spread of cancerous tissue into the omentum. Examples for this are ovarian cancer and advanced or aggressive endometrial cancer as well as intestinal cancer and also appendix cancer . The procedure is generally done as an add-on when the primary lesion is removed.

Omental flap [ edit ] The greater omentum may be surgically harvested for reconstruction of the thoracic wall .

[ 3 ] It has also been used experimentally to reinforce bioengineered tissues transplanted to the surface of the heart for cardiac regeneration.

[ 10 ] Use in brain surgery [ edit ] The greater omentum may be surgically harvested to provide revascularization of brain tissue after a stroke.

[ 11 ] History [ edit ] The greater omentum is also known as the great omentum, the omentum majus, the gastrocolic omentum, the epiploon, and the caul.

In 1906, the greater omentum was described as the "abdominal policeman" by the surgeon James Rutherford Morrison .

[ 12 ] This is due to its immunological function, whereby omental tissue seems to "surveil" the abdomen for infection and cover areas of infection when found - walling it off with immunologically active tissue.

Additional images [ edit ] Vertical disposition of the peritoneum . Main cavity, red; omental bursa, blue. (Greater omentum labeled at left.) The greater omentum is attached to the lower portion of the stomach (here the attachment is cut and the stomach is lifted up).

The celiac artery and its branches; the liver has been raised, and the lesser omentum and anterior layer of the greater omentum removed.

Schematic figure of the bursa omentalis, etc. Human embryo of eight weeks.

Diagrams to illustrate the development of the greater omentum and transverse mesocolon.

Greater omentum. Deep dissection.

See also [ edit ] This article uses anatomical terminology .

Caul fat Omental cake Omental infarction Right gastroepiploic vein Omental bursa ( Lesser sac ) Greater sac Omental foramen ( Epiploic foramen , Foramen of Winslow ) Lesser omentum Peritoneum Notes and references [ edit ] ^ Drake, Richard L., et al., Gray's anatomy for students , Philadelphia, PA: Churchill Livingstone/Elsevier, 2010. Print.

[ page needed ] ^ a b c Federle, Michael P.; Rosado-de-Christenson, Melissa L.; Woodward, Paula J.; Carter, Brett W.; Raman, Siva P.; Shaaban, Akram M., eds. (2017). "Peritoneal Cavity".

Imaging Anatomy: Chest, Abdomen, Pelvis . pp.

528– 549.

doi : 10.1016/b978-0-323-47781-9.50027-1 .

ISBN 978-0-323-47781-9 .

^ a b Fayanju, Oluwadamilola M.; Garvey, Patrick Bryan; Karuturi, Meghan S.; Hunt, Kelly K.; Bedrosian, Isabelle (2018). "Surgical Procedures for Advanced Local and Regional Malignancies of the Breast".

The Breast . pp. 778–801.e4.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-323-35955-9.00059-3 .

ISBN 978-0-323-35955-9 .

^ a b Dalley, Arthur F.; Moore, Keith L. (2006).

Clinically oriented anatomy . Hagerstown, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. p.

237 .

ISBN 0-7817-3639-0 .

^ Anatomy Tables – Stomach & Spleen Archived 2006-12-06 at the Wayback Machine ^ Kyung Won Chung (2005).

Gross Anatomy (Board Review) . Hagerstown, MD: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins. p. 205.

ISBN 0-7817-5309-0 .

^ "Module - Peritoneal Cavity Development" . Archived from the original on 2007-11-13 . Retrieved 2007-12-01 .

^ a b "Phrenicosplenic ligament" . Farlex Partner Medical Dictionary . Retrieved May 18, 2013 .

^ a b c Alagumuthu, M.; Das, Bhupati; Pattanayak, Siba; Rasananda, Mangual (1 May 2006).

"The omentum: A unique organ of exceptional versatility" .

Indian Journal of Surgery .

68 (3): 136– 141.

Gale A148391067 .

^ Wang, Hogan; Roche, Christopher D; Gentile, Carmine (1 December 2020).

"Omentum support for cardiac regeneration in ischaemic cardiomyopathy models: a systematic scoping review" .

European Journal of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery .

58 (6): 1118– 1129.

doi : 10.1093/ejcts/ezaa205 .

PMC 7697859 .

PMID 32808023 .

^ Kuper, C. Frieke; Ruehl-Fehlert, Christine; Elmore, Susan A.; Parker, George A. (2013). "Immune System".

Haschek and Rousseaux's Handbook of Toxicologic Pathology . pp.

1795– 1862.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-12-415759-0.00049-2 .

ISBN 978-0-12-415759-0 .

The omentum helps to restore tissue integrity in the peritoneum by connecting tissue repair with immunological defense. Upon intraperitoneal immunization, follicles and germinal centers can be formed.

^ Epstein, Leonard I. (25 September 1967). "The Abdominal Policeman".

JAMA .

201 (13): 1054.

doi : 10.1001/jama.1967.03130130080033 .

External links [ edit ] Anatomy figure: 37:03-07 at Human Anatomy Online, SUNY Downstate Medical Center [ dead link ] Anatomy figure: 37:05-12 at Human Anatomy Online, SUNY Downstate Medical Center [ dead link ] Anatomy photo:37:07-0100 at the SUNY Downstate Medical Center [ dead link ] spleen at The Anatomy Lesson by Wesley Norman (Georgetown University) abdominalcavity at The Anatomy Lesson by Wesley Norman (Georgetown University) ( xsectthrulesseromentum ) Diagram at Tn.edu Archived 2007-02-04 at the Wayback Machine Photo of model at Waynesburg College digirep/greateromentum Learn about living without an Omentum at The Omentum Project: https://www.theomentumproject.org/ v t e Anatomy of the peritoneum and mesentery General Peritoneum cavity Mesentery Abdominal From ventral mesentery Lesser omentum Hepatoduodenal ligament Hepatogastric ligament Liver Coronary ligament ( Left triangular ligament Right triangular ligament Hepatorenal ligament ) Falciform ligament Round ligament of liver Ligamentum venosum From dorsal mesentery Greater omentum Gastrophrenic ligament Gastrocolic ligament Gastrosplenic ligament Mesentery Splenorenal ligament Phrenicocolic ligament Folds Umbilical folds Supravesical fossa Medial inguinal fossa Lateral umbilical fold Lateral inguinal fossa Ileocecal fold Abdominal cavity Greater sac Lesser sac Omental foramen General Cystohepatic triangle Hepatorenal recess Abdominal wall Inguinal triangle Peritoneal recesses Paracolic gutters Paramesenteric gutters Pelvic Uterus / ovaries Broad ligament of the uterus Mesovarium Mesosalpinx Mesometrium Ovarian ligament Suspensory ligament of ovary Recesses Female Rectouterine pouch Rectouterine fold ( Uterosacral ligament ) Vesicouterine pouch Ovarian fossa Paravesical fossa Retroperitonium Male Rectovesical pouch Pararectal fossa Spaces Extraperitoneal space Retroperitoneal space Retropubic space Portals : Anatomy Biology Medicine Authority control databases Terminologia Anatomica Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Greater_omentum&oldid=1299025840 " Categories : Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 20th edition of Gray's Anatomy (1918) Abdomen Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2021 Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2022 This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 03:56 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Greater omentum 17 languages Add topic

