Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life Toggle Early life subsection 1.1 Education 2 Career Toggle Career subsection 2.1 Arms Control and Disarmament Agency 2.2 Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Regional Programs 2.3 State Department Director of Policy Planning 2.4 State Department Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs 2.5 Ambassador to the Republic of Indonesia 2.6 Undersecretary of Defense for Policy 2.7 Johns Hopkins University 2.8 Deputy Secretary of Defense 2.9 President of the World Bank 3 Controversies Toggle Controversies subsection 3.1 Wolfowitz's relationship with Shaha Riza 3.2 Wolfowitz's leadership of the World Bank Group 4 Recent activities 5 See also 6 Notes 7 Further reading 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Paul Wolfowitz 42 languages العربية تۆرکجه Беларуская Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Ikinyarwanda Latina Latviešu Magyar مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt ייִדיש 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American politician and diplomat (born 1943) Paul Wolfowitz Official portrait, 2001 10th President of the World Bank Group In office June 1, 2005 – June 30, 2007 Preceded by James Wolfensohn Succeeded by Robert Zoellick 28th United States Deputy Secretary of Defense In office March 2, 2001 – June 1, 2005 President George W. Bush Secretary Donald Rumsfeld Preceded by Rudy de Leon Succeeded by Gordon England 5th Dean of the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies In office 1994–2001 Preceded by George R. Packard Succeeded by Jessica Einhorn Under Secretary of Defense for Policy In office May 15, 1989 – January 19, 1993 President George H. W. Bush Preceded by Fred Iklé Succeeded by Frank G. Wisner United States Ambassador to Indonesia In office April 11, 1986 – May 12, 1989 President Ronald Reagan George H. W. Bush Preceded by John H. Holdridge Succeeded by John Cameron Monjo 16th Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs In office December 22, 1982 – March 12, 1986 President Ronald Reagan Preceded by John H. Holdridge Succeeded by Gaston J. Sigur Jr.

12th Director of Policy Planning In office February 13, 1981 – December 22, 1982 President Ronald Reagan Preceded by Anthony Lake Succeeded by Stephen W. Bosworth Personal details Born ( 1943-12-22 ) December 22, 1943 (age 81) Brooklyn, New York , U.S.

Political party Democratic (before 1981) Republican (1981–present) Spouse Clare Selgin ​ ​ ( m.

1968; div.

2002) ​ Children 3 Education Cornell University ( BA ) University of Chicago ( MA , PhD ) Website AEI website This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Paul Dundes Wolfowitz (born December 22, 1943) is an American political scientist and diplomat who served as the 10th President of the World Bank , U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense , U.S. Ambassador to Indonesia , and dean of Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS) at Johns Hopkins University. He is currently a visiting scholar at the American Enterprise Institute .

[ 1 ] Having proposed a plan to invade Iraq in 2001, Wolfowitz was an early advocate of the Iraq War and has widely been described as an "architect" of the war.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] In the aftermath of the insurgency and civil war that followed the invasion, Wolfowitz denied influencing policy on Iraq and disclaimed responsibility.

[ 3 ] [ 7 ] He is a leading neoconservative .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] In 2005, he left the Pentagon to serve as president of the World Bank only to resign after two years over a scandal involving allegations he used his position to help World Bank staffer Shaha Riza to whom he was romantically linked.

[ 10 ] A Reuters report described his tenure there as "a protracted battle over his stewardship, prompted by his involvement in a high-paying promotion for his companion".

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Wolfowitz is the only World Bank president to have resigned over a scandal.

[ 13 ] Early life [ edit ] The second child of Jacob Wolfowitz (b. Warsaw; 1910–1981) and Lillian Dundes, Paul Wolfowitz was born in Brownsville, Brooklyn , New York, into a Polish Jewish immigrant family, and grew up mainly in Ithaca, New York , where his father was a professor of statistical theory at Cornell University .

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] As a student at Cornell, Paul Wolfowitz was profoundly impacted by John Hersey's Hiroshima (1946), [ 16 ] leading him to become "a soft-spoken former aspiring-mathematician-turned-policymaker ... [whose] world views ... were forged by family history and in the halls of academia rather than in the jungles of Vietnam or the corridors of Congress ... [Paul Wolfowitz] ... escaped Poland after World War I . The rest of his father's family perished in the Holocaust ." [ 17 ] In the mid-1960s, while Paul was an undergraduate student at Cornell residing at the Cornell Branch of the Telluride Association , he met Clare Selgin , who later became an anthropologist . They married in 1968, had three children and lived in Chevy Chase, Maryland . They separated in 1999, and, according to some sources, became legally separated in 2001 and divorced in 2002.

[ 14 ] [ 18 ] In late 1999, Wolfowitz began dating Shaha Riza . Their relationship led to controversy later, during his presidency of the World Bank Group .

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Wolfowitz speaks five languages in addition to English: Arabic , French , German , Hebrew , and Indonesian .

[ 18 ] He was reportedly the model for a minor character named Philip Gorman in Saul Bellow 's 2000 book Ravelstein .

[ 20 ] Education [ edit ] Wolfowitz entered Cornell University in 1961. He lived in the Telluride House in 1962 and 1963, while philosophy professor Allan Bloom served as a faculty mentor living in the house.

[ 15 ] In August 1963, he and his mother participated in the civil-rights march on Washington organized by A. Philip Randolph [ 15 ] [ 18 ] Wolfowitz was a member of the Quill and Dagger society. Wolfowitz graduated in 1965 with a B.A.

in mathematics . Against his father's wishes, Wolfowitz decided to go to graduate school to study political science .

[ 15 ] Wolfowitz would later say that "one of the things that ultimately led me to leave mathematics and go into political science was thinking I could prevent nuclear war." [ 17 ] In 1972, Wolfowitz received a Ph.D.

in political science from the University of Chicago , writing his doctoral dissertation on Nuclear Proliferation in the Middle East: The Politics and Economics of Proposals for Nuclear Desalting . At the University of Chicago, Wolfowitz took two courses with Leo Strauss . He completed his dissertation under Albert Wohlstetter .

[ 21 ] Wohlstetter became Wolfowitz's "mentor".

[ 22 ] In the words of Wolfowitz's future colleague Richard Perle : "Paul thinks the way Albert thinks." [ 22 ] In the summer of 1969, Wohlstetter arranged for Wolfowitz, Perle and Peter Wilson to join the Committee to Maintain a Prudent Defense Policy which was set up by Cold War architects Paul Nitze and Dean Acheson .

While finishing his dissertation, Wolfowitz taught in the department of political science at Yale University from 1970 to 1972; one of his students was future colleague Scooter Libby .

[ 23 ] Career [ edit ] Arms Control and Disarmament Agency [ edit ] Main article: Team B In the 1970s, Wolfowitz and Perle served as aides to proto- neoconservative Democratic Senator Henry M. Jackson . A Cold War liberal , Jackson supported higher military spending and a hard line against the Soviet Union alongside more traditional Democratic causes, such as social welfare programs, civil rights, and labor unions.

[ 24 ] In 1972, US President Richard Nixon , under pressure from Senator Jackson, dismissed the head of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (ACDA) and replaced him with Fred Ikle . Ikle brought in a new team that included Wolfowitz. While at ACDA, Wolfowitz wrote research papers and drafted testimony, as he had previously done at the Committee to Maintain a Prudent Defense Policy. He traveled with Ikle to strategic arms limitations talks in Paris and other European cities. He also helped dissuade South Korea from reprocessing plutonium that could be diverted into a clandestine weapons program.

Under President Gerald Ford , the American intelligence agencies came under attack over their annually published National Intelligence Estimate . According to James Mann, "The underlying issue was whether the C.I.A.

and other agencies were underestimating the threat from the Soviet Union, either by intentionally tailoring intelligence to support Kissinger 's policy of détente or by simply failing to give enough weight to darker interpretations of Soviet intentions." Attempting to counter these claims, Director of Central Intelligence George H. W. Bush formed a committee of anti- Communist experts, headed by Richard Pipes , to reassess the raw data. Based on the recommendation of Perle, Pipes picked Wolfowitz for this committee, which was later called Team B .

[ 25 ] The team's 1976 report, which was leaked to the press, stated that "all the evidence points to an undeviating Soviet commitment to what is euphemistically called the 'worldwide triumph of socialism,' but in fact connotes global Soviet hegemony", highlighting a number of key areas where they believed the government's intelligence analysts had failed. According to Jack Davis, Wolfowitz observed later: The B-Team demonstrated that it was possible to construct a sharply different view of Soviet motivation from the consensus view of the [intelligence] analysts and one that provided a much closer fit to the Soviets' observed behavior (and also provided a much better forecast of subsequent behavior up to and through the invasion of Afghanistan). The formal presentation of the competing views in a session out at [CIA headquarters in] Langley also made clear that the enormous experience and expertise of the B-Team as a group were formidable." [ 26 ] Team B's conclusions have faced criticism. They have been called " worst-case analysis ", ignoring the "political, demographic, and economic rot" already eating away at the Soviet system. Wolfowitz reportedly had a central role in Team B, mostly focused on analyzing the role that medium-range missiles played in Soviet military strategy.

[ 20 ] In 1978, Wolfowitz was investigated by the FBI for providing intelligence to an Israeli government official while he was still an employee at ACDA. He was accused of handing over a classified document, via an AIPAC intermediary, which detailed the proposed sale of U.S. weapons to an Arab government. An inquiry was launched, but the probe was later dropped and Wolfowitz was never charged.

[ 27 ] Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Regional Programs [ edit ] In 1977, during the Carter administration, Wolfowitz moved to the Pentagon . He was US Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Regional Programs for the US Defense Department , under US Secretary of Defense Harold Brown .

In 1980, Wolfowitz resigned from the Pentagon and became a visiting professor at the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS) at Johns Hopkins University . Shortly after, he joined the Republican Party . According to The Washington Post : "He said it was not he who changed his political philosophy so much as the Democratic Party, which abandoned the hard-headed internationalism of Harry Truman, Kennedy and Jackson." [ 28 ] State Department Director of Policy Planning [ edit ] Following the 1980 election of President Ronald Reagan , the new National Security Advisor Richard V. Allen formed the administration's foreign policy advisory team. Allen initially rejected Wolfowitz's appointment but following discussions, instigated by former colleague John Lehman , Allen offered Wolfowitz the position of Director of Policy Planning at the Department of State .

President Reagan's foreign policy was heavily influenced by the Kirkpatrick Doctrine , as outlined in a 1979 article in Commentary by Jeane Kirkpatrick entitled "Dictatorships and Double Standards".

Although most governments in the world are, as they always have been, autocracies of one kind or another, no idea holds greater sway in the mind of educated Americans than the belief that it is possible to democratize governments, anytime, anywhere, under any circumstances ... (But) decades, if not centuries, are normally required for people to acquire the necessary disciplines and habits.

Wolfowitz broke from this official line by denouncing Saddam Hussein of Iraq at a time when Donald Rumsfeld was offering the dictator support in his conflict with Iran. James Mann points out: "quite a few neo-conservatives, like Wolfowitz, believed strongly in democratic ideals; they had taken from the philosopher Leo Strauss the notion that there is a moral duty to oppose a leader who is a 'tyrant.

' " [ 29 ] Other areas where Wolfowitz disagreed with the administration was in his opposition to attempts to open up dialogue with the Palestine Liberation Organization (PLO) and to the sale of Airborne Warning and Control System (AWACS) aircraft to Saudi Arabia . "In both instances," according to Mann, "Wolfowitz demonstrated himself to be one of the strongest supporters of Israel in the Reagan administration." Mann stresses: "It was on China that Wolfowitz launched his boldest challenge to the established order." After Nixon and Kissinger had gone to China in the early 1970s, US policy was to make concessions to China as an essential Cold War ally. The Chinese were now pushing for the US to end arms sales to Taiwan , and Wolfowitz used the Chinese incentive as an opportunity to undermine Kissinger's foreign policy toward China. Instead, Wolfowitz advocated a unilateralist policy, claiming that the US did not need China's assistance but that the Chinese needed the US to protect them against the far more-likely prospect of a Soviet invasion of the Chinese mainland. Wolfowitz soon came into conflict with Secretary of State Alexander Haig , who had been Kissinger's assistant at the time of the visits to China. On March 30, 1982, The New York Times predicted that "Paul D. Wolfowitz, the director of policy planning ... will be replaced", because "Mr. Haig found Mr. Wolfowitz too theoretical." Instead, on June 25, 1982, Haig was replaced by George Shultz as US Secretary of State, and Wolfowitz was promoted.

State Department Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs [ edit ] In 1982, Secretary of State Shultz appointed Wolfowitz as Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs .

Jeane Kirkpatrick , on a visit to the Philippines , was welcomed by the dictator Ferdinand Marcos who quoted heavily from her 1979 Commentary article Dictatorships and Double Standards ; although Kirkpatrick had been forced to speak out in favor of democracy, the article continued to influence Reagan's policy toward Marcos. Following the assassination of Philippine opposition leader Benigno Aquino Jr.

in 1983, many within the Reagan administration including the President himself began to fear that the Philippines could fall to the communists and the US military would lose its strongholds at Clark Air Force Base and Subic Bay Naval Station . Wolfowitz tried to change the administration's policy, stating in an April 15, 1985, article in The Wall Street Journal that "The best antidote to Communism is democracy." Wolfowitz and his assistant Lewis Libby made trips to Manila where they called for democratic reforms and met with non-communist opposition leaders.

Mann points out that "the Reagan administration's decision to support democratic government in the Philippines had been hesitant, messy, crisis-driven and skewed by the desire to do what was necessary to protect the American military installations." Following massive street protests, Marcos fled the country on a US Air Force plane and the US recognized the government of Corazón Aquino .

Ambassador to the Republic of Indonesia [ edit ] Paul Wolfowitz (center) during his tenure as United States Ambassador to the Republic of Indonesia in 1987.

U.S. Ambassador to Indonesia Paul Wolfowitz, wearing local Indonesian traditional Batik Shirt , during a visit to local School From 1986 to 1989, during the military-backed government of President Suharto , Wolfowitz was the US ambassador to the Republic of Indonesia .

[ 30 ] According to Peter J. Boyer, Wolfowitz's appointment to Indonesia was not an immediately obvious match. He was a Jew representing America in the largest Muslim republic in the world, an advocate of democracy in Suharto's dictatorship. But Wolfowitz's tenure as Ambassador was a notable success, largely because, in essence, he went native. With tutoring help from his driver, he learned the language, and hurled himself into the culture. He attended academic seminars, climbed volcanoes, and toured the neighborhoods of Jakarta.

[ 31 ] Sipress and Nakashima reported that "Wolfowitz's colleagues and friends, both Indonesian and American" pointed to the "U.S. envoy's quiet pursuit of political and economic reforms in Indonesia." [ 32 ] Dewi Fortuna Anwar, a foreign policy adviser to B. J. Habibie , Suharto's successor as head of state (1998–99), stated "that Wolfowitz was a competent and popular envoy." But "he never intervened to push human rights or stand up to corruption." [ 30 ] Officials involved in the USAID program during Wolfowitz's tenure told The Washington Post that he "took a keen personal interest in development, including health care, agriculture and private sector expansion" and that "Wolfowitz canceled food assistance to the Indonesian government out of concern that Suharto's family, which had an ownership interest in the country's only flour mill, was indirectly benefiting." [ 32 ] In "The Tragedy of Suharto", published in May 1998, in The Wall Street Journal , Wolfowitz states: Although it is fashionable to blame all of Asia's present problems on corruption and the failure of Asian values, it is at bottom a case of a bubble bursting, of too many imprudent lenders chasing too many incautious borrowers. But the greed of Mr. Suharto's children ensured that their father would take the lion's share of the blame for Indonesia's financial collapse. The Suharto children's favored position became a major obstacle to the measures needed to restore economic confidence. Worst of all, they ensured that the economic crisis would be a political crisis as well. That he allowed this, and that he amassed such wealth himself, is all the more mysterious since he lived a relatively modest life.

[ 33 ] After the 2002 Bali bombing , on October 18, 2002, then Deputy Secretary of Defense Wolfowitz observed that "the reason the terrorists are successful in Indonesia is because the Suharto regime fell and the methods that were used to suppress them are gone." [ 34 ] Undersecretary of Defense for Policy [ edit ] Flag of the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy .

Gen.

Colin Powell , Gen.

Norman Schwarzkopf , and Under Sec. Wolfowitz listen as Defense Sec.

Dick Cheney briefs reporters during the Gulf War in February 1991 From 1989 to 1993, Wolfowitz served in the administration of George H. W. Bush as Under Secretary of Defense for Policy , under then US Secretary of Defense Dick Cheney . During the 1991 Persian Gulf War , Wolfowitz's team coordinated and reviewed military strategy, raising $50 billion in allied financial support for the operation. Wolfowitz was present with Cheney, Colin Powell and others, on February 27, 1991, at the meeting with the President where it was decided that the troops should be demobilized.

On February 25, 1998, Wolfowitz testified before a congressional committee that he thought that "the best opportunity to overthrow Saddam was, unfortunately, lost in the month right after the war." [ 35 ] Wolfowitz added that he was horrified in March as "Saddam Hussein flew helicopters that slaughtered the people in the south and in the north who were rising up against him, while American fighter pilots flew overhead, desperately eager to shoot down those helicopters, and not allowed to do so." During that hearing, he also stated: "Some people might say—and I think I would sympathise with this view—that perhaps if we had delayed the ceasefire by a few more days, we might have got rid of Saddam Hussein." After the 1991 Persian Gulf War , Wolfowitz and his then-assistant Scooter Libby wrote the "Defense Planning Guidance of 1992" (DPG), which came to be known as the Wolfowitz Doctrine , to "set the nation's direction for the next century." [ 22 ] As military strategist Andrew Bacevich described the doctrine: Before this classified document was fully vetted by the White House, it was leaked to The New York Times , which made it front-page news. The draft DPG announced that it had become the "first objective" of U.S. policy "to prevent the re-emergence of a new rival." With an eye toward "deterring potential competitors from even aspiring to a larger regional or global role," the United States would maintain unquestioned military superiority and, if necessary, employ force unilaterally. As window dressing, allies might be nice, but the United States no longer considered them necessary.

[ 22 ] At that time, the official administration line was "containment", and the contents of Wolfowitz's plan calling for "preemption" and " unilateralism " was opposed by Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Colin Powell and President Bush.

[ 22 ] Defense Secretary Cheney produced a revised plan released in 1992. Many of the ideas in the Wolfowitz Doctrine later became part of the Bush Doctrine .

[ 22 ] He left the government after the 1992 election .

Johns Hopkins University [ edit ] Main article: Project for the New American Century From 1994 to 2001, Wolfowitz served as Professor of International Relations and Dean of the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS) at Johns Hopkins University .

[ 22 ] He was instrumental in adding more than $75 million to the university's endowment, developing an international finance concentration as part of the curriculum, and combining the various Asian studies programs into one department. He also advised Bob Dole on foreign policy during his 1996 US presidential election campaign, which was managed by Donald Rumsfeld.

[ 36 ] According to Kampfner, "Wolfowitz used his perch at the Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies as a test-bed for a new conservative world vision." Wolfowitz was associated with the Project for the New American Century (PNAC); he signed both the PNAC's June 3, 1997 " Statement of Principles ", [ 37 ] and its January 26, 1998, open letter to President Bill Clinton.

[ 38 ] In February 1998, Wolfowitz testified before a congressional hearing, stating that the current administration lacked the sense of purpose to "liberate ourselves, our friends and allies in the region, and the Iraqi people themselves from the menace of Saddam Hussein." [ 39 ] In September 2000, the PNAC produced a 90-page report entitled Rebuilding America's Defenses: Strategies, Forces and Resources for a New Century , advocating the redeployment of US troops in permanent bases in strategic locations throughout the world where they can be ready to act to protect US interests abroad.

[ 40 ] During the 2000 US presidential election campaign, Wolfowitz served as a foreign policy advisor to George W. Bush as part of the group led by Condoleezza Rice calling itself The Vulcans .

[ 41 ] Deputy Secretary of Defense [ edit ] Wolfowitz and Dutch Foreign Minister Jozias van Aartsen , 2001 President George W. Bush , Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld , and Deputy Secretary Wolfowitz in March 2003 Wolfowitz with Chairman of The Joint Chiefs of Staff General Richard B. Myers at Andrews Air Force Base , May 14, 2004.

Wolfowitz meets with Qatari Emir Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani , October 5, 2001 Dep. Sec. Wolfowitz is escorted by Army General David Petraeus as he tours Mosul , Iraq, July 21, 2003 Wolfowitz, Rumsfeld, and General Richard Myers testifying before the 9/11 Commission in March 2004 Wolfowitz and Rear Admiral Robert T. Moeller aboard the USS Ronald Reagan in July 2004 Deputy Secretary Wolfowitz departs the USS Abraham Lincoln (CVN-72) in January 2005 From 2001 to 2005, during the George W. Bush administration, Wolfowitz served as U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense reporting to U.S. Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld .

The September 11 attacks in 2001 were a turning point in administration policy, as Wolfowitz later explained: "9/11 really was a wake up call and that if we take proper advantage of this opportunity to prevent the future terrorist use of weapons of mass destruction that it will have been an extremely valuable wake up call," adding: "if we say our only problem was to respond to 9/11, and we wait until somebody hits us with nuclear weapons before we take that kind of threat seriously, we will have made a very big mistake." [ 42 ] In the first emergency meeting of the National Security Council on the day of the attacks, Rumsfeld asked, "Why shouldn't we go against Iraq, not just al-Qaeda?" with Wolfowitz adding that Iraq was a "brittle, oppressive regime that might break easily—it was doable," and, according to John Kampfner , "from that moment on, he and Wolfowitz used every available opportunity to press the case." [ 43 ] The idea was initially rejected, at the behest of Secretary of State Colin Powell, but, according to Kampfner, "Undeterred Rumsfeld and Wolfowitz held secret meetings about opening up a second front—against Saddam. Powell was excluded." In such meetings they created a policy that would later be dubbed the Bush Doctrine , centering on "pre-emption" and the war on Iraq , which the PNAC had advocated in their earlier letters.

[ 44 ] After the September 11 attacks, the US invaded Afghanistan to fight Al-Qaeda , which had orchestrated the attack.

[ 44 ] The invasion of Afghanistan began on October 7, 2001. On October 10, 2001, George Robertson , then Secretary-General of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, went to the Pentagon to offer NATO troops, planes and ships to assist. Wolfowitz rebuffed the offer, saying: "We can do everything we need to." Wolfowitz later announced publicly, according to Kampfner, "that 'allies, coalitions and diplomacy' were of little immediate concern." Ten months later, on January 15, 2003, with hostilities still continuing, Wolfowitz made a fifteen-hour visit to the Afghan capital, Kabul , and met with the new president Hamid Karzai . Wolfowitz stated, "We're clearly moving into a different phase, where our priority in Afghanistan is increasingly going to be stability and reconstruction. There's no way to go too fast. Faster is better." Despite the promises, according to Hersh, "little effort to provide the military and economic resources" necessary for reconstruction was made.

[ 44 ] This criticism would also re-occur after the 2003 invasion of Iraq later that year.

[ 44 ] On April 16, 2002, the National Solidarity Rally for Israel was called in Washington to promote US support and collaboration with Israel. Wolfowitz was the sole representative of the Bush administration to attend, speaking alongside Former Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and former New York Mayor Rudolph Giuliani . As reported by the BBC , Wolfowitz told the crowd that US President George W. Bush "wants you to know that he stands in solidarity with you".

[ 45 ] Sharon Samber and Matthew E. Berger reported for Jewish Telegraphic Agency (JTA) that Wolfowitz continued by saying that "Innocent Palestinians are suffering and dying as well. It is critical that we recognize and acknowledge that fact," before being booed and drowned out by chants of "No more Arafat." [ 46 ] Following the invasion of Afghanistan the Bush administration had started to plan for the next stage of the War on Terror . According to John Kampfner , "Emboldened by their experience in Afghanistan, they saw the opportunity to root out hostile regimes in the Middle East and to implant very American interpretations of democracy and free markets, from Iraq to Iran and Saudi Arabia. Wolfowitz epitomized this view." Wolfowitz "saw a liberated Iraq as both paradigm and linchpin for future interventions." The 2003 invasion of Iraq began on March 19.

[ 44 ] Prior to the invasion, Wolfowitz actively championed it, as he later stated: "For reasons that have a lot to do with the U.S. government bureaucracy we settled on the one issue that everyone could agree on which was weapons of mass destruction as the core reason" [ 47 ] [ 48 ] The job of finding WMD and providing justification for the attack would fall to the intelligence services, but, according to Kampfner, "Rumsfeld and Wolfowitz believed that, while the established security services had a role, they were too bureaucratic and too traditional in their thinking." As a result, "they set up what came to be known as the 'cabal', a cell of eight or nine analysts in a new Office of Special Plans (OSP) based in the U.S. Defense Department." According to an unnamed Pentagon source quoted by Hersh, the OSP "was created in order to find evidence of what Wolfowitz and his boss, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld, believed to be true—that Saddam Hussein had close ties to Al Qaeda , and that Iraq had an enormous arsenal of chemical, biological, and possibly even nuclear weapons that threatened the region and, potentially, the United States." [ 44 ] Within months of being set up, the OSP "rivaled both the CIA and the Pentagon's Defense Intelligence Agency , the DIA, as President Bush's main source of intelligence regarding Iraq's possible possession of weapons of mass destruction and connection with Al Qaeda." Hersh explains that the OSP "relied on data gathered by other intelligence agencies and also on information provided by the Iraqi National Congress , or INC, the exile group headed by Ahmad Chalabi ." According to Kampfner, the CIA had ended its funding of the INC "in the mid-1990s when doubts were cast about Chalabi's reliability." Nevertheless, "as the administration geared up for conflict with Saddam, Chalabi was welcomed in the inner sanctum of the Pentagon" under the auspices of the OSP, and "Wolfowitz did not see fit to challenge any of Chalabi's information." The actions of the OSP have led to accusation of the Bush administration "fixing intelligence to support policy" with the aim of influencing Congress in its use of the War Powers Act .

[ 44 ] Kampfner outlined Wolfowitz's strategy for the 2003 invasion of Iraq , which "envisaged the use of air support and the occupation of southern Iraq with ground troops, to install a new government run by Ahmed Chalabi 's Iraqi National Congress ." Wolfowitz believed that the operation would require minimal troop deployment, Hersh explains, because "any show of force would immediately trigger a revolt against Saddam within Iraq, and that it would quickly expand." [ 44 ] The financial expenditure would be kept low, Kampfner observes, if "under the plan American troops would seize the oil fields around Basra, in the South, and sell the oil to finance the opposition." On March 27, 2003, Wolfowitz told the House Appropriations Committee [ 49 ] that oil revenue earned by Iraq alone would pay for Iraq's reconstruction after the Iraq war; he testified his "rough recollection" was: [ 49 ] "The oil revenues of that country could bring between $50 and $100 billion over the course of the next two or three years. Now, there are a lot of claims on that money, but ... We are dealing with a country that can really finance its own reconstruction and relatively soon." [ 50 ] By October of that year, " Lawrence Di Rita , the Pentagon's chief spokesman, said 'prewar estimates that may be borne out in fact are likelier to be more lucky than smart.' [He] added that earlier estimates and statements by Mr. Wolfowitz and others 'oozed with uncertainty.'" Di Rita's comments came as a much less optimistic secret Pentagon study—which had been complete at the time of Wolfowitz's testimony—was coming to public light, and when actual production results in Iraq were coinciding with those projected in the less optimistic Pentagon study.

[ 49 ] During Wolfowitz's pre-war testimony before Congress, he dismissed General Eric K. Shinseki 's estimates of the size of the post war occupation force which would be needed. General Shinseki testified to the US Senate Armed Services Committee on February 25, 2003, that "something in the order of several hundred thousand soldiers" would probably be required for postwar Iraq. By contrast, Wolfowitz estimated that fewer than 100,000 troops would be necessary in Iraq.

[ 51 ] Two days after Shinseki testified, Wolfowitz said to the House Budget Committee on February 27, 2003: There has been a good deal of comment—some of it quite outlandish—about what our postwar requirements might be in Iraq. Some of the higher end predictions we have been hearing recently, such as the notion that it will take several hundred thousand U.S. troops to provide stability in post-Saddam Iraq, are wildly off the mark. It is hard to conceive that it would take more forces to provide stability in post-Saddam Iraq than it would take to conduct the war itself and to secure the surrender of Saddam's security forces and his army—hard to imagine.

[ 44 ] On October 26, 2003, while in Baghdad staying at the Al-Rashid Hotel Wolfowitz narrowly escaped an attack when six rockets hit the floors below his room.

[ 52 ] Army Lt. Col. Charles H. Buehring was killed and seventeen other soldiers were wounded.

[ 53 ] Wolfowitz and his DOD staffers escaped unharmed and returned to the United States on October 28, 2003.

President of the World Bank [ edit ] Press conference at G8 Summit (Paul Wolfowitz standing at rear on right) In March 2005, Wolfowitz was nominated to be president of the World Bank by US President George W. Bush .

[ 54 ] Criticism of his nomination appeared in the media.

[ 55 ] Nobel Laureate in Economics and former chief economist for the World Bank Joseph Stiglitz said: "'The World Bank will once again become a hate figure. This could bring street protests and violence across the developing world.'" [ 56 ] In a speech at the U.N. Economic and Social Council, economist Jeffrey Sachs also opposed Wolfowitz: "It's time for other candidates to come forward that have experience in development. This is a position on which hundreds of millions of people depend for their lives ... Let's have a proper leadership of professionalism." [ 57 ] In the US, there was some praise for the nomination. An editorial in The Wall Street Journal stated: Mr. Wolfowitz is willing to speak the truth to power ... he saw earlier than most, and spoke publicly about, the need for dictators to plan democratic transitions. It is the world's dictators who are the chief causes of world poverty. If anyone can stand up to the Robert Mugabes of the world, it must be the man who stood up to Saddam Hussein.

[ 58 ] He was confirmed and became president on June 1, 2005. He soon attended the 31st G8 summit to discuss issues of global climate change and the economic development in Africa . When this meeting was interrupted by the July 7, 2005 London bombings , Wolfowitz was present with other world leaders at the press conference given by British Prime Minister Tony Blair .

Several of Wolfowitz's initial appointments at the bank proved controversial, including two US nationals (Robin Cleveland and Kevin Kellems) formerly with the Bush administration, whom he appointed as close advisors with $250,000 tax-free contracts.

[ 59 ] Another appointee, Juan José Daboub , faced criticism, including from his colleagues, for attempting to bring policies on climate change and family planning towards a more conservative position.

[ 60 ] [ 61 ] Wolfowitz gave special emphasis to two particular issues. Identifying Sub-Saharan Africa as the region most challenged to improve living standards, he traveled widely in the region. He also made clear his focus on fighting corruption. Several aspects of the latter program raised controversy. Overturning the names produced by a formal search process, he appointed a figure linked to the US Republican party to head the bank's internal watchdog. Member countries worried that Wolfowitz's willingness to suspend lending to countries on grounds of corruption was vulnerable to selective application in line with US foreign policy interests. In a debate on the proposed Governance and Anti-Corruption Strategy at the bank's 2006 Annual Meetings, shareholders directed Wolfowitz to undertake extensive consultations and revise the strategy to show how objective measures of corruption would be incorporated into decisions and how the shareholders' representatives on the bank's Board would play a key role. Following the consultations and revisions, the Board approved a revised strategy in spring 2007.

[ 18 ] Controversies [ edit ] Wolfowitz's relationship with Shaha Riza [ edit ] Main article: Shaha Riza After President George W. Bush nominated Wolfowitz as president of the World Bank , journalists reported that Wolfowitz was involved in a relationship with World Bank Senior Communications Officer (and Acting Manager of External Affairs) for the Middle East and North Africa Regional Office Shaha Ali Riza.

[ 62 ] According to Richard Leiby, of The Washington Post , Riza is "an Oxford-educated British citizen, was born in Tunisia and grew up in Saudi Arabia. She is known for her expertise on women's rights and has been listed on the bank's Web site as a media contact for Iraq reconstruction issues." [ 63 ] According to Leiby and Linton Weeks, in their essay "In the Shadow of a Scandal", Riza's employment at the World Bank predated Wolfowitz's nomination as Bank president: "Riza started at the World Bank as a consultant in July 1997 and became a full-time employee in 1999"; and the relationship between Riza and Wolfowitz pre-dated it as well: In the early 1990s, Riza joined the National Endowment for Democracy and is credited there with development of the organization's Middle East program. Wolfowitz was on the endowment's board—which is how Riza first met him, according to Turkish journalist Cengiz Candar, a friend of the couple. "Shaha was married at the time and Paul was married," Candar recalled, and it wasn't until late 1999—after Riza divorced and Wolfowitz had separated from his wife of 30 years, Clare Selgin Wolfowitz—that the couple began dating." [ 19 ] [ 63 ] When Wolfowitz was considered for head of the CIA after the 2000 election, Clare Wolfowitz wrote President-elect George Bush a letter telling him that her husband's relationship with a foreign national—Riza—posed a national security risk.

[ 64 ] It has been reported that Scooter Libby intercepted the letter.

[ 65 ] Sidney Blumenthal also reported on the letter Clare Wolfowitz wrote: This embittered letter remained a closely guarded secret, although a former high official of the CIA told me about it. Chris Nelson also reported it on April 16 in his widely respected, nonpartisan foreign policy newsletter: "A certain Ms. Riza was even then Wolfowitz's true love. The problem for the CIA wasn't just that she was a foreign national, although that was and is today an issue for anyone interested in CIA employment. The problem was that Wolfowitz was married to someone else, and that someone was really angry about it, and she found a way to bring her complaint directly to the President. So when we, with our characteristic innocence, put Wolfowitz on our short-list for CIA, we were instantly told, by a very, very, very senior Republican foreign policy operative, 'I don't think so.' " The Daily Mail of London also reported on his wife's letter when Wolfowitz was appointed president of the World Bank in 2005.

[ 66 ] According to the London Sunday Times on March 20, 2005, despite their cultural differences: Riza, an Arab feminist who confounds portrayals of Wolfowitz as a leader of a "Zionist conspiracy" of Jewish neoconservatives in Washington ... [and who] works as the bank's senior gender co-ordinator for the Middle East and North Africa ... not only shares Wolfowitz's passion for spreading democracy in the Arab world, but is said to have reinforced his determination to remove Saddam Hussein's oppressive regime.

[ 67 ] The relationship created further controversy over Wolfowitz's nomination to head the World Bank, because the bank's ethics rules preclude sexual relationships between a manager and a staff member serving under that manager, even if one reports to the other only indirectly through a chain of supervision.

Wolfowitz initially proposed to the World Bank's Ethics Committee that he recuse himself from personnel matters regarding Riza, but the committee rejected that proposal.

[ 68 ] Riza was "seconded to the State Department", or placed on "external assignment", assigned "a job at the state department under Liz Cheney , the daughter of the vice-president, promoting democracy in the Middle East".

[ 69 ] She "was also moved up to a managerial pay grade in compensation for the disruption to her career", resulting in a raise of over $60,000, as well as guarantees of future increases; "The staff association claims that the pay rise was more than double the amount allowed under employee guidelines." [ 69 ] [ 70 ] A promotion and raise had been among the options suggested by a World Bank ethics committee that was set up to advise on the situation.

[ 71 ] According to Steven R. Weisman, however, in a report published in The New York Times , the then-current chair of the committee emphasized that he was not informed at the time of the details or extent of the present and future raises built into the agreement with Riza.

[ 72 ] Wolfowitz referred to the controversy concerning his relationship with Riza in a statement posted on the website of the World Bank at the time (April 12, 2007).

[ 73 ] The affair resurfaced in headlines in 2011.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] [ 76 ] Wolfowitz's leadership of the World Bank Group [ edit ] In early 2007, Fox News published on a series of investigative stories on the World Bank, based in part on leaks of internal bank documents.

[ 77 ] On April 11, 2007, Reuters and Al Kamen in The Washington Post , reported that Wolfowitz and the World Bank board had hired the Williams & Connolly law firm to oversee an investigation into the leaking of internal bank documents to Fox News.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] Those reports cite an internal memo to the bank staff later posted on the internet, dated April 9, 2007, in which the World Bank's general counsel, Ana Palacio, states that the bank's legal staff was scrutinizing two articles by investigative reporter Richard Behar published on the website of Fox News on January 31 and March 27, 2007.

[ 80 ] A day after the second report published by Behar, on March 28, 2007, Kamen had disclosed that "Bank records obtained by the Government Accountability Project" documented pay raises in excess of Bank policies given to Shaha Riza .

[ 81 ] On April 12, 2007, the London Financial Times reported that, in a 2005 memorandum, Wolfowitz had personally directed the bank's human resources chief to offer Riza a large pay rise and promotion, according to two anonymous sources who told the Financial Times that they had seen the memo.

[ 82 ] The memo was part of a package of 102 pages of documents released by the bank on April 14, 2007.

[ 82 ] On April 14, 2007, after reviewing these documents, the Financial Times concluded that it was "a potentially fatal blow" to Wolfowitz.

[ 82 ] In contrast, Fox News concluded that the new documents might offer Wolfowitz a "new lifeline" in the scandal, because the bank's ethics committee had launched a review of the Riza compensation case in early 2006 and concluded that it did not warrant any further attention by the committee.

[ 83 ] Wolfowitz failed, on April 19, 2007, to attend a high-profile meeting and the controversy led to disruption at the World Bank when some employees wore blue ribbons "in a display of defiance against his leadership." [ 84 ] [ 85 ] World Bank Group's board of executive directors and staffers complained also that Wolfowitz was imposing Bush administration policies to eliminate family planning from World Bank programs. According to Nicole Gaouette, in her report published in the Los Angeles Times on April 19, 2007, Juan José Daboub —the managing director whom Wolfowitz had appointed who has also been criticized for overly-conservative policies concerning climate change [ 61 ] and "a Roman Catholic with ties to a conservative Salvadoran political party"—repeatedly deleted references to family planning from World Bank proposals.

[ 60 ] On May 14, 2007, the World Bank committee investigating the alleged ethics violations reported (in part): "Mr. Wolfowitz's contract requiring that he adhere to the Code of Conduct for board officials and that he avoid any conflict of interest, real or apparent, were violated"; "The salary increase Ms. Riza received at Mr. Wolfowitz's direction was in excess of the range established by Rule 6.01"; "The ad hoc group concludes that in actuality, Mr Wolfowitz from the outset cast himself in opposition to the established rules of the institution"; and "He did not accept the bank's policy on conflict of interest, so he sought to negotiate for himself a resolution different from that which would have applied to the staff he was selected to head." [ 86 ] Wolfowitz appeared before the World Bank Group's board of executive directors to respond on May 15. Adams speculated that "With Mr Wolfowitz so far refusing to step down, the board may need to take radical action to break the stalemate. Members have discussed a range of options, including sacking Mr Wolfowitz, issuing a vote of no confidence or reprimanding him. Some board members argue that a vote of no confidence would make it impossible for him to stay in the job." [ 87 ] By Wednesday, May 16, 2007, The New York Times , reported that "after six weeks of fighting efforts to oust him as president ... Wolfowitz began today to negotiate the terms of his possible resignation, in return for the bank dropping or softening the charge that he had engaged in misconduct ..." [ 88 ] After expressions from the Bush administration that it "fully" supported Wolfowitz as World Bank president and its urging a "fair hearing" for him, President Bush expressed "regret" at Wolfowitz's impending resignation.

[ 89 ] On May 17, 2007, the World Bank Group's board of Executive Directors announced that Paul Wolfowitz would resign as World Bank Group president at the end of June 2007.

[ 90 ] Recent activities [ edit ] As a visiting scholar of the American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research , Wolfowitz has blogged for the group [ 91 ] and appeared in group events.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] In 2011, he wrote columns that appeared in publications such as The Independent , The Sunday Times , and Newsweek .

[ 94 ] Wolfowitz is a former steering committee member of the Bilderberg group .

[ 95 ] In February 2013, Wolfowitz publicly supported legal recognition for same-sex marriage in an amicus brief submitted to the US Supreme Court .

[ 96 ] In February 2015, Wolfowitz advised presidential candidate Jeb Bush .

[ 97 ] In August 2016, Wolfowitz announced his intention to vote for Hillary Clinton in the 2016 United States presidential election , despite having "serious reservations about her." [ 98 ] However, in a December interview on Fox Business, Wolfowitz claimed that he did not in fact vote for Clinton.

[ 99 ] In January 2017, Wolfowitz wrote an op-ed in The New York Times commenting on a "dissent cable" that had been signed by 1,000 Foreign Service Officers criticizing President Trump's executive action on immigration .

[ 100 ] In February 2023, Wolfowitz was awarded Order of Brilliant Star with Grand Cordon by President of the Republic of China Tsai Ing-wen .

[ 101 ] [ 102 ] See also [ edit ] Biography portal Politics portal Joint Vision 2020 Washington Institute for Near East Policy (WINEP) World Bank Group Notes [ edit ] ^ Zachary A. Goldfarb, "Wolfowitz Joins Think Tank as Visiting Scholar" , online posting, The New Yorker , July 3, 2007, accessed July 3, 2007.

^ keller, bill (September 22, 2002).

"The Sunshine Warrior" .

The New York Times . Retrieved May 6, 2019 .

^ a b Topaz, Jonathan (June 17, 2014).

"Wolfowitz: Not Iraq War 'architect' " .

Politico . Retrieved May 6, 2019 .

^ Purdum, Todd (February 1, 2003).

"The Brains Behind Bush's War Policy" .

The New York Times . Retrieved May 6, 2019 .

^ "Wolfowitz Retreats on Al Qaeda Charge" .

The New York Times . September 13, 2003 . Retrieved May 6, 2019 .

^ Draper, Robert (2020).

To Start a War: How the Bush Administration took America into Iraq . Penguin Press.

ISBN 978-0-525-56104-0 .

OCLC 1124907438 .

^ Harnden, Toby (March 18, 2013).

"10 Years On, Paul Wolfowitz Admits U.S. Bungled in Iraq" .

Politico . Retrieved May 6, 2019 .

^ Paul, Reynolds (March 17, 2005).

"Wolfowitz to spread neo-con gospel" . BBC . Retrieved April 8, 2009 .

^ Ostroy, Andy (June 20, 2014).

"Dick Cheney's Big Neo-Con Con" .

The Huffington Post . Retrieved August 6, 2016 .

^ King, Neil; Hitt, Greg (May 18, 2007).

"Wolfowitz Quits World Bank as U.S. Relents" .

The Wall Street Journal . Retrieved March 23, 2020 .

^ "Statements of Executive Directors and President Wolfowitz" , World Bank Group , May 17, 2007, accessed May 17, 2007.

^ Matthew Jones, "Wolfowitz Exit Seen Clearing Way for Progress" , Reuters (UK), May 18, 2007, accessed May 18, 2007.

^ Parker, Jennifer.

"World Bank Chief Paul Wolfowitz Resigns" .

ABC News . Retrieved March 23, 2020 .

^ a b Suzanne Goldenberg, "Guardian Profile: Paul Wolfowitz" , The Guardian , April 1, 2005, accessed May 1, 2007.

^ a b c d David Dudley, "Paul's Choice" , Cornell Alumni Magazine Online 107.1 (July/August 2004), accessed May 17, 2007.

^ Lewis D. Solomon: PAUL D. WOLFOWITZ. Visionary Intellectual, Policymaker, and Strategist. 2007 ISBN 978-0-275-99587-4 https://api.pageplace.de/preview/DT0400.9780275995881_A47347221/preview-9780275995881_A47347221.pdf ^ a b Eric Schmitt, "The Busy Life of Being a Lightning Rod for Bush" , The New York Times , April 22, 2002, accessed March 24, 2008.

^ a b c d e John Cassidy , "The Next Crusade: Paul Wolfowitz at the World Bank" , online posting, The New Yorker , April 9, 2007, accessed May 7, 2007.

^ a b Linton Weeks and Richard Leiby, "In the Shadow of a Scandal" , The Washington Post , May 10, 2007, Retrieved  May 10, 2007. (Page 2 of 3 pages.) ^ a b Ivo H. Daalder; James H. Lindsay (2005).

America Unbound: The Bush Revolution in Foreign Policy . Wiley. p.

26 .

ISBN 978-0471741503 .

^ James Mann, Rise of the Vulcans: the history of Bush's war cabinet (2004) pp. 28–31 ^ a b c d e f g Bacevich, Andrew , A Letter to Paul Wolfowitz , Harper's (March 2013) ^ "Profile: Paul Wolfowitz Archived May 19, 2007, at the Wayback Machine , Right Web ( International Relations Center ), updated April 19, 2007, accessed May 21, 2007.

^ Kit Oldham, "Cyberpedia Library: Jackson, Henry M. 'Scoop' (1912–1983): HistoryLink.org Essay 5516" , historylink.org ( The Online Encyclopedia of Washington State History ), August 19, 2003, accessed May 17, 2007.

^ Sam Tanenhaus, "The Hard Liner" 2 November 2003 ^ Qtd. by Jack Davis, "The Challenge of Managing Uncertainty: Paul Wolfowitz on Intelligence-Policy Relations", Studies in Intelligence 39.5 (1996):35–42, accessed May 21, 2007. ("Jack Davis served in the Directorate of Intelligence .) [Corrected title.] ^ "FBI probes DOD office - (United Press International)" .

The Washington Times . January 13, 2005. Archived from the original on January 13, 2005 . Retrieved October 11, 2022 .

^ Michael Dobbs, "For Wolfowitz, a Vision May Be Realized" , The Washington Post , April 7, 2003, accessed April 16, 2007.

^ James Mann, Rise of the Vulcans: the history of Bush's war cabinet (2004) p. 93 ^ a b AP , "Indonesian Rights Groups Denounce Wolfowitz' World Bank Nomination" , online posting, Alliance for Reform and Democracy in Asia , March 22, 2005, accessed June 20, 2007.

^ Peter J. Boyer, "The Believer: Paul Wolfowitz Defends His War" , online posting, The New Yorker , November 1, 2004, accessed November 26, 2014 (7 pages).

^ a b Alan Sipress and Ellen Nakashima, "Jakarta Tenure Offers Glimpse of Wolfowitz" , The Washington Post , March 28, 2005, accessed April 16, 2007.

^ Paul Wolfowitz, "The Tragedy of Suharto" Archived 2005-02-08 at the Wayback Machine , The Wall Street Journal , May 27, 1998, accessed April 16, 2007.

^ As qtd. in Scott Burchill, "What the West Wants from Indonesia" Archived September 29, 2007, at the Wayback Machine , Z Magazine , October 1, 2003, accessed June 7, 2007.

^ Transcript of hearing, Committee on International Relations, "U.S. Options in Confronting Iraq" , February 25, 1998, accessed April 17, 2007.

^ Paul Wolfowitz, velociraptor , The Economist (February 7, 2002) ^ Elliott Abrams , et al., "Statement of Principles" [ usurped ] , Project for the New American Century, June 3, 1997, accessed May 27, 2007.

^ Elliott Abrams , et al., "Open letter to President Bill Clinton," [ usurped ] Project for the New American Century, January 26, 1998, accessed May 24, 2007.

^ U.S. House Committee on International Relations, "U.S. Options in Confronting Iraq" , February 25, 1998, accessed April 18, 2007.

^ Rebuilding America's Defenses: Strategies, Forces and Resources for a New Century [ usurped ] , Project for the New American Century, September 2000, accessed May 14, 2007.

^ Martin Sieff, "Mission Accomplished: Archived March 7, 2008, at the Wayback Machine Bush's Brain Trust Had a Grand Plan for the Middle East. The Results Are Coming Home Every Day in Body Bags", Slate , April 8, 2004, accessed May 19, 2007.

^ "U.S. Department of Defense Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Public Affairs) News Transcript" of "Wolfowitz interview with the San Francisco Chronicle", conducted by Robert Collier, "Presenter: Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz", press release, United States Department of Defense , February 23, 2002, accessed May 26, 2007. ["Interview with Robert Collier, San Francisco Chronicle ".] ^ Kampfner, John (2003).

Blair's wars . Simon and Schuster. p. 156.

ISBN 978-0-7432-4829-7 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Seymour M. Hersh , "Annals of National Security Selective Intelligence: Donald Rumsfeld Has His Own Special Sources. Are they reliable?" The New Yorker , May 12, 2003, accessed May 8, 2007.

^ "Thousands in US rally for Israel" , BBC News , April 15, 2002, accessed April 18, 2007.

^ Sharon Samber and Matthew E. Berger, "Speakers Stick to Consensus Theme at National Solidarity Rally for Israel ", United Jewish Communities ( JTA ), April 15, 2002, accessed May 3, 2007.

^ "U.S. Department of Defense Office of the Assistant Secretary of Defense (Public Affairs) News Transcript" of telephone interview of Paul Wolfowitz, conducted by Sam Tanenhaus , "Presenter: Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz", press release, United States Department of Defense , May 9, 2003, accessed May 2, 2007. ["Deputy Secretary Wolfowitz Interview with Sam Tannenhaus  [ sic ]", Vanity Fair .] ^ Qtd. in Associated Press , "Wolfowitz Comments Revive Doubts Over Iraq's WMD" , USA Today , May 30, 2003, accessed May 8, 2007.

^ a b c Gerth, Jeff , "Report Offered Bleak Outlook About Iraq Oil , The New York Times , October 5, 2003. Retrieved September 5, 2010. Referenced in Frank Rich , "Freedom's just another word" , The New York Times , September 4, 2010 (September 5, 2010, p. WK8, NY ed.).

^ Paul Blustein, "Wolfowitz Strives To Quell Criticism" , The Washington Post , March 21, 2005, accessed April 18, 2007.

^ Schmitt, Eric (February 28, 2003).

"Pentagon Contradicts General on Iraq Occupation Force's Size" .

The New York Times . Retrieved April 4, 2012 .

^ Jane Arraf, "Bold, Well-executed Attack" , CNN, October 26, 2003, accessed April 18, 2007.

^ "DoD Identifies Army Casualty" , United States Department of Defense , October 27, 2003, accessed April 18, 2007.

^ Paul Blustein and Peter Baker, "Wolfowitz Picked for World Bank" , The Washington Post , March 27, 2005, accessed January 3, 2009.

^ Alan Beattie and Edward Alden, "Shareholders' dismay at lack of consultation" , The Financial Times , March 16, 2005, accessed April 16, 2007.

^ Peston, Robert (March 20, 2005).

"Stiglitz warns of violence if Wolfowitz goes to World Bank" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2022 . Retrieved May 8, 2012 .

^ "Many Wary, Some Cheer Wolfowitz Pick" Archived October 1, 2007, at the Wayback Machine , Al Jazeera , April 16, 2007, accessed April 16, 2007.

^ "Banking on Wolfowitz: And You Thought Iraq Was Difficult" , The Wall Street Journal , March 17, 2005, accessed April 16, 2007, Review & Outlook (Past Featured Article), accessed June 8, 2007.

^ Karen DeYoung, "Wolfowitz Clashed Repeatedly With World Bank Staff: Tenure as President Has Been Rocky" , The Washington Post , April 15, 2007: A12, accessed May 1, 2007.

^ a b Nicole Gaouette, "World Bank May Target Family Planning: Repeated Absence of References to Birth Control in Internal Reports Alarms Women's Health Advocates", The Los Angeles Times , April 19, 2007, accessed May 1, 2007.

^ a b Krishna Guha, "Wolfowitz Deputy Under Fire for Climate Change" , The Financial Times , April 24, 2007, updated April 25, 2007, accessed May 2, 2007.

^ Philip Sherwell, "Special 'relationship' Behind US West Asia policy" , The Telegraph , August 1, 2002, Retrieved April 18, 2007.

^ a b Richard Leiby, "Reliable Source: What Will the Neighbors Say?" , The Washington Post , March 22, 2007, C-03, Retrieved May 1, 2007.

^ How Cheney took control of Bush's foreign policy Archived October 12, 2008, at the Wayback Machine , Craig Unger, Salon.com, November 9, 2007; Interview with Vanity Fair contributing editor Craig Unger , David Shankbone, Wikinews , November 12, 2007 ^ Libby and Wolfie: A Story of Reacharounds Archived June 22, 2007, at the Wayback Machine , Ward Harkarvey, The Village Voice , June 14, 2007.

^ Wolfowitz's tomb , Sidney Blumenthal, Salon.com, May 24, 2007.

^ "Profile: Paul Wolfowitz: Hawk with a Lot of Loot Needs a Bit of Lady Luck" , The Sunday Times , March 20, 2005, Retrieved  April 18, 2007.

^ Greg Hitt, "World Bank Ex-Board Member Disputes Wolfowitz" , The Wall Street Journal , May 2, 2007, A8, Retrieved  May 8, 2007 (restricted access; free preview); rpt.

2-2007/ "World Bank Ex-Board Member Disputes Wolfowitz" , goldnotes.wordpress.com , May 2, 2007, Retrieved May 8, 2007; cf. Greg Hitt, "Top Wolfowitz Adviser Resigns" , The Wall Street Journal , Wall Street Journal Online , May 7, 2007, Washington Wire, Retrieved May 8, 2007.

^ a b Suzanne Goldenberg, "Wolfowitz Under Fire After Partner Receives Promotion and Pay Rise" , The Guardian , April 7, 2007, Retrieved  May 2, 2007.

^ William McQuillen, "Wolfowitz Says He Won't Quit, Calls Charges 'Bogus'" (Update2), Bloomberg News , April 30, 2007, accessed May 2, 2007.

^ "Ethics Committee Case No 2 and President Papers" . Archived from the original on December 12, 2008.

, World Bank , "strictly confidential" documents posted online at bicusa.org , April 12, 2007, Retrieved  April 14, 2007.

^ Steven R. Weisman, "Wolfowitz Loses Ground in Fight for World Bank Post" , The New York Times , April 27, 2007, Retrieved May 1, 2007.

^ Paul Wolfowitz, "Statement by Paul Wolfowitz, President of the World Bank Group WB/IMF Spring Meetings 2007" , Worldbank.org , April 12, 2007, Retrieved May 1, 2007. (Video and audio links.) ^ "Dominique Strauss-Kahn, Anwar Ibrahim, and Paul Wolfowitz: The Woman Troubles of Men Who Oversee Money" Archived May 21, 2011, at the Wayback Machine , New Ledger. May 16, 2011. Accessed June 9, 2011 ^ "Can Asians become chief of IMF or World Bank?" , Robert E. Kelly. May 25, 2011. Retrieved June 9, 2011 ^ "France's Lagarde leads IMF race" , Business Live. June 6, 2011. Retrieved June 9, 2011 ^ Richard Behar (February 8, 2007).

"World Bank Launches Internal Probe to Root Out Leakers" . Fox News. Archived from the original on April 3, 2007 . Retrieved May 14, 2007 .

^ Reuters, "World Bank Launches Probe Into Leak of Confidential Documents to FOXNews.com" Archived May 16, 2007, at the Wayback Machine , Fox News, April 11, 2007, accessed May 16, 2007.

^ Al Kamen, "Under Flood of Criticism, Looking to Plug a Leak" , The Washington Post , April 11, 2007, accessed May 16, 2007.

^ Richard Behar , "Wolfowitz vs. the World Bank Board: It's Trench Warfare" Archived May 18, 2007, at the Wayback Machine , Fox News, January 31, 2007, and "World Bank Anticorruption Drive Blunted as China Threatens to Halt Loans" Archived May 10, 2007, at the Wayback Machine , Fox News, March 27, 2007, both accessed May 14, 2007.

^ Al Kamen, "In the Loop: Where the Money Is" , The Washington Post , March 28, 2007, accessed May 10, 2007.

^ a b c Krishna Guha and Eoin Callan, "Wolfowitz Laid Out Terms for Partner’s Pay Package" , The Financial Times , April 12, 2007, accessed May 14, 2007.

^ Richard Behar , "Documents May Give Wolfowitz New Lifeline in World Bank Scandal" , Fox News, April 14, 2007, accessed May 14, 2007.

^ "Wolfowitz Absent As World Bank Board Decides Fate" , The Guardian , April 19, 2007, accessed April 20, 2007.

^ "Wolfowitz's Troubles Disrupt World Bank" , San Francisco Chronicle , April 20, 2007, accessed April 20, 2007.

^ Reuters, "Wolfowitz Rejects World Bank Ethics Ruling" . Archived from the original on May 18, 2007 . Retrieved May 15, 2007 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) : Bank Committee Determines That President Violated Ethics Standards Over His Girlfriend's Promotion; Wolfowitz Calls Findings 'unbalanced' and 'flawed'", online posting, CNN Money.com ("The Internet home of Fortune , Money , Business 2.0 "), May 15, 2007, accessed November 17, 2008.

^ Richard Adams, "Angry Wolfowitz in Four-letter Tirade" , The Guardian Unlimited , May 15, 2007, accessed May 16, 2007.

^ Steven R. Weisman, "Wolfowitz Said to Be Working On Deal for His Resignation" , The New York Times , May 16, 2007, accessed May 16, 2007.

^ Jeannine Aversa ( Associated Press ), "White House: Give Wolfowitz Fair Hearing" , USA Today , May 9, 2007, accessed November 17, 2008; "Markets: Bush Expresses Regret Over Wolfowitz" . Archived from the original on May 19, 2007 . Retrieved May 13, 2017 .

{{ cite web }} :  CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown ( link ) , The Houston Chronicle , May 17, 2007, accessed November 19, 2008.

^ Steven R. Weisman, "'Second Chance' at Career Goes Sour for Wolfowitz" , The New York Times , May 18, 2007, accessed May 18, 2007.

^ "The Friend of My Enemy is My Enemy « the Enterprise Blog" .

blog.american.com . Archived from the original on June 2, 2011 . Retrieved January 15, 2022 .

^ "What Will 'Odyssey Dawn' Bring?" Archived June 1, 2011, at the Wayback Machine . AEI, March 28, 2011.

^ "A Conversation with Libyan National Council Representative Ali Aujali" Archived June 3, 2011, at the Wayback Machine . AEI, April 11, 2011.

^ "AEI - Scholars - Paul Wolfowitz" . Archived from the original on April 28, 2011 . Retrieved May 31, 2011 .

^ Bilderberg Meetings.

Archived February 2, 2014, at the Wayback Machine ^ "The Pro-Freedom Republicans Are Coming: 131 Sign Gay-Marriage Brief" , The Daily Beast , February 28, 2013.

^ "Wolfowitz, Jeb Bush Foreign Policy Adviser, Plays Up Reagan Influence" , Bloomberg Politics , February 22, 2015, 3:09 PM CST.

^ "Former Bush adviser Wolfowitz to vote for Clinton: Spiegel" .

Reuters . August 26, 2016 . Retrieved August 26, 2016 .

^ "Amb. Wolfowitz Raises Concerns About Surveillance and Putin" .

Fox Business . December 21, 2016.

^ Wolfowitz, Paul D. (January 31, 2017).

"A Diplomat's Proper Channel of Dissent" .

The New York Times . Retrieved February 1, 2017 .

^ Teng, Pei-ju (February 8, 2023).

"Ex-USTBC chair receives presidential medal for promoting Taiwan-U.S. ties" . Central News Agency . Retrieved February 9, 2023 .

^ Madjar, Kayleigh (February 9, 2023).

"President Tsai confers honor on Paul Wolfowitz" .

Taipei Times . Retrieved February 9, 2023 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bazbauers, Adrian Robert. "The wolfensohn, wolfowitz, and zoellick presidencies: Revitalising the neoliberal agenda of the world bank." Forum for Development Studies 41#1 (2014) pp. 91–114..

Davis, Jack. "Paul Wolfowitz on Intelligence Policy-Relations" (CIA Center For The Study Of Intelligence, 1996) online Hanlon, Joseph. "Wolfowitz, the World Bank, and illegitimate lending." Brown Journal of World Affairs 13.2 (2007): 41-54 online .

Immerman, Richard H.

Empire for Liberty: A History of American Imperialism from Benjamin Franklin to Paul Wolfowitz (2010) pp. 196–231 excerpt and text search Meyer, Karl E. and Shareen Blair Brysac.

Kingmakers: The Invention of the Modern Middle East (2009) pp 381–410.

Milne, David. "Paul Wolfowitz and the promise of American power, 1969–2001." on American foreign policy (Manchester University Press, 2017) pp. 159–192.

Milne, David. "Intellectualism in US diplomacy: Paul Wolfowitz and his predecessors." International Journal 62.3 (2007): 667-680.

Rich, Bruce. "The Brief, Broken Presidency of Paul Wolfowitz." in Foreclosing the Future: The World Bank and the Politics of Environmental Destruction (2013) pp: 114-137.

Solomon, Lewis D.

Paul D. Wolfowitz: Visionary intellectual, policymaker, and strategist (Greenwood, 2007), aq standard scholarly biography.

Wolfowitz, Paul D. "Clinton's first year." Foreign Affairs (1994) 73#1: 28-43.

online External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Paul Wolfowitz .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Paul Wolfowitz .

English Wikisource has original works by or about: Paul Dundes Wolfowitz Paul Wolfowitz Archived October 27, 2011, at the Wayback Machine at the American Enterprise Institute's website Appearances on C-SPAN Official biographical accounts "Biography: Paul Wolfowitz: President, The World Bank Group" , at web.worldbank.org ( World Bank Group ). Accessed May 4, 2007.

"Paul Wolfowitz – Department of Defense, Deputy Secretary of Defense" . Search result in obsolete directory of "The President and His Leadership Team". Accessed May 4, 2007.

"Paul Wolfowitz, Deputy Secretary of Defense" at the Wayback Machine (archived May 2, 2006) – Archived biography at the United States Department of Defense . Last updated: March 16, 2005. Accessed May 2, 2007.

Wolfowitz, Paul.

"Statement by Paul Wolfowitz, President of the World Bank Group WB/IMF Spring Meetings 2007" . Online posting.

World Bank Group , Worldbank.org , April 12, 2007. Accessed May 1, 2007. (Video and audio links.) Political offices Preceded by Anthony Lake Director of Policy Planning 1981–1982 Succeeded by Stephen Bosworth Preceded by John Holdridge Assistant Secretary of State for East Asian and Pacific Affairs 1982–1986 Succeeded by Gaston Sigur Preceded by Fred Iklé Undersecretary of Defense for Policy 1989–1993 Succeeded by Frank Wisner Preceded by Rudy de Leon United States Deputy Secretary of Defense 2001–2005 Succeeded by Gordon England Diplomatic posts Preceded by John Holdridge United States Ambassador to Indonesia 1986–1989 Succeeded by John Cameron Monjo Preceded by James Wolfensohn President of the World Bank Group 2005–2007 Succeeded by Robert Zoellick Academic offices Preceded by George Packard Dean of the Paul H. Nitze School of Advanced International Studies 1993–2001 Succeeded by Jessica Einhorn v t e World Bank World Bank Group International Bank for Reconstruction and Development International Development Association International Finance Corporation Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency International Centre for Settlement of Investment Disputes Presidents Eugene Meyer John J. McCloy Eugene R. Black, Sr.

George David Woods Robert McNamara Alden W. Clausen Barber Conable Lewis Thompson Preston James Wolfensohn Paul Wolfowitz Robert Zoellick Jim Yong Kim Kristalina Georgieva (acting) David Malpass Ajay Banga Elections 1946 1947 1949 1963 1968 1981 1986 1991 1995 2005 2007 2012 2017 2019 by country Afghanistan Argentina Australia Belarus Botswana Brazil Cambodia Cape Verde Chile China Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Democratic Republic of the Congo Djibouti Ethiopia France Guatemala Haiti Honduras India Indonesia Ireland Jamaica Japan Kazakhstan Kenya Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mali Mexico Mongolia Morocco Myanmar Nicaragua Nigeria Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Russia Senegal Serbia Singapore South Africa South Korea Sri Lanka Tajikistan Tanzania Turkey Uganda Ukraine Uruguay Uzbekistan Vietnam Zimbabwe Category World Bank World Bank Group Country Relations v t e United States Deputy Secretaries of Defense Early Lovett Foster Kyes Anderson Robertson Quarles Gates Douglas Gilpatric Vance Nitze Packard Rush Clements Ellsworth Duncan Claytor Carlucci Thayer Taft Atwood Perry Deutch White Hamre de Leon Wolfowitz England Lynn Carter Work Shanahan Norquist Hicks Feinberg v t e United States ambassadors to Indonesia Cochran Cumming Allison Jones Green Galbraith Newsom Masters Monjo (a.i.) Holdridge Wolfowitz Monjo Barry Roy Gelbard Boyce Pascoe Hume Marciel Blake Donovan Variava (a.i.) Kim Klaine (a.i.) Lakhdhir v t e Neoconservatism General American exceptionalism Democratization Globalization Humanitarian intervention Interventionism Liberal internationalism Bush Doctrine Axis of evil Pax Americana Constitutional Federalism Figures William Kristol Robert Kagan Frederick Kagan Irving Kristol Paul Wolfowitz Richard Perle Charles Krauthammer David Frum Elliott Abrams Norman Podhoretz David Wurmser Douglas Feith Paul Bremer Peter Berkowitz Douglas Murray David Aaronovitch Anne Applebaum Oliver Kamm Max Boot Eliot A. Cohen Jeane Kirkpatrick Michael Novak Jonah Goldberg Joshua Muravchik Jennifer Rubin Irwin Stelzer Bret Stephens Zalmay Khalilzad Scooter Libby Yuval Levin Michael Ledeen James Kirchick Michael Gerson Dan Senor Eli Lake Reuel Marc Gerecht James Woolsey Clifford May Larry Diamond Niall Ferguson Major influences Leo Strauss Bernard Lewis Henry M. Jackson James Burnham John Courtney Murray Organisations Project for the New American Century National Endowment for Democracy Foundation for Defense of Democracies Jewish Institute for National Security Affairs Henry Jackson Society Emergency Committee for Israel American Enterprise Institute Foreign Policy Initiative NGO Monitor Publications Commentary The Weekly Standard The Public Interest National Affairs Encounter Harry's Place First Things Crisis Related articles Timeline of modern American conservatism Neoconservatism and paleoconservatism British neoconservatism Clash of Civilizations Idealism in international relations Liberal hawk Pro-war Left Anti-Stalinist left ( New York Intellectuals and Trotskyism ) Republican in Name Only (pejorative) Cuckservative (pejorative) Never Trump movement Euston Manifesto Authority control databases International ISNI 2 VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Norway Korea Poland Israel People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef 2 NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Paul_Wolfowitz&oldid=1303938307 " Categories : 1943 births Living people 21st-century American businesspeople 21st-century American Jews 21st-century American male writers 21st-century American non-fiction writers Ambassadors of the United States to Indonesia American bankers American male non-fiction writers American people of Polish-Jewish descent American political scientists American political writers American Zionists Assistant secretaries of state for East Asian and Pacific affairs Cornell University alumni Diplomats from Brooklyn Directors of policy planning George W. Bush administration personnel Ithaca High School (Ithaca, New York) alumni Jewish American bankers Jewish American government officials Jewish American non-fiction writers Johns Hopkins University faculty Members of the Jewish Institute for National Security of America Members of the Steering Committee of the Bilderberg Group Neoconservatism New York (state) Republicans Politicians from Brooklyn Politicians from Ithaca, New York Presidents of the World Bank Group Reagan administration personnel Businesspeople from New York City Recipients of the Order of Brilliant Star United States under secretaries of defense for policy University of Chicago alumni Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 maint: bot: original URL status unknown Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use American English from January 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from October 2022 Commons link from Wikidata People appearing on C-SPAN This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 23:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Paul Wolfowitz 42 languages Add topic

