Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Meteorological criteria 2 Types 3 Climatology 4 Famous ground blizzards 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Ground blizzard 5 languages Français Nederlands Polski Simple English Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia A ground blizzard in Ontario, March 21, 2004 Part of a series on Weather Temperate and polar seasons Winter Spring Summer Autumn Tropical seasons Dry season Harmattan Wet season Storms Cloud Cumulonimbus cloud Arcus cloud Downburst Microburst Heat burst Derecho Lightning Volcanic lightning Thunderstorm Air-mass thunderstorm Thundersnow Dry thunderstorm Mesocyclone Supercell Tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Dust devil Fire whirl Anticyclone Cyclone Polar low Extratropical cyclone European windstorm Nor'easter Subtropical cyclone Tropical cyclone Atlantic hurricane Typhoon Storm surge Dust storm Simoom Haboob Monsoon Amihan Gale Sirocco Firestorm Winter storm Ice storm Blizzard Ground blizzard Snow squall Precipitation Drizzle Freezing Graupel Hail Megacryometeor Ice pellets Diamond dust Rain Freezing Cloudburst Snow Rain and snow mixed Snow grains Snow roller Slush Topics Air pollution Atmosphere Chemistry Convection Physics River Climate Cloud Physics Fog Mist Season Cold wave Heat wave Jet stream Meteorology Severe weather List Extreme Severe weather terminology Canada Japan United States Weather forecasting Weather modification Glossaries Meteorology Climate change Tornado terms Tropical cyclone terms Weather portal v t e Ground blizzard refers to a weather condition where loose snow or ice on the ground is lifted and blown by strong winds.

[ 1 ] This can occur in the absence of precipitation, and can even occur when the sky is clear. This is in contrast to "ordinary" blizzards , which are accompanied by heavy falling snow. They can be especially dangerous as they occur after a winter storm has passed, when it is assumed that all forms of severe winter weather has ended.

[ 2 ] Meteorological criteria [ edit ] While the term "ground blizzard" is  often associated with intense blowing and drifting snow conditions, there are specific criteria which must be met. Often such criteria will be determined by a country's governing weather agency or other similar body. In the U.S, according to the National Weather Service a blizzard is defined as having sustained winds or frequent gusts of 35 mph or more, visibility frequently below 1/4 mile in considerable snow and/or blowing snow, and the above conditions are expected to prevail for 3 hours or longer.

[ 3 ] Environment Canada similarly maintains that widespread reduction of visibility to less than 400 meters due to snow and/or blowing snow and sustained wind speeds or gusts of 40 km/h or more must be present for at least 4 hours (6 hours for the Northwest Territories and Nunavut) [ 4 ] Types [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( January 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) There are three different forms of ground blizzards: In horizontal advection conditions, the winds blow across the surface of the earth with very little if any large-scale upward motion.

In vertical advection conditions, the winds exhibit large-scale upward motion lifting the snow into the atmosphere creating drifting waves of snow up to 500 meters in height.

In thermal-mechanical mixing conditions, massive convective rolls form in the atmosphere and the blizzard may be observed from space with the blizzards convective rolls creating waves of snow (also known as snow billows ) resembling lake or ocean effect snow bands. The extreme conditions can quickly bury a two-story home and make breathing very difficult if not impossible if caught outdoors.

[ citation needed ] Strong advection rolls during a ground blizzard in North Dakota, January 15th, 1997 Climatology [ edit ] Ground blizzards occur throughout the world, however unlike other winter storms, topography either aids in their formation or prevention. The most important topographic element in a blizzard is the requirement for a vast amount of large open and relatively flat land. Any type of flora, especially coniferous forms, will catch any drifting snow reducing the blizzard's effects.

[ citation needed ] The environment must also support temperatures cold enough to prevent any snow on the ground from melting and bonding the ice crystals together.

Ground blizzards are common in the American Great Plains in the wake of snowstorms producing light, dry snowfall that is more easily picked up by strong winds.

[ 2 ] They are also common in the Canadian Prairies , Siberia, Northern China, and also Arctic and Antarctic regions during seasonal transition periods, such as the spring and fall.

Famous ground blizzards [ edit ] Blizzard of 1977 (Western New York and Southern Ontario) References [ edit ] ^ Ahrens, C. Donald.

Essentials of Meteorology: An Invitation to the Atmosphere . C. Donald Ahrens. 7th ed. Stamford: Cengage Learning, 2015. 144. Print.

^ a b Rauber, Robert M; Walsh, John E; Charlevoix, Donna Jean (2012).

Severe & Hazardous Weather . Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company. p. 265.

ISBN 9780757597725 .

^ "National Weather Service Glossary" . Retrieved 27 January 2018 .

^ "Criteria for Public Weather Alerts" .

Government of Canada . 26 July 2010 . Retrieved 27 January 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Animation of an extreme ground blizzard as seen from space Definition of various weather terms including a ground blizzard CMISS Article dealing with the North Dakota ground blizzard satellite imagery Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ground_blizzard&oldid=1269448550 " Categories : Snow or ice weather phenomena Blizzards Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from January 2025 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from January 2018 This page was last edited on 14 January 2025, at 18:55 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ground blizzard 5 languages Add topic

