Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formal sciences Toggle Formal sciences subsection 1.1 Logic 1.2 Data science 1.3 Information science 1.4 Mathematics 1.5 Statistics 1.6 Systems theory 1.7 Decision theory 1.8 Theoretical computer science 2 Natural sciences Toggle Natural sciences subsection 2.1 Physical science 2.1.1 Physics 2.1.2 Chemistry 2.1.3 Earth science 2.1.3.1 Geology 2.1.3.2 Oceanography 2.1.3.3 Meteorology 2.1.4 Astronomy 2.2 Biological science 2.2.1 Biochemistry 2.2.2 Microbiology 2.2.3 Botany 2.2.4 Zoology 2.2.5 Ecology 3 Social sciences 4 Applied sciences 5 Relationships between the branches 6 Visualizations and metascience 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References Toggle References subsection 9.1 Footnotes 9.2 Works cited 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Branches of science 30 languages العربية Čeština Ελληνικά Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Bahasa Melayu Монгол नेपाली ߒߞߏ Novial Oromoo پښتو Polski Português Shqip سنڌي Slovenčina کوردی Tagalog తెలుగు Türkçe Українська اردو 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subdivisions of science defined by their scope Further information: Outline of science For broader coverage of this topic, see Academic discipline .

Part of a series on Science General History Literature Method Philosophy Branches Formal Natural Physical Life Social Behavioural Cognitive Applied In society Communication Community Education Funding Policy Pseudoscience Scientist Science fiction Science portal Outline Category Article indexes Glossaries v t e The branches of science , also referred to as sciences , scientific fields or scientific disciplines , are commonly divided into three major groups: Formal sciences : the study of formal systems , such as those under the branches of logic and mathematics , which use an a priori , as opposed to empirical , methodology . They study abstract structures described by formal systems .

Natural sciences : the study of natural phenomena (including cosmological , geological , physical , chemical , and biological factors of the universe ). Natural science can be divided into two main branches: physical science and life science (or biology ).

Social sciences: the study of human behavior in its social and cultural aspects.

[ 1 ] Scientific knowledge must be grounded in observable phenomena and must be capable of being verified by other researchers working under the same conditions.

[ 2 ] Natural, social, and formal science make up the fundamental sciences , which form the basis of interdisciplinarity - and applied sciences such as engineering and medicine . Specialized scientific disciplines that exist in multiple categories may include parts of other scientific disciplines but often possess their own terminologies and expertises .

[ 3 ] Formal sciences [ edit ] Main article: Formal sciences For a topical guide, see Outline of formal science .

The formal sciences are the branches of science that are concerned with formal systems , such as logic , mathematics , theoretical computer science , information theory , systems theory , decision theory , statistics .

Unlike other branches, the formal sciences are not concerned with the validity of theories based on observations in the real world ( empirical knowledge ), but rather with the properties of formal systems based on definitions and rules .  Hence there is disagreement on whether the formal sciences actually constitute as a science.  Methods of the formal sciences are, however, essential to the construction and testing of scientific models dealing with observable reality, [ 4 ] and major advances in formal sciences have often enabled major advances in the empirical sciences .

Logic [ edit ] Main article: Logic For a topical guide, see Outline of logic .

Logic (from Greek : λογική , logikḗ , 'possessed of reason , intellectual , dialectical , argumentative ') [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ note 1 ] is the systematic study of valid rules of inference , i.e. the relations that lead to the acceptance of one proposition (the conclusion ) on the basis of a set of other propositions ( premises ). More broadly, logic is the analysis and appraisal of arguments .

[ 7 ] It has traditionally included the classification of arguments; the systematic exposition of the logical forms ; the validity and soundness of deductive reasoning ; the strength of inductive reasoning ; the study of formal proofs and inference (including paradoxes and fallacies ); and the study of syntax and semantics .

Historically, logic has been studied in philosophy (since ancient times) and mathematics (since the mid-19th century).  More recently, logic has been studied in cognitive science , which draws on computer science , linguistics , philosophy and psychology , among other disciplines.

Data science [ edit ] Main article: Data science See also: Data visualization and DIKW pyramid Information science [ edit ] Main article: Information science Information science is an academic field which is primarily concerned with analysis , collection, classification , manipulation, storage, retrieval , movement, dissemination , and protection of information . Practitioners within and outside the field study the application and the usage of knowledge in organizations in addition to the interaction between people, organizations, and any existing information systems with the aim of creating, replacing, improving, or understanding the information systems.

See also: Information visualization and DIKW pyramid Mathematics [ edit ] Main article: Mathematics For a topical guide, see Outline of mathematics .

Mathematics , in the broadest sense, is just a synonym of formal science; but traditionally mathematics means more specifically the coalition of four areas: arithmetic , algebra , geometry , and analysis , which are, to some degree, the study of quantity, structure, space, and change respectively.

Statistics [ edit ] Main article: Statistics For a topical guide, see Outline of statistics .

Statistics is the study of the collection, organization, and interpretation of data .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] It deals with all aspects of this, including the planning of data collection in terms of the design of surveys and experiments .

[ 8 ] A statistician is someone who is particularly well versed in the ways of thinking necessary for the successful application of statistical analysis. Such people have often gained this experience through working in any of a wide number of fields . There is also a discipline called mathematical statistics , which is concerned with the theoretical basis of the subject.

The word statistics , when referring to the scientific discipline, is singular, as in "Statistics is an art." [ 10 ] This should not be confused with the word statistic , referring to a quantity (such as mean or median ) calculated from a set of data, [ 11 ] whose plural is statistics ("this statistic seems wrong" or "these statistics are misleading").

Systems theory [ edit ] Main article: Systems theory Systems theory is the transdisciplinary study of systems in general, to elucidate principles that can be applied to all types of systems in all fields of research. The term does not yet have a well-established, precise meaning, but systems theory can reasonably be considered a specialization of systems thinking and a generalization of systems science . The term originates from Bertalanffy 's General System Theory (GST) and is used in later efforts in other fields, such as the action theory of Talcott Parsons and the sociological autopoiesis of Niklas Luhmann .

In this context the word systems is used to refer specifically to self-regulating systems, i.e. that are self-correcting through feedback . Self-regulating systems are found in nature, including the physiological systems of the human body, in local and global ecosystems, and climate.

Decision theory [ edit ] Main article: Decision theory Decision theory (or the theory of choice not to be confused with choice theory ) is the study of an agent's choices.

[ 12 ] Decision theory can be broken into two branches: normative decision theory, which analyzes the outcomes of decisions or determines the optimal decisions given constraints and assumptions, and descriptive decision theory, which analyzes how agents actually make the decisions they do.

Decision theory is closely related to the field of game theory [ 13 ] and is an interdisciplinary topic, studied by economists, statisticians, psychologists, biologists, [ 14 ] political and other social scientists, philosophers, [ 15 ] and computer.

[ clarification needed ] Empirical applications of this rich theory are usually done with the help of statistical and econometric methods.

Theoretical computer science [ edit ] Main article: Theoretical computer science Theoretical computer science ( TCS ) is a subset of general computer science and mathematics that focuses on more mathematical topics of computing, and includes the theory of computation .

It is difficult to circumscribe the theoretical areas precisely. The ACM 's (Association for Computing Theory) Special Interest Group on Algorithms and Computation Theory (SIGACT) provides the following description: [ 16 ] TCS covers a wide variety of topics including algorithms , data structures , computational complexity , parallel and distributed computation, probabilistic computation , quantum computation , automata theory , information theory , cryptography , program semantics and verification , machine learning , computational biology , computational economics , computational geometry , and computational number theory and algebra . Work in this field is often distinguished by its emphasis on mathematical technique and rigor .

Natural sciences [ edit ] Main article: Natural science For a topical guide, see Outline of natural science .

Natural science is a branch of science concerned with the description, prediction, and understanding of natural phenomena , based on empirical evidence from observation and experimentation . Mechanisms such as peer review and repeatability of findings are used to try to ensure the validity of scientific advances.

Natural science can be divided into two main branches: life science and physical science . Life science is alternatively known as biology , and physical science is subdivided into branches: physics , chemistry , astronomy and Earth science . These branches of natural science may be further divided into more specialized branches (also known as fields).

Physical science [ edit ] For a topical guide, see Outline of physical science .

Physical science is an encompassing term for the branches of natural science that study non-living systems, in contrast to the life sciences. However, the term "physical" creates an unintended, somewhat arbitrary distinction, since many branches of physical science also study biological phenomena. There is a difference between physical science and physics.

Physics [ edit ] Main articles: Physics and Branches of physics For a topical guide, see Outline of physics .

Physics (from Ancient Greek : φύσις , romanized : physis , lit.

'nature') is a natural science that involves the study of matter [ note 2 ] and its motion through spacetime , along with related concepts such as energy and force .

[ 18 ] More broadly, it is the general analysis of nature , conducted in order to understand how the universe behaves.

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] [ note 3 ] Physics is one of the oldest academic disciplines , perhaps the oldest through its inclusion of astronomy .

[ note 4 ] Over the last two millennia, physics was a part of natural philosophy along with chemistry , certain branches of mathematics , and biology , but during the Scientific Revolution in the 16th century, the natural sciences emerged as unique research programs in their own right.

[ note 5 ] Certain research areas are interdisciplinary , such as biophysics and quantum chemistry , which means that the boundaries of physics are not rigidly defined . In the nineteenth and twentieth centuries physicalism emerged as a major unifying feature of the philosophy of science as physics provides fundamental explanations for every observed natural phenomenon . New ideas in physics often explain the fundamental mechanisms of other sciences, while opening to new research areas in mathematics and philosophy.

Chemistry [ edit ] Main article: Chemistry For a topical guide, see Outline of chemistry .

Chemistry (the etymology of the word has been much disputed) [ note 6 ] is the science of matter and the changes it undergoes. The science of matter is also addressed by physics , but while physics takes a more general and fundamental approach, chemistry is more specialized, being concerned by the composition, behavior (or reaction), structure, and properties of matter , as well as the changes it undergoes during chemical reactions .

[ 21 ] [ 22 ] It is a physical science which studies various substances , atoms , molecules , and matter (especially carbon based).  Example sub-disciplines of chemistry include: biochemistry , the study of substances found in biological organisms ; physical chemistry , the study of chemical processes using physical concepts such as thermodynamics and quantum mechanics ; and analytical chemistry , the analysis of material samples to gain an understanding of their chemical composition and structure . Many more specialized disciplines have emerged in recent years, e.g.

neurochemistry the chemical study of the nervous system .

Earth science [ edit ] Main article: Earth science For a topical guide, see Outline of Earth sciences .

Earth science (also known as geoscience , the geosciences or the Earth sciences ) is an all-embracing term for the sciences related to the planet Earth .

[ 23 ] It is arguably a special case in planetary science , the Earth being the only known life -bearing planet. There are both reductionist and holistic approaches to Earth sciences. The formal discipline of Earth sciences may include the study of the atmosphere , hydrosphere , lithosphere , and biosphere , as well as the solid earth . Typically Earth scientists will use tools from physics , chemistry , biology , geography , chronology and mathematics to build a quantitative understanding of how the Earth system works, and how it evolved to its current state.

Geology [ edit ] Main article: Geology For a topical guide, see Outline of geology .

Geology (from the Ancient Greek γῆ, gē ("earth") and -λoγία, -logia , ("study of", "discourse") [ 24 ] [ 25 ] ) is an Earth science concerned with the solid Earth , the rocks of which it is composed, and the processes by which they change over time. Geology can also include the study of the solid features of any terrestrial planet or natural satellite such as Mars or the Moon . Modern geology significantly overlaps all other Earth sciences, including hydrology and the atmospheric sciences , and so is treated as one major aspect of integrated Earth system science and planetary science .

Oceanography [ edit ] Main article: Oceanography Oceanography , or marine science , is the branch of Earth science that studies the ocean. It covers a wide range of topics, including marine organisms and ecosystem dynamics; ocean currents , waves , and geophysical fluid dynamics; plate tectonics and the geology of the seafloor; and fluxes of various chemical substances and physical properties within the ocean and across its boundaries. These diverse topics reflect multiple disciplines that oceanographers blend to further knowledge of the world ocean and understanding of processes within it: biology , chemistry , geology , meteorology , and physics as well as geography .

Meteorology [ edit ] Main article: Meteorology For a topical guide, see Outline of meteorology .

Meteorology is the interdisciplinary scientific study of the atmosphere . Studies in the field stretch back millennia, though significant progress in meteorology did not occur until the 17th century. The 19th century saw breakthroughs occur after observing networks developed across several countries. After the development of the computer in the latter half of the 20th century, breakthroughs in weather forecasting were achieved.

Astronomy [ edit ] For a topical guide, see Outline of astronomy .

Space science is the study of everything in outer space.

[ 26 ] This has sometimes been called astronomy , but recently astronomy has come to be regarded as a division of broader space science, which has grown to include other related fields, [ 27 ] such as studying issues related to space travel and space exploration (including space medicine ), space archaeology [ 28 ] and science performed in outer space (see space research ).

Biological science [ edit ] Main article: Biology For a topical guide, see Outline of biology .

See also: List of life sciences Life science , also known as biology , is the natural science that studies life such as microorganisms , plants , and animals including human beings , – including their physical structure , chemical processes , molecular interactions , physiological mechanisms , development , and evolution .

[ 29 ] Despite the complexity of the science, certain unifying concepts consolidate it into a single, coherent field. Biology recognizes the cell as the basic unit of life, genes as the basic unit of heredity , and evolution as the engine that propels the creation and extinction of species .

Living organisms are open systems that survive by transforming energy and decreasing their local entropy [ 30 ] to maintain a stable and vital condition defined as homeostasis .

[ 31 ] Biochemistry [ edit ] Main article: Biochemistry For a topical guide, see Outline of biochemistry .

Biochemistry , or biological chemistry , is the study of chemical processes within and relating to living organisms .

[ 32 ] It is a sub-discipline of both biology and chemistry, and from a reductionist point of view it is fundamental in biology.  Biochemistry is closely related to molecular biology , cell biology , genetics , and physiology .

Microbiology [ edit ] Main article: Microbiology See also: Branches of microbiology Microbiology is the study of microorganisms , those being unicellular (single cell), multicellular (cell colony), or acellular (lacking cells).  Microbiology encompasses numerous sub-disciplines including virology , bacteriology , protistology , mycology , immunology and parasitology .

Botany [ edit ] Main article: Botany For a topical guide, see Outline of botany .

Botany , also called plant science(s) , plant biology or phytology , is the science of plant life and a branch of biology .  Traditionally, botany has also included the study of fungi and algae by mycologists and phycologists respectively, with the study of these three groups of organisms remaining within the sphere of interest of the International Botanical Congress . Nowadays, botanists (in the strict sense) study approximately 410,000 species of land plants of which some 391,000 species are vascular plants (including approximately 369,000 species of flowering plants ), [ 33 ] and approximately 20,000 are bryophytes .

[ 34 ] Zoology [ edit ] Main article: Zoology For a topical guide, see Outline of zoology .

Zoology ( / z oʊ ˈ ɒ l ə dʒ i / ) [ note 7 ] is the branch of biology that studies the animal kingdom, including the structure , embryology , evolution , classification , habits , and distribution of all animals , both living and extinct , and how they interact with their ecosystems. The term is derived from Ancient Greek ζῷον, zōion , i.e. " animal " and λόγος, logos , i.e. "knowledge, study".

[ 35 ] Some branches of zoology include: anthrozoology , arachnology , archaeozoology , cetology , embryology , entomology , helminthology , herpetology , histology , ichthyology , malacology , mammalogy , morphology , nematology , ornithology , palaeozoology , pathology , primatology , protozoology , taxonomy , and zoogeography .

Ecology [ edit ] Main article: Ecology For a topical guide, see Outline of ecology .

Ecology (from Greek : οἶκος , "house", or "environment"; -λογία , "study of") [ note 8 ] is a branch of biology [ 36 ] concerning interactions among organisms and their biophysical environment , which includes both biotic and abiotic components. Topics of interest include the biodiversity , distribution, biomass , and populations of organisms, as well as cooperation and competition within and between species .

Ecosystems are dynamically interacting systems of organisms , the communities they make up, and the non-living components of their environment. Ecosystem processes, such as primary production , pedogenesis , nutrient cycling , and niche construction , regulate the flux of energy and matter through an environment. Organisms with specific life history traits sustain these processes.

Social sciences [ edit ] Main article: Social science For a topical guide, see Outline of social science .

Social science is the branch of science devoted to the study of societies and the relationships among individuals within those societies. The term was formerly used to refer to the field of sociology , the original "science of society", established in the 19th century. In addition to sociology, it now encompasses a wide array of academic disciplines , including anthropology , archaeology , economics , education , history , human geography , law , linguistics , political science , and psychology .

Positivist social scientists use methods resembling those of the natural sciences as tools for understanding society, and so define science in its stricter modern sense .

Interpretivist social scientists, by contrast, may use social critique or symbolic interpretation rather than constructing empirically falsifiable theories. In modern academic practice, researchers are often eclectic , using multiple methodologies (for instance, by combining both quantitative and qualitative research ). The term " social research " has also acquired a degree of autonomy as practitioners from various disciplines share in its aims and methods.

Applied sciences [ edit ] Main article: Applied science For a topical guide, see Outline of applied science .

Applied science is the use of existing scientific knowledge to achieve practical goals, like technology or inventions.

Within natural science , disciplines that are basic science develop basic information to explain and perhaps predict phenomena in the natural world. Applied science is the use of scientific processes and knowledge as the means to achieve a particularly practical or useful result. This includes a broad range of applied science-related fields, including engineering and medicine .

Applied science can also apply formal science , such as statistics and probability theory , as in epidemiology .

Genetic epidemiology is an applied science applying both biological and statistical methods.

Relationships between the branches [ edit ] The relationships between the branches of science are summarized by the  table [ 37 ] Science Formal science Empirical sciences Natural science Social science Foundation Logic Pure Mathematics Systems science Data science Information science Physics Chemistry Biology Earth science Astronomy Economics Political science Sociology Psychology Anthropology Application Statistics Computer science Systems engineering Data engineering Information engineering Engineering Agricultural science Medicine Pharmacy Accounting Business administration Finance Jurisprudence [ verification needed ] Pedagogy Visualizations and metascience [ edit ] Metascience refers to or includes a field of science that is about science itself.

OpenAlex and Scholia can be used to visualize and explore scientific fields and research topics.

Cluster network of scientific publications in relation to Nobel prizes [ 38 ] A visualization of scientific outputs by field in OpenAlex.

[ 39 ] A study can be part of multiple fields and lower numbers of papers is not necessarily detrimental for fields.

Graph illustrating the recent development or history of scientific outputs based on data in OpenAlex.org [ 39 ] See also [ edit ] Index of branches of science List of words ending in ology Outline of science Exact sciences Basic research Hard and soft science Branches of philosophy Philosophy of science Engineering physics Human science Notes [ edit ] ^ Also related to λόγος ( logos ), "word, thought, idea, argument, account, reason, or principle." (Liddell and Scott, 1999).

^ Richard Feynman begins his Lectures with the atomic hypothesis , as his most compact statement of all scientific knowledge: "If, in some cataclysm, all of scientific knowledge were to be destroyed, and only one sentence passed on to the next generations ..., what statement would contain the most information in the fewest words? I believe it is ... that all things are made up of atoms – little particles that move around in perpetual motion, attracting each other when they are a little distance apart, but repelling upon being squeezed into one another. ...

" [ 17 ] ^ The term 'universe' is defined as everything that physically exists: the entirety of space and time, all forms of matter, energy and momentum, and the physical laws and constants that govern them. However, the term 'universe' may also be used in slightly different contextual senses, denoting concepts such as the cosmos or the philosophical world ^ Evidence exists that the earliest civilizations dating back to beyond 3000  BCE, such as the Sumerians , Ancient Egyptians , and the Indus Valley civilization , all had a predictive knowledge and a very basic understanding of the motions of the Sun, Moon, and stars.

^ Francis Bacon 's 1620 Novum Organum was critical in the development of scientific method .

^ See Chemistry (etymology) for possible origins of this word.

^ The pronunciation of zoology as / z u ˈ ɒ l ə dʒ i / is typically regarded as nonstandard, though is not uncommon.

^ In Ernst Haeckel's (1866) footnote where the term ecology originates, he also gives attribute to Ancient Greek : χώρας , romanized : khōrā , lit.

'χωρα', meaning "dwelling place, distributional area" —quoted from Stauffer (1957).

References [ edit ] Footnotes [ edit ] ^ "social science | History, Disciplines, & Facts" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2020-08-18 .

^ Popper 2002 , p. 20.

^ Editorial Staff (March 7, 2008).

"Scientific Method: Relationships among Scientific Paradigms" . Seed magazine. Archived from the original on March 10, 2007 . Retrieved 2007-09-12 .

^ Popper 2002 , pp. 79–82.

^ Liddell, Henry George , and Robert Scott . 1940. " Logikos ." A Greek–English Lexicon , edited by H. S. Jones with R. McKenzie. Oxford: Clarendon Press . – via Perseus Project . Retrieved 9 May 2020.

^ Harper, Douglas. 2020 [2001]. " logic (n.) ." Online Etymology Dictionary . Retrieved 9 May 2020.

^ Gensler, Harry J. (2017) [2002]. "Chapter 1: Introduction".

Introduction to logic (3rd ed.). New York: Routledge. p. 1.

doi : 10.4324/9781315693361 .

ISBN 9781138910591 .

OCLC 957680480 .

^ a b Dodge, Y. (2003) The Oxford Dictionary of Statistical Terms , OUP.

ISBN 0-19-920613-9 ^ "statistics" .

TheFreeDictionary.com . Retrieved 25 August 2020 .

^ "Statistics" .

Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary .

^ "Statistic" .

Merriam-Webster Online Dictionary . 29 March 2024.

^ Steele, Katie and Stefánsson, H. Orri, "Decision Theory", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Winter 2015 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = [1] ^ Myerson, Roger B. (1991). "1.2: Basic concepts of Decision Theory".

Game theory analysis of conflict . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674728615 .

^ Habibi I, Cheong R, Lipniacki T, Levchenko A, Emamian ES, Abdi A (April 2017).

"Computation and measurement of cell decision making errors using single cell data" .

PLOS Computational Biology .

13 (4): e1005436.

Bibcode : 2017PLSCB..13E5436H .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005436 .

PMC 5397092 .

PMID 28379950 .

^ Hansson, Sven Ove. "Decision theory: A brief introduction." (2005) Section 1.2: A truly interdisciplinary subject.

^ "SIGACT" . Retrieved 2017-01-19 .

^ R.P. Feynman; R.B. Leighton ; Matthew Sands (1963).

The Feynman Lectures on Physics . Vol. 1. Addison-Wesley. p. I-2.

ISBN 0-201-02116-1 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ J.C. Maxwell (1878).

Matter and Motion .

D. Van Nostrand . p.

9 .

ISBN 0-486-66895-9 .

Physical science is that department of knowledge which relates to the order of nature, or, in other words, to the regular succession of events.

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ H.D. Young; R.A. Freedman (2004).

University Physics with Modern Physics (11th ed.).

Addison Wesley . p. 2.

Physics is an experimental science. Physicists observe the phenomena of nature and try to find patterns and principles that relate these phenomena. These patterns are called physical theories or, when they are very well established and of broad use, physical laws or principles.

^ S. Holzner (2006).

Physics for Dummies .

Wiley . p. 7.

ISBN 0-470-61841-8 .

Physics is the study of your world and the world and universe around you.

^ "Definition of CHEMISTRY" .

www.merriam-webster.com . Retrieved 24 August 2020 .

^ "Definition of chemistry | Dictionary.com" .

www.dictionary.com . Retrieved 24 August 2020 .

^ "WordNet Search: Earth science" .

wordnetweb.princeton.edu . Retrieved 23 August 2020 .

^ Harper, Douglas.

"geology" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ γῆ .

Liddell, Henry George ; Scott, Robert ; A Greek–English Lexicon at the Perseus Project ^ "space science" .

TheFreeDictionary.com . Retrieved 2020-08-23 .

^ National Space Science Data Center (NSSDC) – NASA Science ^ "Space science | Define Space science at Dictionary.com" .

^ Based on definition from: "Aquarena Wetlands Project glossary of terms" . Texas State University at San Marcos. Archived from the original on 2004-06-08.

^ Davies, PC; Rieper, E; Tuszynski, JA (January 2013).

"Self-organization and entropy reduction in a living cell" .

Bio Systems .

111 (1): 1– 10.

Bibcode : 2013BiSys.111....1D .

doi : 10.1016/j.biosystems.2012.10.005 .

PMC 3712629 .

PMID 23159919 .

^ Modell, Harold; Cliff, William; Michael, Joel; McFarland, Jenny; Wenderoth, Mary Pat; Wright, Ann (December 2015).

"A physiologist's view of homeostasis" .

Advances in Physiology Education .

39 (4): 259– 66.

doi : 10.1152/advan.00107.2015 .

ISSN 1043-4046 .

PMC 4669363 .

PMID 26628646 .

^ "Biological/Biochemistry" .

acs.org .

^ RBG Kew (2016). The State of the World's Plants Report – 2016. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew.

https://stateoftheworldsplants.com/report/sotwp_2016.pdf Archived 2016-09-28 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Bryophytes (Mosses and liverworts) — The Plant List" .

www.theplantlist.org .

^ "zoology" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ "the definition of ecology" .

Dictionary.com .

Archived from the original on 21 February 2018 . Retrieved 20 February 2018 .

^ Cohen, Eliel (2021). "The boundary lens: theorising academic actitity".

The University and its Boundaries: Thriving or Surviving in the 21st Century 1st Edition . New York, New York: Routledge. pp.

14– 41.

ISBN 978-0367562984 .

^ Ioannidis, John P. A.; Cristea, Ioana-Alina; Boyack, Kevin W. (29 July 2020).

"Work honored by Nobel prizes clusters heavily in a few scientific fields" .

PLOS ONE .

15 (7): e0234612.

Bibcode : 2020PLoSO..1534612I .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0234612 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 7390258 .

PMID 32726312 .

^ a b "Open Alex Data Evolution" .

observablehq.com . 8 February 2022 . Retrieved 20 February 2022 .

Works cited [ edit ] Lagemaat, Richard van de (2006).

Theory of Knowledge for the IB Diploma . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-54298-2 .

Popper, Karl R. (2002) [1959].

The Logic of Scientific Discovery . New York, NY: Routledge Classics.

ISBN 0-415-27844-9 .

OCLC 59377149 .

Sandoz, Raphaël.

"Interactive Historical Atlas of the Disciplines" .

University of Geneva . Retrieved 20 May 2019 .

External links [ edit ] Branches of Science , sciencemirror NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐nsv4b
Cached time: 20250814215948
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.729 seconds
Real time usage: 0.851 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3883/1000000
Revision size: 39667/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 94688/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 5632/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 56/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 153975/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.460/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 20102654/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  715.609      1 -total
 33.75%  241.487      2 Template:Reflist
 18.70%  133.842     18 Template:Cite_web
 11.24%   80.415      5 Template:Langx
 10.40%   74.457      1 Template:Science
 10.23%   73.231      1 Template:Sidebar
  7.11%   50.915      1 Template:Short_description
  6.08%   43.532      9 Template:Cite_book
  5.13%   36.736     19 Template:For_outline
  4.93%   35.280     22 Template:Main Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:11983318:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215948 and revision id 1298074696. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Branches_of_science&oldid=1298074696 " Categories : Branches of science Scientific disciplines Hidden categories: Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text CS1: unfit URL CS1 errors: ISBN date Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles needing clarification from November 2024 Articles containing Greek-language text All pages needing factual verification Wikipedia articles needing factual verification from March 2024 This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 10:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Branches of science 30 languages Add topic

