Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Abiotic factors 2 Biotic factors 3 Parasitic flowering plants 4 Animals 5 Hazard trees 6 Pathogens that affect trees 7 Signs and symptoms 8 Pathology detection 9 See also 10 Sources 11 References 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Forest pathology 8 languages বাংলা Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 日本語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Subfield of forestry and plant pathology Forest pathology is the research of both biotic and abiotic maladies affecting the health of  a forest ecosystem , primarily fungal pathogens and their insect vectors .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] It is a subfield of forestry and plant pathology .

Forest pathology is part of the broader approach of forest protection .

Insects, diseases and severe weather events damaged about 40 million ha of forests in 2015, mainly in the temperate and boreal domains.

[ 3 ] Abiotic factors [ edit ] There  are a number of abiotic factors which affect the health of a forest, such as moisture issues like drought , winter-drying , waterlogging resulting from over-abundance or lack of precipitation such as hail , snow , rain .

Wind is also an important abiotic factor as windthrow (the uprooting or breaking of trees due to high winds) causes an obvious and direct loss of stability to a forest or its trees.

Often, abiotic factors and biotic factors will affect a forest at the same time. For example, if wind speed is 80 km per hour then many trees which have root rot (caused by a pathogen) are likely to be thrown. Higher wind speeds are necessary to damage healthier trees.

Fire , whether caused by humans or lightning , and related abiotic factors also affect the health of forest.

The effects of man often alter a forest's predisposition to damage from both abiotic and biotic effects. For example, soil properties may be altered by heavy machinery.

Other abiotic factors Nutrient imbalances: deficiencies, chemicals ( toxic salts , herbicides , air pollutants ) Stemflow which can concentrate dry deposits which via soil acidification can kill surrounding plants.

Temperature Biotic factors [ edit ] Fungi : Ascomycota , Basidiomycota and Fungi imperfecti There is a category listing fungal tree pathogens and diseases in Wikipedia .

Oomycota : Phytophthora Bacteria Phytoplasmas Viruses Insects There is a category listing insect pests of temperate forests in Wikipedia .

Ips (genus) bark beetles Bark beetle Ambrosia beetle Cerambycidae Black arches Some of these factors act in concert (all do to a degree). For example, Amylostereum areolatum is spread by the Sirex noctilio . The fungus gains access to new trees to live off, and the woodwasp larvae gain food.

Parasitic flowering plants [ edit ] Many plants can parasitize trees via root to root contact. Many of these parasitic plants originate in the tropical and subtropical climates.

Animals [ edit ] Nematodes , insects especially bark beetles , mammals may browse . Browsing can be prevented with tree shelters .

Humans and other mammals predate on trees, and on unsustainable, especially industrial scales, these are demonstrably pathological to the forest. Additionally, poorly planned but conventionally replanted (post-cut) forest plantations are typically monocropped , and highly susceptible to further insect or fungal infection due to low biodiversity and diminished capacity for community resilience - see the " Wood wide web ".

Part of forest pathology is forest entomology . Forest entomology includes the study of all insects and arthropods , such as mites, centipedes and millipedes, which live in and interact in forest ecosystems. Forest entomology also includes the management of insect pests that cause the degrading, defoliation, crown die-back or death of trees.

Thus the scope is wide and includes: Documentation of all insect species and related arthropods in natural and man-made forests, and the study and ecology of those species.

Description and assessment of damage to tree structures (parts of a tree), to forest stands, landscape effects and to wood products, timber in service and other ecosystem services .

Eradication of recently introduced pests, or long-term management of established exotics and indigenous pests, to minimise losses in wood quality and wood production, and to reduce tree mortality.

Assessments of forest operations, or of management impacts, on the invertebrate fauna, and the alleviation of any adverse effects on these invertebrates.

[ 4 ] Hazard trees [ edit ] The likelihood of property damage or personal injury due to tree failure. Hazard includes not only the tree's condition, but the potential target as well. Rating systems, procedures and guidelines have been developed for decision making but knowledge, judgement, and experience are an important part to the process.

Pathogens that affect trees [ edit ] There is a category listing tree diseases in Wikipedia.

Armillaria , which causes white rot root disease Cenangium Hymenoscyphus fraxineus , which causes Ash Dieback Heterobasidion annosum , which causes Annosum or red root rot, the economically most significant pathogen in the Northern hemisphere.

[ citation needed ] Chestnut blight Rickettsia , which possibly causes citrus greening disease [ vague ] Spiroplasma Dutch elm disease Ink disease Emerald ash borer Olive tree pathology Witch's broom White Pine Blister Rust Phytophthora cinnamomi , which causes root rot Phytophthora ramorum , which causes sudden oak death Polypore or bracket fungus Tinder conk Signs and symptoms [ edit ] Symptoms are a result of a pathogen: Blight Burl Canker Chlorosis Drunken trees Forest dieback Gall Girdling Leaf scorch Root rot Virescence Wilt disease Signs are the visible presence of a part of a pathogen: Ascus is a part of an ascomycota fungus.

Conk (fungi) is the fruiting body of a bracket fungus.

Hypha are collectively called a mycelium Mycelial cord or rhizomorphs Pathology detection [ edit ] This can be done by machines or by dogs smelling the trees, similar to the methods used to find truffles . It can also be done by monitoring and identification can happen via tree clinics, experts such as arborists or even non-experts through citizen science .

It is important to consider the disease triangle when evaluating pathologies. Demonstration of suspected active agents can be done by confirmation of Koch's postulates .

See also [ edit ] Allelopathy Disease Etiology Disturbance (ecology) Forest IPM Glossary of phytopathology Lists of invasive species Outline of forestry Pest (organism) Plant disease epidemiology Robert Hartig Forest Pathology (journal) Secondary forest Sanitation harvest Sources [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a free content work. Licensed under CC BY-SA 3.0 ( license statement/permission ). Text taken from Global Forest Resources Assessment 2020 Key findings​ , FAO, FAO.

References [ edit ] ^ "Forest Pathology | Diseases of forest and shade trees" .

Forest Pathology . Retrieved 2023-11-15 .

^ "Forest Pathology Journal Overview" .

doi : 10.1111/(ISSN)1439-0329 . Retrieved 2023-11-15 .

^ Global Forest Resources Assessment 2020 – Key findings . Rome: FAO. 2020.

doi : 10.4060/ca8753en .

ISBN 978-92-5-132581-0 .

S2CID 130116768 .

^ Christian Stauffer, Lecture on Forest Protection 2013, Institute of Forest Entomology, Forest Pathology and Forest Protection, Department of Forest and Soil Sciences, University of Natural Resources and Applied Life Sciences, Vienna, Hasenauerstraße 38, A-1190 Vienna.

Further reading [ edit ] Tainter, Frank H., and Fred A. Baker . Principles of Forest Pathology. New York, NY: John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1996.

European Journal of Forest Pathology (Eur J Forest Pathol), Springer, ISSN 0300-1237 (printed), ISSN 1573-8469 (electronic), 1895–present, 5-Year Impact Factor: 2.054 External links [ edit ] Forest & Shade Tree Pathology Forest pathology team at INRA Nancy, France Hazard Trees v t e Forestry Index Forest areas Ministries Research institutes Colleges Journals Arbor Day Types Agroforestry dehesa Analog forestry Bamboo forestry Close to nature forestry Community forestry Ecoforestry Energy forestry Mycoforestry Permaforestry Plantation forestry Social forestry Sustainable forestry Urban forest Urban forestry Ecology and management Arboriculture Controlled burn Debris coarse driftwood large log jam slash Dendrology Ecological thinning Even-aged management Fire ecology Forest dynamics informatics IPM inventory governance law Global Forest Information Service old-growth pathology protection restoration secondary stand transition Trillion Tree Campaign Forest certification ATFS CFS FSC PEFC SFI SmartWood Woodland Carbon Code Forestation afforestation reforestation Formally designated Glade Growth and yield modelling Horticulture GM trees i-Tree urban Multipurpose tree Silviculture Sustainable management Tree allometry breeding Tree measurement crown girth height volume Environmental topics Acid rain Carbon sequestration Clearcutting Deforestation Ecosystem services Forest degradation Forest dieback Forest fragmentation Ghost forest Great Green Wall (Africa) Great Green Wall (China) High grading Illegal logging timber mafia Invasive species wilding Million Tree Initiative REDD Shifting cultivation chitemene slash-and-burn slash-and-char svedjebruk Timber recycling Tree hugging Urban forest inequity Wildfire Industries Coppicing Forest farming Forest gardening Logging Manufacturing lumber plywood pulp and paper sawmilling Products biochar biomass charcoal non-timber palm oil rayon rubber tanbark Rail transport Tree farm Christmas trees Wood engineered fuel mahogany spruce-pine-fir teak Woodworking green woodworking Occupations Forester Arborist Bucker Choker setter Ecologist Feller Firefighter handcrew hotshot lookout smokejumper River driver Truck driver Log scaler Lumberjack Ranger Resin tapper Rubber tapper Shingle weaver Timber cruiser Tree planter Wood process engineer WikiProject Climate change portal Earth sciences portal Ecology portal Environment portal Plants portal Trees portal Category Outline Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Forest_pathology&oldid=1278080166 " Categories : Forest pathology Tree diseases Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from February 2025 Free-content attribution Free content from FAO This page was last edited on 28 February 2025, at 10:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Forest pathology 8 languages Add topic

