Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and career 2 Contributions 3 Awards and honors 4 Selected works 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Jan Mycielski 8 languages Deutsch Français 한국어 Հայերեն مصرى Polski Русский Volapük Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Polish-American mathematician (1932–2025) Jan Mycielski Born ( 1932-02-07 ) February 7, 1932 Wiśniowa , Poland Died January 18, 2025 (2025-01-18) (aged 92) Nationality Polish Alma mater University of Wrocław Known for Ehrenfeucht–Mycielski sequence Mycielskian Mycielski–Grötzsch graph Mycielski's theorem graph theory Awards Stefan Banach Prize (1965) Fellow of the American Mathematical Society (2012) Scientific career Fields Mathematics Institutions University of Colorado at Boulder French National Centre for Scientific Research Polish Academy of Sciences University of California, Berkeley Case Western Reserve University Jan Mycielski ( Polish : [jan mɨˈt͡ɕɛlskʲi] ; February 7, 1932 – January 18, 2025) was a Polish-American mathematician, logician and philosopher, who was a professor of mathematics at the University of Colorado at Boulder .

[ 1 ] He is known for contributions to graph theory , combinatorics , set theory , topology and the philosophy of mathematics .

Life and career [ edit ] Mycielski was born in Wiśniowa , Podkarpackie Voivodeship , Poland on February 2, 1932.

[ 2 ] Mycielski received his Ph.D. in mathematics from the University of Wrocław in 1957 under the supervision of Stanisław  Hartman [ pl ] . His dissertation was entitled "Applications of Free Groups to Geometrical Constructions".

[ 3 ] Following positions at the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique in Paris, the Institute of Mathematics of the Polish Academy of Sciences , the University of California, Berkeley , and Case Western Reserve University , he took a permanent faculty position at Colorado in 1969.

[ 2 ] Mycielski died in January 2025, at the age of 92.

[ 4 ] Contributions [ edit ] Among the mathematical concepts named after Mycielski are: The Ehrenfeucht–Mycielski sequence , a sequence of binary digits with pseudorandom properties The Mycielskian , a construction for embedding any undirected graph into a larger graph with strictly higher chromatic number without creating any additional triangles .

The Mycielski–Grötzsch graph , the Mycielskian of the 5- cycle , an 11-vertex triangle-free graph that is the smallest possible triangle-free graph requiring four colors.

Mycielski's theorem that there exist triangle-free graphs with arbitrarily large chromatic number.

Awards and honors [ edit ] In 1965, he received the Stefan Banach Prize of the Polish Mathematical Society .

In 1990, he was awarded the Wacław Sierpiński Medal and Lecture by the Polish Mathematical Society.

[ 5 ] In 2012, he became a fellow of the American Mathematical Society .

[ 6 ] Selected works [ edit ] 1991.

A Note on S. M. Ulam's Mathematics .

A note in Adventures of a Mathematician .

Stanislaw Ulam . University of California Press, 1991.

ISBN 0520071549 See also [ edit ] List of Polish mathematicians References [ edit ] ^ Departmental web page for Mycielski Archived 2010-06-03 at the Wayback Machine at the Univ. of Colorado.

^ a b Curriculum vitae from Mycielski's web site, retrieved 2010-03-10.

^ Jan  Mycielski at the Mathematics Genealogy Project ^ Zmarł Jan Mycielski (in Polish) ^ "Medal i Wykład im. Wacława Sierpińskiego" .

ptm.org.pl (in Polish) . Retrieved 22 November 2023 .

^ List of Fellows of the American Mathematical Society , retrieved 2013-02-10.

External links [ edit ] Mycielski's personal web page at the Univ. of Colorado.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Netherlands Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH DBLP MathSciNet Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jan_Mycielski&oldid=1273806862 " Categories : 1932 births 2025 deaths Set theorists Polish logicians University of Colorado Boulder faculty Polish emigrants to the United States University of Wrocław alumni 20th-century American mathematicians 21st-century American mathematicians Fellows of the American Mathematical Society Mycielski family 20th-century Polish philosophers Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with Polish-language sources (pl) CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 4 February 2025, at 03:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jan Mycielski 8 languages Add topic

