Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Description 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Waterfall (M. C. Escher) 11 languages العربية Español Euskara Français עברית Nederlands 日本語 Русский Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Lithograph print by M. C. Escher Waterfall Artist M. C. Escher Year 1961 Type Lithograph Dimensions 38 cm × 30 cm (15 in × 12 in) Waterfall ( Dutch : Waterval ) is a lithograph by the Dutch artist M. C. Escher , first printed in October 1961. It shows a perpetual motion machine where water from the base of a waterfall appears to run downhill along the water path before reaching the top of the waterfall.

While most two-dimensional artists use relative proportions to create an illusion of depth, Escher here and elsewhere uses conflicting proportions to create a visual paradox . The watercourse supplying the waterfall (its aqueduct or leat ) has the structure of three Penrose triangles . A Penrose triangle is an impossible object designed by Oscar Reutersvärd in 1934, and found independently by Roger Penrose in 1958.

[ 1 ] Description [ edit ] The image depicts a watermill with an elevated aqueduct and waterwheel as the main feature. The aqueduct begins at the waterwheel and flows behind it. The walls of the aqueduct step downward, suggesting that it slopes downhill. The aqueduct turns sharply three times, first to the left, then to the right, and finally to the left again. The viewer looks down at the scene diagonally, which means that from the viewer's perspective the aqueduct appears to be slanted upward. The viewer is also looking across the scene diagonally from the lower right, which means that from the viewer's perspective the two left-hand turns are directly in line with each other, while the waterwheel, the forward turn and the end of the aqueduct are all in line. The second left-hand turn is supported by pillars from the first, while the other two corners are supported by a tower of pillars that begins at the waterwheel. The water falls off the edge of the aqueduct and over the waterwheel in an impossible infinite cycle; in his notes on the picture, Escher points out that some water must be periodically added to this perpetual motion machine to compensate for evaporation . The use of the Penrose stairs is paralleled by Escher's Ascending and Descending (1960), where instead of the flow of water, two lines of monks endlessly march uphill or downhill around the four flights of stairs.

[ 2 ] The two support towers continue above the aqueduct and are topped by two compound polyhedra , revealing Escher's interest in mathematics as an artist . The one on the left is a compound of three cubes . The one on the right is a stellation of a rhombic dodecahedron (or a compound of three non-regular octahedra ) and is known as Escher's solid .

Below the mill is a garden of bizarre, giant plants. This is a magnified view of a cluster of moss and lichen that Escher drew in ink as a study in 1942.

[ 3 ] The background seems to be a climbing expanse of terraced farmland.

See also [ edit ] First stellation of rhombic dodecahedron Monument Valley , a puzzle game featuring an Escher-like waterfall and similar impossible structures References [ edit ] ^ Penrose, L. S.; Penrose, R. (1958). "Impossible objects: A special type of visual illusion".

British Journal of Psychology .

49 (1): 31– 33.

doi : 10.1111/j.2044-8295.1958.tb00634.x .

PMID 13536303 .

^ Schattschneider, Doris (2010).

"The Mathematical Side of M. C. Escher" (PDF) .

Notices of the AMS .

57 (6). American Mathematical Society: 706– 718.

^ Locher, J. L. (1971).

The World of M. C. Escher .

Abrams . p. 146.

External links [ edit ] Escher's Solid—from Wolfram MathWorld Escher's Solid Includes a great deal of metric data The Polyhedra of M.C. Escher from George W. Hart v t e M. C. Escher Works Dolphins (1923) Tower of Babel (1928) Strada di Scanno (1929) Castrovalva (1930) The Bridge (1930) Atrani, Coast of Amalfi (1931) Still Life with Mirror (1934) Still Life with Spherical Mirror (1934) Hand with Reflecting Sphere (1935) Regular Division of the Plane (1936) Still Life and Street (1937) Metamorphosis I (1937) Day and Night (1938) Sky and Water I (1938) Sky and Water II (1938) Metamorphosis II (1939-1940) Reptiles (1943) Magic Mirror (1946) Three Spheres II (1946) Another World (1947) Drawing Hands (1948) Stars (1948) Double Planetoid (1949) Curl-up (1951) House of Stairs (1951) Puddle (1952) Dragon (1952) Gravitation (1952) Relativity (1953) Convex and Concave (1955) Three Worlds (1955) Print Gallery (1956) Cube with Magic Ribbons (1957) Belvedere (1958) Circle Limit III (1959) Ascending and Descending (1960) Waterfall (1961) Metamorphosis III (1967-1968) Snakes (1969) Museums Escher in the Palace Related Escher in popular culture George Arnold Escher (father) Berend George Escher (brother) Mathematics and art Video games inspired by Escher Adventures in Perception (1971 documentary) Gödel, Escher, Bach (1979 book) M. C. Escher: Visions of Symmetry (1990 book) Symmetry aspects of M. C. Escher's periodic drawings (1965 book) v t e Mathematics and art Concepts Algorithm Catenary Fractal Golden ratio Hyperboloid structure Minimal surface Paraboloid Perspective Camera lucida Camera obscura Plastic ratio Projective geometry Proportion Architecture Human Symmetry Tessellation Wallpaper group Forms Algorithmic art Anamorphic art Architecture Geodesic dome Pyramid Vastu shastra Computer art Fiber arts 4D art Fractal art Islamic geometric patterns Girih Jali Muqarnas Zellij Knotting Celtic knot Croatian interlace Interlace Music Origami Mathematics Sculpture String art String figure Tiling Artworks List of works designed with the golden ratio Continuum Mathemalchemy Mathematica: A World of Numbers... and Beyond Octacube Pi Pi in the Sky Buildings Cathedral of Saint Mary of the Assumption Hagia Sophia Kresge Auditorium Pantheon Parthenon Pyramid of Khufu Sagrada Família Sydney Opera House Taj Mahal Artists Renaissance Paolo Uccello Piero della Francesca Leonardo da Vinci Vitruvian Man Albrecht Dürer Parmigianino Self-portrait in a Convex Mirror 19th–20th Century William Blake The Ancient of Days Newton Jean Metzinger Danseuse au café L'Oiseau bleu Giorgio de Chirico Man Ray M. C. Escher Circle Limit III Print Gallery Relativity Reptiles Waterfall René Magritte La condition humaine Salvador Dalí Crucifixion The Swallow's Tail Crockett Johnson Contemporary Max Bill Martin and Erik Demaine Scott Draves Jan Dibbets John Ernest Helaman Ferguson Peter Forakis Susan Goldstine Bathsheba Grossman George W. Hart Desmond Paul Henry Anthony Hill Charles Jencks Garden of Cosmic Speculation Andy Lomas Robert Longhurst Jeanette McLeod Hamid Naderi Yeganeh István Orosz Hinke Osinga Antoine Pevsner Tony Robbin Alba Rojo Cama Reza Sarhangi Oliver Sin Hiroshi Sugimoto Daina Taimiņa Roman Verostko Margaret Wertheim Theorists Ancient Polykleitos Canon Vitruvius De architectura Renaissance Filippo Brunelleschi Leon Battista Alberti De pictura De re aedificatoria Piero della Francesca De prospectiva pingendi Luca Pacioli De divina proportione Leonardo da Vinci A Treatise on Painting Albrecht Dürer Vier Bücher von Menschlicher Proportion Sebastiano Serlio Regole generali d'architettura Andrea Palladio I quattro libri dell'architettura Romantic Samuel Colman Nature's Harmonic Unity Frederik Macody Lund Ad Quadratum Jay Hambidge The Greek Vase Modern Owen Jones The Grammar of Ornament Ernest Hanbury Hankin The Drawing of Geometric Patterns in Saracenic Art G. H. Hardy A Mathematician's Apology George David Birkhoff Aesthetic Measure Douglas Hofstadter Gödel, Escher, Bach Nikos Salingaros The 'Life' of a Carpet Publications Journal of Mathematics and the Arts Lumen Naturae Making Mathematics with Needlework Rhythm of Structure Viewpoints: Mathematical Perspective and Fractal Geometry in Art Organizations Ars Mathematica The Bridges Organization European Society for Mathematics and the Arts Goudreau Museum of Mathematics in Art and Science Institute For Figuring Mathemalchemy National Museum of Mathematics Related Droste effect Mathematical beauty Patterns in nature Sacred geometry Category v t e Optical illusions ( list ) Illusions Afterimage Ambigram Ambiguous image Ames room Autostereogram Barberpole Bezold Café wall Checker shadow Chubb Cornsweet Delboeuf Ebbinghaus Ehrenstein Flash lag Fraser spiral Gravity hill Grid Hering Impossible trident Irradiation Jastrow Lilac chaser Mach bands McCollough Müller-Lyer Necker cube Oppel-Kundt Orbison Penrose stairs Penrose triangle Peripheral drift Poggendorff Ponzo Rubin vase Sander Schroeder stairs Shepard tables Spinning dancer Ternus Vertical–horizontal White's Wundt Zöllner Popular culture Op art Trompe-l'œil Spectropia (1864 book) Ascending and Descending (1960 drawing) Waterfall (1961 drawing) The dress (2015 photograph) Related Accidental viewpoint Auditory illusions Illusions Tactile illusions Temporal illusion Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Waterfall_(M._C._Escher)&oldid=1266318348 " Categories : Mathematical artworks Works by M. C. Escher 1961 paintings Impossible objects Water in art Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Dutch-language text This page was last edited on 31 December 2024, at 02:08 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Waterfall (M. C. Escher) 11 languages Add topic

