Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Classical republics 2.2 Other ancient republics 2.3 Indian subcontinent 2.4 Icelandic Commonwealth 2.5 Mercantile republics 2.6 Calvinist republics 2.7 Liberal republics 2.8 Decolonization 2.9 Socialist republics 3 Constitution 4 Head of state Toggle Head of state subsection 4.1 Structure 4.2 Elections 4.3 Ambiguities 5 Sub-national republics 6 Other meanings Toggle Other meanings subsection 6.1 Archaic meaning 6.2 Democracy vs. republic debate 6.3 Political philosophy 6.4 United States 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Republic 185 languages Адыгэбзэ Адыгабзэ Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ Ænglisc العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Արեւմտահայերէն অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) भोजपुरी Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Cebuano Čeština ChiShona ChiTumbuka Cymraeg Dansk Davvisámegiella Deutsch डोटेली Eesti Ελληνικά Emiliàn e rumagnòl Эрзянь Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Fulfulde Furlan Gaeilge Gaelg Gàidhlig Galego ГӀалгӀай 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hornjoserbsce Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Ирон IsiXhosa Íslenska Italiano עברית Jawa ಕನ್ನಡ Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Коми Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Кыргызча Ladin Ladino ລາວ Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lingála Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Mirandés Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands Nedersaksies नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Napulitano Нохчийн Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Олык марий ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu پښتو ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Qırımtatarca Română Romani čhib Rumantsch Runa Simi Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Scots Seeltersk Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Ślůnski Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Taqbaylit Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย ትግርኛ Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Tiếng Việt Volapük 文言 West-Vlams Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Betawi Batak Mandailing Yerwa Kanuri Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Checked From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Page version status This is an accepted version of this page This is the latest accepted revision , reviewed on 8 August 2025 .

Form of government This article is about the form of government. For the political ideology, see Republicanism . For other uses, see Republic (disambiguation) .

Part of the Politics series Basic forms of government List of forms · List of countries Source of power Democracy ( rule by many ) Demarchy Direct Economic Liberal Representative Social Socialist Others Oligarchy (rule by few) Anocracy Aristocracy Broligarchy Gerontocracy Kleptocracy Kritarchy Meritocracy Noocracy Particracy Plutocracy Stratocracy Technocracy Theocracy Autocracy ( rule by one ) Despotism Dictatorship Military dictatorship Tyranny Anarchy (rule by none) Anarchism Free association Stateless Power ideology Monarchy Republic (socio-political ideologies) Absolute Communist Constitutional Directorial Legalist Parliamentary Presidential Semi-presidential Authoritarian Libertarian (socio-economic ideologies) Anarchism Colonialism Communism Despotism Distributism Fascism Feudalism Islamism Socialism Totalitarianism Tribalism Religious Secular State religion Secular state Separation of church and state State atheism Global Local (geo-cultural ideologies) City-state Intergovernmental organisation National government World government Nationalism Internationalism Globalism Power structure Unitarism Unitary state Empire Principality Client state Associated state Dependent territory Dominion Protectorate Puppet state Puppet monarch Satellite state Self-governing colony Tributary state Buffer state Vassal state Viceroyalty Federalism Confederation Devolution Federation Superstate Supranational union International relations Small power Middle power Regional power Emerging power Great power Superpower Related Administrative division Democracy indices Democratic transition Autocratization Democratisation Hybrid regimes Politics portal v t e A republic , based on the Latin phrase res publica ('public thing' or 'people's thing'), is a state in which political power rests with the public ( people ), typically through their representatives —in contrast to a monarchy .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Although a republic is most often a single sovereign state , subnational state entities that have governments that are republican in nature may be referred to as republics.

Representation in a republic may or may not be freely elected by the general citizenry. In many historical republics, representation has been based on personal status and the role of elections has been limited. This remains true today; among the 159 states that use republic in their official names as of 2017 [update] , and other states formally constituted as republics, are states that narrowly constrain both the right of representation and the process of election.

The term developed its modern meaning in reference to the constitution of the ancient Roman Republic , lasting from the overthrow of the kings in 509 BC to the establishment of the Empire in 27 BC. This constitution was characterized by a Senate composed of wealthy aristocrats wielding significant influence; several popular assemblies of all free citizens, possessing the power to elect magistrates from the populace and pass laws; and a series of magistracies with varying types of civil and political authority.

Etymology [ edit ] See also: Res publica and Civitas Sculpture of Cicero The term originates from the Latin translation of Greek word politeia .

Cicero , among other Latin writers, translated politeia into Latin as res publica , and it was in turn translated by Renaissance scholars as republic (or similar terms in various European languages).

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] The term can literally be translated as 'public matter'.

[ 5 ] It was used by Roman writers to refer to the state and government, even during the period of the Roman Empire .

[ 6 ] The term politeia can be translated as form of government , polity , or regime , and it does not necessarily imply any specific type of regime as the modern word republic sometimes does. One of Plato 's major works on political philosophy, usually known in English as The Republic ,  was titled Politeia . However, apart from the title, modern translations  are generally used.

[ 7 ] Aristotle was apparently the first classical writer to state that the term politeia can be used to refer more specifically to one type of politeia , asserting in Book III of his Politics : "When the citizens at large govern for the public good, it is called by the name common to all governments ( to koinon onoma pasōn tōn politeiōn ), government ( politeia )". In later Latin works the term republic can also be used in a general way to refer to any regime, or to refer specifically to governments which work for the public good.

[ 8 ] In medieval Northern Italy , a number of city states had commune or signoria based governments. In the late Middle Ages, writers such as Giovanni Villani described these states using terms such as libertas populi , a free people. The terminology changed in the 15th century as the renewed interest in the writings of Ancient Rome caused writers to prefer classical terminology. To describe non-monarchical states, writers (most importantly, Leonardo Bruni ) adopted the Latin phrase res publica .

[ 9 ] While Bruni and Machiavelli used the term to describe the states of Northern Italy, which were not monarchies, the term res publica has a set of interrelated meanings in the original Latin. In subsequent centuries, the English word commonwealth came to be used as a translation of res publica , and its use in English was comparable to how the Romans used the term res publica .

[ 10 ] Notably, during The Protectorate of Oliver Cromwell the word commonwealth was the most common term to call the new monarchless state, but the word republic was also in common use.

[ 11 ] History [ edit ] While the philosophical terminology developed in classical Greece and Rome , as already noted by Aristotle there was already a long history of city states with a wide variety of constitutions, not only in Greece but also in the Middle East . After the classical period, during the Middle Ages , many free cities developed again, such as Venice .

Since the Age of Revolution the term republic has described a system of government in which the source of authority for the government is a constitution [ 12 ] and the legitimacy of its officials derives from the consent of the people rather than heredity or divine right .

[ 13 ] Classical republics [ edit ] Main article: Classical republic A map of the Roman Republic in 45 BC The modern type of republic itself is different from any type of state found in the classical world.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] Nevertheless, there are a number of states of the classical era that are today still called republics. This includes ancient Athens and the Roman Republic . While the structure and governance of these states was different from that of any modern republic, there is debate about the extent to which classical, medieval, and modern republics form a historical continuum.

J. G. A. Pocock has argued that a distinct republican tradition stretches from the classical world to the present.

[ 5 ] [ 16 ] Other scholars disagree.

[ 5 ] Paul Rahe, for instance, argues that the classical republics had a form of government with few links to those in any modern country.

[ 17 ] The political philosophy of the classical republics has influenced republican thought throughout the subsequent centuries. Philosophers and politicians advocating republics, such as Machiavelli , Montesquieu , Adams , and Madison , relied heavily on classical Greek and Roman sources which described various types of regimes.

Aristotle 's Politics discusses various forms of government. One form Aristotle named politeia , which consisted of a mixture of the other forms, oligarchy and democracy . He argued that this was one of the ideal forms of government.

Polybius expanded on many of these ideas, again focusing on the idea of mixed government and differentiated basic forms of government between "benign" monarchy , aristocracy , and democracy, and the "malignant" tyranny , oligarchy, and ochlocracy . The most important Roman work in this tradition is Cicero's De re publica .

Over time, the classical republics became empires or were conquered by empires. Most of the Greek republics were annexed to the Macedonian Empire of Alexander . The Roman Republic expanded dramatically,  conquering the other states of the Mediterranean that could be considered republics, such as Carthage . The Roman Republic itself then became the Roman Empire.

Other ancient republics [ edit ] The term republic is not commonly used to refer to pre-classical city-states, especially if outside Europe and the area which was under Graeco-Roman influence.

[ 5 ] However some early states outside Europe had governments that are sometimes today considered similar to republics.

In the ancient Near East , a number of cities of the Eastern Mediterranean achieved collective rule. Republic city-states flourished in Phoenicia along the Levantine coast starting from the 11th century BC. In ancient Phoenicia, the concept of Shophet was very similar to a Roman consul . Under Persian rule (539–332 BC), Phoenician city-states such as Tyre abolished the king system and adopted "a system of the suffetes (judges), who remained in power for short mandates of 6 years".

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] Arwad has been cited as one of the earliest known examples of a republic, in which the people, rather than a monarch, are described as sovereign.

[ 20 ] [ unreliable source?

] The Israelite confederation of the era of the Judges [ 21 ] before the United Monarchy has also been considered a type of republic.

[ 5 ] [ 22 ] [ 23 ] The system of government of the Igbo people in what is now Nigeria has been described as "direct and participatory democracy".

[ 24 ] Indian subcontinent [ edit ] Main article: Gaṇasaṅgha Early republican institutions come from the independent gaṇasaṅgha s — gaṇa means 'tribe' and saṅgha means 'assembly'—which may have existed as early as the 6th century BC and persisted in some areas until the 4th century AD in India. The evidence for this is scattered, however, and no pure historical source exists for that period.

Diodorus , a Greek historian who wrote two centuries after the time of Alexander the Great 's invasion of India (now Pakistan and northwest India) mentions, without offering any detail, that independent and democratic states existed in India.

[ 25 ] Modern scholars note the word democracy at the time of the 3rd century BC and later suffered from degradation and could mean any autonomous state, no matter how aristocratic in nature.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] The Mahajanapadas were the sixteen most powerful and vast kingdoms and republics of the era; there were also a number of smaller kingdoms stretching the length and breadth of Ancient India . Among the mahajanapadas and smaller states, the Shakyas , Koliyas , Mallakas , and Licchavis followed republican government.

Key characteristics of the gaṇa seem to include a gaṇa mukhya (chief), and a deliberative assembly. The assembly met regularly. It discussed all major state decisions. At least in some states, attendance was open to all free men. This body also had full financial, administrative, and judicial authority. Other officers, who rarely receive any mention, obeyed the decisions of the assembly. Elected by the gaṇa , the chief apparently always belonged to a family of the noble class of Kshatriya Varna . The chief coordinated his activities with the assembly; in some states, he did so with a council of other nobles.

[ 28 ] The Licchavis had a primary governing body of 7,077 gaṇa mukhyas , the heads of the most important families. On the other hand, the Shakyas , Koliyas , Mallakas , and Licchavis , [ clarification needed ] during the period around Gautama Buddha , had the assembly open to all men, rich and poor.

[ 29 ] Early republics or gaṇasaṅgha , [ 30 ] such as Mallakas, centered in the city of Kusinagara , and the Vajjika (or Vṛjika) League, centered in the city of Vaishali , existed as early as the 6th century BC and persisted in some areas until the 4th century AD.

[ 31 ] The most famous clan amongst the ruling confederate clans of the Vajji Mahajanapada were the Licchavis.

[ 32 ] The Empire of Magadha included republican communities such as the community of Rajakumara. Villages had their own assemblies under their local chiefs called gramakas . Their administrations were divided into executive, judicial, and military functions.

Scholars differ over how best to describe these governments, and the vague, sporadic quality of the evidence allows for wide disagreements. Some emphasize the central role of the assemblies and thus tout them as democracies; other scholars focus on the upper-class domination of the leadership and possible control of the assembly and see an aristocracy .

[ 33 ] [ 34 ] Despite the assembly's obvious power, it has not yet been established whether the composition and participation were truly popular. This is reflected in the Arthashastra , an ancient handbook for monarchs on how to rule efficiently. It contains a chapter on how to deal with the saṅgha s , which includes injunctions on manipulating the noble leaders, yet it does not mention how to influence the mass of the citizens, indicating that the gaṇasaṅgha are more of an aristocratic republic, than democracy.

[ 35 ] Icelandic Commonwealth [ edit ] The Icelandic Commonwealth was established in 930 AD by refugees from Norway who had fled the unification of that country under King Harald Fairhair . The Commonwealth consisted of a number of clans run by chieftains, and the Althing was a combination of parliament and supreme court where disputes appealed from lower courts were settled, laws were decided, and decisions of national importance were taken. One such example was the Christianisation of Iceland in 1000, where the Althing decreed that all Icelanders must be baptized into Christianity, and forbade celebration of pagan rituals. Contrary to most states, the Icelandic Commonwealth had no official leader.

In the early 13th century, the Age of the Sturlungs , the Commonwealth began to suffer from long conflicts between warring clans. This, combined with pressure from the Norwegian king Haakon IV for the Icelanders to rejoin the Norwegian "family", led the Icelandic chieftains to accept Haakon IV as king by the signing of the Gamli sáttmáli (" Old Covenant ") in 1262. This effectively brought the Commonwealth to an end. The Althing, however, is still Iceland's parliament, almost 800 years later.

[ 36 ] Mercantile republics [ edit ] Giovanni Battista Tiepolo , Neptune offers the wealth of the sea to Venice , 1748–1750. This painting is an allegory of the power of the Republic of Venice .

In Europe new republics appeared in the late Middle Ages when a number of small states embraced republican systems of government. These were generally small, but wealthy, trading states, like the Mediterranean maritime republics and the Hanseatic League , in which the merchant class had risen to prominence. Knud Haakonssen has noted that, by the Renaissance , Europe was divided with those states controlled by a landed elite being monarchies and those controlled by a commercial elite being republics.

[ 10 ] Italy was the most densely populated area of Europe, and also one with the weakest central government. Many of the towns thus gained considerable independence and adopted commune forms of government. Completely free of feudal control, the Italian city-states expanded, gaining control of the rural hinterland.

[ 37 ] The two most powerful were the Republic of Venice and its rival the Republic of Genoa . Each were large trading ports, and further expanded by using naval power to control large parts of the Mediterranean. It was in Italy that an ideology advocating for republics first developed. Writers such as Bartholomew of Lucca , Brunetto Latini , Marsilius of Padua , and Leonardo Bruni saw the medieval city-states as heirs to the legacy of Greece and Rome.

Across Europe a wealthy merchant class developed in the important trading cities. Despite their wealth they had little power in the feudal system dominated by the rural land owners, and across Europe began to advocate for their own privileges and powers. The more centralized states, such as France and England, granted limited city charters.

Beginning of the Republic of Metz . Election of the first Head-Alderman in 1289, by Auguste Migette.

Metz was then a free imperial city of the Holy Roman Emperor .

In the more loosely governed Holy Roman Empire , 51 of the largest towns became free imperial cities . While still under the dominion of the Holy Roman Emperor most power was held locally and many adopted republican forms of government.

[ 37 ] The same rights to imperial immediacy were secured by the major trading cities of Switzerland. The towns and villages of alpine Switzerland had, courtesy of geography, also been largely excluded from central control. Unlike Italy and Germany, much of the rural area was thus not controlled by feudal barons, but by independent farmers who also used communal forms of government. When the Habsburgs tried to reassert control over the region both rural farmers and town merchants joined the rebellion. The Swiss were victorious, and the Swiss Confederacy was proclaimed, and Switzerland has retained a republican form of government to the present.

[ 23 ] Two Russian cities with a powerful merchant class— Novgorod and Pskov —also adopted republican forms of government in 12th and 13th centuries, respectively, which ended when the republics were conquered by Muscovy / Russia at the end of 15th – beginning of 16th century.

[ 38 ] Following the collapse of the Seljuk Sultanate of Rum and establishment of the Turkish Anatolian Beyliks , the Ahiler merchant fraternities established a state centered on Ankara that is sometimes compared to the Italian mercantile republics.

The dominant form of government for these early republics was control by a limited council of elite patricians . In those areas that held elections, property qualifications or guild membership limited both who could vote and who could run. In many states no direct elections were held and council members were hereditary or appointed by the existing council. This left the great majority of the population without political power, and riots and revolts by the lower classes were common. The late Middle Ages saw more than 200 such risings in the towns of the Holy Roman Empire.

[ 39 ] Similar revolts occurred in Italy, notably the Ciompi Revolt in Florence.

Calvinist republics [ edit ] See also: European wars of religion While the classical writers had been the primary ideological source for the republics of Italy, in Northern Europe, the Protestant Reformation would be used as justification for establishing new republics.

[ 40 ] Most important was Calvinist theology, which developed in the Swiss Confederacy, one of the largest and most powerful of the medieval republics.

John Calvin did not call for the abolition of monarchy, but he advanced the doctrine that the faithful had the duty to overthrow irreligious monarchs.

[ 41 ] Advocacy for republics appeared in the writings of the Huguenots during the French Wars of Religion .

[ 42 ] Calvinism played an important role in the republican revolts in England and the Netherlands. Like the city-states of Italy and the Hanseatic League, both were important trading centres, with a large merchant class prospering from the trade with the New World. Large parts of the population of both areas also embraced Calvinism. During the Dutch Revolt (beginning in 1566), the Dutch Republic emerged from rejection of Spanish Habsburg rule. However, the country did not adopt the republican form of government immediately: in the formal declaration of independence ( Act of Abjuration , 1581), the throne of king Philip was only declared vacant, and the Dutch magistrates asked the Duke of Anjou , queen Elizabeth of England and prince William of Orange , one after another, to replace Philip. It took until 1588 before the Estates (the Staten , the representative assembly at the time) decided to vest the sovereignty of the country in themselves.

In 1641 the English Civil War began. Spearheaded by the Puritans and funded by the merchants of London, the revolt was a success, and King Charles I was executed. In England James Harrington , Algernon Sidney , and John Milton became some of the first writers to argue for rejecting monarchy and embracing a republican form of government. The English Commonwealth was short-lived, and the monarchy was soon restored. The Dutch Republic continued in name until 1795, but by the mid-18th century the stadtholder had become a de facto monarch. Calvinists were also some of the earliest settlers of the British and Dutch colonies of North America.

Liberal republics [ edit ] Liberal republics in early modern Europe An allegory of the French Republic in Paris Septinsular Republic flag from the early 1800s A revolutionary Republican hand-written bill from the Stockholm riots during the Revolutions of 1848 , reading: "Dethrone Oscar he is not fit to be a king: Long live the Republic! The Reform! down with the Royal house, long live Aftonbladet ! death to the king / Republic Republic the People. Brunkeberg this evening". The writer's identity is unknown.

Along with these initial republican revolts, early modern Europe also saw a great increase in monarchical power. The era of absolute monarchy replaced the limited and decentralized monarchies that had existed in most of the Middle Ages. It also saw a reaction against the total control of the monarch as a series of writers created the ideology known as liberalism .

Most of these Enlightenment thinkers were far more interested in ideas of constitutional monarchy than in republics. The Cromwell regime had discredited republicanism, and most thinkers felt that republics ended in either anarchy or tyranny .

[ 43 ] Thus philosophers like Voltaire opposed absolutism while at the same time being strongly pro-monarchy.

Jean-Jacques Rousseau and Montesquieu praised republics, and looked on the city-states of Greece as a model. However, both also felt that a state like France, with 20 million people, would be impossible to govern as a republic. Rousseau admired the republican experiment in Corsica (1755–1769) and described his ideal political structure of small, self-governing communes. Montesquieu felt that a city-state should ideally be a republic, but maintained that a limited monarchy was better suited to a state with a larger territory.

The American Revolution began as a rejection only of the authority of the British Parliament over the colonies, not of the monarchy. The failure of the British monarch to protect the colonies from what they considered the infringement of their rights to representative government , the monarch's branding of those requesting redress as traitors, and his support for sending combat troops to demonstrate authority resulted in widespread perception of the British monarchy as tyrannical .

With the United States Declaration of Independence the leaders of the revolt firmly rejected the monarchy and embraced republicanism. The leaders of the revolution were well-versed in the writings of the French liberal thinkers, and also in the history of the classical republics.

John Adams had notably written a book on republics throughout history. In addition, the widely distributed and popularly read-aloud tract Common Sense , by Thomas Paine , succinctly and eloquently laid out the case for republican ideals and independence to the larger public. The Constitution of the United States , which went into effect in 1789, created a relatively strong federal republic to replace the relatively weak confederation under the first attempt at a national government with the Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union ratified in 1781. The first ten amendments to the Constitution called the United States Bill of Rights , guaranteed certain natural rights fundamental to republican ideals that justified the Revolution.

The French Revolution was also not republican at its outset. Only after the Flight to Varennes removed most of the remaining sympathy for the king was a republic declared and Louis XVI sent to the guillotine. The stunning success of France in the French Revolutionary Wars saw republics spread by force of arms across much of Europe as a series of client republics were set up across the continent. The rise of Napoleon saw the end of the French First Republic and her Sister Republics , each replaced by " popular monarchies ". Throughout the Napoleonic period, the victors extinguished many of the oldest republics on the continent, including the Republic of Venice , the Republic of Genoa , and the Dutch Republic . They were eventually transformed into monarchies or absorbed into neighboring monarchies.

Outside Europe, another group of republics was created as the Napoleonic Wars allowed the states of Latin America to gain their independence. Liberal ideology had only a limited impact on these new republics. The main impetus was the local European-descended Creole population in conflict with the Peninsulares —governors sent from overseas. The majority of the population in most of Latin America was of either African or Amerindian descent, and the Creole elite had little interest in giving these groups power and broad-based popular sovereignty .

Simón Bolívar , both the main instigator of the revolts and one of its most important theorists, was sympathetic to liberal ideals but felt that Latin America lacked the social cohesion for such a system to function and advocated autocracy as necessary.

In Mexico, this autocracy briefly took the form of a monarchy in the First Mexican Empire . Due to the Peninsular War , the Portuguese court was relocated to Brazil in 1808. Brazil gained independence as a monarchy on September 7, 1822, and the Empire of Brazil lasted until 1889. In many other Latin American states various forms of autocratic republic existed until most were liberalized at the end of the 20th century.

[ 44 ] European states in 1815 [ 45 ] Monarchies (55) Republics (9) European states in 1914 [ 46 ] Monarchies (22) Republics (4) European states in 1930 [ 47 ] Monarchies (20) Republics (15) European states in 1950 [ 48 ] Monarchies (13) Republics (21) European states in 2015 [ 49 ] Monarchies (12) Republics (35) Honoré Daumier The Republic (1848), a symbolic representation of the French Second Republic . Oil on canvas, 73 x 60 cm., The Louvre, Paris The French Second Republic was created in 1848 but abolished by Napoleon III who proclaimed himself Emperor in 1852. The French Third Republic was established in 1870 when a civil revolutionary committee refused to accept Napoleon III's surrender during the Franco-Prussian War . Spain briefly became the First Spanish Republic in 1873–74, but the monarchy was soon restored. By the start of the 20th century France, Switzerland and San Marino remained the only republics in Europe. This changed when, after the 1908 Lisbon Regicide , the 5 October 1910 revolution established the Portuguese Republic .

A 1920s poster that commemorates the permanent President of the Republic of China Yuan Shikai and the provisional President of the Republic Sun Yat-sen In East Asia, China had seen considerable anti-Qing sentiment during the 19th century, and a number of protest movements developed calling for constitutional monarchy. The most important leader of these efforts was Sun Yat-sen , whose Three Principles of the People combined American, European, and Chinese ideas. Under his leadership, the Republic of China was proclaimed on January 1, 1912.

Republican ideas were spreading, especially in Asia. The United States began to have considerable influence in East Asia in the later part of the 19th century, with Protestant missionaries playing a central role. The liberal and republican writers of the West also exerted influence. These combined with native Confucian inspired political philosophy that had long argued that the populace had the right to reject unjust governments that had lost the Mandate of Heaven .

During this period, three short-lived republics were proclaimed in East Asia; the Republic of Ezo , the Republic of Formosa , and the First Philippine Republic .

Republicanism expanded significantly in the aftermath of World War I when several of the largest European empires collapsed: the Russian Empire (1917), German Empire (1918), Austro-Hungarian Empire (1918), and Ottoman Empire (1922) were all replaced by republics. New states gained independence during this turmoil, and many of these, such as Ireland , Poland , Finland and Czechoslovakia , chose republican forms of government. Following Greece's defeat in the Greco-Turkish War (1919–22) , the monarchy was briefly replaced by the Second Hellenic Republic (1924–35). In 1931, the proclamation of the Second Spanish Republic (1931–39) resulted in the Spanish Civil War leading to the establishment of a Francoist regime .

Electoral ballot of the 1946 Italian institutional referendum The aftermath of World War II left Italy with a destroyed economy, a divided society, and anger against the monarchy for its endorsement of the Fascist regime . These frustrations contributed to a revival of the Italian republican movement.

[ 50 ] King Umberto II was pressured to call the 1946 Italian institutional referendum to decide whether Italy should remain a monarchy or become a republic.

[ 51 ] The supporters of the republic chose the effigy of the Italia turrita , the national personification of Italy, as their unitary symbol to be used in the electoral campaign and on the referendum ballot on the institutional form of the State, in contrast to the Savoy coat of arms , which represented the monarchy.

[ 52 ] On June 2, 1946 the republican side won 54.3% of the vote and Italy officially became a republic, [ 53 ] a day celebrated since as Festa della Repubblica . Italy has a written democratic constitution , resulting from the work of a Constituent Assembly formed by the representatives of all the anti-fascist forces that contributed to the defeat of Nazi and Fascist forces during the liberation of Italy .

[ 54 ] Decolonization [ edit ] A map of the Commonwealth republics In the years following World War II , most of the remaining European colonies gained their independence, and most became republics. The two largest colonial powers were France and the United Kingdom. Republican France encouraged the establishment of republics in its former colonies. The United Kingdom attempted to follow the model it had for its earlier settler colonies of creating independent Commonwealth realms still linked under the same monarch. While most of the settler colonies and the smaller states in the Caribbean and the Pacific retained this system, it was rejected by the newly independent countries in Africa and Asia , which revised their constitutions and became republics instead.

Britain followed a different model in the Middle East; it installed local monarchies in several colonies and mandates including Iraq , Jordan , Kuwait , Bahrain , Oman , Yemen and Libya . In subsequent decades revolutions and coups overthrew a number of monarchs and installed republics. Several monarchies remain, and the Middle East is the only part of the world where several large states are ruled by monarchs with almost complete political control.

[ 55 ] Socialist republics [ edit ] See also: People's Republic and Socialist state In the wake of the First World War, the Russian monarchy fell during the Russian Revolution . The Russian Provisional Government was established in its place on the lines of a liberal republic, but this was overthrown by the Bolsheviks who went on to establish the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR). This was the first republic established under Marxist–Leninist ideology. Communism was wholly opposed to monarchy and became an important element of many republican movements during the 20th century. The Russian Revolution spread into Mongolia and overthrew its theocratic monarchy in 1924. In the aftermath of the Second World War, the communists gradually gained control of Romania , Bulgaria , Yugoslavia , Hungary and Albania , ensuring that the states were reestablished as socialist republics rather than monarchies.

Communism also intermingled with other ideologies. It was embraced by many national liberation movements during decolonization . In Vietnam, communist republicans pushed aside the Nguyễn dynasty , and monarchies in neighbouring Laos and Cambodia were overthrown by communist movements in the 1970s.

Arab socialism contributed to a series of revolts and coups that saw the monarchies of Egypt , Iraq, Libya, and Yemen ousted. In Africa, Marxism–Leninism and African socialism led to the end of monarchy and the proclamation of republics in states such as Burundi and Ethiopia .

Constitution [ edit ] A republic does not necessarily have a constitution but is often constitutional in the sense of constitutionalism , meaning that it is constituted by a set of institutions which provide a separation of powers . The term constitutional republic is a way to highlight an emphasis on the separation of powers in a given republic, as with constitutional monarchy or absolute monarchy highlighting the absolute autocratic character of a monarchy .

Head of state [ edit ] Structure [ edit ] World's states coloured by systems of government : Parliamentary systems : Head of government is elected or nominated by and accountable to the legislature.

Constitutional monarchy with a ceremonial monarch Parliamentary republic with a ceremonial president Parliamentary republic with an executive president Presidential system : Head of government (president) is popularly elected and independent of the legislature.

Presidential republic Hybrid systems: Semi-presidential republic : Executive president is independent of the legislature; head of government is appointed by the president and is accountable to the legislature.

Assembly-independent republic : Head of government (president or directory) is elected by the legislature, but is not accountable to it.

Other systems: Theocratic republic: Supreme Leader is both head of state and church and holds significant executive and legislative power Semi-constitutional monarchy : Monarch holds significant executive or legislative power.

Absolute monarchy : Monarch has unlimited power.

One-party state : Power is constitutionally linked to a single political party.

Military junta : Committee of military leaders controls the government; constitutional provisions are suspended.

Governments with no constitutional basis : No constitutionally defined basis to current regime, i.e.

provisional governments or Islamic theocracies .

Dependent territories or places without governments Note: this chart represents the de jure systems of government, not the de facto degree of democracy.

v t e With no monarch, most modern republics use the title president for the head of state . Originally used to refer to the presiding officer of a committee or governing body in Great Britain the usage was also applied to political leaders, including the leaders of some of the Thirteen Colonies (originally Virginia in 1608); in full, the "President of the Council".

[ 56 ] The first republic to adopt the title was the United States of America . Keeping its usage as the head of a committee the President of the Continental Congress was the leader of the original congress. When the new constitution was written the title of President of the United States was conferred on the head of the new executive branch .

If the head of state of a republic is also the head of government , this is called a presidential system . There are a number of forms of presidential government. A full-presidential system has a president with substantial authority and a central political role.

In other states the legislature is dominant and the presidential role is almost purely ceremonial and apolitical, such as in Germany , Italy , India , and Trinidad and Tobago . These states are parliamentary republics and operate similarly to constitutional monarchies with parliamentary systems where the power of the monarch is also greatly circumscribed. In parliamentary systems the head of government, most often titled prime minister , exercises the most real political power.

Semi-presidential systems have a president as an active head of state with important powers, but they also have a prime minister as a head of government with important powers.

The rules for appointing the president and the leader of the government, in some republics permit the appointment of a president and a prime minister who have opposing political convictions: in France, when the members of the ruling cabinet and the president come from opposing political factions, this situation is called cohabitation .

In some countries, like Bosnia and Herzegovina , San Marino , and Switzerland , the head of state is not a single person but a committee (council) of several persons holding that office. The Roman Republic had two consuls , elected for a one-year term by the comitia centuriata , consisting of all adult, freeborn males who could prove citizenship.

Elections [ edit ] In democracies , presidents are elected, either directly by the people or indirectly by a parliament or council. Typically in presidential and semi-presidential systems the president is directly elected by the people or is indirectly elected as done in the United States. In that country, the president is officially elected by an electoral college , chosen by the States. All U.S. States have chosen electors by popular election since 1832. The indirect election of the president through the electoral college conforms to the concept of the republic as one with a system of indirect election. In the opinion of some, direct election confers legitimacy upon the president and gives the office much of its political power.

[ 57 ] However, this concept of legitimacy differs from that expressed in the United States Constitution which established the legitimacy of the United States president as resulting from the signing of the Constitution by nine states.

[ 58 ] The idea that direct election is required for legitimacy also contradicts the spirit of the Great Compromise , whose actual result was manifest in the clause [ 59 ] that provides voters in smaller states with more representation in presidential selection than those in large states; for example citizens of Wyoming in 2016 had 3.6 times as much electoral vote representation as citizens of California .

[ 60 ] In states with a parliamentary system, the president is usually elected by the parliament. This indirect election subordinates the president to the parliament, and also gives the president limited legitimacy and turns most presidential powers into reserve powers that can only be exercised under rare circumstances. There are exceptions where elected presidents have only ceremonial powers, such as in Ireland .

Ambiguities [ edit ] The distinction between a republic and a monarchy is not always clear. The constitutional monarchies of the former British Empire and Western Europe today have almost all real political power vested in the elected representatives, with the monarchs only holding either theoretical powers, no powers or rarely used reserve powers. Real legitimacy for political decisions comes from the elected representatives and is derived from the will of the people. While hereditary monarchies remain in place, political power is derived from the people as in a republic. These states are thus sometimes referred to as crowned republics .

[ 61 ] Terms such as "liberal republic" are also used to describe all of the modern liberal democracies.

[ 62 ] There are also self-proclaimed republics that act similarly to absolute monarchies with absolute power vested in the leader and passed down from father to son. North Korea and Syria are two notable examples where a son has inherited political control. Neither of these states are officially monarchies. There is no constitutional requirement that power be passed down within one family, but it has occurred in practice.

There are also elective monarchies where ultimate power is vested in a monarch, but the monarch is chosen by some manner of election. A current example of such a state is Malaysia where the Yang di-Pertuan Agong is elected every five years by the Conference of Rulers composed of the nine hereditary rulers of the Malay states , and the Vatican City-State , where the pope is selected by cardinal-electors, currently all cardinals under the age of 80. While rare today, elective monarchs were common in the past. The Holy Roman Empire is an important example, where each new emperor was chosen by a group of electors. Islamic states also rarely employed primogeniture , instead relying on various forms of election to choose a monarch's successor.

The Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth had an elective monarchy, with a wide suffrage of some 500,000 nobles. The system, known as the Golden Liberty , had developed as a method for powerful landowners to control the crown. The proponents of this system looked to classical examples, and the writings of the Italian Renaissance, and called their elective monarchy a rzeczpospolita , based on res publica .

Sub-national republics [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( June 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The de jure republics of Russia , which were created to give more autonomy to the country's ethnic minorities In general being a republic also implies sovereignty as for the state to be ruled by the people it cannot be controlled by a foreign power. There are important exceptions to this, for example, republics in the Soviet Union were member states which had to meet three criteria to be named republics: be on the periphery of the Soviet Union so as to be able to take advantage of their theoretical right to secede; be economically strong enough to be self-sufficient upon secession; and be named after at least one million people of the ethnic group which should make up the majority population of said republic.

It is sometimes argued that the former Soviet Union was also a supra-national republic, based on the claim that the member states were different nation states .

The Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia was a federal entity composed of six republics (Socialist Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Macedonia, Montenegro, Serbia, and Slovenia). Each republic had its parliament, government, institute of citizenship, constitution, etc., but certain functions were delegated to the federation (army, monetary matters). Each republic also had a right of self-determination according to the conclusions of the second session of the AVNOJ and according to the federal constitution .

The Swiss cantons displayed on the cupola of the Federal Palace In Switzerland, all cantons can be considered to have a republican form of government, with constitutions, legislatures, executives and courts; many of them being originally sovereign states. As a consequence, several Romance-speaking cantons are still officially referred to as republics, reflecting their history and will of independence within the Swiss Confederation. Notable examples are the Republic and Canton of Geneva and the Republic and Canton of Ticino .

[ 63 ] Flag of the US state of California , a sub-national entity.

States of the United States are required, like the federal government, to be republican in form, with final authority resting with the people. This was required because the states were intended to create and enforce most domestic laws, with the exception of areas delegated to the federal government and prohibited to the states. The founders of the country intended most domestic laws to be handled by the states. Requiring the states to be a republic in form was seen as protecting the citizens' rights and preventing a state from becoming a dictatorship or monarchy, and reflected unwillingness on the part of the original 13 states (all independent republics) to unite with other states that were not republics. Additionally, this requirement ensured that only other republics could join the union.

In the example of the United States, the original 13 British colonies became independent states after the American Revolution, each having a republican form of government. These independent states initially formed a loose confederation called the United States and then later formed the current United States by ratifying the current U.S. Constitution , creating a union that was a republic. Any state joining the union later was also required to be a republic.

Other meanings [ edit ] Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Archaic meaning [ edit ] Before the 17th Century, the term 'republic' could be used to refer to states of any form of government as long as it was not a tyrannical regime. French philosopher Jean Bodin 's definition of the republic was "the rightly ordered government of a number of families, and of those things which are their common concern, by a sovereign power." Oligarchies and monarchies could also be included as they were also organised toward 'public' shared interests.

[ 12 ] In medieval texts, 'republic' was used to refer to the body of shared interest with the king at its head.

[ 64 ] [ 65 ] For instance, the Holy Roman Empire was also known as the Sancta Respublica Romana , the Holy Roman Republic.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] The Byzantine Empire also continued calling itself the Roman Republic as the Byzantines did not regard monarchy as a contradiction to republicanism. Instead, republics were defined as any state based on popular sovereignty and whose institutions were based on shared values.

[ 68 ] Democracy vs. republic debate [ edit ] See also: Democratic republic In a republic state, power is held by the people through elected representatives. The head of state is typically elected or nominated by representatives. In a democratic state, power is wielded by the people of the state, typically through a mixture of elected representatives and direct voting, but in theory could happen purely by Direct democracy without elected representatives acting as proxies. Many states are considered a mixture of both ideals, such as a Representative democracy or Democratic republic .

The term democracy is sometimes used interchangeably with the term republic, while others have made sharp distinctions between the two for millennia. "Montesquieu, founder of the modern constitutional state, repeated in his The Spirit of the Laws of 1748 the insight that Aristotle had expressed two millennia earlier, 'Voting by lot is in the nature of democracy; voting by choice is in the nature of aristocracy.

' " [ 69 ] Additional critics of elections include Rousseau , Robespierre , and Marat , who said of the new French Republic, "What use is it to us, that we have broken the aristocracy of the nobles, if that is replaced by the aristocracy of the rich?" [ 70 ] Political philosophy [ edit ] Main article: Republicanism The term republic originated from the writers of the Renaissance as a descriptive term for states that were not monarchies. These writers, such as Machiavelli, also wrote important prescriptive works describing how such governments should function. These ideas of how a government and society should be structured is the basis for an ideology known as classical republicanism or civic humanism . This ideology is based on the Roman Republic and the city states of Ancient Greece and focuses on ideals such as civic virtue , rule of law and mixed government.

[ 71 ] This understanding of a republic as a form of government distinct from a liberal democracy is one of the main theses of the Cambridge School of historical analysis.

[ 72 ] This grew out of the work of J. G. A. Pocock who in 1975 argued that a series of scholars had expressed a consistent set of republican ideals. These writers included Machiavelli, Milton, Montesquieu and the founders of the United States of America.

Pocock argued that this was an ideology with a history and principles distinct from liberalism.

[ 73 ] These ideas were embraced by a number of different writers, including Quentin Skinner , Philip Pettit [ 74 ] and Cass Sunstein . These subsequent writers have further explored the history of the idea, and also outlined how a modern republic should function.

United States [ edit ] Main article: Republicanism in the United States A distinct set of definitions of the term "republic" evolved in the United States, where the term is often equated with " representative democracy ". This narrower understanding of the term was originally developed by James Madison [ 75 ] [ 76 ] and notably employed in Federalist Paper No. 10 . This meaning was widely adopted early in the history of the United States, including in Noah Webster 's dictionary of 1828.

[ 77 ] It was a novel meaning to the term; representative democracy was not an idea mentioned by Machiavelli and did not exist in the classical republics.

[ 78 ] There is also evidence that contemporaries of Madison considered the meaning of "republic" to reflect the broader definition found elsewhere, as is the case with a quotation of Benjamin Franklin taken from the notes of James McHenry where the question is put forth, "a Republic or a Monarchy?".

[ 79 ] The term republic does not appear in the Declaration of Independence , but it does appear in Article IV of the Constitution, which "guarantee[s] to every State in this Union a Republican form of Government." What exactly the writers of the constitution felt this should mean is uncertain. The Supreme Court , in Luther v. Borden (1849), declared that the definition of republic was a " political question " in which it would not intervene. In two later cases, it did establish a basic definition. In United States v. Cruikshank (1875), the court ruled that the "equal rights of citizens" were inherent to the idea of a republic.

However, the term republic is not synonymous with the republican form. The republican form is defined as one in which the powers of sovereignty are vested in the people and are exercised by the people, either directly, or through representatives chosen by the people, to whom those powers are specially delegated.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] [ better source needed ] Beyond these basic definitions, the word republic has a number of other connotations. W. Paul Adams observes that republic is most often used in the United States as a synonym for "state" or "government", but with more positive connotations than either of those terms.

[ 82 ] Republicanism is often referred to as the founding ideology of the United States.

[ 83 ] [ 84 ] Traditionally scholars believed this American republicanism was a derivation of the classical liberal ideologies of John Locke and others developed in Europe.

[ 83 ] In the 1960s and 1970s, Bernard Bailyn began to argue that republicanism was just as, or even more important than liberalism in the creation of the United States.

[ 85 ] This issue is still much disputed and scholars like Isaac Kramnick completely reject this view.

[ 86 ] See also [ edit ] Free state Primus inter pares List of republics Index: Republics Guarantee Clause of the U.S. Constitution References [ edit ] ^ "Republic | Definition of Republic by the Oxford English Dictionary" .

Oxford English Dictionary . Retrieved 2022-05-10 .

A state in which power rests with the people or their representatives; specifically a state without a monarchy. Also: a government, or system of government, of such a state; a period of government of this type. The term is often (especially in the 18th and 19th centuries) taken to imply a state with a democratic or representative constitution and without a hereditary nobility, but more recently it has also been used of autocratic or dictatorial states not ruled by a monarch. It is now chiefly used to denote any non-monarchical state headed by an elected or appointed president.

^ "Definition of Republic" .

Merriam-Webster Dictionary . Retrieved 2017-02-18 .

a government having a chief of state who is not a monarch ^ "Republic" .

Merriam Webster . Merrium-Webster Inc . Retrieved 5 June 2019 .

^ Cullen, Daniel (2014). "Republics".

The Encyclopedia of Political Thought . pp.

3243– 3248.

doi : 10.1002/9781118474396.wbept0887 .

ISBN 9781118474396 .

^ a b c d e "Republic"j, New Dictionary of the History of Ideas . Ed.

Maryanne Cline Horowitz . Vol. 5. Detroit: Charles Scribner's Sons, 2005. p. 2099 ^ Lewis, Charlton T.; Short, Charles (1879).

"res, II.K" .

A Latin Dictionary . Oxford: Oxford University Press . Retrieved August 14, 2010 .

^ Bloom, Allan .

The Republic . Basic Books, 1991. pp. 439–40 ^ "Republic | Encyclopedia.com" .

www.encyclopedia.com . Retrieved 2018-10-20 .

^ Rubinstein, Nicolai. "Machiavelli and Florentine Republican Experience" in Machiavelli and Republicanism Cambridge University Press, 1993.

^ a b Haakonssen, Knud. "Republicanism".

A Companion to Contemporary Political Philosophy . Robert E. Goodin and Philip Pettit. eds. Cambridge: Blackwell, 1995.

^ Everdell (2000) p. xxiii.

^ a b Munro, André.

"republic" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 15 Dec 2021 .

^ Paine, Thomas (1776). "On the Origin and Design of Government in General, With Concise Remarks on the English Constitution".

Common Sense .

^ Nippel, Wilfried. "Ancient and Modern Republicanism".

The Invention of the Modern Republic ed. Biancamaria Fontana. Cambridge University Press, 1994 p. 6 ^ Reno, Jeffrey. "republic".

International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences p. 184 ^ Pocock, J.G.A.

The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine Political Thought and the Atlantic Republican Tradition (1975; new ed. 2003) ^ Paul A. Rahe, Republics, Ancient and Modern , three volumes, University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, 1994.

^ Jidejian, Nina (2018).

TYRE Through The Ages (3rd ed.) . Beirut: Librairie Orientale. pp.

57– 99.

ISBN 9789953171050 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) ^ Medlej, Youmna Jazzar; Medlej, Joumana (2010).

Tyre and its history . Beirut: Anis Commercial Printing Press s.a.l. pp.

1– 30.

ISBN 978-9953-0-1849-2 .

^ Bernal, M.; Moore, D.C. (2001).

Black Athena Writes Back: Martin Bernal Responds to His Critics . History / Classics. Duke University Press. pp.

356 - 357 .

ISBN 978-0-8223-2717-2 .

^ Clarke, Adam (1825). "PREFACE To The BOOK OF JUDGES".

The Holy Bible Containing the Old and New Testaments: The Text Printed from the Most Correct Copies of the Present Authorized Translation Including the Marginal Readings and Parallel Texts with a Commentary and Critical Notes Designed as a Help to a Better Understanding of the Sacred Writings . Vol. 2. New-York: N. Bangs and J. Emory. p. 3 . Retrieved 10 June 2019 .

The persons called Judges [...] were the heads or chiefs of the Israelites who governed the Hebrew Republic from the days of Moses and Joshua, till the time of Saul.

^ Everdell, William Romeyn (1983). "Samuel and Solon: The Origins of the Republic in Tribalism".

The End of Kings: A History of Republics and Republicans (2 ed.). Chicago: University of Chicago Press (published 2000). p.

18 .

ISBN 9780226224824 . Retrieved 10 June 2019 .

[...] Samuel [...] has the distinction of being the first self-conscious republican in his society of whom we have nearly contemporary written record and of whose actual existence we can be reasonably sure.

^ a b Everdell (2000) ^ Nwauwa, Apollos O.

"Concepts of Democracy and Democratization in Africa Revisited" . Archived from the original on 14 August 2012 . Retrieved 8 March 2022 .

^ Diodorus 2.39 [ full citation needed ] ^ Larsen, 1973, pp. 45–46 [ full citation needed ] ^ de Sainte, 2006, pp. 321–3 [ full citation needed ] ^ Robinson, 1997, p. 22 [ full citation needed ] ^ Robinson, 1997, p. 23 [ full citation needed ] ^ Thapar, Romila (2002).

Early India: From the Origins to AD 1300 . University of California. pp.

146– 150.

ISBN 9780520242258 . Retrieved 28 October 2013 .

^ Raychaudhuri Hemchandra (1972), Political History of Ancient India , Calcutta: University of Calcutta, p.107 ^ Republics in ancient India . Brill Archive. pp. 93–. GGKEY:HYY6LT5CFT0.

^ Bongard-Levin, 1996, pp. 61–106 ^ Sharma 1968, pp. 109–22 ^ Trautmann T. R., Kautilya and the Arthashastra , Leiden 1971 ^ Chu, Henry (April 2, 2011).

"Iceland seeks to become sanctuary for free speech" .

Los Angeles Times .

^ a b Finer 1999 , pp. 950–955.

^ Ferdinand Joseph Maria Feldbrugge.

Law in Medieval Russia , IDC Publishers, 2009 ^ Finer 1999 , pp. 955–956.

^ Finer 1999 , p. 1020.

^ "Republicanism".

Encyclopedia of the Enlightenment p. 435 ^ "Introduction".

Republicanism: a Shared European Heritage . By Martin van Gelderen and Quentin Skinner. Cambridge University Press, 2002 p. 1 ^ "Republicanism".

Encyclopedia of the Enlightenment p. 431 ^ "Latin American Republicanism" New Dictionary of the History of Ideas. Ed. Maryanne Cline Horowitz. Vol. 5. Detroit: Charles Scribner's Sons, 2005.

^ The Ottoman Empire and Russian Empire are counted amongst Europe . Counted as republics are the Swiss Confederation , the Free Cities of Hamburg , Bremen , Lübeck and Frankfurt , the Most Serene Republic of San Marino , the Republic of Cospaia , the Septinsular Republic and the German Confederation ; however, member states of the German Confederation are also separately counted (35 monarchies).

^ The Ottoman Empire and Russian Empire are counted amongst Europe.

^ The Republic of Turkey is counted amongst Europe, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics as a single republic, the Irish Free State as an independent monarchy (see also Irish head of state from 1922 to 1949 ), Vatican City as an elective monarchy , the Kingdom of Hungary as a nominal monarchy.

^ The Republic of Turkey is counted amongst Europe , the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics as a single republic, the Free Territory of Trieste as an independent republic, Vatican City as an elective monarchy , the Spanish State as a nominal monarchy.

^ The Republic of Turkey is counted amongst Europe , the Russian Federation as a single republic, the Republic of Kosovo (recognised by most other European states) as an independent republic, Vatican City as an elective monarchy .

The Republic of Kazakhstan is not shown on this map and is excluded from the count. The Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus (recognised only by Turkey) and all other unrecognised states are excluded from the count.

^ "Italia", Dizionario enciclopedico italiano (in Italian), vol. VI, Treccani , 1970, p. 456 ^ Guichonnet, Paul (1975).

Histoire de l'Italie (in French). Presses universitaires de France. p. 121.

[ISBN unspecified] ^ Bazzano, Nicoletta (2011).

Donna Italia. L'allegoria della Penisola dall'antichità ai giorni nostri (in Italian). Angelo Colla Editore. p. 72.

ISBN 978-88-96817-06-3 .

^ Bocca, Giorgio (1981).

Storia della Repubblica italiana (in Italian). Rizzoli. pp.

14– 16.

[ISBN unspecified] ^ Smyth, Howard McGaw Italy: From Fascism to the Republic (1943–1946) The Western Political Quarterly vol. 1 no. 3 (pp. 205–222), September 1948.

JSTOR 442274 ^ Anderson, Lisa. "Absolutism and the Resilience of Monarchy in the Middle East".

Political Science Quarterly , Vol. 106, No. 1 (Spring, 1991), pp. 1–15 ^ OED , s. v.

^ "Presidential Systems" Governments of the World: A Global Guide to Citizens' Rights and Responsibilities . Ed. C. Neal Tate. Vol. 4. Detroit: Macmillan Reference USA, 2006. pp. 7–11.

^ Article VII, Constitution of the United States ^ Article II, Para 2, Constitution of the United States ^ Petrocelli, William (10 November 2016).

"Voters In Wyoming Have 3.6 Times The Voting Power That I Have. It's Time To End The Electoral College" .

huffingtonpost.com .

^ The novelist and essayist H. G. Wells regularly used the term crowned republic to describe the United Kingdom, for instance in his work A Short History of the World .

Alfred, Lord Tennyson in his poem Idylls of the King .

^ Dunn, John . "The Identity of the Bourgeois Liberal Republic". The Invention of the Modern Republic. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994.

^ "République" (in French).

Historical Dictionary of Switzerland . Retrieved 1 February 2021 .

Les nouveaux cantons de la Suisse latine choisirent le titre de république, qui soulignait leur indépendance, alors que "canton" met l'accent sur l'appartenance à la Confédération; Genève, Neuchâtel et le Tessin l'ont conservé jusqu'à nos jours.

[The new cantons of Latin Switzerland chose the title of republic, which underlined their independence, while "canton" emphasizes membership of the Confederation; Geneva, Neuchâtel and Ticino have kept it to this day.] ^ Mantello, Frank Anthony Carl; Rigg, A. G. (1996).

Medieval Latin: An Introduction and Bibliographical Guide . CUA Press. p. 209.

ISBN 9780813208428 .

^ Glenn, Jason (2004).

Politics and History in the Tenth Century: The Work and World of Richer of Reims . Cambridge University Press. p. 246.

ISBN 9780521834872 .

^ Christopher Dawson (2002).

The Making of Europe: An Introduction to the History of European Unity . CUA Press. p. 101.

ISBN 9780813210834 .

^ Giuliano Amato, Enzo Moavero-Milanesi, Gianfranco Pasquino, Lucrezia Reichlin (2019).

The History of the European Union: Constructing Utopia . Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 17.

ISBN 9781509917426 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Anthony Kaldellis (2013).

Ethnography After Antiquity: Foreign Lands and Peoples in Byzantine Literature . University of Pennsylvania Press. p. 14.

ISBN 9780812208405 .

^ Van Reybrouck, David.

Against Elections (p. 75). Seven Stories Press. 2016.

^ Van Reybrouck, David.

Against Elections (p. 85). Seven Stories Press. 2016.

^ " Republicanism Archived 2018-03-09 at the Wayback Machine " Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Jun 19, 2006 ^ McCormick, John P. "Machiavelli against Republicanism: On the Cambridge School's 'Guicciardinian Moments ' " Political Theory , Vol. 31, No. 5 (Oct., 2003), pp. 615–43 ^ Pocock, J. G. A The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine Political Thought and the Atlantic Republican Tradition Princeton: 1975, 2003 ^ Philip Pettit, Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and Government , NY: Oxford U.P., 1997, ISBN 0-19-829083-7 ; Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997.

^ "Democracy - Democracy or republic?" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 2021-06-27 .

^ "What Is a Democracy? [ushistory.org]" .

www.ushistory.org . Retrieved 2021-06-27 .

^ "SEARCHING -word- for [republic] :: Search the 1828 Noah Webster's Dictionary of the English Language (FREE) :: 1828.mshaffer.com" .

1828.mshaffer.com . Retrieved 2021-06-27 .

^ Everdell (2000) p. 6 ^ "1593. Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790). Respectfully Quoted: A Dictionary of Quotations. 1989" . 25 June 2022.

^ In re Duncan , 139 U.S. 449, 11 S.Ct. 573, 35 L.Ed. 219; Minor v. Happersett , 88 U.S. (21 Wall.) 162, 22 L.Ed. 627.

^ GOVERNMENT (Republican Form of Government) – One in which the powers of sovereignty are vested in the people and are exercised by the people ... directly ... Black's Law Dictionary, Sixth Edition, p. 695 ^ W. Paul Adams "Republicanism in Political Rhetoric Before 1776".

Political Science Quarterly , Vol. 85, No. 3 (Sep., 1970), pp. 397–421 ^ a b Wood, Gordon (April 1990).

"Classical Republicanism and the American Revolution" .

Chicago-Kent Law Review .

66 (1): 13– 20.

Archived from the original on Mar 7, 2023.

^ Hutchins, Thomas; Washington, George; Paine, Thomas; Jefferson, Thomas; Adams, John; Fadden, Will (2008-04-12).

"Founded on a Set of Beliefs - Creating the United States | Exhibitions" .

Library of Congress . Retrieved 2021-06-27 .

^ Bailyn, Bernard.

The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution . Cambridge: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1967.

^ Kramnick, Isaac.

Republicanism and Bourgeois Radicalism: Political Ideology in Late Eighteenth-Century England and America . Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1990.

Finer, S.E. (1999).

The History of Government from the Earliest Times: Volume II: The Intermediate Ages . OUP Oxford.

ISBN 978-0-19-820790-0 .

Further reading [ edit ] Speech of U.S. Senator against the Mexican–American War characterizing it as imperialist and presidential.

Martin van Gelderen & Quentin Skinner , eds., Republicanism: A Shared European Heritage , v. 1, Republicanism and Constitutionalism in Early Modern Europe , Cambridge: Cambridge U.P., 2002 Martin van Gelderen & Quentin Skinner, eds., Republicanism: A Shared European Heritage , v. 2, The Values of Republicanism in Early Modern Europe , Cambridge: Cambridge U.P., 2002 Willi Paul Adams, "Republicanism in Political Rhetoric before 1776", Political Science Quarterly 85(1970), pp. 397–421.

Joyce Appleby, "Republicanism in Old and New Contexts", in William & Mary Quarterly , 3rd series, 43 (January, 1986), pp. 3–34.

Joyce Appleby, ed., "Republicanism" issue of American Quarterly 37 (Fall, 1985).

Sarah Barber, Regicide and Republicanism: Politics and Ethics in the English Republic, 1646–1649 , Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1998.

Gisela Bock, Quentin Skinner & Maurizio Viroli, eds., Machiavelli and Republicanism , Cambridge: Cambridge U.P., 1990.

Everdell, William R. (2000), The End of Kings: A History of Republics and Republicans (2nd ed.), Chicago: University of Chicago Press Eric Gojosso, Le concept de république en France (XVIe – XVIIIe siècle) , Aix/Marseille, 1998, pp. 205–45.

James Hankins, "Exclusivist Republicanism and the Non-Monarchical Republic", Political Theory 38.4 (August 2010), 452–82.

Frédéric Monera, L'idée de République et la jurisprudence du Conseil constitutionnel – Paris: L.G.D.J., 2004 Fnac , LGDJ.fr Philip Pettit, Republicanism: A Theory of Freedom and Government , Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997, pp. x and 304.

J. G. A. Pocock, The Machiavellian Moment: Florentine Political Thought and the Atlantic Republican Tradition , Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1975 J. G. A. Pocock, "Between Gog and Magog: The Republican Thesis and the Ideologia Americana", Journal of the History of Ideas 48 (1987), p. 341 J. G. A. Pocock, " The Machiavellian Moment Revisited: A Study in History and Ideology" Journal of Modern History 53 (1981) Paul A. Rahe, Republics Ancient and Modern: Classical Republicanism and the American Revolution , 3 v., Chapel Hill: U. of North Carolina Press 1992, 1994.

Jagdish P. Sharma, Republics in ancient India, c. 1500 B.C.–500 B.C.

, 1968 David Wootton, ed., Republicanism, Liberty, and Commercial Society, 1649–1776 (The Making of Modern Freedom series), Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1994.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Republic at Wikimedia Commons Media related to Republics at Wikimedia Commons The dictionary definition of republic at Wiktionary Quotations related to Republic at Wikiquote Everdell, William R. Everdell .

"From State to Freestate: The Meaning of the Word Republic from Jean Bodin to John Adams" .

Archived 2019-03-24 at the Wayback Machine (7th ISECS, Budapest, 7/31/87).

Valley Forge Journal . June 1991.

Authority control databases National Germany United States 2 France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Latvia Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Republic&oldid=1304847988 " Categories : Republicanism Republic Hidden categories: CS1 maint: publisher location All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from December 2024 CS1 Italian-language sources (it) CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia pending changes protected pages Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2017 All articles containing potentially dated statements All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from February 2018 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2023 Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Articles needing additional references from June 2015 All articles needing additional references Articles lacking reliable references from December 2018 Commons category link is on Wikidata Commons category link is locally defined This page was last edited on 8 August 2025, at 14:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Republic 185 languages Add topic

