Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Metadata 2 In computer science Toggle In computer science subsection 2.1 In computer languages 3 Ambiguity Toggle Ambiguity subsection 3.1 Identifiers (IDs) versus Unique identifiers (UIDs) 3.2 Implicit context and namespace conflicts 4 Identifiers in various disciplines 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Identifier 32 languages Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Español Français Galego 한국어 हिन्दी Ido Italiano Қазақша Kiswahili Кыргызча Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi தமிழ் Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Name that identifies a specific entity Registration plates are used to display identifiers for motor vehicles .

An identifier is a name that identifies (that is, labels the identity of) either a unique object or a unique class of objects, where the "object" or class may be an idea, person, physical countable object (or class thereof), or physical noncountable substance (or class thereof). The abbreviation ID often refers to identity, identification (the process of identifying), or an identifier (that is, an instance of identification). An identifier may be a word, number, letter, symbol, or any combination of those.

The words, numbers, letters, or symbols may follow an encoding system (wherein letters, digits, words, or symbols stand for [represent] ideas or longer names) or they may simply be arbitrary. When an identifier follows an encoding system, it is often referred to as a code or id code .  For instance the ISO/IEC 11179 metadata registry standard defines a code as system of valid symbols that substitute for longer values in contrast to identifiers without symbolic meaning. Identifiers that do not follow any encoding scheme are often said to be arbitrary Ids ; they are arbitrarily assigned and have no greater meaning. (Sometimes identifiers are called "codes" even when they are actually arbitrary, whether because the speaker believes that they have deeper meaning or simply because they are speaking casually and imprecisely.) The unique identifier ( UID ) is an identifier that refers to only one instance —only one particular object in the universe. A part number is an identifier, but it is not a unique identifier—for that, a serial number is needed, to identify each instance of the part design. Thus the identifier "Model T" identifies the class (model) of automobiles that Ford's Model T comprises; whereas the unique identifier "Model T Serial Number 159,862" identifies one specific member of that class—that is, one particular Model T car, owned by one specific person.

The concepts of name and identifier are denotatively equal, and the terms are thus denotatively synonymous ; but they are not always connotatively synonymous, because code names and Id numbers are often connotatively distinguished from names in the sense of traditional natural language naming. For example, both " Jamie Zawinski " and " Netscape employee number 20" are identifiers for the same specific human being; but normal English-language connotation may consider "Jamie Zawinski" a "name" and not an "identifier", whereas it considers "Netscape employee number 20" an "identifier" but not a "name." This is an emic indistinction rather than an etic one.

Metadata [ edit ] In metadata, an identifier is a language-independent label, sign or token that uniquely identifies an object within an identification scheme . The suffix "identifier" is also used as a representation term when naming a data element .

ID codes may inherently carry metadata along with them. For example, when you know that the food package in front of you has the identifier "2011-09-25T15:42Z-MFR5-P02-243-45", you not only have that data, you also have the metadata that tells you that it was packaged on September 25, 2011, at 3:42pm UTC, manufactured by Licensed Vendor Number 5, at the Peoria, IL, USA plant, in Building 2, and was the 243rd package off the line in that shift, and was inspected by Inspector Number 45.

Arbitrary identifiers might lack metadata. For example, if a food package just says 100054678214, its ID may not tell anything except identity—no date, manufacturer name, production sequence rank, or inspector number. In some cases, arbitrary identifiers such as sequential serial numbers leak information (i.e. the German tank problem ). Opaque identifiers—identifiers designed to avoid leaking even that small amount of information—include "really opaque pointers " and Version 4 UUIDs .

In computer science [ edit ] In computer science , identifiers (IDs) are lexical tokens that name entities . Identifiers are used extensively in virtually all information processing systems. Identifying entities makes it possible to refer to them, which is essential for any kind of symbolic processing.

In computer languages [ edit ] Main article: Identifier (computer languages) In computer languages , identifiers are tokens (also called symbols ) which name language entities. Some of the kinds of entities an identifier might denote include variables , types , labels , subroutines ,  and packages .

Ambiguity [ edit ] Identifiers (IDs) versus Unique identifiers (UIDs) [ edit ] Main article: Unique identifier A resource may carry multiple identifiers. Typical examples are: One person with multiple names, nicknames, and forms of address (titles, salutations) For example: One specific person may be identified by all of the following identifiers: Jane Smith; Jane Elizabeth Meredith Smith; Jane E. M. Smith; Jane E. Smith; Janie Smith; Janie; Little Janie (as opposed to her mother or sister or cousin, Big Janie); Aunt Jane; Auntie Janie; Mom; Grandmom; Nana; Kelly's mother; Billy's grandmother; Ms. Smith; Dr. Smith; Jane E. Smith, PhD; and Fuzzy (her jocular nickname at work).

One document with multiple versions [ 1 ] One substance with multiple names (for example, CAS index names versus IUPAC names; [ 2 ] INN generic drug names versus USAN generic drug names versus brand names) The inverse is also possible, where multiple resources are represented with the same identifier (discussed below).

Implicit context and namespace conflicts [ edit ] See also: Naming collision Many codes and nomenclatural systems originate within a small namespace . Over the years, some of them bleed into larger namespaces (as people interact in ways they formerly had not, e.g., cross-border trade, scientific collaboration, military alliance, and general cultural interconnection or assimilation). When such dissemination happens, the limitations of the original naming convention, which had formerly been latent and moot, become painfully apparent, often necessitating retronymy , synonymity ,
translation/ transcoding , and so on. Such limitations generally accompany the shift away from the original context to the broader one. Typically the system shows implicit context (context was formerly assumed, and narrow), lack of capacity (e.g., low number  of possible IDs, reflecting the outmoded narrow context), lack of extensibility (no features defined and reserved against future needs), and lack of specificity and disambiguating capability (related to the context shift, where longstanding uniqueness encounters novel nonuniqueness). Within computer science, this problem is called naming collision . The story of the origination and expansion of the CODEN system provides a good case example in a recent-decades, technical-nomenclature context. The capitalization variations seen with specific designators reveals an instance of this problem occurring in natural languages , where the proper noun/common noun distinction (and its complications) must be dealt with. A universe in which every object had a UID would not need any namespaces, which is to say that it would constitute one gigantic namespace; but human minds could never keep track of, or semantically interrelate, so many UIDs.

Identifiers in various disciplines [ edit ] Main page: Category:Identifiers Identifier Scope atomic number , corresponding one-to-one with element name international (via ISV ) Australian Business Number Australian CAGE code U.S. and NATO CAS registry number originated in U.S.; today international (via ISV ) CODEN originated in U.S.; today international Digital object identifier (DOI, doi) Handle System Namespace , international scope DIN standard number originated in Germany; today international E number originated in E.U.; may be seen internationally EC number Employer Identification Number (EIN) U.S.

Electronic Identifier Serial Publicaction (EISP) international Global Trade Item Number international Group identifier many scopes, e.g., specific computer systems International Chemical Identifier international International Standard Book Number (ISBN) ISBN is part of the EAN Namespace ; international scope International eBook Identifier Number (IEIN) international International Standard Serial Number (ISSN) international ISO standard number, e.g., ISO 8601 international Library of Congress Control Number U.S., with some international bibliographic usefulness Personal identification number (Denmark) Denmark Pharmaceutical code Many different systems Product batch number Serial Item and Contribution Identifier U.S., with some international bibliographic usefulness Serial number many scopes, e.g., company-specific, government-specific Service batch number Social Security Number U.S.

Tax file number Australian Unique Article Identifier (UAI) international See also [ edit ] Barcode Binomial nomenclature British Approved Name Data descriptor Data element Descriptor Diagnosis code Document management system File descriptor Food labeling regulations Gene nomenclature Handle (computing) Identification Identity (object-oriented programming) Identity document Index term Marketing part number Metadata Name binding Namespace Naming convention (programming) National identification number Nomenclature – contains various standardized naming systems Nomenclature code Chemical nomenclature International Code of Nomenclature for algae, fungi, and plants International Code of Nomenclature of Bacteria International Code of Nomenclature for Cultivated Plants International Code of Zoological Nomenclature Overloading Part number Personally identifiable information Product code Reference (computer science) Referent Representation term Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine Uniform resource identifier (URI) Unique identifier Unique key References [ edit ] ^ University of Glasgow .

"Procedure for Applying Identifiers to Documents" . Archived from the original on 5 June 2011 . Retrieved 28 April 2009 .

^ University of Pennsylvania .

"Information on Chemical Nomenclature" . Archived from the original on 4 January 2009 . Retrieved 28 April 2009 .

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of identifier at Wiktionary Media related to Identifiers at Wikimedia Commons v t e Personal names and anthroponymy Personal name Birth name Given name Surname patrilineal matrilineal affixes nobiliary particle By sequence Given name list Middle name Surname list By trait Diminutive Double-barrelled Epithet animal common plant Eponymic Matronymic Metonymic Mononymic Occupational Patronymic surname Sobriquet Teknonymic Toponymic surname Patrial Unisex Virtue By life situation Aptronym Birth name Code name Maiden and married names Necronym Posthumous name Temple name Placeholder name Notname Regnal name Slave name Pseudonyms ( list ) Art name bugō Nicknames list hypocorism list of monarchs nom de guerre Pen name heteronym Ring name shikona Stage name list list of mononyms Username By culture ( surnames ) East Asia Amami Chinese art courtesy generation titles Hong Kong Formosan Japanese Korean Okinawan Vietnamese Northern Asia and Central Asia Kalmyk Manchu Mongolian Sakha Tibetan North Africa and Western Asia Afghan Arabic Azerbaijani Berber Coptic Hebrew Mandaean Pashtun Persian Somali Tatar Turkish Oceania Australian Aboriginal Fijian Hawaiian Māori Vanuatuan Sub-Saharan Africa Ashanti Congolese Eritrean and Ethiopian Ewe Ghanaian Igbo Yoruba Zimbabwean Europe, Americas, and Australasia Baltic Latvian Lithuanian Celtic Cornish Irish Manx Scottish Welsh Germanic Dutch English American African-American Canadian German Gothic Icelandic Scandinavian Swedish Romance Catalan French Italian Occitan Portuguese Roman praenomen nomen cognomen agnomen Romanian Spanish Latin America Slavic Bulgarian Croatian Czech East Slavic Belarusian Russian Ukrainian Kashubian Macedonian Polish Serbian Slovak Suffixes Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Other Albanian Armenian Basque Georgian Greek ancient Cypriot South and Southeast Asia Balinese Bengali Bhutanese Burmese Filipino Indonesian Chinese Javanese Cambodian Malaysian Mizo (Lushai) Indian Lao Pakistani Sindhi Sinhalese Tamilian Thai By religion Christian biblical papal saint Buddhist surname Dharma Jewish Hebrew surname Mandaean Theophoric Manners of address ( list ) Of authority and of honour Styles Honorific diplomatic imperial, royal, and noble judiciary religious ecclesiastical Pre-nominal letters Suffix emeritus Post-nominal letters academic orders , decorations , and medals Titles Academic Imperial, royal and noble chivalric courtesy false hereditary subsidiary substantive Military professional Academic educational honorary Corporate Diplomatic Judicial Religious ecclesiastical papal Related traditions Baptism Name day Calendar of saints Related Acronym Anonymity Anthropomorphism personification national Call sign Deadnaming Endonym and exonym Family Galton–Watson process Legal name name change Namesake Naming taboo Nomenclature nomen nescio Misnomer Onomastics -onym Personal identity identifier Proper noun Signature monogram royal cypher khelrtva signum manus tughra Surnames by country Authority control databases Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐bbfj8
Cached time: 20250818141615
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.334 seconds
Real time usage: 0.442 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 987/1000000
Revision size: 13089/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 43158/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 4834/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 11/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 22847/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.213/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 4719955/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  344.973      1 -total
 29.70%  102.454      1 Template:Personal_names
 27.05%   93.331      1 Template:Reflist
 23.78%   82.050      2 Template:Cite_web
 19.16%   66.094      1 Template:Short_description
  9.20%   31.754      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.38%   25.470      5 Template:Main_other
  7.25%   25.009      2 Template:Sister-inline
  7.00%   24.135      1 Template:Commons_category-inline
  6.78%   23.374      1 Template:SDcat Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:41250:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818141615 and revision id 1298348750. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Identifier&oldid=1298348750 " Categories : Identifiers Metadata Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 1 July 2025, at 23:30 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Identifier 32 languages Add topic

