Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types 2 Legal issues 3 Excessive waste 4 Avoiding post-consumer waste 5 See also 6 Footnotes 7 References Toggle the table of contents Post-consumer waste 4 languages العربية Hausa Igbo Македонски Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Trash or garbage discarded by the end-consumers of products This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Post-consumer waste" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( September 2008 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Pollution Air pollution from a factory Air Acid rain Air quality index Atmospheric dispersion modeling Chlorofluorocarbon Combustion Exhaust gas Haze Household air pollution Global dimming Global distillation Indoor air quality Non-exhaust emissions Ozone depletion Particulates Persistent organic pollutant Smog Soot Volatile organic compound Biological Biological hazard Genetic Illegal logging Introduced species Invasive species Digital Information Electromagnetic Light Ecological Overillumination Radio spectrum Natural Ozone Radium and radon in the environment Volcanic ash Wildfire Noise Transportation Health effects from noise Marine mammals and sonar Noise barrier Noise control Soundproofing Radiation Actinides Bioremediation Depleted uranium Nuclear fission Nuclear fallout Plutonium Poisoning Radioactivity Uranium Radioactive waste Soil Agricultural Land degradation Bioremediation Defecation Electrical resistance heating Illegal mining Soil guideline values Phytoremediation Solid waste Advertising mail Biodegradable waste Brown waste Electronic waste Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Industrial waste Litter Mining Municipal solid waste Nanomaterials Plastic Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Waste management Space Space debris Visual Air travel Advertising clutter Overhead power lines Traffic signs Urban blight Vandalism War Chemical warfare Herbicidal warfare Agent Orange Nuclear holocaust Nuclear fallout Nuclear famine Nuclear winter Scorched earth Unexploded ordnance War and environmental law Water Agricultural wastewater Biosolids Diseases Eutrophication Firewater Freshwater Groundwater Hypoxia Industrial wastewater Marine Monitoring Nonpoint source Nutrient Ocean acidification Oil spill Pharmaceuticals Freshwater salinization Septic tanks Sewage Shipping Sludge Stagnation Sulfur water Surface runoff Turbidity Urban runoff Water quality Wastewater Topics History Pollutants Heavy metals Paint Misc Area source Brain health and pollution Debris Dust Garbology Legacy Thermal pollution Midden Point source Waste Toxic Lists Diseases Law by country Most polluted cities Least polluted cities by PM2.5 Treaties Most polluted rivers Categories By country Environment portal Ecology portal v t e Post-consumer waste is a waste type produced by the end consumer of a material stream; that is, where the waste-producing use did not involve the production of another product.

The terms of pre-consumer and post-consumer recycled materials are not defined in ISO standard number 14021 (1999), but pre-consumer and post-consumer materials are. These definitions are the most widely recognized and verified definitions as used by manufacturers and procurement officers worldwide.

Quite commonly, it is simply the waste that individuals routinely discard, either in a waste receptacle or a dump, or by littering , incinerating, pouring down the drain, or washing into the gutter. Things that are used by a consumer and then recycled instead of being permanently disposed of are also considered post consumer waste, even though they are meant to be repurposed.

[1] Post-consumer waste is distinguished from pre-consumer waste, which is the reintroduction of manufacturing scrap (such as trimmings from paper production , defective aluminum cans , etc.) back into the manufacturing process. Pre-consumer waste is commonly used in manufacturing industries , and is often not considered recycling in the traditional sense.

It should also be noted that post-consumer waste should not be equated with post-consumer material. Post-consumer material is post-consumer waste that is diverted from landfills and reprocessed into new material to reenter the production cycle.

[2] Post-consumer waste is associated with a cradle to grave or linear cycle of production. In this system goods are created using standards of what is the easiest and most cost effective instead of using standards focused on creating recyclable and reusable materials. Instead of being sent back to the industrial sector to be repurposed into new products, the material is sent to the “grave” or landfills/open dumps.

[3] Types [ edit ] Post-consumer waste consists of: packaging parts that are not needed, such as fruit skins, bones in meat, etc.

undesired things received, e.g.: advertising material in the mailbox a flyer received in the street without having the opportunity to refuse dust, weeds, fallen leaves, etc.

things one no longer needs, e.g. a magazine that has been read, things replaced by new versions, clothes out of fashion , remaining food that one cannot keep or does not want to keep broken things, things no longer working, spoiled food, worn-out clothes, clothes which no longer fit outgrown items toys, clothing, books, schoolwork disposables such as Kleenex and finished batteries human waste, waste of pets, waste water from various forms of cleaning leftover materials from single use commodities plastic grocery bags plastic water bottles cardboard boxes "post-life waste" one's body or ashes things people do not want and cannot sell broken/unused cars items that cannot be used Legal issues [ edit ] In many countries, such as the United States , there is no reasonable expectation of privacy in post-consumer waste once it leaves the consumer's home. Anyone can search it, including the police , and any incriminating evidence recovered can be used at trial. This doctrine was established in The California v. Greenwood case, in which the U.S. Supreme Court held that there is no common law expectation of privacy for discarded materials. This has since led people to argue the legality of taking post-consumer waste for salvage value.

[4] There has also been controversy over the fact that these laws have caused many arrests for the use of illicit substances. After California v. Greenwood there were many cases of individuals having been convicted on evidence that was found in the trash of growing or processing illegal substances, most often marijuana .

[5] The post-consumer waste in question varies from drug paraphernalia to full marijuana plants in some cases. This has caused some to wonder about who holds the legal responsibility towards and ownership of post-consumer waste.

According to the decision of California v. Greenwood, the consumer relinquishes ownership and responsibility of their refuse.

[6] The verdict of this was intended to address cases like those mentioned above. But it also brings up questions of whether or not people are responsible for their own post consumer waste and the damage that it causes. There have been several cases in the wake of Greenwood questioning this very thing, such as if it is legal for third parties other than trash collectors to lay claim to someone's refuse or if someone is responsible for hazardous post-consumer waste they disposed of once it enters public landfills.

[7] Excessive waste [ edit ] Especially within the food system , there is a lot of waste occurring at the consumer end. Post-consumer waste accounts for a large proportion of food that is wasted. This can be attributed to many reasons, including the way in which food is labeled. According to a study published in 2020, the confusing labeling of "use by", "consume by", or "sell by" dates is a significant reason why food is wasted at such a high volume when the food is otherwise entirely edible.

[8] Another reason is the way that food is used once it reaches the average consumer household due to many factors, with the main factors being social, behavioral, and personal purchasing habits. Additionally, each of those factors influences each other and affects the amount of food that is wasted per person.

[9] Food waste from production to land use changes adds to the worldwide carbon footprint with the amount between 2000 and 3600 kg CO 2 equivalent. The focus should be on prevention from within households as each generation are massively increasing their food waste.

[ 1 ] Multiple studies have shown that the greenhouse gases caused by our food waste at times can be more harmful to the environment than coal power plants.

[ 2 ] This is part of a longstanding belief that manufacturers are responsible for the prevalence of post-consumer waste. Many people accused manufacturers for being responsible for its prevalence due to the many materials not being made with recycling or reuse in mind. Additionally products often have excessive packaging serving no real purpose other than being useful for marketing .

[10] In recent years there has been increased regulation regarding the subject, such as in the EU where new regulations are being passed in order to support more sustainable packaging use and create a cradle-to-cradle material flow.

[11] The Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) discovered that 1/3 of all made food is wasted each year adding up to about 1.3 billion tons of food that was edible.

[ 3 ] Avoiding post-consumer waste [ edit ] As previously mentioned, current systems of consumer waste use a cradle-to-grave or linear model of waste management. This is a model of the lifecycle of a product that results in the product reentering the supply chain instead of being disposed of.

[14] This system allows for greater reduction of waste as a large section of the waste produced would be able to enter the supply chain.

There are many ways for individuals to participate in the process of reducing post consumer waste, especially in communities where local governments encourage processes that reduce post consumer waste and promote the cradle-to-cradle structure. The most productive activities to do this are to reuse materials that a person already owns instead of disposing of them, learning methods of repairing and repurposing materials that no longer function, and when buying items is necessary buying those items that will not break or lose functionality after a small number of uses.

[16] This process is often quite difficult as products are often not designed to be reused. This has led to many individuals blaming the producers of these products for the excess amounts of post-consumer waste. This accusation has been held against manufacturers for many years, claiming that retailers incentivized short term profits over the long term safety of the environment. One study shows how as far back as the 1990s, many large scale retailers were claiming to understand their responsibility to waste management, but offered no policies or initiatives to cut back on the amount of waste that is inevitably produced by the consumer [13] To combat this, some governments and private institutions have attempted to find new ways of avoiding excessive post-consumer waste. In the European Union , one project is being developed which uses enzymes to dissolve plastic and cardboard waste into basic materials that can be remade into new products for consumer use.

[15] In the United States there are organizations such as the Vermont Journal of Environmental Law which holds an annual conference to discuss how best to combat the excessive post consumer waste issue in the United States.

[12] Strategies like this allow for greater control over the issue of post consumer waste without changing the supply chain as a whole.

See also [ edit ] Retail hazardous waste Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Davide Tonini, Paola Federica Albizzati, Thomas Fruergaard Astrup,Environmental impacts of food waste: Learnings and challenges from a case study on UK, Waste Management, Volume 76, 2018, Pages 744-766,ISSN 0956-053X, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wasman.2018.03.032 ^ Food waste: environmental impact and possible solutions, Kirtika Kohli, Ravindra Prajapati, et al., Royal Society of Chemistry, 2023, https://doi.org/10.1039/D3FB00141E ^ Ishangulyyev, R., Kim, S., & Lee, S. H. (2019). Understanding Food Loss and Waste-Why Are We Losing and Wasting Food?. Foods (Basel, Switzerland), 8(8), 297.

https://doi.org/10.3390/foods8080297 References [ edit ] “What Is Post-Consumer Waste?” Pro Environmental Services Ltd, Pro Environmental Services, 14 Feb. 2020, www.proenvironmentalltd.co.uk/what-is-post-consumer-waste.

“What Is ‘Post-Consumer Waste?’” Mass.Gov, Massachusetts State Government, 8 Nov. 2017, [1] (post consumer materials).

“Cradle-to-Grave in LCA: What Is It & How Does It Work?” Ecochain , 22 Mar. 2024, ecochain.com/blog/cradle-to-grave-in-lca/ ↑ "Legality of Scrapping Metal". Retrieved 2010-10-04.

Welty, Jeff. “Does a Dirty Trash Pull Provide Probable Cause to Search a Residence?” North Carolina Criminal Law, UNC School of Government, 20 Nov. 2022, nccriminallaw.sog.unc.edu/does-a-dirty-trash-pull-provide-probable-cause-to-search-a-residence/.

Line, Julie A. “Fourth Amendment: Further erosion of the warrant requirement for unreasonable searches and seizures: The Warrantless Trash Search Exception.” The Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology (1973-), vol. 79, no. 3, 1988, p. 623, https://doi.org/10.2307/1143534.

Manning, Colleen H. "California v. Greenwood: Did the United States Supreme Court Trash the Fourth Amendment." Criminal Justice Journal, vol. 11, no. 1, Fall-Winter 1988, pp. 267–284.

HeinOnline , https://heinonline-org.proxy2.cl.msu.edu/HOL/P?h=hein.journals/tjeflr11&i=273.

↑ Toma, Luiza; Font, Montserrat Costa; Thompson, Bethan (2020). "Impact of Consumers' Understanding of Date Labelling on Food Waste Behaviour".

Operational Research .

20 (2): 543–560.

doi :10.1007/s12351-017-0352-3.

hdl :1842/33150.

S2CID 158834200.

↑ Roodhuyzen, D.M.A.; Luning, P.A.; Fogliano, V.; Steenbekkers, L.P.A. (October 2017). "Putting together the puzzle of consumer food waste: Towards an integral perspective".

Trends in Food Science & Technology .

68 : 37–50.

doi :10.1016/j.tifs.2017.07.009. Retrieved 1 December 2020.{{ cite journal }}: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Wheeler, David. “Why Retailers Should Take Responsibility for Post-Consumer Waste.” Greener Management International , no. 9, 1995, pp. 95–105.

JSTOR , http://www.jstor.org/stable/45259130. Accessed 1 Apr. 2024.

“Revision of the Packaging and Packaging Waste Directive.” Revision of the Packaging and Packaging Waste Directive, European Union Parliament, Nov. 2023, www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2023/745707/EPRS_BRI(2023)745707_EN.pdf.

Backsen, Megan, and Jack Hornickel. “Cradle-to-Cradle: The Elimination of Waste Introduction.” Vermont Journal of Environmental Law, vol. 16, no. 4, 2015, pp. 572–74. JSTOR, https://doi.org/10.2307/vermjenvilaw.16.4.572. Accessed 1 Apr. 2024.

Wheeler, David. “Why Retailers Should Take Responsibility for Post-Consumer Waste.” Greener Management International, no. 9, 1995, pp. 95–105. JSTOR, http://www.jstor.org/stable/45259130. Accessed 1 Apr. 2024.

“Cradle-to-Cradle: What Is It & How Does It Work in LCA?” Ecochain, 19 Mar. 2024, [2] .

“Home.” REPURPOSE, www.repurposeproject.eu/. Accessed 1 Apr. 2024.

“Reuse & Buy Recycled.” Milpitas CA Public Works Footer, www.milpitas.gov/615/Reuse-Buy-Recycled. Accessed 1 Apr. 2024.

v t e Biosolids , waste , and waste management Major types Agricultural wastewater Biodegradable waste Biomedical waste Brown waste Chemical waste Construction waste Demolition waste Electronic waste by country Food waste Green waste Hazardous waste Heat waste Industrial waste Industrial wastewater Litter Marine debris Mining waste Municipal solid waste Open defecation Packaging waste Post-consumer waste Radioactive waste Scrap metal Sewage Sharps waste Surface runoff Toxic waste Processes Anaerobic digestion Balefill Biodegradation Composting Durable good Ecological design Garden waste dumping Illegal dumping Incineration Landfill Landfill mining Mechanical biological treatment Mechanical sorting Photodegradation Reclaimed lumber Recycling appliance recycling battery recycling bottle recycling fluorescent lamp recycling land recycling plastic recycling textile recycling timber recycling tire recycling water heat recycling water recycling shower Repurposing Resource recovery Reusable packaging Right to repair Sewage treatment Urban mining Waste collection Waste sorting Waste trade Waste treatment Waste-to-energy Countries Afghanistan Albania Armenia Australia Belgium Bangladesh Brazil Bosnia and Herzegovina Egypt Georgia Hong Kong India Israel Japan Kazakhstan New Zealand Russia South Korea Sri Lanka Switzerland Syria Tanzania Taiwan Thailand Turkey United Kingdom United States Agreements Bamako Convention Basel Convention EU directives batteries Recycling framework incineration landfills RoHS vehicles waste water WEEE London Convention Oslo Convention OSPAR Convention Occupations Sanitation worker Street sweeper Waste collector Waste picker Other topics Blue Ribbon Commission on America's Nuclear Future China's waste import ban Cleaner production Downcycling Eco-industrial park Extended producer responsibility High-level radioactive waste management History of waste management Landfill fire Sewage regulation and administration Supervised injection site Toxic colonialism Upcycling Waste hierarchy Waste legislation Waste minimisation Zero waste Environment portal Category: Waste Index Journals Lists Organizations Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Post-consumer_waste&oldid=1305396108 " Category : Waste Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from September 2008 All articles needing additional references Pages using sidebar with the child parameter This page was last edited on 11 August 2025, at 20:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Post-consumer waste 4 languages Add topic

