Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Soft versus hard 3 Gods and divinity 4 Types of deities 5 Religion and mythology 6 Ancient and historical religions Toggle Ancient and historical religions subsection 6.1 Ancient Greece 7 Folk religions 8 Modern religions Toggle Modern religions subsection 8.1 Buddhism 8.2 Christianity 8.2.1 Mormonism 8.3 Hinduism 8.4 Zoroastrianism 8.5 Tengrism 8.6 Modern Paganism 8.6.1 Reconstructionism 8.6.2 Wicca 8.7 Serer 9 Use as a term of abuse 10 Polydeism 11 See also 12 References 13 Bibliography 14 Further reading 15 External links Toggle the table of contents Polytheism 122 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Français Frysk Furlan Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Kaszëbsczi Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kriyòl gwiyannen Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം მარგალური مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Олык марий Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Papiamentu Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Scots Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Тыва дыл Українська اردو Vepsän kel’ Tiếng Việt Võro Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Yerwa Kanuri Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Worship of or belief in multiple deities Part of a series on Theism Types of faith Agnosticism Apatheism Atheism Classical theism Deism Henotheism Ietsism Ignosticism Monotheism Monism Dualism Monolatry Kathenotheism Omnism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Transtheism Specific conceptions Brahman Creator Demiurge Deus Father Form of the Good God Great Architect Monad Mother Summum bonum Supreme The Lord Trinity Tawhid Ditheism Monism Personal Unitarianism In particular religions Abrahamic Judaism Christianity Islam Baháʼí Faith Mormonism Mandaeism Samaritanism Indo-Iranian Hinduism Buddhism Jainism Sikhism Yungdrung Bon Zoroastrianism Chinese Tian Shangdi Hongjun Laozu Attributes Eternalness Existence Gender Names ( "God" ) Omnibenevolence Omnipotence Omnipresence Omniscience Aseity Transcendence Experiences Practices Belief Esotericism Faith Fideism Gnosis Hermeticism Metaphysics Mysticism Prayer Revelation Worship Related topics Euthyphro dilemma God complex God gene Theology Ontology Problem of evil ( theodicy ) Religion philosophy texts Portrayals of God in popular media Religion portal v t e Polytheism is the belief in or worship of more than one god .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] According to Oxford Reference , it is not easy to count gods, and so not always obvious whether an apparently polytheistic religion, such as Chinese folk religions, is really so, or whether the apparent different objects of worship are to be thought of as manifestations of a singular divinity.

[ 1 ] Polytheistic belief is usually assembled into a pantheon of gods and goddesses , along with their own religious sects and rituals . Polytheism is a type of theism . Within theism, it contrasts with monotheism , the belief in a singular god who is, in most cases, transcendent .

In religions that accept polytheism, the different gods and goddesses may be representations of forces of nature or ancestral principles ; they can be viewed either as autonomous or as aspects or emanations of a creator deity or transcendental absolute principle ( monistic theologies), which manifests immanently in nature ( panentheistic and pantheistic theologies).

[ 4 ] Polytheists do not always worship all the gods equally; they can be in monolatrists or kathenotheists , specializing in the worship of one particular deity only or at certain times (respectively).

The recognition of the existence of multiple gods and goddesses does not necessarily equate to the worship of all the deities of one or more pantheons, as the believer can either worship them as a whole, or concentrate only on a specific group of deities, determined by various conditions such as the believer's occupation, tastes, personal experience, family tradition, etc. It is also possible to worship a single deity, considered supreme, without ruling out the existence of other gods. This religious position has been called henotheism, but some prefer to call it monolatry. Although the term "henotheism" is controversial, it is recognized by scholars that the worship of a single God accompanied by belief in other deities maintains the principle of polytheism.

[ 5 ] Polytheism was the typical form of religion before the development and spread of the Abrahamic religions of Judaism , Christianity , and Islam , which enforce monotheism. However, there are still some dualistic aspects, such as Satan , and polytheistic aspects, such as saints .

Saint Brigid is in fact Brigit , the main goddess of Celtic Ireland . It is well documented throughout history, from prehistory and the earliest records of ancient Egyptian religion and ancient Mesopotamian religion to the religions prevalent during Classical antiquity , such as ancient Greek religion and ancient Roman religion , and in ethnic religions such as Germanic , Slavic , and Baltic paganism and Native American religions . Notable polytheistic religions practiced today include Taoism , Shenism or Chinese folk religion , Shinto , Santería , most Traditional African religions , [ 6 ] and various neopagan faiths such as Wicca and Hellenism .

Hinduism , while popularly held as polytheistic by many scholars, cannot be exclusively categorised as such as some Hindus consider themselves to be pantheists , panentheists , henotheist , polymorphist, monotheists or monist . Hinduism does not have a single book, Hinduism is an umbrella term for a collection of ideologies. They are compatible with Hindu texts, since there exists no consensus of standardisation in the faith.

Vedanta , the most dominant school of Hinduism, offers a combination of pantheism/panentheism and polytheism, holding that Brahman is the sole ultimate reality of the universe, yet unity with it can be reached by worshipping the innumerable deities that represent the Supreme Absolute Truth . Hindus who practice Bhakti ultimately believe in one God, who is known variously as Paramatman , Parabrahman , Bhagavan , Ishvara , and so on, that transcends all categories (e.g. both of form and formless), however the common people who remain unaware of these concepts worship their deities as ultimate god. Different regions can have their own local deities whose worship is restricted to that region. Brahman is personification of the concept of Moksha and the different gods are paths to moksha or realising the Brahman.

Terminology [ edit ] The term comes from the Greek πολύ poly ("many") and θεός theos ("god") and was coined by the Jewish writer Philo of Alexandria to argue with the Greeks. When Christianity spread throughout Europe and the Mediterranean, non-Christians were called Gentiles (a term originally used by Jews to refer to non-Jews) or pagans (locals) or by the clearly pejorative term idolaters (worshippers of "false" gods). In modern times, the term polytheism was first revived in French by Jean Bodin in 1580, followed by Samuel Purchas 's usage in English in 1614.

[ 7 ] Soft versus hard [ edit ] See also: Interpretatio graeca A major division in modern polytheistic practices is between so-called soft polytheism and hard polytheism.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] "Soft" polytheism is the belief that different gods may either be psychological archetypes , personifications of natural forces, or as being one essential god interpreted through the lenses of different cultures (e.g.

Odin , Zeus , and Indra all being the same god as interpreted by Germanic, Greek, and Indic peoples respectively) – known as omnitheism .

[ 10 ] In this way, gods may be interchangeable for one another across cultures.

[ 9 ] "Hard" polytheism is the belief that gods are distinct, separate, real divine beings, rather than psychological archetypes or personifications of natural forces. Hard polytheists reject the idea that "all gods are one essential god" and may also reject the existence of gods outside their own pantheon altogether .

[ 9 ] Gods and divinity [ edit ] The deities of polytheism are often portrayed as complex personages of greater or lesser status, with individual skills, needs, desires and histories, in many ways similar to humans ( anthropomorphic ) in their personality traits, but with additional individual powers, abilities, knowledge or perceptions.
Polytheism cannot be cleanly separated from the animist beliefs prevalent in most folk religions . The gods of polytheism are in many cases the highest order of a continuum of supernatural beings or spirits, which may include ancestors , demons , wights , and others. In some cases these spirits are divided into celestial or chthonic classes, and belief in the existence of all these beings does not imply that all are worshipped.

Types of deities [ edit ] Further information: List of deities Types of deities often found in polytheism may include: Creator deity Culture hero Death deity ( chthonic ) Life-death-rebirth deity Love deity Mother goddess Political deity (such as a king or emperor) Sky deity ( celestial ) Solar deity Trickster deity Water deity Lunar deity Deities of music, arts, science, farming, or other endeavors Religion and mythology [ edit ] Main article: Religion and mythology In the Classical era , 4th century CE Neoplatonist Sallustius categorized mythology into five types: [ 11 ] Theological: myths that contemplate the essence of the gods, such as Cronus swallowing his children, which Sallustius regarded as expressing in allegory the essence of divinity Physical: expressing the activities of gods in the world Psychological: myths as allegories of the activities of the soul itself or the soul's acts of thought Material: regarding material objects as gods, for example: to call the earth Gaia , the ocean Okeanos, or heat Typhon Mixed The beliefs of many historical polytheistic religions are commonly referred to as "mythology", [ 12 ] [ unreliable source?

] though the stories cultures tell about their gods should be distinguished [ according to whom?

] from their worship or religious practice. For instance, deities portrayed in conflict in mythology were often nonetheless worshipped side by side, illustrating the distinction within the religion between belief and practice.

[ citation needed ] Scholars such as Jaan Puhvel , J. P. Mallory , and Douglas Q. Adams have reconstructed aspects of the ancient Proto-Indo-European religion from which the religions of the various Indo-European peoples are thought to derive, which is believed to have been an essentially naturalist numenistic religion.

[ citation needed ] An example of a religious notion from this shared past is the concept of *dyēus , which is attested in several religious systems of Indo-European-speaking peoples.

Ancient and historical religions [ edit ] Egyptian gods in the Carnegie Museum of Natural History Well-known historical polytheistic pantheons include the Sumerian gods, the Egyptian gods, the pantheon attested in Classical Antiquity (in ancient Greek and Roman religion), the Norse Æsir and Vanir , the Yoruba Orisha , and the Aztec gods.

In many civilizations, pantheons tended to grow over time. Deities first worshipped as the patrons of cities or other places came to be collected together as empires extended over larger territories. Conquests could lead to the subordination of a culture's pantheon to that of the invaders, as in the Greek Titanomachia , and possibly also the Æsir–Vanir war in the Norse mythos . Cultural exchange could lead to "the same" deity being revered in two places under different names, as seen with the Greeks, Etruscans , and Romans, and also to the cultural transmission of elements of an extraneous religion, as with the ancient Egyptian deity Osiris , who was later worshipped in ancient Greece .

Most ancient belief systems held that gods influenced human lives. However, the Greek philosopher Epicurus held that the gods were incorruptible but material, blissful beings who inhabited the empty spaces between worlds and did not trouble themselves with the affairs of mortals, but could be perceived by the mind, especially during sleep.

Ancient Greece [ edit ] Main article: Religion in ancient Greece Procession of the Twelve Olympians The classical scheme in Ancient Greece of the Twelve Olympians (the Canonical Twelve of art and poetry) were: [ 13 ] [ 14 ] Zeus , Hera , Poseidon , Athena , Ares , Demeter , Apollo , Artemis , Hephaestus , Aphrodite , Hermes , and Hestia . Though it is suggested that Hestia stepped down when Dionysus was invited to Mount Olympus , this is a matter of controversy. Robert Graves' The Greek Myths cites two sources [ 15 ] [ 16 ] that obviously do not suggest Hestia surrendered her seat, though he suggests she did.

Hades [ 17 ] was often excluded because he dwelt in the underworld. All of the gods had a power. There was, however, a great deal of fluidity as to whom was counted among their number in antiquity.

[ 18 ] Different cities often worshipped the same deities, sometimes with epithets that distinguished them and specified their local nature.

Hellenic Polytheism extended beyond mainland Greece, to the islands and coasts of Ionia in Asia Minor , to Magna Graecia (Sicily and southern Italy), and to scattered Greek colonies in the Western Mediterranean, such as Massalia (Marseille). Greek religion tempered Etruscan cult and belief to form much of the later Roman religion . During the Hellenistic Era, philosophical schools like Epicureanism developed distinct theologies.

[ 19 ] Hellenism is, in practice, primarily centered around polytheistic and animistic worship.

Folk religions [ edit ] Main article: Folk religion Further information: Saint , Angel , Folk Catholicism , and Shamanism Bulul statues serve as avatars of rice deities in the Anitist beliefs of the Ifugao in the Philippines .

The majority of so-called " folk religions " in the world today (distinguished from traditional ethnic religions ) are found in the Asia-Pacific region .

[ 20 ] This fact conforms to the trend of the majority of polytheist religions being found outside the western world.

[ 21 ] Folk religions are often closely tied to animism . Animistic beliefs are found in historical and modern cultures. Folk beliefs are often labeled superstitions when they are present in monotheistic societies.

[ 22 ] Folk religions often do not have organized authorities, also known as priesthoods , or any formal sacred texts .

[ 23 ] They often coincide with other religions as well.

Abrahamic monotheistic religions , which dominate the western world, typically do not approve of practicing parts of multiple religions, but folk religions often overlap with others.

[ 22 ] Followers of polytheistic religions do not often problematize following practices and beliefs from multiple religions.

Modern religions [ edit ] Further information: Theology , Pantheon (gods) , Euhemerism , Interpretatio graeca , Demigod , and Apotheosis Buddhism [ edit ] Further information: God in Buddhism , Deva (Buddhism) , and Nontheism § Buddhism Depending on the tradition practiced, Buddhism may be seen as polytheistic as it at least acknowledges the existence of multiple gods.

The Buddha is a leader figure but is not meant to be worshipped as a god.

Devas , a Sanskrit word for gods , are also not meant to be worshipped. They are not immortal and have limited powers. A Deva may have been human with positive karma in previous lives and was reborn as a Deva.

[ 24 ] A common Buddhist practice is tantra : the use of rituals to achieve enlightenment. Tantra focuses on seeing oneself as a deity and the use of deities as symbols rather than supernatural agents.

[ 25 ] Buddhism is most closely aligned with polytheism when it is linked with other religions, often folk religions. For example, the Japanese Shinto religion, in which deities called kami are worshipped, is sometimes syncretized with Buddhism.

[ 26 ] Christianity [ edit ] See also: God in Christianity and Trinity Although Christianity is usually described as monotheistic, [ 27 ] [ 28 ] it is sometimes claimed that the doctrine of the Trinity , upheld by most Christian traditions since late antiquity, precludes pure monotheism.

[ 29 ] The doctrine posits that God consists of the Father , the Son and the Holy Spirit . Because the deity is three distinct persons, some believe Christianity should be considered a form of tritheism , a form of polytheism.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] Christianity contends that "one God exists in Three Persons and One Substance," [ 32 ] but that the deity cannot be a unitary person with an individual identity. Christianity inherited the idea of " one God " from Judaism and maintains that its monotheistic doctrine is central to the faith.

It is sometimes claimed that Christianity is not truly monotheistic because of its idea of the Trinity Jordan Paper, a Western scholar and self-described polytheist, considers polytheism the normal state of human culture. He argues that "Even the Catholic Church shows polytheistic aspects with the 'veneration' of the saints." On the other hand, he asserts, monotheistic missionaries and scholars were eager to see a proto-monotheism or at least henotheism in polytheistic religions, for example, when taking from the Chinese pair of Sky and Earth only one part and calling it the King of Heaven , as Matteo Ricci did.

[ 33 ] In 1508, a London Lollard named William Pottier was accused of believing in six gods.

[ 34 ] Mormonism [ edit ] Further information: God in Mormonism Joseph Smith , the founder of the Latter Day Saint movement , believed in "the plurality of Gods", saying, "I have always declared God to be a distinct personage, Jesus Christ a separate and distinct personage from God the Father, and that the Holy Ghost was a distinct personage and a Spirit: and these three constitute three distinct personages and three Gods." [ 35 ] Mormonism, which emerged from Protestantism, [ 36 ] teaches exaltation , which is defined as the hypothesis that people can, in all ways, become like God in the afterlife .

[ 37 ] Mormonism also affirms the existence of a Heavenly Mother , [ 38 ] and the prevailing view among Mormons is that God the Father was once a man who lived on a planet with his own higher God, and became perfect after following this higher God.

[ 39 ] [ 40 ] Some critics of Mormonism argue that statements in the Book of Mormon describe a trinitarian conception of God (e.g.

2 Nephi 31:21 ; Alma 11:44 ), but were superseded by later revelations .

[ 41 ] Due to teachings within Mormon cosmology , some theologians claim that it allows for an infinite number of gods.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] Mormon theology posits that scriptural statements on the unity of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost represent a unity of purpose, not substance.

[ 48 ] They believe that the early Christian Church did not characterize divinity in terms of an immaterial, formless, shared substance until post-apostolic theologians began to incorporate Greek metaphysical philosophies (such as Neoplatonism ) into Christian doctrine.

[ 49 ] [ 50 ] Mormons believe that the truth about God's nature was restored through modern-day revelation, which reinstated the original Judeo-Christian concept of a natural, corporeal, immortal God, [ 51 ] who is the literal father of the spirits of humans.

[ 52 ] It is to this personage alone that Mormons pray, as he is and always will be their Heavenly Father, the supreme "God of gods" (Deuteronomy 10:17). In the sense that Mormons worship only God the Father, they consider themselves monotheists. Nevertheless, Mormons adhere to Jesus's teaching that those who receive God's Word can obtain the title of "gods" (John 10:33–36) because, as literal children of God, they can take upon themselves his divine attributes.</ref> Mormons teach that "The glory of God is intelligence" ( Doctrine and Covenants 93:36), and that it is by sharing the Father's perfect comprehension of all things that both Jesus and the Holy Spirit are also divine.

[ 53 ] Hinduism [ edit ] Further information: Hindu views on monotheism Hinduism is neither a monolithic religion nor an organized religion : a wide variety of religious traditions and practices are grouped under this umbrella term, and some modern scholars have questioned the legitimacy of unifying them artificially and suggest that one should speak of "Hinduisms" in the plural.

[ 54 ] Theistic Hinduism encompasses both monotheistic and polytheistic tendencies and variations on or mixes of both structures.

Hindus venerate deities in the form of the pratima , or idol. The Puja (worship) of the pratima is like a way to communicate with the formless, abstract divinity ( Brahman in Hinduism) which creates, sustains and dissolves creation. However, some sects have advocated that there is no need to give a shape to God and that it is omnipresent and beyond what humans can see or feel tangibly. These gods were not worshipped without a proper consecration ritual.

[ 55 ] It was believed that after the consecration ritual, the idol no longer remained as stone or metal and attained a temporary or permanent state of divinity.

Some Hindu philosophers and theologians argue for a transcendent metaphysical structure with a single divine essence.

[ citation needed ] This divine essence is usually referred to as Brahman or Atman , but the understanding of the nature of this absolute divine essence is the line which defines many Hindu philosophical traditions such as Vedanta .

Among lay Hindus, some believe in different deities emanating from Brahman, while others practice more traditional polytheism and henotheism. These practices focus worship on one or more personal deities while granting the existence of others.

Academically speaking, the ancient Vedic scriptures, upon which Hinduism is derived, describe four authorized disciplic lines of teaching coming down over thousands of years. (Padma Purana). Four propound that the Absolute Truth is Fully Personal, as in Judeo-Christian theology. They say that the Primal Original God is Personal, both transcendent and immanent throughout creation. He can be and is often approached through worship of Prathimas, called "Archa-Vigraha", described in the Vedas as identical to his various dynamic, spiritual Forms. This is the Vaisnava theology.

The fifth disciplic line of Vedic spirituality, founded by Adi Shankaracharya , promotes the concept that the Absolute is Brahman, without clear differentiations, will, thought, or intelligence.

In the Smarta denomination of Hinduism, the philosophy of Advaita expounded by Shankara allows veneration of numerous deities [ citation needed ] with the understanding that all of them are but manifestations of one impersonal divine power, Brahman . Therefore, according to various schools of Vedanta including Shankara, which is the most influential and important Hindu theological tradition, there are a great number of deities in Hinduism, such as Vishnu , Shiva , Ganesha , Hanuman , Lakshmi , Kali , Parvati , Durga , Rama , Krishna but they are essentially different forms of the same "Being".

[ citation needed ] However, many Vedantic philosophers also argue that the same impersonal, divine power united all individuals in the form of the Atman .

Many other Hindus, however, view polytheism as far preferable to monotheism.

Ram Swarup , for example, points to the Vedas as being specifically polytheistic, [ 56 ] and states that, "only some form of polytheism alone can do justice to this variety and richness." [ 57 ] Nasadiya Sukta (Hymn of non-Eternity, origin of universe): There was neither non-existence nor existence then; Neither the realm of space, nor the sky which is beyond; What stirred? Where? In whose protection?

There was neither death nor immortality then; No distinguishing sign of night nor of day; That One breathed, windless, by its own impulse; Other than that there was nothing beyond.

Darkness there was at first, by darkness hidden; Without distinctive marks, this all was water; That which, becoming, by the void was covered; That One by force of heat came into being; Who really knows? Who will here proclaim it?

Whence was it produced? Whence is this creation?

Gods came afterwards, with the creation of this universe.

Who then knows whence it has arisen?

Whether God's will created it, or whether He was mute; Perhaps it formed itself, or perhaps it did not; The Supreme Brahman of the world, all pervasive and all knowing He indeed knows, if not, no one knows - Rig Veda 10.129 (Abridged, Tr: Kramer / Christian) Some Hindus construe this notion of polytheism in the sense of polymorphism—one God with many forms or names. The Rig Veda , the primary Hindu scripture, elucidates this as follows: They call him Indra, Mitra, Varuna, Agni, and he is heavenly nobly-winged Garutman.

To what is One , sages give many a title they call it Agni, Yama, Matarisvan.

Book I, Hymn 164, Verse 46 Rigveda Zoroastrianism [ edit ] See also: Criticism of Zoroastrianism § Polytheism Ahura Mazda is the supreme god, but Zoroastrianism does not deny other deities. Ahura Mazda has yazatas ("good agents"), some of which include Anahita , Sraosha , Mithra , Rashnu , and Tishtrya .

Richard Foltz has put forth evidence that Iranians of Pre-Islamic era worshiped all these figures, especially Mithra and Anahita.

[ 58 ] Prods Oktor Skjærvø states Zoroastrianism is henotheistic and "a dualistic and polytheistic religion, but with one supreme god, who is the father of the ordered cosmos".

[ 59 ] Other scholars state that this is unclear, because historic texts present a conflicting picture, ranging from Zoroastrianism's belief in "one god, two gods, or a best god henotheism".

[ 60 ] Tengrism [ edit ] See also: Turkic mythology , Mongol mythology , and Mongolian shamanism The nature of Tengrism remains debatable. According to many scholars, Tengrism was originally polytheistic , but a monotheistic branch with the sky god Kök-Tengri as the supreme being evolved as a dynastical legitimation. It is at least agreed that Tengrism formed from the diverse folk religions of the local people and may have had diverse branches.

[ 61 ] [ 62 ] [ 63 ] It is suggested that Tengrism was a monotheistic religion only at the imperial level in aristocratic circles, [ 64 ] [ 65 ] [ 66 ] and, perhaps, only by the 12th–13th centuries (a late form of development of ancient animistic shamanism in the era of the Mongol empire).

[ 67 ] According to Jean-Paul Roux , the monotheistic concept evolved from a polytheistic system and was not the original form of Tengrism. The monotheistic concept helped to legitimate the rule of the dynasty: "As there is only one God in Heaven, there can only be one ruler on the earth ...".

[ 68 ] Others point out that Tengri itself was never an Absolute, but only one of many gods of the upper world, the sky deity , of polytheistic shamanism, later known as Tengrism.

[ 69 ] The term also describes several contemporary Turko-Mongolic native religious movements and teachings. All modern adherents of "political" Tengrism are monotheists.

[ 70 ] Modern Paganism [ edit ] Modern Paganism , also known as neopaganism and contemporary paganism , [ 71 ] is a group of contemporary religious movements influenced by or claiming to be derived from the various historical pagan beliefs of pre-modern Europe.

[ 72 ] [ 73 ] Although they have commonalities, contemporary pagan religious movements are diverse, and no single set of beliefs, practices, or texts are shared by them all.

[ 74 ] Founder of Wicca Gerald Gardner helped to revive ancient polytheism.

[ 75 ] [ 76 ] English occultist Dion Fortune was a major populiser of soft polytheism . In her novel The Sea Priestess , she wrote, "All gods are one god, and all goddesses are one goddess, and there is one initiator." [ 77 ] Reconstructionism [ edit ] Main article: Polytheistic reconstructionism Reconstructionist polytheists apply scholarly disciplines such as history , archaeology , and language study to revive ancient, traditional religions that have been fragmented, damaged, or even destroyed, such as Norse Paganism , Roman and Celtic . A reconstructionist endeavors to revive and reconstruct an authentic practice based on the ancestors' ways but workable in contemporary life. These polytheists sharply differ from neopagans in that they consider their religion not only as inspired by historical religions but, in many cases, as a continuation or revival of those religions.

[ 78 ] [ self-published source?

] Wicca [ edit ] Main article: Wicca Wicca is a duotheistic faith created by Gerald Gardner that allows for polytheism.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] [ 81 ] Wiccans specifically worship the Lord and Lady of the Isles (their names are oathbound).

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] It is an orthopraxic mystery religion that requires initiation to the priesthood to consider oneself Wiccan.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] [ 84 ] Wicca emphasizes duality and the cycle of nature.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] [ 85 ] Serer [ edit ] Main articles: Serer religion , Timeline of Serer history , and States headed by ancient Serer Lamanes In Africa , polytheism in Serer religion dates to the Neolithic Era or possibly earlier, when the ancient ancestors of the Serer people represented their Pangool on the Tassili n'Ajjer .

[ 86 ] [ dubious – discuss ] The supreme creator deity in the Serer religion is Roog . However, there are many deities [ 87 ] and Pangool (singular: Fangool , the interceders with the divine) in the Serer religion.

[ 86 ] Each has its own purpose and serves as Roog's agent on Earth.

[ 87 ] Amongst the Cangin speakers , a sub-group of the Serers , Roog is known as Koox .

[ 88 ] Use as a term of abuse [ edit ] The term "polytheist" is sometimes used by Sunni Muslim extremist groups such as Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant (ISIL) as a derogatory reference to Shiite Muslims, whom they view as having "strayed from Islam's monotheistic creed because of the reverence they show for historical figures, like Imam Ali ".

[ 89 ] Professor Paul Vitz , an opponent of Selfism [sic], viewed America as a "most polytheistic nation".

[ 90 ] The term has occasionally been used by Protestant thinkers, such as Samuel Purchas , as an anti-papist condemnation of worship of "Saints, Images, and the Host ".

[ 91 ] Polydeism [ edit ] Deism Origins Deus ( Deus otiosus ) Logos § Ancient Greek philosophy Neoplatonism § The One Chinese theology § Confucian theology Averroism Socinianism Unmoved mover Watchmaker God Movements 18th-century England and France Christian Deism Pandeism ( in Asia ) ( and Christianity ) ( criticism ) Spinozism Cult of the Supreme Being Theophilanthropy Deistic evolution Natural theology Congregationalism in the US § Disinterested benevolence Polydeism Notable figures Edward Herbert, 1st Baron Herbert of Cherbury Henry St John, 1st Viscount Bolingbroke Matthew Tindal Voltaire Charles Blount Thomas Chubb Thomas Jefferson Thomas Paine Guido von List Cayetano Ripoll False equivalencies Ceremonial deism Moralistic therapeutic deism Opposition Catholic Church John Leland Edward Stillingfleet § Philosophical controversy Anthony Bliss John Jackson Johann Georg Hamann Charles Jennens Religious thought of Edmund Burke Richard Blackmore § Non-epic writing James McGready Valentin Ernst Löscher Continental prophecies § Themes Friedrich Julius Stahl v t e Polydeism (from the Greek πολύ poly ("many") and Latin deus meaning god) is a portmanteau referencing a polytheistic form of deism , encompassing the belief that the universe was the collective creation of multiple gods , each of whom created a piece of the universe or multiverse and then ceased to intervene in its evolution. This concept addresses an apparent contradiction in deism, that a monotheistic God created the universe, but now expresses no apparent interest in it, by supposing that if the universe is the construct of many gods, none of them would have an interest in the universe as a whole.

Creighton University Philosophy professor William O. Stephens , [ 92 ] who has taught this concept, suggests that C. D. Broad projected this concept [ 93 ] in Broad's 1925 article, "The Validity of Belief in a Personal God".

[ 94 ] Broad noted that the arguments for the existence of God only tend to prove that "a designing mind had existed in the past, not that it does exist now. It is quite compatible with this argument that God should have died long ago, or that he should have turned his attention to other parts of the Universe", and notes in the same breath that "there is nothing in the facts to suggest that there is only one such being".

[ 95 ] Stephens contends that Broad, in turn, derived the concept from David Hume . Stephens states: David Hume's criticisms of the argument from design include the argument that, for all we know, a committee of very powerful, but not omnipotent, divine beings could have collaborated in creating the world, but then afterwards left it alone or even ceased to exist. This would be polydeism.

This use of the term appears to originate at least as early as Robert M. Bowman Jr.

's 1997 essay, Apologetics from Genesis to Revelation .

[ 96 ] Bowman wrote: Materialism (illustrated by the Epicureans ), represented today by atheism , skepticism , and deism. The materialist may acknowledge superior beings, but they do not believe in a Supreme Being. Epicureanism was founded about 300 BC by Epicurus . Their world view might be called "polydeism:" there are many gods, but they are merely superhuman beings; they are remote, uninvolved in the world, posing no threat and offering no hope to human beings. Epicureans regarded traditional religion and idolatry as harmless enough as long as the gods were not feared or expected to do or say anything.

Sociologist Susan Starr Sered used the term in her 1994 book, Priestess, Mother, Sacred Sister: Religions Dominated by Women , which includes a chapter titled, "No Father in Heaven: Androgyny and Polydeism". She writes that she has "chosen to gloss on 'polydeism' a range of beliefs in more than one supernatural entity".

[ 97 ] Sered used this term in a way that would encompass polytheism, rather than exclude much of it, as she intended to capture both polytheistic systems and nontheistic systems that assert the influence of "spirits or ancestors".

[ 97 ] This use of the term, however, does not accord with the historical misuse of deism as a concept to describe an absent creator god .

See also [ edit ] Mythology portal Religion portal Animism Ethnic religion Hellenismos Henotheism Judgement of Paris Kathenotheism Monolatry Panentheism Pantheism Polytheistic reconstructionism Shirk (polytheism) West African Vodun References [ edit ] ^ a b "Polytheism" .

Oxford Reference .

Oxford University Press . Retrieved 3 February 2023 .

^ "Polytheism" .

Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary .

Cambridge University Press . Retrieved 3 February 2023 .

^ "Polytheism" .

Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary .

Oxford University Press . Retrieved 3 February 2023 .

^ Ulrich Libbrecht .

Within the Four Seas...: Introduction to Comparative Philosophy . Peeters Publishers, 2007.

ISBN 9042918128 . p. 42.

^ "Monotheism - Polytheism, Dualism, Henotheism" .

Britannica . Retrieved 26 December 2023 .

^ Kimmerle, Heinz (11 April 2006).

"The world of spirits and the respect for nature: towards a new appreciation of animism" .

The Journal for Transdisciplinary Research in Southern Africa .

2 (2): 15.

doi : 10.4102/td.v2i2.277 .

ISSN 2415-2005 .

^ Schmidt, Francis (1987).

The Inconceivable Polytheism: Studies in Religious Historiography . New York: Gordon & Breach Science Publishers. p. 10.

ISBN 978-3718603671 .

^ Galtsin, Dmitry (21 June 2018).

"Modern Pagan religious conversion revisited" .

Sacra .

14 (2): 7– 17 . Retrieved 5 February 2019 .

^ a b c Hoff, Kraemer, Christine (2012).

Seeking the mystery : an introduction to Pagan theologies . Englewood, CO: Patheos Press.

ISBN 9781939221186 .

OCLC 855412257 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ Negedu, I. A. (1 January 2014).

"The Igala traditional religious belief system: Between monotheism and polytheism" .

OGIRISI: A New Journal of African Studies .

10 (1): 116– 129.

doi : 10.4314/og.v10i1.7 .

ISSN 1597-474X .

^ Sallustius, On the Gods and the World , 4 ^ Eugenie C. Scott, Evolution Vs. Creationism: An Introduction (2009), p. 58.

^ "Greek mythology".

Encyclopedia Americana . Vol. 13. 1993. p. 431.

^ "Dodekatheon" [Twelve Olympians].

Papyrus Larousse Britannica (in Greek). 2007.

^ "Apollodorus, Library, book 3, chapter 5, section 3" .

^ "Pausanias, Description of Greece" .

^ George Edward Rines, ed. (1919).

Encyclopedia Americana Vol. 13 . Vol. 13. Americana Corp. pp.

408– 411.

^ Stoll, Heinrich Wilhelm (R.B. Paul trans.) (1852).

Handbook of the religion and mythology of the Greeks . Francis and John Rivington. p. 8.

The limitation [of the number of Olympians] to twelve seems to have been a comparatively modern idea ^ "On the Epicurean Gods" . Society of Friends of Epicurus. 2020.

Archived from the original on 15 December 2021.

^ "Folk Religionists" .

Pew Forum . Pew Research Center. 18 December 2012 . Retrieved 31 March 2021 .

^ Gries, P.; Su, J.; Schak, D. (December 2012).

"Toward the scientific study of polytheism: beyond forced-choice measures of religious belief" .

Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion .

51 (4): 623– 637.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-5906.2012.01683.x . Retrieved 31 March 2021 .

^ a b van Baaren, Theodorus P.

"Monotheism" .

Britannica . Encyclopaedia Britannica . Retrieved 12 April 2021 .

^ "Folk Religionists" .

Pew Forum . Pew Research Center. 18 December 2012 . Retrieved 31 March 2021 .

^ Trainor, Kevin (2004).

Buddhism: The Illustrated Guide . Oxford University Press. p. 62.

^ O'Brien, Barbara.

"The Role of Gods and Deities in Buddhism" .

Learn Religions . Retrieved 31 March 2021 .

^ "Buddhism and Shinto: The Two Pillars of Japanese Culture" .

Japanology . 20 June 2016. Archived from the original on 15 April 2021 . Retrieved 14 April 2021 .

^ Woodhead, Linda (2004).

Christianity: A Very Short Introduction . Oxford: Oxford University Press. pp. n.p.

^ "Monotheism | Definition, Types, Examples, & Facts" . 24 May 2023.

^ Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (1974) art. "Monotheism" ^ "Typical Jewish Misunderstandings of Christianity" .

Council of Centers on Jewish-Christian Relations . Archived from the original on 12 June 2018 . Retrieved 8 June 2018 .

^ "Muslims reject the Trinity because they do understand it" .

thedebateinitiative . Retrieved 8 June 2018 .

^ Oxford Dictionary of the Christian Church (1974) art. "Trinity, Doctrine of the" ^ Jordan Paper: The Deities are Many. A Polytheistic Theology. Albany: State University of New York Press, 2005, pp. 112 and 133.

^ Royal, S.; Milton, A. (2020).

Lollards in the English Reformation: History, radicalism, and John Foxe . Politics, Culture and Society in Early Modern Britain. Manchester University Press. p. 44.

ISBN 978-1-5261-2882-9 . Retrieved 23 February 2023 .

^ Dahl, Paul E. (1992), "Godhead" , in Ludlow, Daniel H (ed.), Encyclopedia of Mormonism , New York: Macmillan Publishing , pp.

552– 553, ISBN 0-02-879602-0 , OCLC 24502140 ^ Bowen, K. (2005).

Christians in a Secular World: The Canadian Experience . McGill-Queen's Studies in the History of Religion. McGill-Queen's University Press. p. 26.

ISBN 978-0-7735-2712-6 . Retrieved 13 November 2022 .

^ Pope, Margaret McConkie, "Exaltation" , Encyclopedia of Mormonism , p. 479, archived from the original on 19 October 2017 , retrieved 12 November 2014 ^ Cannon, Elaine Anderson , "Mother in Heaven" , Encyclopedia of Mormonism , p. 961, archived from the original on 19 October 2017 , retrieved 26 March 2014 ^ "Religions: An explanation of Mormon beliefs about God" , BBC , 2 October 2009 , retrieved 28 October 2014 .

^ Riess, Jana ; Bigelow, Christopher Kimball (2005), "Chapter 3: Heavenly Parents, Savior, and Holy Ghost", Mormonism for Dummies , John Wiley & Sons, ISBN 978-0-7645-7195-4 ^ Hoekema, Anthony (1969) [1963], The Four Major Cults: Christian Science, Jehovah's Witnesses, Mormonism, Seventh-Day Adventism , Exeter, England: Paternoster Press , p. 34, ISBN 0853640947 , OCLC 12735425 [ unreliable source?

] ^ Crane, S.A. (2010).

Is Mormonism Now Christian?

. Wipf & Stock Pub. p. 63.

ISBN 978-1-60899-251-5 . Retrieved 23 February 2023 .

^ Haddad, J.F.; Groothuis, D. (2011).

Leaving Dirt Place: Love as an Apologetic for Christianity . Wipf & Stock Publishers. p. 57.

ISBN 978-1-61097-217-8 . Retrieved 23 February 2023 .

^ Parrish, S.E. (2019).

Atheism?: A Critical Analysis . Wipf & Stock Publishers. p. 65.

ISBN 978-1-5326-7266-8 . Retrieved 23 February 2023 .

^ Morley, B.K. (2015).

Mapping Apologetics: Comparing Contemporary Approaches . InterVarsity Press. p. 277.

ISBN 978-0-8308-9704-9 . Retrieved 23 February 2023 .

^ Ankerberg, J.; Weldon, J. (2019).

Everything You Ever Wanted to Know About Mormonism . ATRI. p. 122.

ISBN 978-1-937136-51-2 . Retrieved 23 February 2023 .

^ Tsoukalas, S. (2022).

Knowing Christ in the Challenge of Heresy: A Christology of the Cults, A Christology of the Bible . Wipf & Stock Publishers. p. 37.

ISBN 978-1-6667-3786-8 . Retrieved 23 February 2023 .

^ Holland, Jeffrey R.

(November 2007), "The Only True God and Jesus Christ Whom He Hath Sent" , Ensign ^ Bickmore, Barry R.

(2001), Does God Have a Body In Human Form?

(PDF) , Foundation for Apologetic Information & Research ^ Draper, Richard R. (April 1994), "The Reality of the Resurrection" , Ensign ^ Webb, Steven H.

(2012), Jesus Christ, Eternal God: Heavenly Flesh and the Metaphysics of Matter , Oxford University Press, archived from the original on 14 February 2020 , retrieved 24 October 2016 ^ "God Is Truly Our Father" , Liahona , January 2010 ^ " 'The Glory of God is Intelligence' – Lesson 37: Section 93" , Doctrine and Covenants Instructor's Guide: Religion 324–325 (PDF) , Institutes of Religion , Church Educational System , 1981 ^ Smith, Brian. "Hinduism." New Dictionary of the History of Ideas. 2005. Retrieved May 22, 2013 from Encyclopedia.com: http://www.encyclopedia.com/doc/1G2-3424300342.html ^ "What is Consecration?" .

isha.sadhguru.org . Retrieved 7 September 2024 .

^ Goel, Sita Ram (1987).

Defence of Hindu Society . New Delhi, India: Voice of India. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 23 August 2011 .

"In the Vedic approach, there is no single God. This is bad enough. But the Hindus do not have even a supreme God, a fuhrer-God who presides over a multiplicity of Gods." – Ram Swarup ^ Goel, Sita Ram (1987).

Defence of Hindu Society . New Delhi, India: Voice of India. Archived from the original on 3 March 2016 . Retrieved 23 August 2011 .

^ Richard Foltz , "Religions of Iran: From Prehistory to the Present", Oneworld Publications, 2013, p. xiv ^ Prods Oktor Skjærvø (2006), Introduction to Zoroastrianism , 2005, Harvard University Archives, p. 15 with footnote 1 ^ Brian Arthur Brown (2016).

Four Testaments: Tao Te Ching, Analects, Dhammapada, Bhagavad Gita: Sacred Scriptures of Taoism, Confucianism, Buddhism, and Hinduism . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. pp.

347– 349.

ISBN 978-1-4422-6578-3 .

^ Schmidt, Wilhelm (1949–52).

Der Ursprung der Gottes [ The Origin of the Idea of God ] (in German). Vol.

9– 10.

^ Doerfer, Gerhard (1965).

Turkische und Mongolische Elemente im Neupersischen (in German). Vol. 2. Wiesbaden. p. 580.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Pettazzoni 1956 , p. 261f; Gumilyov 1967 , ch. 7; Tanyu 1980 ; Alici 2011 .

^ Roux 1956 ; Roux 1984 ; Róna-Tas 1987 , pp. 33–45; Kodar 2009 .

^ Meserve, R., Religions in the central Asian environment . In: History of Civilizations of Central Asia, Vol. 4 Archived 2016-03-03 at the Wayback Machine , The age of achievement: A.D. 750 to the end of the fifteenth century, Part Two: The achievements, p. 68: "The 'imperial' religion was more monotheistic, centred around the all-powerful god Tengri, the sky god." ^ Fergus, Michael; Jandosova, Janar.

Kazakhstan: Coming of Age , Stacey International, 2003, p. 91: "... a profound combination of monotheism and polytheism that has come to be known as Tengrism." ^ Bira 2011 , p. 14.

^ Roux 1956 , p. 242.

^ Stebleva 1971 ; Klyashtornyj 2008 .

^ Laruelle 2006 , pp. 3–4.

^ Adler 2006 , p. xiii.

^ Lewis 2004 , p. 13.

^ Hanegraaff 1996 , p. 84.

^ Carpenter 1996 , p. 40.

^ "Gerald Gardner: Blue plaque for 'father of witchcraft' – BBC News" .

BBC News . 13 June 2014 . Retrieved 22 February 2023 .

^ Hodge, B. (2016).

World Religions and Cults Volume 2: Moralistic, Mythical and Mysticism Religions . World of Religions and Cults. New Leaf Publishing Group, Incorporated. p. 183.

ISBN 978-1-61458-504-6 . Retrieved 22 February 2023 .

^ Fortune, Dion ; Knight, Gareth (30 June 2003).

The Sea Priestess . Weiser. p. 169.

ISBN 978-1-57863-290-9 .

All gods are one god, and all goddesses are one goddess, and there is one initiator.

^ Alexander, T.J. (2007).

Hellenismos Today . Lulu.com. p. 14.

ISBN 9781430314271 . Retrieved 23 August 2015 .

^ Gardner, Gerald (1982).

The Meaning of Witchcraft . Llewellyn Pubns. pp.

165– 166.

ISBN 0939708027 .

^ a b c d Hutton, Ronald (2003).

The Triumph of the Moon: A History of Modern Pagan Witchcraft . Oxford Paperbacks.

ISBN 0192854496 .

^ a b c d Lamond, Frederic (2005).

Fifty Years of Wicca . Green Magic.

ISBN 0954723015 .

^ Bracelin, J (1999).

Gerald Gardner: Witch . Pentacle Enterprises. p. 199.

ISBN 1872189083 .

^ Gardner, Gerald (1982).

The Meaning of Witchcraft . Llewellyn Pubns. pp.

260– 261.

ISBN 0939708027 .

^ Gardner, Gerald (1982).

The Meaning of Witchcraft . Llewellyn Pubns. pp.

21– 22, 28– 29, 69, 116.

ISBN 0939708027 .

^ Gardner, Gerald (1982).

The Meaning of Witchcraft . Llewellyn Pubns.

ISBN 0939708027 .

^ a b (in French) Gravrand, Henry , "La civilisation Sereer – Pangool" , Les Nouvelles Editions Africaines du Senegal, (1990), ISBN 2-7236-1055-1 . pp 9, 20, 77 ^ a b (in English) Kellog, Day Otis, and Smith, William Robertson, "The Encyclopædia Britannica: latest edition. A dictionary of arts, sciences and general literature", Volume 25, p 64, Werner (1902) ^ (in French) Ndiaye, Ousmane Sémou, "Diversité et unicité sérères: l'example de la région de Thiès", Éthiopiques, no. 54, vol. 7, 2e semestre 1991 [1] Archived 2020-06-30 at the Wayback Machine ^ Callimachi, Rukmini; Coker, Margaret (2018).

"ISIS Claims Responsibility for Baghdad Bombings" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 21 January 2018 .

The second refers to the group's view that Shiites have strayed from Islam's monotheistic creed because of the reverence they show for historical figures, like Imam Ali.

^ Institute, T.P. (2013).

Newman and the Intellectual Tradition: Portsmouth Review . Sheed & Ward. p. 58.

ISBN 978-1-58051-249-7 . Retrieved 3 May 2023 .

^ Purchas, Samuel (1613).

Purchas, His Pilgrimage . London: William Standby for Henrie Fetherstone. p. 43.

^ "Article on "Bill" Stephens" . Archived from the original on 29 November 2016 . Retrieved 7 July 2018 .

^ "article on C. D. Broad's concept projection" . Archived from the original on 21 June 2006 . Retrieved 7 July 2018 .

^ C. D. Broad, "The Validity of Belief in a Personal God", reprinted in C. D. Broad, Religion, Philosophy and Psychical Research , (1953), 159–174.

^ Id. at 171.

^ "Apologetics – From Genesis to Revelation" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 31 August 2006 . Retrieved 7 July 2018 .

^ a b Susan Starr Sered , Priestess, Mother, Sacred Sister: Religions Dominated by Women (1994), p. 169.

Bibliography [ edit ] Adler, Margot (2006) [1979].

Drawing Down the Moon: Witches, Druids, Goddess-Worshippers and Other Pagans in America (Revised ed.). London: Penguin.

ISBN 978-0-14-303819-1 .

Alici, Mustafa (2011).

"The Idea of God in Ancient Turkish Religion According to Raffaele Pettazzoni. A Comparison with the Turkish Historian of Religions Hikmet Tanyu" .

SMSR .

77 (1): 137– 54.

Bira, Shagdaryn (2011).

Монголын тэнгэрийн үзэл: түүвэр зохиол, баримт бичгүүд [ Mongolian Tengerism: selected papers and documents ] (in Mongolian). Ulaanbaatar: Sodpress.

ISBN 9789992955932 .

Carpenter, Dennis D. (1996). "Emergent Nature Spirituality: An Examination of the Major Spiritual Contours of the Contemporary Pagan Worldview". In Lewis, James R.

(ed.).

Magical Religion and Modern Witchcraft . Albany: State University of New York Press.

ISBN 978-0-7914-2890-0 .

Gumilyov, Lev N.

(1967).

"Гл. 7. Религия тюркютов" [Chapter 7. Religion of the Turkuts].

Древние тюрки [ The Ancient Turks ] (in Russian). Москва: Наука .

Hanegraaff, Wouter J. (1996).

New Age Religion and Western Culture: Esotericism in the Mirror of Secular Thought . Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-10696-3 .

Klyashtornyj, Sergei G. (2008). Spinei, V. and C. (ed.).

Old Turkic Runic Texts and History of the Eurasian Steppe . Bucureşti/Brăila: Editura Academiei Române; Editura Istros a Muzeului Brăilei.

Kodar, Auezkhan (2009).

"Тенгрианство в контексте монотеизма" [Tengriism in context of monotheism].

Новые исследования Тувы (in Russian) ( 1– 2).

—— (22 March 2006).

"Tengrism: In Search for Central Asia's Spiritual Roots" (PDF) .

Central Asia-Caucasus Analyst .

8 (6): 3– 4. Archived from the original (PDF) on 7 December 2006.

Lewis, James R.

(2004).

The Oxford Handbook of New Religious Movements . Oxford University Press. p. 13.

ISBN 0-19-514986-6 .

Pettazzoni, Raffaele (1956) [1955]. "Turco-Mongols and Related Peoples".

The All-Knowing God. Researches into Early Religion and Culture . Translated by H. J. Rose. London.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Róna-Tas, A. (1987).

W. Heissig ; H.-J. Klimkeit (eds.). "Materialien zur alten Religion den Turken: Synkretismus in den Religionen zentralasiens" [Materials on the ancient religion of the Turks: syncretism in the religions of Central Asia].

Studies in Oriental Religions (in German).

13 . Wiesbaden: 33– 45.

—— (1956). "Tängri. Essai sur le ciel-dieu des peuples altaïques" [Tängri. An Essay on the Deities of the Altaic Peoples].

Revue de l'histoire des religions (in French).

——, ed. (1984).

La religion des Turcs et des Mongols [ The Religion of the Turks and Mongols ] (in French). Paris: Payot.

Stebleva, Irina V. (1971). "К реконструкции древнетюркской мифологической системы" [To the reconstruction of the ancient Turkic mythological system].

Тюркологический сборник (in Russian). Москва: АН СССР .

Tanyu, Hikmet (1980).

İslâmlıktan Önce Türkler'de Tek Tanrı İnancı [ The Belief of Monotheism among Pre-Islamic Turks ] (in Turkish). İstanbul.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) Further reading [ edit ] Assmann, Jan, 'Monotheism and Polytheism' in: Sarah Iles Johnston (ed.), Religions of the Ancient World: A Guide , Harvard University Press (2004), ISBN 0-674-01517-7 , pp. 17–31.

Burkert, Walter , Greek Religion: Archaic and Classical , Blackwell (1985), ISBN 0-631-15624-0 .

Greer, John Michael; A World Full of Gods: An Inquiry Into Polytheism , ADF Publishing (2005), ISBN 0-9765681-0-1 Iles Johnston, Sarah; Ancient Religions , Belknap Press (September 15, 2007), ISBN 0-674-02548-2 Paper, Jordan; The Deities are Many: A Polytheistic Theology , State University of New York Press (March 3, 2005), ISBN 978-0-7914-6387-1 Penchansky, David, Twilight of the Gods: Polytheism in the Hebrew Bible (2005), ISBN 0-664-22885-2 .

Swarup, Ram, & Frawley, David (2001).

The word as revelation: Names of gods . New Delhi: Voice of India.

ISBN 978-8185990682 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Polytheism .

Look up polytheism in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Media related to Polytheism at Wikimedia Commons The Association of Polytheist Traditions – APT, a UK-based community of Polytheists (archived 9 September 2015) International Year Of Polytheism Philosophical project promoting polytheism by group monochrom (archived 7 September 2015) Integrational Polytheism [ usurped ] (archived 8 September 2008) v t e God Deity Divinity Goddess List Conceptions of God Existence Gender of God Agnostic theism Animism Antitheism Apatheism Atheism Agnostic atheism Christian atheism Implicit and explicit atheism Jewish atheism Negative and positive atheism New Atheism Theological noncognitivism Binitarianism Classical theism Deism Ceremonial deism Christian deism Pandeism Polydeism Dipolar theism Dystheism Egotheism Misotheism Henotheism Ietsism Kathenotheism Liberal theism Monolatry Monotheism Ethical monotheism Post-monotheism Mysticism Nontheism Post-theism Nontrinitarianism Open theism Panentheism Pantheism Classical pantheism Hylotheism Naturalistic pantheism Philosophical theism Physitheism Euhemerism Polytheism Skeptical theism Spiritualism Theism Theistic finitism Transtheism Trinitarianism Tritheism Unitarianism Religion portal v t e Paganism (and modern paganism ) Animism Panentheism Pantheism Polytheism Historical ethnic religions ( list ) (existing and extinct) Asian Ainu Altaic Manchu Mongolian Tengrism Turkic Austroasiatic Sarnaism Vietnamese Indonesia Parmalim Kaharingan Momolianism Kejawèn Malay Philippine Tagalog Marapu Sunda Wiwitan Chinese Hinduism Hindu mythology Dravidian Tamil Kalash Punjabi Vedic Shinto Ryukyuan Korean Miao Tai Ahom Mo Satsana Phi Tibeto-Burmese Bathouism Benzhuism Bimoism Bon Bongthingism Burmese Donyi-Polo Heraka Kiratism Qiang Sanamahism European Albanian Anatolian Hittite Lydian Phrygian Armenian Baltic Old Prussian Latvian Lithuanian Basque Caucasian Circassian Georgian Ossetian Vainakh Celtic Irish Etruscan Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Norse Greek Hellenistic religion Hero cult Sacred mysteries Eleusinian Orphic Samothracian Iberian Cantabrian Castro Gallaecian Lusitanian Italic Camunnian Ligurian Umbrian Minoan Nuragic Paleo-Balkan Dacian Illyrian Thracian Roman Cybele Gallo-Roman Imperial cult Mithraism Mysteries of Isis Natale di Roma Scythian Slavic Uralic Baltic Finnic Hungarian Mari Sami Middle-Eastern and North African Ancient Near Eastern Hurrian Egyptian Nubian Mesopotamian Babylonian Sumerian Semitic Arabian Canaanite Iranian Persian Berber Punic Oceanian and Pacific Islander Australian Melanesian Micronesian Nauruan Papuan Polynesian Cook Islander Hawaiian Māori Rapa Nui Tahitian Tongan Sub-Saharan African Akan Bantu Bushongo Kongo Lozi Zulu Dahomean Dinka Efik Hausa Lugbara Maasai Malagasy Mbuti Odinani San Serer Somali Modern paganism ( movements ) Ethnic African Ausar Auset Godianism American Mexicayotl Native American Church Armenian Baltic Dievturība Romuva Caucasian Abkhaz Adyghe Habze Uatsdin Celtic Canarian Heathenry Hellenism Hindu Italo-Roman Kemetism Zalmoxianism Romani Semitic Slavic Turko-Mongolic Burkhanism Vattisen Yaly Uralic Estonian Finnish Hungarian Mordvin Udmurt Vos Other Neopagan witchcraft Cochrane's Craft Feri Tradition Stregheria Wicca Druidry European Congress of Ethnic Religions Goddess movement Neoshamanism Polytheistic reconstructionism Secular paganism Myth and ritual Veneration of the dead Bear worship Blót Tumulus Dying and rising deity Ethos Folklore Idolatry Magic and religion Megalith Dolmen Menhir Stone row Myth Myth and ritual Mythology Orthopraxy Reincarnation Religion and mythology Ritual Sacred grove Holy well Sacrifice animal human Supernatural magic Trees in mythology Tree of life World tree Totem Virtue Witchcraft Animal worship Christianization Christianity and paganism Christianization of saints and feasts Constantinian shift Neoplatonism Religio licita Virtuous pagan v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Philosophy of religion Conceptions of God Brahman Demiurge Divine simplicity Egoism God Speaks Holy Spirit Misotheism Pandeism Personal god Process theology Supreme Being Unmoved mover God in Abrahamic religions Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism Mormonism Sikhism Baháʼí Faith Wicca Existence of God For Beauty Christological Trilemma Resurrection Consciousness Cosmological Kalam cosmological Contingency Metaphysical Degree Desire Experience Existential choice Fine-tuned universe Knowledge Love Mathematics Miracles Morality Mystical idealism Natural-law Necessary existent Seddiqin Nyayakusumanjali Ontological Anselm Gödel Meinongian Modal Mulla Sadra Pascal's wager Reason Proper basis and Reformed epistemology Responses to the problem of evil Teleological Natural law Watchmaker Testimony Historical events Historical personages Trademark Transcendental Against 747 gambit Atheist's Wager Evil Free will Hell Inconsistent revelations Nonbelief Noncognitivism Occam's razor Omnipotence Poor design Russell's teapot Theology Acosmism Agnosticism Animism Antireligion Atheism Creationism Dharmism Deism Demonology Divine command theory Dualism Esotericism Exclusivism Existentialism Christian Atheistic Feminist theology Thealogy Womanist theology Fideism Fundamentalism Gnosticism Henotheism Humanism Religious Secular Christian Inclusivism Theories about religions Monism Monotheism Mysticism Naturalism Metaphysical Religious Humanistic New Age Nondualism Nontheism Pandeism Panentheism Pantheism Perennialism Polytheism Possibilianism Process theology Religious skepticism Spiritualism Shamanism Taoic Theism Transcendentalism Philosophers of religion (by date active) Ancient and medieval Anselm of Canterbury Augustine of Hippo Avicenna Averroes Boethius Gaudapada Gaunilo of Marmoutiers Pico della Mirandola Heraclitus King James VI and I Marcion of Sinope Maimonides Adi Shankara Thomas Aquinas William of Ockham Early modern Augustin Calmet René Descartes Blaise Pascal Desiderius Erasmus Baruch Spinoza Nicolas Malebranche Gottfried W Leibniz William Wollaston Thomas Chubb David Hume Baron d'Holbach Immanuel Kant Johann G Herder 1800 1850 Friedrich Schleiermacher Karl C F Krause Georg W F Hegel Thomas Carlyle William Whewell Ludwig Feuerbach Søren Kierkegaard Karl Marx Albrecht Ritschl Afrikan Spir 1880 1900 Ernst Haeckel W K Clifford Friedrich Nietzsche Harald Høffding William James Vladimir Solovyov Ernst Troeltsch Rudolf Otto Lev Shestov Sergei Bulgakov Pavel Florensky Ernst Cassirer Joseph Maréchal 1920 postwar George Santayana Bertrand Russell Martin Buber René Guénon Paul Tillich Karl Barth Emil Brunner Rudolf Bultmann Gabriel Marcel Reinhold Niebuhr Charles Hartshorne Mircea Eliade Frithjof Schuon J L Mackie Walter Kaufmann Martin Lings Peter Geach George I Mavrodes William Alston Antony Flew 1970 1990 2010 William L Rowe Dewi Z Phillips Alvin Plantinga Anthony Kenny Nicholas Wolterstorff Richard Swinburne Robert Merrihew Adams Ravi Zacharias Peter van Inwagen Daniel Dennett Loyal Rue Jean-Luc Marion William Lane Craig Ali Akbar Rashad Alexander Pruss Related topics Criticism of religion Desacralization of knowledge Ethics in religion Exegesis History of religion Religion Religious language Religious philosophy Relationship between religion and science Faith and rationality Portal Category v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7889cf5cc‐q8jnh
Cached time: 20250818113626
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.458 seconds
Real time usage: 1.792 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9881/1000000
Revision size: 65515/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 542385/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 10278/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 44/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 412320/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.874/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 28206767/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1390.512      1 -total
 41.19%  572.777      1 Template:Reflist
 13.39%  186.137     39 Template:Cite_book
 10.23%  142.273     20 Template:Cite_web
  9.17%  127.467     26 Template:Navbox
  7.46%  103.689      3 Template:In_lang
  6.94%   96.521      1 Template:God
  6.74%   93.717      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  6.54%   90.919     10 Template:Fix
  4.80%   66.784      4 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:19195836:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818113626 and revision id 1306555551. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Polytheism&oldid=1306555551 " Categories : Polytheism Philosophy of religion Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list CS1 Greek-language sources (el) All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from November 2014 CS1: abbreviated year range CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 maint: location missing publisher Webarchive template wayback links Articles with French-language sources (fr) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from May 2024 Articles lacking reliable references from July 2022 All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from July 2022 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from April 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2011 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2010 All articles with self-published sources Articles with self-published sources from February 2020 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from May 2024 CS1 Mongolian-language sources (mn) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1 Turkish-language sources (tr) Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 11:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Polytheism 122 languages Add topic

