Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Shoring structures Toggle Shoring structures subsection 1.1 Gallery 2 Excavation 3 Civil engineering use 4 Military use 5 Equipment 6 Mass haul planning 7 See also 8 Calculation software 9 References 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Earthworks (engineering) 30 languages العربية Boarisch Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Português Română Русский සිංහල Slovenčina Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Works that re-shape the earth's surface This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Earthworks" engineering – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Caterpillar D10 bulldozer at work Earthworks are engineering works created through the processing of parts of the earth's surface involving quantities of soil or unformed rock .

Shoring structures [ edit ] An incomplete list of possible temporary or permanent geotechnical shoring structures that may be designed and utilised as part of earthworks: Mechanically stabilized earth Earth anchor Cliff stabilization Grout curtain Retaining wall Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback (geotechnical) Trench shoring Caisson Dam Gabion Ground freezing Gallery [ edit ] Mechanically stabilized earth Grout curtain Retaining wall types Soil nailing Tieback Trench shoring Caisson Dam Gabions Ground freezing Excavation [ edit ] Main article: Digging Earth moving equipment ( c.

1922 ) Flattened and leveled construction site.

Road roller in the background.

Excavation may be classified by type of material: [ 1 ] : 13.1 Topsoil excavation Earth excavation Rock excavation Muck excavation – this usually contains excess water and unsuitable soil Unclassified excavation – this is any combination of material types Excavation may be classified by the purpose: [ 1 ] : 13.1, 13.2 Stripping Roadway excavation Drainage or structure excavation Bridge excavation Channel excavation Footing excavation Borrow excavation Dredge excavation Underground excavation Civil engineering use [ edit ] Typical earthworks include road construction , railway beds , causeways , dams , levees , canals , and berms . Other common earthworks are land grading to reconfigure the topography of a site, or to stabilize slopes.

Geofoam is a new lightweight earthworks technique used to build a bridge overpass on weak soil near Montreal .

Military use [ edit ] Earthworks ditch and rampart in Germany - age prehistorical prior to 300 BC In military engineering , earthworks are, more specifically, types of fortifications constructed from soil. Although soil is not very strong, it is cheap enough that huge quantities can be used, generating formidable structures. Examples of older earthwork fortifications include moats , sod walls , motte-and-bailey castles, and hill forts . Modern examples include trenches and berms .

Equipment [ edit ] Heavy construction equipment is usually used due to the amounts of material to be moved — up to millions of cubic metres. Earthwork construction was revolutionized by the development of the ( Fresno ) scraper and other earth-moving machines such as the loader , the dump truck , the grader , the bulldozer , the backhoe , and the dragline excavator .

Mass haul planning [ edit ] Excavation of over 76 million cubic metres (23 million cubic metres of which was additional to the planned amount due to landslides) for the Culebra Cut, Panama canal construction photo taken c.

1907 Engineers need to concern themselves with issues of geotechnical engineering (such as soil density and strength) and with quantity estimation to ensure that soil volumes in the cuts match those of the fills , while minimizing the distance of movement. In the past, these calculations were done by hand using a slide rule and with methods such as Simpson's rule . Earthworks cost is a function of hauled amount x hauled distance. The goal of mass haul planning is to determine these amounts and the goal of mass haul optimization is to minimize either or both.

[ 2 ] Now they can be performed with a computer and specialized software, including optimisation on haul cost and not haul distance (as haul cost is not proportional to haul distance).

See also [ edit ] Contour trenching – Conservation technique in agriculture Cut and fill – Earthmoving technique to minimize labor Earth movers – Vehicles designed for executing construction tasks Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets , construction/engineering vehicles used for earthworks civil engineering Earth structure – Building or other structure made largely from soil Gabion – Cage full of rock Keyline design – Landscaping to optimize water usage Land restoration – Process of restoring land to a different state Grading (earthworks) – In civil engineering, creating a profile Spoil tip – Pile built of accumulated spoil Subgrade – Material underneath a road or track Terrace (earthworks) – Terrain formed by tiered platforms Calculation software [ edit ] Earthworks cut and fill map and estimation summary produced by Kubla Cubed Earthwork software is generally a subset of CAD software, in which case it often an add-on to a more general CAD package such as AutoCAD .

[ 3 ] In that case, earthwork software is principally used to calculate cut and fill volumes which are then used for producing material and time estimates. Most products offer additional functionality such as the ability to takeoff terrain elevation from plans (using contour lines and spot heights ); produce shaded cut and fill maps; produce cross sections and visualize terrain in 3D.

[ 4 ] The means by which volumes are calculated in software can differ quite considerably leading to potentially different results with the same input data.  Many software products use methods based on triangulated irregular networks (TINS) and triangular prism volume algorithms, however other calculation methods are in use based on rationalizing elevations into high density grids or cross-sections.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] A few programs are specialised in earthworks transport optimization and planning the construction works.

References [ edit ] ^ a b Frederick S. Merritt, M. Kent Loftin, Jonathan T. Ricketts, Standard Handbook for Civil Engineers, Fourth Edition , McGraw-Hill Book Company, 1995.

^ "Earthworks cost optimization through mass haul planning" . www.topconplanning.com. Archived from the original on 2 April 2015 . Retrieved 7 June 2015 .

^ "Taking the Measure of Methods for Estimating Earthwork Volumes - Forester Network" .

Forester Network . Retrieved 2016-02-09 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ "Vertigraph, Inc. -- Automating the Takeoff & Estimating Process" .

www.vertigraph.com . Archived from the original on 2015-12-15 . Retrieved 2016-02-09 .

^ "How to Estimate Cut and Fill Volumes for Earthworks Projects | Grid Method, Cross Section Method, Earthworks Software" .

www.kublasoftware.com . Retrieved 2016-02-09 .

^ "Vertigraph, Inc. -- Calculating Cut and Fill Quantities : Modern Techniques and Best Practices" .

vertigraph.com . Archived from the original on 2016-01-31 . Retrieved 2016-02-10 .

^ Cheng, Jian-chuan; Jiang, Long-jian (2013-11-06).

"Accuracy Comparison of Roadway Earthwork Computation between 3D and 2D Methods" .

Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences . Intelligent and Integrated Sustainable Multimodal Transportation Systems Proceedings from the 13th COTA International Conference of Transportation Professionals (CICTP2013).

96 : 1277– 1285.

doi : 10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.08.145 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Earthworks at Wikimedia Commons Saving Old Dirt: The Preservation of Earthworks at the American Battlefield Trust v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Portal : Engineering Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic 2 Israel NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐8nw4t
Cached time: 20250814215539
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.607 seconds
Real time usage: 0.807 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3890/1000000
Revision size: 10053/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 85455/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 7041/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 49410/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.394/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24627178/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  687.959      1 -total
 24.62%  169.354     11 Template:Annotated_link
 18.73%  128.880      1 Template:Reflist
 13.72%   94.386      5 Template:Cite_web
 13.03%   89.664      5 Template:Navbox
 12.33%   84.792      1 Template:Geotechnical_engineering
 10.67%   73.371      1 Template:More_citations_needed
 10.00%   68.810      1 Template:Ambox
  9.72%   66.892      1 Template:Short_description
  5.49%   37.799      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1096021:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215539 and revision id 1301765907. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Earthworks_(engineering)&oldid=1301765907 " Categories : Civil engineering Earthworks (engineering) Fortification (architectural elements) Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from July 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2015 All articles needing additional references Pages displaying short descriptions of redirect targets via Module:Annotated link Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 July 2025, at 15:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Earthworks (engineering) 30 languages Add topic

