Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Jurisdiction-specific details Toggle Jurisdiction-specific details subsection 1.1 Armenia 1.2 Belgium 1.3 Canada 1.4 Canon law (Catholic Church) 1.5 France 1.6 Germany 1.7 Hong Kong 1.8 Hungary 1.9 India 1.10 Ireland, Republic of 1.11 Isle of Man 1.12 Italy 1.13 Japan 1.14 Kenya 1.15 Luxembourg 1.16 Macau 1.17 Malta 1.18 Mexico 1.19 Poland 1.20 Portugal 1.21 Romania 1.22 Spain 1.23 Sweden 1.24 Turkey 1.25 United Kingdom 1.26 United States 2 References 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Promulgation 21 languages العربية Български Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano Қазақша Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Act of formally declaring a new law after its enactment For the term in Catholic canon law, see Promulgation (Catholic canon law) .

Promulgation is the formal proclamation or the declaration that a new statutory or administrative law is enacted after its final approval .

[ 1 ] In some jurisdictions , this additional step is necessary before the law can take effect.

After a new law is approved, it is announced to the public through the publication of government gazettes and/or on official government bulletins. National laws of extraordinary importance to the public may be announced by the head of state or head of government on a national broadcast. Local laws are usually announced in local newspapers and published in bulletins or compendia of municipal regulations.

[ citation needed ] Jurisdiction-specific details [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( January 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Armenia [ edit ] Main article: Law of Armenia Bills are enacted by the President of Armenia and published in the Official Gazette of Armenia .

Belgium [ edit ] Main article: Law of Belgium Statutes are promulgated by the King of the Belgians [ 2 ] and published in the Belgian Official Journal . Decrees and Ordinances are promulgated by the different Regional and Community governments and published in the Belgian Official Journal.

Canada [ edit ] Main article: Law of Canada Canadian federal Acts of Parliament, orders in council, proclamations, public notices, official appointments and proposed regulations from the Government of Canada are promulgated in the Canada Gazette (French: Gazette du Canada ).

[ 3 ] The Canada Gazette consists of three parts that are published separately. Part 1 promulgates public notices, official appointments and proposed regulations; Part 2 promulgates regulations; and Part 3 promulgates Acts of Parliament.

[ 4 ] Each province and territory has its own publication in which their laws, regulations, and other statutory instruments are promulgated.

Province Publication [ 5 ] Alberta The Alberta Gazette British Columbia The British Columbia Gazette Manitoba The Manitoba Gazette / Gazette du Manitoba New Brunswick The Royal Gazette / Gazette royal Newfoundland and Labrador The Newfoundland and Labrador Gazette Northwest Territories Northwest Territories Gazette / Gazette des Territoires du Nord-Ouest Nova Scotia Royal Gazette Part I Part II Nunavut Nunavut Gazette / Gazette du Nunavut Ontario The Ontario Gazette / La Gazette de l'Ontario Prince Edward Island Royal Gazette Quebec Gazette officielle du Québec : Partie 1—Avis juridiques Partie 2—Lois et règlements Part 2—Laws and Regulations Saskatchewan The Saskatchewan Gazette Yukon The Yukon Gazette / La Gazette du Yukon Canon law (Catholic Church) [ edit ] Part of a series on the Canon law of the Catholic Church Ius vigens (current law) 1983 Code of Canon Law Omnium in mentem Magnum principium Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Ad tuendam fidem Ex corde Ecclesiae Indulgentiarum Doctrina Praedicate evangelium Veritatis gaudium Custom Matrimonial nullity trial reforms of Pope Francis Documents of the Second Vatican Council Christus Dominus Lumen gentium Optatam totius Orientalium ecclesiarum Presbyterorum ordinis Sacrosanctum concilium Precepts of the Church Legal history Jus antiquum ( c.

33 –1140) Ancient Church Orders Didache The Apostolic Constitutions Canons of the Apostles Collections of ancient canons Collectiones canonum Dionysianae Collectio canonum quadripartita Collectio canonum Quesnelliana Collectio canonum Wigorniensis Gelasian Decree Symmachian forgeries Pseudo-Isidorian Decretals Donation of Constantine Gregorian Reform Lay investiture controversy Dictatus papae Libertas ecclesiae Plenitudo potestatis Jus novum ( c.

1140 –1563) Corpus Juris Canonici Decretum Gratiani Decretist Canon Episcopi Margaritae Jus commune Decretals of Gregory IX Decretalist Regulæ Juris Extravagantes Liber Septimus Jus novissimum ( c.

1563 –1918) Council of Trent Benedictus Deus Tametsi Apostolicae Sedis moderationi Jus codicis (1918-present) 1917 Code of Canon Law Ecclesiae Sanctae 1983 Code of Canon Law Other Contractum trinius Papal judge-delegate Right of option Eastern law Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches Eastern Canonical Reforms of Pius XII Nomocanon Eparchy Exarchate Ordinariate for Eastern Catholic faithful Protosyncellus Liturgical law Latin Church General Roman Calendar Ranking of liturgical days in the Roman Rite General Instruction of the Roman Missal Code of Rubrics Sacrosanctum Concilium Mysterii Paschalis Musicam sacram Scripturarum thesaurus Liturgiam authenticam Quattuor abhinc annos Ecclesia Dei Summorum Pontificum Magnum principium Traditionis custodes Red Mass Holy day of obligation Sacramental law Communicatio in sacris Ex opere operato Omnium in mentem Validity and liceity Sacraments Holy Orders Impediment (Catholic canon law) Abstemius Defect of birth Obligation of celibacy Nullity of Sacred Ordination Apostolicae curae Dimissorial letters Episcopal consecrators Approbation (Catholic canon law) Confession Penitential canons Paenitentiale Theodori Seal of the Confessional Internal and external forum Note on the importance of the internal forum and the inviolability of the Sacramental Seal Apostolic Penitentiary Canon penitentiary Complicit absolution Sacramentum Poenitentiae Eucharist Eucharistic discipline Canon 915 Celebret Mass stipend Sacramentals Indulgence Indulgentiarum doctrina Sacred places Altars Major basilica Minor basilica Oratory (chapel) Sacred times Feast days Fast days and abstinence Paenitemini Holy day of obligation Matrimonial law Canonical form (Latin Church) Tametsi Ne Temere Banns of marriage Declaration of Nullity Dignitas connubii Matrimonial Nullity Trial Reforms of Pope Francis Vetitum Defender of the Bond Impediments to Marriage Affinity Clandestinity Impediment of crime Disparity of cult Ligamen Public propriety Matrimonial dispensation Ratum sed non consummatum Sanatio in radice Natural marriage Pauline privilege Petrine privilege Supreme authority, particular churches , and canonical structures Supreme authority of the Church Roman Pontiff Papal conclave College of Bishops Supra-diocesan/eparchal structures College of Cardinals Conference of bishops Synod of Bishops Particular churches Churches sui juris Latin Church Eastern Catholic Churches Local particular churches Appointment of bishops Abbacy nullius Apostolic vicariate Apostolic vicar Apostolic administration Apostolic administrator Diocese/Archdiocese Aeque principaliter Cathedraticum In persona episcopi Diocesan Curia Moderator of the Curia Chancery Deanery Vicar forane Eparchy Eparchal curia Military ordinariate Mission sui juris Personal ordinariate Anglicanorum Coetibus Juridic persons Parish Team of priests in solidum Collegiate church Parish register Lay trusteeism Roman Curia Dicastery Congregation Pontifical council Personal prelature Types of membership of Opus Dei Association of the Christian faithful Vicar general Quinquennial visit ad limina Jurisprudence Canonical coronation Canonically crowned images Computation of time Custom Delegata potestas non potest delegari Derogation Dispensation Taxa Innocentiana Faculty Indult Impediment Donation Interpretation Pontifical Council for Legislative Texts Jurisdiction Peritus Obreption & subreption Obrogation Promulgation Resignation of the Roman Pontiff Sede vacante Simony Vacatio legis Validity and liceity Visitation Apostolic visitor Philosophy, theology, and fundamental theory of Catholic canon law Theology Ecclesiology Treatise on Law Determinatio Temporal goods (property) Benefice Cathedraticum Contract law Mass stipend Stole fee Temporalities Law of persons Person (Catholic canon law) Formal act of defection from the Catholic Church Canonical age Emancipation Exemption Heresy Clerics Secular clergy Regular clergy Obligation of celibacy Clerics and public office Incardination and excardination Laicization (dispensation) Canonical faculties Office Canonical provision Canonical election Juridic and physical persons Jus patronatus Associations of the faithful Consecrated life Canonical documents Acta Apostolicae Sedis Acta Sanctae Sedis Censor librorum Imprimatur Imprimi potest Notary Protonotary apostolic Apostolic constitution Canon Concordat Decree Decretal Encyclical Motu proprio Ordinance Papal brief Papal bull Penitential Positive law Rescript Parish register Ecclesiastical Latin Penal law Canon 1324 Canon 1397 §2 Censure (Catholic canon law) De delictis gravioribus Complicit absolution Crimen sollicitationis Excommunication List of excommunicable offences in the Catholic Church List of people excommunicated by the Catholic Church List of cardinals excommunicated by the Catholic Church Interdict Laicization (penal) Latae sententiae and ferendae sententiae Lifetime of prayer and penance Canonical admonitions Ecclesiastical prison Procedural law Pars statica (tribunals & ministers/parties) Tribunals Supreme Tribunal of the Apostolic Signatura Tribunal of the Roman Rota Apostolic Penitentiary Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith Ministers of Justice Judicial Vicar / Officialis Auditor Parties Defender of the Bond Procurator Pars dynamica (trial procedure) Dignitas connubii (matrimonial causes) Appeal as from an abuse Presumption Penal procedure Vos estis lux mundi Canonization Congregation for the Causes of Saints Maiorem hac dilectionem Advocatus Diaboli Oblatio vitae Positio Beatification and canonization process in 1914 Election of the Roman Pontiff Current law Universi Dominici gregis Papal renunciation Reforms of Pope Benedict XVI Historical Cum proxime Jus exclusivae Papal appointment Aeterni Patris Filius Romano Pontifici eligendo Ingravescentem aetatem Ubi periculum Quia propter Legal practice and scholarship List of legal abbreviations Academic degrees Licentiate of Canon Law Doctor of Canon Law Doctor of both laws Journals and Professional Societies Canon Law Society of America The Jurist Faculties of canon law Catholic University of America School of Canon Law Canonists Medieval Gratian Hostiensis Jean Lemoine Raymond of Penyafort Rufinus Johannes Teutonicus Geoffrey of Trani Burchard of Worms Brocard Modern & Contemporary Eugenio Corecco John D. Faris Pietro Gasparri Ladislas Orsy Edward N. Peters Law of consecrated life Solemn vow Exclaustration Manifestation of Conscience Canonical erection of a house of religious Pontifical right Diocesan right Congregation for Institutes of Consecrated Life and Societies of Apostolic Life Institute of consecrated life Religious institute Congregation Order Monasticism Canons regular Mendicant orders Clerics regular Secular institute Cum Sanctissimus Primo Feliciter Provida Mater Ecclesia Society of apostolic life Decretum laudis Catholicism portal v t e Main article: Promulgation (Catholic canon law) A canonical law issued by the Pope (or with his consent in the case of laws issued by an ecumenical council or congregation ) is promulgated when it is published in Acta Apostolicae Sedis , and by default has the force of law three months after promulgation.

[ 6 ] Laws issued by bishops and particular councils are promulgated in various ways but by default take effect one month after promulgation.

[ 7 ] According to canon 7 of the 1983 Code of Canon Law , Lex instituitur cum promulgatur ("A law is instituted when it is promulgated").

[ 8 ] This is an ancient provision in Latin Church canon law, dating in its plural form to the Latin formulation of the great 12th century codifier of canon law, Gratian : Leges instituuntur cum promulgantur ("Laws are instituted when they are promulgated").

[ citation needed ] France [ edit ] Main article: Law of France The President of France promulgates law (he may ask Parliament to reconsider the law, but only once).

Germany [ edit ] Main article: Law of Germany The President of Germany has the duty to duly promulgate and issue laws, unless the President deems them "evidently unconstitutional ". The question to what degree they must be convinced of the constitutional violation to deny promulgation is hotly debated.

Hong Kong [ edit ] Main article: Law of Hong Kong Bills have to be signed and promulgated by the Chief Executive , and be announced by the government in the gazette .

Hungary [ edit ] Main article: Constitution of Hungary Legislative proposals adopted by the National Assembly obtain the force of law only after they are signed by the President of the Republic and published in the official gazette Magyar Közlöny .

India [ edit ] Main articles: Ordinance (India) and Law of India If at any time the Indian Parliament is not in session, the President of India on the recommendation of the Union Cabinet may promulgate an ordinance , which will have the same effect as an Act of Parliament . However, such ordinance will be presented before the parliament for final approval. They can only be issued when Parliament is not  in session. They enable the Indian government to take immediate legislative action. Ordinances cease to operate either if Parliament does not approve of them within six weeks of reassembly, or if disapproving resolutions are passed by both Houses. It is also compulsory for a session of Parliament to be held within six months.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] [ 11 ] Ireland, Republic of [ edit ] Main article: Law of the Republic of Ireland All laws passed by the Oireachtas are promulgated by a notice in the Iris Oifigiúil published by the President of Ireland , as required by the Constitution of Ireland .

[ 12 ] Isle of Man [ edit ] Main article: Manx law By ancient custom an Act of Tynwald , the legislature of the island, did not come into force until it had been "promulgated" at an open-air sitting of Tynwald , usually held on Tynwald Hill at St John's on St John's Day (24 June) but since the adoption of the Gregorian calendar in 1753 [ 13 ] on 5 July (or on the following Monday if 5 July is a Saturday or Sunday [ 14 ] ). Promulgation originally consisted of the reading of the Act in English and Manx , but after 1865 the reading of the title of the Act and a summary of each section were sufficient.

[ 15 ] This was reduced in 1895 to the titles and a memorandum of the object and purport of the Act, [ 16 ] and since 1988 only the short title and a summary of the long title have been read.

[ 17 ] An emergency procedure enabling an Act to come into force on  royal assent being announced at an ordinary sitting of Tynwald , subject to its being promulgated within 12 months, was introduced in 1916; [ 18 ] since 1976 this has been the 'default' procedure, [ 19 ] and since 1988 an Act ceases to have effect unless promulgated within 18 months after  royal assent is announced in Tynwald.

[ 20 ] Italy [ edit ] Main article: Law of Italy The President of the Republic promulgates law. The President remands a law to the Chambers of Parliament, with an explanation, and asks for reconsideration—but must promulgate the law if it is re-approved without modification.

Japan [ edit ] Main article: Law of Japan The Emperor of Japan promulgates laws passed by the Diet . The Emperor cannot refuse to promulgate a law.

Kenya [ edit ] Main article: Constitution of Kenya Promulgation is performed by the President.

Luxembourg [ edit ] Article 34 of the constitution of Luxembourg requires the grand duke or duchess to promulgate a new law for it to take effect.

Macau [ edit ] Main article: Legal system of Macau Bills have to approved by the Legislative Assembly, signed and promulgated by the Chief Executive . They must be published in the Official Gazette Boletim Oficial .

Malta [ edit ] Main article: Law of Malta When a bill is approved by the House of Representatives of Malta , it is presented to the President of Malta for his assent. According to constitutional obligation he shall without delay signify that he assents and hence promulgate the said bill into a parliamentary act. The parliamentary act is then published in the Malta Government Gazette , and thus comes into force [ citation needed ] .

Mexico [ edit ] Main article: Law of Mexico A law is approved by Congress, signed by the President, and published in the Official Diary of the Federation ( Spanish : Diario Oficial de la Federación ), or DOF. Each law in its Transitional Articles ( Transitorios ) states when the Law takes effect ( entra en vigor ) and, when applicable, what law it cancels and replaces. Regulations are prepared by the Executive branch in order to establish the administration of the Law. They are signed by the President and published in the DOF.

Poland [ edit ] Main article: Law of Poland Laws have to be promulgated by the President of the Republic in the Dziennik Ustaw journal. The President may refer to the Constitutional Tribunal ; if he has not made reference, he may refer the bill to the Sejm ( veto ) for further reconsideration. The bill shall then be promulgated.

Portugal [ edit ] Main article: Law of Portugal The laws (statutes issued by the Parliament ) and the decree-laws (statutes issued by the Government ) have to be promulgated by the President of Portugal to take effect. The promulgation is the act by which the President solemnly testifies the existence of a rule of law and intimates its observation. The President may however decide not to promulgate the bill and to veto it with a political or legal justification. After the promulgation, the statutes are published in the Diário da República (official journal), with the laws needing a Government referendum before.

Romania [ edit ] Main article: Law of Romania Bills have to be promulgated by the President and afterwards published in the official gazette, Monitorul Oficial .

Spain [ edit ] Article 91 of the Spanish Constitution establishes that bills, upon being passed by the Cortes Generales ,  must be sanctioned (i.e., given royal assent ) by the King of Spain within two weeks of their passing. The King will then promulgate and immediately publish them in the official gazette, the Boletín Oficial del Estado .

Sweden [ edit ] Main article: Law of Sweden Laws and secondary legislation are promulgated by the Government of Sweden and are published in the Swedish Code of Statutes ( Swedish : Svensk författningssamling ).

Turkey [ edit ] Main article: Law of Turkey Bills are promulgated by the President of the Republic and published in the official gazette, Resmi Gazete .

United Kingdom [ edit ] Acts of Parliament in the United Kingdom are promulgated when given royal assent by the King . The sovereign may appear personally in the House of Lords or may appoint Lords Commissioners , who announce that royal assent has been granted at a ceremony held at the Palace of Westminster for this purpose. However, royal assent is usually granted less ceremonially by letters patent .

United States [ edit ] Main article: Law of the United States Acts of Congress are given the force of law, in one of the following ways: signed by the President of the United States ; neither signed nor vetoed by the President within ten days from reception (excluding Sundays) while the Congress is in session; or, when both the Senate and the House of Representatives vote, by a two-thirds majority in each chamber, to override a presidential veto during its session.

[ 21 ] In United States administrative law , a federal regulation may be said to be formally promulgated when it appears in the Federal Register and after the public-comment period concludes.

Amendments to the United States Constitution attain force of law "when ratified by the legislatures of three fourths of the several states, or by conventions in three fourths thereof, as the one or the other mode of ratification may be proposed by the Congress".

[ 22 ] When the requisite number of state ratifications has been reached (currently 38), it is the duty of the Archivist of the United States to issue a certificate proclaiming a particular amendment duly ratified and part of the Constitution.

[ 23 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Promulgate Law & Legal Definition" .

USLegal.com . US Legal, Inc . Retrieved October 28, 2015 .

^ Article 109 of the Belgian Constitution ^ "Understand the Canada Gazette" .

Government of Canada . 13 May 2018. Archived from the original on 8 August 2019 . Retrieved 8 August 2018 .

^ Deavy, Betty; Gauld, Norma (Summer 1994).

"The Canada Gazette" .

Canadian Parliamentary Review .

17 (2): 30– 32.

^ "Canada Gazette resources" .

Government of Canada . 24 July 2019. Archived from the original on 8 August 2019.

^ can. 8 §1, CIC , 1983 ^ can. 8 §2, CIC , 1983 ^ Canon 7, 1983 CIC ^ Chowdhury, Kavita (23 December 2014).

"Govt points to Ordinance route for crucial bills" .

Business Standard . Retrieved 17 November 2015 .

^ "The Constitution (Thirty-eighth Amendment) Act, 1975, The Constitution of India" .

^ List of ordinances 1950–2014 ^ Articles 13.3.2° and 25.4.2° ^ Gregorian Calendar Act 1753 Statutes of the Isle of Man , vol. I, Douglas, 1883, pp.

258– 267 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Statutory Time etc. Act 1883 Statutes of the Isle of Man , vol. V, p. 209 ^ Acts of Tynwald (Promulgation) Act 1865 Statutes of the Isle of Man , vol. III, p. 176 ^ An Act to further alter the mode of promulgating Acts of Tynwald Statutes of the Isle of Man , vol. VII, p. 1 ^ Promulgation Act 1988 sections 2, 3 and 5 ^ Acts of Tynwald (Emergency Promulgation) Act 1916 Statutes of the Isle of Man , vol. X, p. 31 ^ Interpretation Act 1976 section 10 ^ Promulgation Act 1988 section 3 ^ "1 U.S. Code § 106a - Promulgation of laws" . Legal Information Institute (LII) . Retrieved 2015-10-28 .

^ National Archives and Records Administration (15 August 2016).

"The Constitution of the United states Article V" .

archives.gov .

^ Pub. L.

98–497 External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of promulgation at Wiktionary Portal : Law NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐d49c7db49‐9xq7w
Cached time: 20250814215822
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.618 seconds
Real time usage: 0.780 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2595/1000000
Revision size: 17577/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 100364/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2861/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 31/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 68283/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.397/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 17168268/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  639.159      1 -total
 25.78%  164.777      1 Template:Reflist
 16.34%  104.416      1 Template:Canon_law
 16.26%  103.919      6 Template:Cite_web
 15.74%  100.619      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 15.47%   98.859      2 Template:Lang
 11.17%   71.404      1 Template:Short_description
  8.44%   53.954     23 Template:Main
  6.85%   43.795      3 Template:Fix
  6.18%   39.482      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:208645:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215822 and revision id 1276632460. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Promulgation&oldid=1276632460 " Categories : Promulgation Statutory law Administrative law Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2011 Articles needing additional references from January 2009 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Latin-language text Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2025 Articles containing Spanish-language text Articles containing Swedish-language text This page was last edited on 19 February 2025, at 23:38 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Promulgation 21 languages Add topic

