Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Members 2 Indigenous businesses 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Supply Nation Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia NGO that certifies Indigenous ownership of businesses in Australia Supply Nation (formerly the Australian Indigenous Minority Supplier Council ) is a non-profit organisation that aims to grow the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander business sector through the promotion of supplier diversity in Australia.

[ 1 ] The organisation was founded in 2009 by Michael McLeod and Dug Russell, co-founders of Message Stick Communications, with pilot funding from the federal government .

[ 2 ] Supply Nation certifies Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander businesses as being genuinely Indigenous by establishing that they are at least 51% owned, managed, and controlled by Indigenous Australians .

[ 3 ] Once an Indigenous business is certified it is able to use the Supply Nation certification logo on its marketing material, access the corporate and government Member database, and get discounted rates to Supply Nation events and workshops. Supply Nation has certified over 450 Indigenous businesses, covering nearly every industry sector.

[ 4 ] Supply Nation is part funded by the Federal Government, but gets the remainder of its funding by charging an annual membership fee to its corporate, government, and non-profit members.

[ 5 ] On 1 July 2015, Supply Nation launched a new publicly available directory of 50% or more Indigenous-owned businesses, called Indigenous Business Direct . As of August 2018, Supply Nation had over 1,500 Indigenous businesses registered or Certified on Indigenous Business Direct .

Members [ edit ] Becoming a member gives that company, non-profit organisation, or government agency access to Supply Nation services designed to boost that organisation's supplier diversity efforts.

[ 6 ] Members pay an annual fee depending on its size and structure. Since Supply Nation was founded, members have transacted over A$200M with Certified Suppliers, translating to a significant boost to the Indigenous business sector. According to the Supply Nation website, there are currently 268 Members.

[ 7 ] Indigenous businesses [ edit ] Indigenous businesses are Registered with Supply Nation first, which requires 50% minimum Indigenous ownership. Eligible businesses can then elect to be Certified, which requires 51% ownership, management and control by Indigenous people.

Category Registered suppliers Certified suppliers Indigenous ownership requirement 50% owned 51% owned, managed & controlled (trading evidence of $50k income in last 12 mths) Registered businesses are considered genuinely Indigenous for the purposes of the Indigenous Procurement Policy and are listed on Indigenous Business Direct. Certified Suppliers receive a number of other benefits from Supply Nation and are aligned to the International standards of minority ownership set by Supply Nation's sister councils in USA, Canada, South Africa, China and the UK.

The government organisation Indigenous Business Australia is also working towards the same cause by offering advice, workshops, support programmes, and funding to eligible Indigenous business owners.

[ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Supply Nation" .

Australian Government Department of Employment . Department of Employment. 2014 . Retrieved 23 July 2014 .

^ Natasha Mitchell (2014).

"Indigenous Enterprises" .

ABC Life Matters . Australian Broadcasting Corporation . Retrieved 23 July 2014 .

^ Indigenous Business Australia (2014).

"IBA Supply Nation" .

Australian Government, Indigenous Business Australia . Indigenous Business Australia . Retrieved 23 July 2014 .

{{ cite web }} : |author1= has generic name ( help ) ^ The Australian Government Department of Education, Employment and Workplace Relations (DEEWR).

"Annual Report 2012-2013" (PDF) .

Supply Nation . Retrieved 23 July 2014 .

^ Karvelas, Patricia (14 May 2013).

"Push for Preferential Treatment at G20 Summit" .

The Australian . Retrieved 23 July 2014 .

^ "Supply Nation CMS" .

Association Membership Software . AMS . Retrieved 23 July 2014 .

^ "Supply Nation Members" .

Supply Nation . Retrieved 3 September 2014 .

^ "Indigenous business" .

business.gov.au . 9 May 2019.

External links [ edit ] Official website Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Supply_Nation&oldid=1284707940 " Categories : 2009 establishments in Australia Organisations serving Indigenous Australians Hidden categories: Pages with non-numeric formatnum arguments CS1 errors: generic name Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from November 2019 Use Australian English from January 2020 All Wikipedia articles written in Australian English Official website not in Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 April 2025, at 06:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Supply Nation Add languages Add topic

