Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 Origins 2 Dialects Toggle Dialects subsection 2.1 Research 2.2 English regional 3 Features Toggle Features subsection 3.1 T-glottalling 3.2 R-dropping 3.3 Diphthongisation 3.3.1 North 3.3.2 South 3.4 People in groups 3.5 Negatives 4 Standard British English Toggle Standard British English subsection 4.1 History of standardisation 5 Relationship with Commonwealth English 6 See also 7 References Toggle References subsection 7.1 Notes 7.2 Citations 7.3 Bibliography 8 External links Toggle the table of contents British English 56 languages العربية Aragonés Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Čeština Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar مصرى Bahasa Melayu ꯃꯤꯇꯩ ꯂꯣꯟ Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Scots Simple English کوردی Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikifunctions Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Set of varieties of English language "BrE" redirects here. For other uses, see BRE .

British English Native to United Kingdom (originally England ) Region British Isles Ethnicity British people Language family Indo-European Germanic West Germanic North Sea Germanic Anglo-Frisian Anglic English British English Early forms Proto-English Old English Middle English Early Modern English Standard forms Received Pronunciation Dialects English language in England Scottish English Welsh English Ulster English Hiberno-English Bermudian English Falkland Islands English Cayman Islands English Gibraltarian English Manx English Channel Island English Writing system Latin ( English alphabet ) Unified English Braille Official status Official language in United Nations (with Oxford spelling ) Language codes ISO 639-3 – IETF en-GB [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Comparison of American and British English American English British English Keyboards Grammar Speech Standard accents Word pronunciations Spelling Vocabulary Glossary of American terms not widely used in the United Kingdom Glossary of British terms not widely used in the United States List of garments having different names in American and British English Lists of words having different meanings in American and British English: ( A–L M–Z ) Works Works with different titles in the UK and US v t e British English [ a ] is the set of varieties of the English language native to the United Kingdom , especially Great Britain .

[ 6 ] More narrowly, it can refer specifically to the English language in England , or, more broadly, to the collective dialects of English throughout the United Kingdom taken as a single umbrella variety, for instance additionally incorporating Scottish English , Welsh English , and Northern Irish English .

Tom McArthur in the Oxford Guide to World English acknowledges that British English shares "all the ambiguities and tensions [with] the word 'British' and as a result can be used and interpreted in two ways, more broadly or more narrowly, within a range of blurring and ambiguity".

Variations exist in formal (both written and spoken) English in the United Kingdom. For example, the adjective wee is almost exclusively used in parts of Scotland, north-east England, Northern Ireland, Ireland, and occasionally Yorkshire , whereas the adjective little is predominant elsewhere. Nevertheless, there is a meaningful degree of uniformity in written English within the United Kingdom, and this could be described by the term British English . The forms of spoken English, however, vary considerably more than in most other areas of the world where English is spoken [ 7 ] and so a uniform concept of British English is more difficult to apply to the spoken language.

Globally, countries that are former British colonies or members of the Commonwealth tend to follow British English, [ 8 ] as is the case for English used by European Union institutions.

[ 9 ] The United Nations also uses British English with Oxford spelling .

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] In China, both British English and American English are taught.

[ 12 ] The UK government actively teaches and promotes English around the world and operates in over 100 countries .

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] History Main article: History of the English language Origins Further information: History of the English language , Proto-Indo-European , Proto-Germanic , Proto-West Germanic , Proto-English , Old English , Middle English , Early Modern English , and Modern English English is a West Germanic language that originated from the Anglo-Frisian dialects brought to Britain by Germanic settlers from various parts of what is now northwest Germany and the northern Netherlands. The resident population at this time was generally speaking Common Brittonic —the insular variety of Continental Celtic , which was influenced by the Roman occupation. This group of languages ( Welsh , Cornish , Cumbric ) cohabited alongside English into the modern period, but due to their remoteness from the Germanic languages , influence on English was notably limited . However, the degree of influence remains debated, and it has recently been argued that its grammatical influence accounts for the substantial innovations noted between English and the other West Germanic languages.

[ 16 ] Initially, Old English was a diverse group of dialects, reflecting the varied origins of the Anglo-Saxon kingdoms of England. One of these dialects, Late West Saxon , eventually came to dominate. The original Old English was then influenced by two waves of invasion: the first was by speakers of the Scandinavian branch of the Germanic family, who settled in parts of Britain in the eighth and ninth centuries; the second was the Normans in the 11th century, who spoke Old Norman and ultimately developed an English variety of this called Anglo-Norman . These two invasions caused English to become "mixed" to some degree (though it was never a truly mixed language in the strictest sense of the word; mixed languages arise from the cohabitation of speakers of different languages, who develop a hybrid tongue for basic communication).

The more idiomatic, concrete and descriptive English is, the more it is from Anglo-Saxon origins. The more intellectual and abstract English is, the more it contains Latin and French influences, e.g. swine (like the Germanic schwein ) is the animal in the field bred by the occupied Anglo-Saxons and pork (like the French porc ) is the animal at the table eaten by the occupying Normans.

[ 17 ] Another example is the Anglo-Saxon cu meaning cow, and the French bœuf meaning beef.

[ 18 ] Cohabitation with the Scandinavians resulted in a significant grammatical simplification and lexical enrichment of the Anglo-Frisian core of English; the later Norman occupation led to the grafting onto that Germanic core of a more elaborate layer of words from the Romance branch of the European languages. This Norman influence entered English largely through the courts and government. Thus, English developed into a "borrowing" language of great flexibility and with a huge vocabulary .

Dialects See also: English language in England , Scottish English , Welsh English , Northern Irish English , Irish English , Anguillan Creole , Montserrat Creole , Bermudian English , Falkland Islands English , Cayman Islands English , Gibraltarian English , Manx English , and Channel Island English This article contains phonetic transcriptions in the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) . For an introductory guide on IPA symbols, see Help:IPA . For the distinction between [ ] , / / and ⟨ ⟩, see IPA § Brackets and transcription delimiters .

Dialects and accents vary amongst the four countries of the United Kingdom , as well as within the countries themselves.

The major divisions are normally classified as English English (or English as spoken in England (which is itself broadly grouped into Southern English , West Country , East and West Midlands English and Northern English ), Northern Irish English (in Northern Ireland), Welsh English (not to be confused with the Welsh language ), and Scottish English (not to be confused with the Scots language or Scottish Gaelic ). Each group includes a range of dialects, some markedly different from others. The various British dialects also differ in the words that they have borrowed from other languages.

Around the middle of the 15th century, there were points where within the 5 major dialects there were almost 500 ways to spell the word though .

[ 19 ] Research Following its last major survey of English Dialects (1949–1950), the University of Leeds has started work on a new project. In May 2007 the Arts and Humanities Research Council awarded a grant to Leeds to study British regional dialects.

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] The team are [ b ] sifting through a large collection of examples of regional slang words and phrases turned up by the "Voices project" run by the BBC , in which they invited the public to send in examples of English still spoken throughout the country. The BBC Voices project also collected hundreds of news articles about how the British speak English from swearing through to items on language schools. This information will also be collated and analysed by Johnson's team both for content and for where it was reported. "Perhaps the most remarkable finding in the Voices study is that the English language is as diverse as ever, despite our increased mobility and constant exposure to other accents and dialects through TV and radio".

[ 21 ] When discussing the award of the grant in 2007, Leeds University stated: that they were "very pleased"—and indeed, "well chuffed"—at receiving their generous grant. He could, of course, have been "bostin" if he had come from the Black Country , or if he was a Scouser he would have been well "made up" over so many spondoolicks, because as a Geordie might say, £460,000 is a "canny load of chink".

[ 22 ] English regional This section needs expansion with: details about other different regional accents and dialects. You can help by making an edit request adding to it .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page .

( April 2024 ) Most people in Britain speak with a regional accent or dialect. However, about 2% of Britons speak with an accent called Received Pronunciation [ 23 ] (also called "the King's English", "Oxford English" and " BBC English" [ 24 ] ), that is essentially region-less.

[ 25 ] [ 26 ] It derives from a mixture of the Midlands and Southern dialects spoken in London in the early modern period.

[ 26 ] It is frequently used as a model for teaching English to foreign learners.

[ 26 ] In the South East, there are significantly different accents; the Cockney accent spoken by some East Londoners is strikingly different from Received Pronunciation (RP). Cockney rhyming slang can be (and was initially intended to be) difficult for outsiders to understand, [ 27 ] although the extent of its use is often somewhat exaggerated.

Londoners speak with a mixture of accents, depending on ethnicity, neighbourhood, class, age, upbringing, and sundry other factors.

Estuary English has been gaining prominence in recent decades: it has some features of RP and some of Cockney.

[ 28 ] Immigrants to the UK in recent decades have brought many more languages to the country and particularly to London. Surveys started in 1979 by the Inner London Education Authority discovered over 125 languages being spoken domestically by the families of the inner city's schoolchildren.

[ 29 ] Notably Multicultural London English , a sociolect that emerged in the late 20th century spoken mainly by young, working-class people in multicultural parts of London .

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Since the mass internal migration to Northamptonshire in the 1940s and given its position between several major accent regions, it has become a source of various accent developments. In Northampton the older accent has been influenced by overspill Londoners. There is an accent known locally as the Kettering accent, which is a transitional accent between the East Midlands and East Anglian . It is the last southern Midlands accent to use the broad "a" in words like bath or grass (i.e.

barth or grarss ). Conversely crass or plastic use a slender "a". A few miles northwest in Leicestershire the slender "a" becomes more widespread generally. In the town of Corby , five miles (8 km) north, one can find Corbyite which, unlike the Kettering accent, is largely influenced by the West Scottish accent.

Features Phonological features characteristic of British English revolve around the pronunciation of the letter R, as well as the dental plosive T and some diphthongs specific to this dialect.

T-glottalling Once regarded as a Cockney feature, in a number of forms of spoken British English, /t/ has become commonly realised as a glottal stop [ʔ] when it is in the intervocalic position, in a process called T-glottalisation . National media, being based in London, have seen the glottal stop spreading more widely than it once was in word endings, not being heard as "no [ʔ] " and bottle of water being heard as "bo [ʔ] le of wa [ʔ] er". It is still stigmatised when used in word-medial positions, such as later .

[ 33 ] Other consonants subject to this usage in Cockney English are p , as in pa [ʔ] er and k as in ba [ʔ] er.

[ 33 ] R-dropping In most areas of England and Wales, outside the West Country and other near-by counties of the UK, the consonant R is not pronounced if not followed by a vowel, lengthening the preceding vowel instead. This phenomenon is known as non-rhoticity .
In these same areas, a tendency exists to insert an R between a word ending in a vowel and a next word beginning with a vowel. This is called the intrusive R . It could be understood as a merger, in that words that once ended in an R and words that did not are no longer treated differently. This is also due to London-centric influences. Examples of R-dropping are car and sugar , where the R is not pronounced.

Diphthongisation British dialects differ on the extent of diphthongisation of long vowels, with southern varieties extensively turning them into diphthongs, and with northern dialects normally preserving many of them. As a comparison, North American varieties could be said to be in-between.

North Long vowels /iː/ and /uː/ are usually preserved, and in several areas also /oː/ and /eː/, as in go and say (unlike other varieties of English, that change them to [oʊ] and [eɪ] respectively). Some areas go as far as not diphthongising medieval /iː/ and /uː/, that give rise to modern /aɪ/ and /aʊ/; that is, for example, in the traditional accent of Newcastle upon Tyne , 'out' will sound as 'oot', and in parts of Scotland and North-West England, 'my' will be pronounced as 'me'.

South Long vowels /iː/ and /uː/ are diphthongised to [ɪi] and [ʊu] respectively (or, more technically, [ʏʉ], with a raised tongue), so that ee and oo in feed and food are pronounced with a movement. The diphthong [oʊ] is also pronounced with a greater movement, normally [əʊ], [əʉ] or [əɨ].

People in groups Dropping a morphological grammatical number , in collective nouns , is stronger in British English than North American English.

[ 34 ] This is to treat them as plural when once grammatically singular, a perceived natural number prevails, especially when applying to institutional nouns and groups of people.

The noun 'police', for example, undergoes this treatment: Police are investigating the theft of work tools worth £500 from a van at the Sprucefield park and ride car park in Lisburn.

[ 35 ] A football team can be treated likewise: Arsenal have lost just one of 20 home Premier League matches against Manchester City.

[ 36 ] This tendency can be observed in texts produced already in the 19th century. For example, Jane Austen , a British author, writes in Chapter 4 of Pride and Prejudice , published in 1813: All the world are good and agreeable in your eyes.

[ 37 ] However, in Chapter 16, the grammatical number is used.

The world is blinded by his fortune and consequence.

Negatives Some dialects of British English use negative concords, also known as double negatives . Rather than changing a word or using a positive, words like nobody, not, nothing, and never would be used in the same sentence.

[ 38 ] While this does not occur in Standard English, it does occur in non-standard dialects. The double negation follows the idea of two different morphemes, one that causes the double negation, and one that is used for the point or the verb.

[ 39 ] Standard British English Standard English in the United Kingdom, as in other English-speaking nations, is widely enforced in schools and by social norms for formal contexts but not by any singular authority; for instance, there is no institution equivalent to the Académie française with French or the Royal Spanish Academy with Spanish. Standard British English differs notably in certain vocabulary, grammar, and pronunciation features from standard American English and certain other standard English varieties around the world.

British and American spelling also differ in minor ways.

The accent, or pronunciation system, of standard British English, based in southeastern England, has been known for over a century as Received Pronunciation (RP). However, due to language evolution and changing social trends, some linguists argue that RP is losing prestige or has been replaced by another accent, one that the linguist Geoff Lindsey for instance calls Standard Southern British English.

[ 40 ] Other scholars suggest that more regionally-oriented standard accents are emerging in England.

[ 41 ] Outside of England, namely in Scotland and Northern Ireland, RP exerts very little influence, particularly in the 21st century. RP, while long established as the standard English accent around the globe due to the spread of the British Empire , is distinct from the standard English pronunciation in some parts of the world; most prominently, RP notably contrasts with standard North American accents.

As of the 21st century, dictionaries such as the Oxford English Dictionary , the Longman Dictionary of Contemporary English , the Chambers Dictionary , and the Collins Dictionary record actual usage rather than attempting to prescribe it.

[ 42 ] In addition, vocabulary and usage change with time; words are freely borrowed from other languages and other varieties of English, and neologisms are frequent.

History of standardisation For historical reasons dating back to the rise of London in the ninth century, the form of language spoken in London and the East Midlands became standard English within the Court, and ultimately became the basis for generally accepted use in the law, government, literature and education in Britain. The standardisation of British English is thought to be from both dialect levelling and a thought of social superiority. Speaking in the Standard dialect created class distinctions; those who did not speak the standard English would be considered of a lesser class or social status and often discounted or considered of a low intelligence.

[ 42 ] Another contribution to the standardisation of British English was the introduction of the printing press to England in the mid-15th century. In doing so, William Caxton enabled a common language and spelling to be dispersed among the entirety of England at a much faster rate.

[ 19 ] Samuel Johnson's A Dictionary of the English Language (1755) was a large step in the English-language spelling reform , where the purification of language focused on standardising both speech and spelling.

[ 43 ] By the early 20th century, British authors had produced numerous books intended as guides to English grammar and usage, a few of which achieved sufficient acclaim to have remained in print for long periods and to have been reissued in new editions after some decades. These include, most notably of all, Fowler's Modern English Usage and The Complete Plain Words by Sir Ernest Gowers .

[ 44 ] Detailed guidance on many aspects of writing British English for publication is included in style guides issued by various publishers including The Times newspaper, the Oxford University Press and the Cambridge University Press .

The Oxford University Press guidelines were originally drafted as a single broadsheet page by Horace Henry Hart, and were at the time (1893) the first guide of their type in English; they were gradually expanded and eventually published, first as Hart's Rules , and in 2002 as part of The Oxford Manual of Style . Comparable in authority and stature to The Chicago Manual of Style for published American English , the Oxford Manual is a fairly exhaustive standard for published British English that writers can turn to in the absence of specific guidance from their publishing house.

[ 45 ] Relationship with Commonwealth English British English is the basis of, and very similar to, Commonwealth English .

[ 46 ] Commonwealth English is English as spoken and written in the Commonwealth countries , though often with some local variation. This includes English spoken in Australia , Malta , New Zealand , Nigeria , and South Africa . It also includes South Asian English used in South Asia, in English varieties in Southeast Asia , and in parts of Africa.

Canadian English is based on British English, but has more influence from American English , often grouped together due to their close proximity.

[ 47 ] British English, for example, is the closest English to Indian English, but Indian English has extra vocabulary and some English words are assigned different meanings.

[ 48 ] See also American English American and British English spelling differences Australian English British Sign Language Canadian English English in the Commonwealth of Nations Hiberno-English Newfoundland English New Zealand English South African English References Notes ^ Abbreviations: BrE , en-GB , and BE ) [ 3 ] ^ In British English collective nouns may be either singular or plural, according to context. An example provided by Partridge is: " 'The committee of public safety is to consider the matter', but 'the committee of public safety quarrel regarding their next chairman' ...Thus...singular when...a unit is intended; plural when the idea of plurality is predominant".

BBC television news and The Guardian style guide follow Partridge but other sources, such as BBC Online and The Times style guides, recommend a strict noun-verb agreement with the collective noun always governing the verb conjugated in the singular. BBC radio news, however, insists on the plural verb. Partridge, Eric (1947) Usage and Abusage : "Collective Nouns". Allen, John (2003) BBC News style guide , page 31.

Citations ^ "English" .

IANA language subtag registry . 16 October 2005 . Retrieved 11 January 2019 .

^ "United Kingdom" .

IANA language subtag registry . 16 October 2005 . Retrieved 11 January 2019 .

^ "British English" . Lexico.com. Archived from the original on 12 November 2020 . Retrieved 18 February 2022 .

^ "British English; Hiberno-English" .

Oxford English Dictionary (2 ed.). Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. 1989.

^ British English , Cambridge Academic Content Dictionary ^ The Oxford English Dictionary applies the term to English as "spoken or written in the British Isles ; esp[ecially] the forms of English usual in Great Britain", reserving " Irish English " for the "English language as spoken and written in Ireland".

[ 4 ] Others, such as the Cambridge Academic Content Dictionary , define it as the " English language as it is spoken and written in England ".

[ 5 ] ^ Jeffries, Stuart (27 March 2009).

"The G2 Guide to Regional English" .

The Guardian . section G2, p. 12.

^ New Oxford Style Manual . Oxford University Press. 2016.

^ "10.3. Spelling" .

Interinstitutional Style Guide . Publications Office of the European Union . Retrieved 11 June 2024 .

^ "Six Official UN Languages" .

Language and Communications Training . United Nations . Retrieved 12 July 2025 .

^ "Spelling" .

Department for General Assembly and Conference Management . United Nations . Retrieved 12 July 2025 .

^ Odinye, Sunny (2016). "A study of British and American English for Chinese students".

Dezuruigbo Journal .

^ "British Council" .

GOV.UK . 19 July 2018.

Archived from the original on 21 January 2023 . Retrieved 21 January 2023 .

^ "Learn English Online" .

British Council .

Archived from the original on 21 January 2023 . Retrieved 4 February 2023 .

^ "About BBC Learning English" .

Archived from the original on 4 February 2023 . Retrieved 4 February 2023 .

^ English and Welsh , 1955 J. R. R. Tolkien, also see references in Brittonicisms in English ^ "Linguistics 201: History of English" .

Pandora Internet Web Server . Archived from the original on 18 October 2017 . Retrieved 29 July 2017 .

^ Scott, Tom (14 June 2013), "Why You Swear in Anglo-Saxon and Order Fancy Food in French: Registers" , YouTube , archived from the original on 28 October 2021 , retrieved 18 March 2021 ^ a b "Early Modern English (c. 1500 – c. 1800)" .

The History of English . Archived from the original on 9 December 2014 . Retrieved 28 July 2017 .

^ Professor Sally Johnson biography on the Leeds University website ^ a b Mapping the English language—from cockney to Orkney , Leeds University website, 25 May 2007.

^ McSmith, Andy.

Dialect researchers given a "canny load of chink" to sort "pikeys" from "chavs" in regional accents , The Independent , 1 June 2007. Page 20 ^ "Received Pronunciation" . Archived from the original on 22 July 2019 . Retrieved 20 March 2017 .

^ BBC English because this was originally the form of English used on radio and television, although a wider variety of accents can be heard these days.

^ Sweet, Henry (1908).

The Sounds of English . Clarendon Press. p.

7 .

^ a b c Fowler, H.W. (1996). R.W. Birchfield (ed.). "Fowler's Modern English Usage". Oxford University Press.

^ Franklyn, Julian (1975).

A dictionary of rhyming slang . London: Routledge and Kegan Paul. p. 9.

ISBN 0-415-04602-5 .

^ Crystal, David.

"Language and time" .

BBC - Voices - Your Voice .

^ Department of Education and Science (Summer 1980).

"Report by HM Inspectors on Educational Provision by the Inner London Educational Authority" (Report). H.M. Stationery Office. p. 4. Archived from the original on 19 November 2017 . Retrieved 17 January 2023 – via Education in England.

A survey of all school pupils conducted by ILEA's Research and Statistics Division has established that one in ten children in inner London speak English as a second language; ILEA pupils have over 125 different mother tongues, far more than any other LEA in England and more than in New York.

^ "UrBEn-ID | The UrBEn-ID project" .

urben-id.org .

Archived from the original on 19 March 2021 . Retrieved 23 May 2016 .

^ "Argot bargy" .

The Economist . 2 November 2013.

ISSN 0013-0613 .

Archived from the original on 30 April 2021 . Retrieved 15 April 2021 .

^ Ewens, Hannah (24 February 2016).

"How Is Immigration Changing Language In the UK?" .

Vice . Retrieved 16 April 2021 .

^ a b Trudgill, Peter (1984).

Language in the British Isles . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. pp.

56– 57.

ISBN 0-521-28409-0 .

^ Soanes, Catherine (5 September 2011).

"A quest for agreement over collective nouns" .

OxfordWords .

Oxford Dictionaries . Archived from the original on 18 November 2011.

^ [1] , BBC , 8 January 2017.

^ [2] , BBC , 2 April 2017.

^ Austen, Jane.

"Pride and Prejudice" .

The Project Gutenberg . Retrieved 27 February 2020 .

^ "Double negatives and usage" .

Cambridge Dictionary .

^ Tubau, Susagna (2016).

"Lexical variation and Negative Concord in Traditional Dialects of British English" .

The Journal of Comparative Germanic Linguistics .

19 (2): 143– 177.

doi : 10.1007/s10828-016-9079-4 .

S2CID 123799620 .

^ Lindsey, Geoff (2019).

English after RP: standard British pronunciation today . Cham, Switzerland: Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-3-030-04356-8 .

^ Strycharczuk, P., López-Ibáñez, M., Brown, G., & Leemann, A. (2020). "General Northern English. Exploring regional variation in the North of England with machine learning". Frontiers in Artificial Intelligence, 3, 545883.

^ a b "The Standardisation of English" .

courses.nus.edu.sg .

^ "The History of English: Spelling and Standardization (Suzanne Kemmer)" .

ruf.rice.edu .

^ "New edition of The Complete Plain Words will delight fans of no-frills" .

Independent.co.uk . 27 March 2014.

^ "Style Guide" (PDF) .

University of Oxford .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 9 October 2022 . Retrieved 14 June 2019 .

^ Matthews, R. J. (December 1982).

"New Zealand English: A Case Study" .

World Englishes .

2 (2): 75– 80.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-971X.1982.tb00525.x .

ISSN 0883-2919 .

^ Tirban, N (2012).

"The Major Difference between British and American English in Written and Oral Communication" (PDF) .

Communication, Context, Interdisciplinarity (2012): 985– 990.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 July 2022 – via Google Scholar.

^ Dash, Niladri Sekhar (2007).

"Indian and British English: A handbook of usage and pronunciation (review)" .

Language .

83 (2): 465.

doi : 10.1353/lan.2007.0065 .

ISSN 1535-0665 .

S2CID 144960858 .

Bibliography McArthur, Tom (2002).

Oxford Guide to World English . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-866248-3 hardback, ISBN 0-19-860771-7 paperback.

Bragg, Melvyn (2004).

The Adventure of English , London: Sceptre.

ISBN 0-340-82993-1 Lindsey, Geoff (2019).

English After RP: Standard British Pronunciation Today . Switzerland: Springer Nature.

ISBN 978-3030043568 .

Peters, Pam (2004).

The Cambridge Guide to English Usage . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-62181-X .

Simpson, John (ed.) (1989).

Oxford English Dictionary , 2nd edition. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

External links Wikimedia Commons has media related to British English .

Sounds Familiar?

Archived 12 September 2016 at the Wayback Machine – Examples of regional accents and dialects across the UK on the British Library 's 'Sounds Familiar' website Accents and dialects from the British Library Sound Archive Accents of English from Around the World Archived 29 April 2011 at the Wayback Machine Hear and compare how the same 110 words are pronounced in 50 English accents from around the world – instantaneous playback online The Septic's Companion: A British Slang Dictionary – an online dictionary of British slang, viewable alphabetically or by category British English Turkey v t e Dialects and accents of Modern English by continent Europe Great Britain England North Cheshire Cumbria Barrow Lancashire Liverpool/Scouse Manchester Northumbria Pitmatic Sunderland Tyneside/Geordie Teesside Yorkshire Midlands East Midlands West Midlands Birmingham Black Country Stoke-on-Trent South East Anglia London & Thames Estuary Cockney Multicultural Received Pronunciation West Country Cornwall Dorset Scotland Glasgow Highlands Wales Abercraf Cardiff Gower Port Talbot Ireland Dublin South-West Ulster Channel Islands Gibraltar Isle of Man Malta Americas North America Canada Aboriginal Atlantic Lunenburg Newfoundland Multicultural Toronto Ottawa Valley Quebec Standard Canadian United States Midland New England Boston East Maine West New York City accent North Inland North North-Central Philadelphia Baltimore South accent Appalachia Chesapeake/Outer Banks New Orleans Older South Texas West California Pacific Northwest Western Pennsylvania Social and ethno-cultural African-American Vernacular American Indian Cajun Chicano General American Good American Speech Miami Latino New York Latino Northeastern elite Pennsylvania Dutch Caribbean Antigua and Barbuda The Bahamas Barbados Bequia Cayman Islands Bay Islands Jamaica Saba Samaná Trinidad and Tobago Bermuda Falkland Islands Oceania Australia variation accent Aboriginal South Torres Strait West Fiji New Zealand accent Palau Solomon Islands Africa Cameroon The Gambia Ghana Kenya Liberia Malawi Namibia Nigeria Sierra Leone South Africa accent Cape Flats South Atlantic Uganda Zimbabwe Asia East Asia Hong Kong South Asia Bangladesh India regional and occupational Maldives Nepal Pakistan Sri Lanka Southeast Asia Brunei Cambodia Malaysia Myanmar Philippines Singapore Thailand Antarctica Antarctica Related English language Basic Broad and general accents Commonwealth Comparison of American and British English E-Prime Engrish English as a lingua franca English-based creole languages Englishisation Globish Gogate Nerrière International Jewish English ( Yeshiva English ) Learning Linguistic purism in English List of English-based pidgins Non-native pronunciations of English Plain Standard v t e English-speaking world English speaking countries Further links Articles English-speaking world History of the English language British Empire English in the Commonwealth of Nations Anglosphere Lists List of countries by English-speaking population List of countries where English is an official language Countries and territories where English is the national language or the native language of the majority Africa Saint Helena, Ascension and Tristan da Cunha Americas Anguilla Antigua and Barbuda The Bahamas Barbados Belize Bermuda British Virgin Islands Canada Cayman Islands Dominica Falkland Islands Grenada Guyana Jamaica Montserrat Saba Saint Kitts and Nevis Saint Lucia Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Sint Eustatius Sint Maarten South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands Trinidad and Tobago Turks and Caicos Islands United States United States Virgin Islands Europe Guernsey Ireland Isle of Man Jersey United Kingdom Oceania Australia New Zealand Norfolk Island Pitcairn Islands Countries and territories where English is an official language, but not the majority first language Africa Botswana Cameroon Eswatini The Gambia Ghana Kenya Lesotho Liberia Malawi Mauritius Namibia Nigeria Rwanda Sierra Leone Somaliland South Africa South Sudan Sudan Tanzania Uganda Zambia Zimbabwe Americas Puerto Rico Asia Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong India Pakistan Philippines Singapore Europe Gibraltar Akrotiri and Dhekelia Malta Oceania American Samoa Cook Islands Fiji Guam Kiribati Marshall Islands Micronesia Nauru Niue Northern Mariana Islands Palau Papua New Guinea Samoa Solomon Islands Tokelau Tuvalu Vanuatu Dependencies shown in italics .

Portals : United Kingdom Language Authority control databases Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐t6mgg
Cached time: 20250817043534
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.057 seconds
Real time usage: 1.307 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6513/1000000
Revision size: 39263/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 226570/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 9837/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 36/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 197535/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.670/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19181820/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1146.245      1 -total
 19.70%  225.794      2 Template:Reflist
 16.32%  187.014      1 Template:Infobox_language
 14.63%  167.652      1 Template:Infobox
  9.95%  114.042      5 Template:Lang
  8.64%   99.059      1 Template:Wikidata
  7.89%   90.393     18 Template:Cite_web
  7.78%   89.143      1 Template:American_and_British_English_differences
  6.47%   74.128      1 Template:Short_description
  5.73%   65.666      5 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4179:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817043534 and revision id 1300817740. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=British_English&oldid=1300817740 " Categories : British English Dialects of English Languages of Gibraltar Languages of the United Kingdom Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Use British English from December 2016 Use dmy dates from August 2024 Language articles with IETF language tag Language articles without speaker estimate Dialects of languages with ISO 639-3 code Language articles missing Glottolog code Articles containing German-language text Articles containing French-language text Articles containing Old English (ca. 450-1100)-language text Pages with plain IPA Articles to be expanded from April 2024 All articles to be expanded Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 16 July 2025, at 15:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents British English 56 languages Add topic

