Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Usage 2 Versus factlet 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Factoid 18 languages العربية Deutsch Español Esperanto Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latviešu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Invented claim or trivial fact A common factoid is the incorrect claim that the Great Wall of China is visible from space with the naked eye .

A factoid is either a false statement presented as a fact, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] or a true but brief or trivial item of news or information.

The term was coined in 1973 by American writer Norman Mailer to mean a piece of information that becomes accepted as a fact even though it is not actually true, or an invented fact believed to be true because it appears in print.

[ 3 ] Since the term's invention in 1973, it has become used to describe a brief or trivial item of news or information.

Usage [ edit ] The term was coined by American writer Norman Mailer in his 1973 biography of Marilyn Monroe .

[ 4 ] Mailer described factoids as "facts which have no existence before appearing in a magazine or newspaper", [ 5 ] and formed the word by combining the word fact and the ending -oid to mean "similar but not the same".

The Washington Times described Mailer's new word as referring to "something that looks like a fact, could be a fact, but in fact is not a fact".

[ 6 ] Accordingly, factoids may give rise to, or arise from, common misconceptions and urban legends . Several decades after the term was coined by Mailer, it came to have several meanings, some of which are quite distinct from each other.

[ 7 ] In 1993, William Safire identified several contrasting senses of factoid : "factoid: accusatory: misinformation purporting to be factual; or, a phony statistic." [ 7 ] "factoid: neutral: seemingly though not necessarily factual" [ 7 ] "factoid: (the CNN version): a little-known bit of information; trivial but interesting data." [ 7 ] This new sense of a factoid as a trivial but interesting fact was popularized by the CNN Headline News TV channel, which, during the 1980s and 1990s, often included such a fact under the heading "factoid" during newscasts.

BBC Radio 2 presenter Steve Wright used factoids extensively on his show.

[ 8 ] Versus factlet [ edit ] As a result of confusion over the meaning of factoid, some English-language style and usage guides discourage its use.

[ 9 ] William Safire in his "On Language" column advocated the use of the word factlet instead of factoid to express a brief interesting fact as well as a "little bit of arcana" but did not explain how adopting this new term would alleviate the ongoing confusion over the existing contradictory common use meanings of factoid .

[ 10 ] Safire suggested that factlet be used to designate a small or trivial bit of information that is nonetheless true or accurate.

[ 7 ] [ 10 ] A report in The Guardian identified Safire as the writer who coined the term factlet , [ 4 ] although Safire's 1993 column suggested factlet was already in use at that time.

[ 7 ] The Atlantic magazine agreed with Safire and recommended factlet to signify a "small probably unimportant but interesting fact", as factoid still connoted a spurious fact.

[ 11 ] The term factlet has been used in publications such as Mother Jones , [ 12 ] the San Jose Mercury News , [ 13 ] and in the Reno Gazette Journal .

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Look up factoid in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Chuck Norris facts Communal reinforcement Fake news Just-so story Meme Pseudoscience Talking point Truthiness Woozle effect References [ edit ] ^ "factoid: definition of factoid in Merriam-Webster Dictionary (US)" .

Merriam-Webster . Retrieved November 14, 2015 .

^ "factoid: definition of factoid in Oxford dictionary (American English) (US)" .

Oxford Dictionaries Online . Archived from the original on June 14, 2013 . Retrieved July 13, 2015 .

^ Dickson, Paul (April 30, 2014).

"The origins of writerly words" .

Time . Retrieved November 14, 2015.

^ a b Marsh, David (January 17, 2014).

"A factoid is not a small fact. Fact: A factoid is subtly different from a trivial fact, whatever Steve Wright may claim" .

The Guardian . Retrieved June 16, 2014 .

^ Mailer, Norman (1973).

Marilyn: A Biography . Grosset & Dunlap.

ISBN 0-448-01029-1 .

^ Pruden, Wesley (January 23, 2007).

"Ah, there's joy in Mudville's precincts" .

The Washington Times . Retrieved February 24, 2012 .

^ a b c d e f Safire, William (December 5, 1993).

"On Language; Only the Factoids" .

The New York Times Magazine . Retrieved June 15, 2014 .

^ Steve Wright (2005).

Steve Wright's Book of Factoids . HarperCollins Entertainment.

ISBN 0-00-720660-7 .

^ Brians, Paul (2003).

Common Errors in English Usage . William James & Company.

ISBN 1-887902-89-9 .

"factoid" The Website of Prof. Paul Brians .

^ a b Safire, William (December 5, 1993).

"On Language; Only the Factoids" .

The New York Times Magazine . Retrieved February 24, 2012 .

^ Madrigal, Alexis C.

(March 29, 2012).

"Down With Factoid! Up With Factlet!" .

The Atlantic . Accessed June 9, 2014. "Factoid is now almost exclusively used to mean a brief interesting fact ... ought instead to use another word for a small probably unimportant but interesting fact".

^ Drum, Kevin (April 19, 2010).

"Factlet of the Day" .

Mother Jones . Accessed June 9, 2014.

^ Burrell, Jackie (May 19, 2014).

"Amazing Race All-Star Winners: And the winner is (spoiler!!)" .

The San Jose Mercury News . Accessed June 9, 2014. "Brendan has promised his bride that if they win the million bucks, she can have a baby, a factlet that keeps coming up in the most manipulative and unsavory ways". (italics added) ^ Wright, Johnathan L. (May 26, 2014).

"In One Ear: Cherchez the sparkle at jewelry fundraiser; Cakebread dinner" .

Reno Gazette Journal . Accessed June 9, 2014. "The chardonnay made its entrance next on the arm of rabbit loin wrapped in serrano ham (little food factlet for you: serrano ham couldn't be imported to the United States until 1997, when the pigs used in the ham were certified as free from African swine disease)". (italics added) v t e Disinformation and misinformation Core content Disinformation Misinformation Malinformation Propaganda Disinformation attack Disinformation research Publications about disinformation Mechanisms Psychological Cognitive bias List Denialism Manipulation Misinformation effect Political polarization Psychology of climate change denial Computational Algorithmic radicalization Content moderation Community notes Internet manipulation Social bot Social networking service List User-generated content Economic Fake news websites Surveillance capitalism Programmatic advertising Media and Politics Audience fragmentation Echo chamber (media) Fake news Media bias Media culture Media manipulation Tactics Astroturfing Big Lie Circular reporting Clickbait Conspiracy theory List Culture war Deception Deepfake Disinformation playbook Dog whistle (politics) Doublespeak Doxxing Fake news Fake news website List of fake news websites List of satirical fake news websites False accusation False attribution False balance Fear, uncertainty, and doubt Firehose of falsehood Forgery as covert operation Gaslighting Greenwashing Historical negationism Information warfare Logic and reasoning Cherry picking False dilemma Gish gallop Half-truth Fallacy Formal fallacy Informal fallacy List of fallacies Quote mining Red herring Whataboutism Memetic warfare Pink-slime journalism Psychological warfare Propaganda Black propaganda Counterpropaganda State-sponsored Internet propaganda Perception management Rumors Spin (propaganda) Smear campaign Scientific fabrication Strategy of tension Yellow journalism Related terms Alternative facts Factoid Hoax Infodemic Malinformation Post-truth politics Potemkin village Pseudoscience Tabloid journalism Truthiness Targets and campaigns International Politics Disinformation in the Russian invasion of Ukraine Misinformation in the Gaza war New World Order conspiracy theory Russian disinformation Genocide denial Politics by country List of disinformation attacks by country List of political disinformation website campaigns Antisemitism Holocaust denial International Jewish conspiracy Environmental science Climate change denial Fossil fuel industry ExxonMobil climate change denial Fossil fuels lobby Leaded gasoline Ethyl Corporation Robert A. Kehoe Clair Cameron Patterson Pesticide industry Rachel Carson Silent Spring Red mercury Medicine and Public health 5G misinformation Anti-vaccine activism Lancet MMR autism fraud Vaccines and autism Vaccine misinformation COVID-19 misinformation COVID-19 misinformation by governments COVID-19 vaccine misinformation and hesitancy Birth control misinformation Ebola misinformation GMO conspiracy theories HIV/AIDS denialism Mental illness denial Misinformation related to abortion Tobacco industry playbook Transgender health care misinformation Opposition to water fluoridation Journalism and journalists Safety of journalists Maria Ressa Daily Maverick Rappler The Quint Countering disinformation Academic research Critical thinking Digital literacy Health literacy Information literacy Media literacy Science communication Scientific consensus Scientific literacy List of climate change video games Scientific skepticism Skepticism Truth sandwich Verificado 2018 Watchdog journalism Fact-checking and research Fact-checking Websites List of fact-checking websites Non-profits and charities Africa Check FactCheck.org Full Fact PolitiFact USAFacts Private companies Logically (company) NewsGuard StopFake Other Bellingcat International Fact-Checking Network Media Bias/Fact Check Snopes Quackwatch Projeto Comprova Research Canada Citizen Lab EU East StratCom Task Force Finland Faktabaari New Zealand The Disinformation Project UK Counter disinformation unit Ukraine Center for Countering Disinformation USA Active Measures Working Group Counter Misinformation Team Disinformation Governance Board Countering Foreign Propaganda and Disinformation Act United States Information Agency WikiProjects WikiCred Climate change COVID-19 Medicine Skepticism Vaccine safety Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Factoid&oldid=1296918667 " Categories : Communication Doubt Traditional stories Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from January 2022 This page was last edited on 23 June 2025, at 03:39 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Factoid 18 languages Add topic

