Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition 2 History Toggle History subsection 2.1 Belgium 2.2 France 2.3 Italy 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Liberal Catholicism 8 languages العربية Español Français Bahasa Indonesia Polski Português Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Liberal branch within the Catholic Church For other uses, see Liberal Catholic (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Liberal Catholic Church .

Félicité de La Mennais is considered the forerunner of liberal Catholicism.

Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Liberal Catholicism is a current of thought within the Catholic Church influenced by classical liberalism and promoting the separation of church and state , freedom of religion in the civic arena, expanded suffrage, and broad-based education. It was influential in the 19th century and the first half of the 20th, especially in France . It is largely identified with French political theorists such as Felicité Robert de Lamennais , Henri Lacordaire , and Charles Forbes René de Montalembert influenced, in part, by a similar contemporaneous movement in Belgium.

Being predominantly political in nature, liberal Catholicism as a movement was distinct from the contemporary theological movement of modernism . The movement is also distinct from the attitude of historical and present-day Roman Catholics who are described as theologically progressive or liberal .

Elements of liberal Catholicism were repeatedly condemned by the pre- Vatican II Holy See , particularly in the encyclicals Mirari vos (1832) of Pope Gregory XVI , Quanta cura (1864) of Pope Pius IX , and the dogmatic constitution Pastor aeternus (1870) of the First Vatican Council .

[ 1 ] Also vehemently criticized in the work Liberalism is a Sin by Félix Sardà y Salvany , published in 1884.

Definition [ edit ] Liberal Catholicism has been defined as "in essence a trend among sincere Catholics to exalt freedom as a primary value and to draw from this consequences in social, political, and religious life, seeking to reconcile the principles on which Christian France was founded with those that derived from the French Revolution ".

[ 2 ] The phrase was used to describe the currents of thought and action that arose in the wake of Napoleon's remaking of Europe, and the restoration of traditional monarchies.

History [ edit ] Belgium [ edit ] The National Congress of Belgium , an alliance between Roman Catholics and secular liberals on the basis of mutually recognized rights and freedoms, [ 3 ] adopted in 1831 a constitution that enshrined several of the freedoms for which liberal Catholicism campaigned.  The Congress Column in Brussels , erected in honour of the congress, has at its base four bronze statues that represent the four basic freedoms enshrined in the constitution: freedom of religion , freedom of association , education and freedom of the press . These four freedoms are also reflected in the names of the four streets that lead to the Place de la Liberté/Vrijheidsplein (Freedom Square) of Brussels: the Rue des Cultes/Eredienststraat (Religion Street), the Rue de l'Association/Verenigingsstraat (Association Street), the Rue de l'Enseignement/Onderrichtstraat (Education Street) and the Rue de la Presse/Drukpersstraat (Press Street). The constitution adopted almost all of Lamennais's proposals for the separation of church and state, granting the Catholic Church independence in church appointments and public activities, and almost complete supervision of Catholic education.

[ 4 ] J.P.T Bury suggests that Lamennais and his associates found inspiration in a Belgian Liberal Catholic movement centered in Malines and led by Archbishop de Méan 's vicar-general, Engelbert Sterckx .

[ 5 ] Largely Catholic Belgium seceded from the Netherlands in 1830 and established a constitutional monarchy. Sterckx, who became archbishop in 1832 found a way not merely to tolerate the new liberal constitution, but to expand the Church under the new liberties guaranteed.

At a noted Catholic congress in Malines, Belgium in 1863, Montalembert gave two long addresses on Catholic Liberalism, including "A Free Church in a Free State".

[ 6 ] France [ edit ] The movement of liberal Catholicism was initiated in France by Hugues Felicité Robert de Lamennais with the support of Jean-Baptiste Henri Lacordaire , Charles Forbes René de Montalembert and Olympe-Philippe Gerbet , Bishop of Perpignan , while a parallel movement arose in Belgium, led by François Antoine Marie Constantin de Méan et de Beaurieux , Archbishop of Mechelen , and his vicar general Engelbert Sterckx .

[ 7 ] Lamennais founded the newspaper L'Ami de l'Ordre (precursor of today's L'Avenir ), the first issue of which appeared on 16 October 1830, with the motto "God and Liberty". The paper was aggressively democratic, demanding rights of local administration, an enlarged suffrage, separation of church and state , universal freedom of conscience , freedom of education, freedom of assembly , and freedom of the press . Styles of worship were to be criticized, improved or abolished in absolute submission to the spiritual, not to the temporal authority.

On 7 December 1830, the editors articulated their demands as follows: We firstly ask for the freedom of conscience or the freedom of full universal religion, without distinction as without privilege; and by consequence, in what touches us, we Catholics, for the total separation of church and state ... this necessary separation, without which there would exist for Catholics no religious freedom, implies, for a part, the suppression of the ecclesiastical budget, and we have fully recognized this; for another part, the absolute independence of the clergy in the spiritual order ... Just as there can be nothing religious today in politics there must be nothing political in religion.
We ask, secondly, for freedom of education, because it is a natural right, and thus to say, the first freedom of the family; because there exists without it neither religious freedom nor freedom of expression.

With the help of Montalembert, Lammenais founded the Agence générale pour la défense de la liberté religieuse , which became a far-reaching organization with agents throughout France who monitored violations of religious freedom. As a result, the periodical's career was stormy and its circulation opposed by conservative bishops. In response, Lamennais, Montalembert and Lacordaire suspended their work and in November 1831 set out to Rome to obtain the approval of Pope Gregory XVI .

Archbishop Quelen of Paris had warned Lammenais that he was being unrealistic and was viewed as a demagogue in favor of revolution. As Quelen was a Gallican, Lammenais ignored him.

[ 8 ] Although pressured by the French government and the French hierarchy, Pope Gregory XVI would have preferred not to make an official issue of the matter.

[ 9 ] After much opposition, they gained an audience on 15 March 1832 only on condition that their political views should not be mentioned. The meeting was apparently cordial and uneventful.

Prince Metternich , whose Austrian troops ensured the stability of the Papal States, pressed for a condemnation. The Pope's advisors were convinced that if he said nothing, it would viewed that he did not disapprove of Lamennais's opinions.

Mirari vos was issued the following August, criticizing Lamennais's views without mentioning him by name.

[ 8 ] After this, Lamennais and his two lieutenants declared that out of deference to the pope they would not resume the publication of L'Avenir and dissolved the Agence générale as well. Lamennais soon distanced himself from the Catholic Church, which was a blow to the credibility of the liberal Catholic movement, and the other two moderated their tone, but still campaigned for liberty of religious education and liberty of association.

[ 10 ] They corresponded with Ignaz von Döllinger regarding their views on reconciling the Roman Catholic Church with the principles of modern society (liberalism); which views had aroused much suspicion in Ultramontane, mainly Jesuit-dominated, circles. In 1832 Lammenais and his friends Lacordaire and Montalembert, visited Germany, obtaining considerable sympathy in their attempts to bring about a modification of the Roman Catholic attitude to modern problems and liberal political principles.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Italy [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( November 2022 ) In 19th-century Italy, the liberal Catholic movement had a lasting impact in that it ended the association of the ideal of national independence with that of anti-clerical revolution.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Americanism (heresy) Catholic social teaching Centesimus annus , an encyclical clarifying the Church's position on democracy Christian libertarianism Dignitatis humanae , the Second Vatican Council 's declaration on religious freedom References [ edit ] ^ "Liberalism" .

Catholic Answers . Retrieved 3 January 2023 .

^ "Essentiellement une tendance, chez des catholiques sincères, à exalter la liberté comme valeur première avec les conséquences que cela entraîne pour les principes qui régissent la vie sociale, politique et religieuse : on en vient à vouloir concilier des inconciliables, les principes sur lesquels étaient fondés la France chrétienne et ceux qui découlent de la Révolution" (Arnaud de Lassus, Connaissance élémentaire du Libéralisme catholique , 1988).

^ Stuart Joseph Woolf, A History of Italy, 1700–1860 (Routledge 1979 ISBN 978-0-416-80880-3 ), p. 339 ^ Ellen Lovell Evans, The cross and the Ballot (Brill Academic Publishers 1999 ISBN 978-0-391-04095-3 ), p. 25 ^ Bury, J.P.T., "Religion and Relations of Churches and States", The New Cambridge Modern History , Vol. 10, CUP Archive, 1960 ISBN 9780521045483 ^ "Charles le Comte de Montalembert", The Acton Institute, 20 July 2010 ^ J. P. T. Bury, The New Cambridge Modern History: The Zenith of European Power, 1830–70 (Cambridge University Press 1960 ISBN 978-0-521-04548-3 ), p. 77 ^ a b Chadwick, Owen. "Gregory XVI", A History of the Popes, 1830–1914 , Oxford University Press, 2003 ISBN 9780199262861 ^ Bernard, Cook. "Lamennais, Hugues-Felicité Robert de (1782–1854)", Encyclopedia of 1848 Revolutions , (James Chastain, ed.), Ohio University, 2005 ^ Parker Thomas Moon, The Labor Problem and the Social Catholic Movement in France (Macmillan 1921), pp. 32–34 This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Lias 1911 , p. 390.

^ Baumgarten, Paul Maria. "Johann Joseph Ignaz von Döllinger." The Catholic Encyclopedia Vol. 5. New York: Robert Appleton Company, 1909. 24 January 2019 This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ Mikuláš Teich , Roy Porter , The National Question in Europe in Historical Context (Cambridge University Press 1993 ISBN 978-0-521-36713-4 ), p. 86 ^ Paul Ginsborg, Daniele Manin and the Venetian revolution of 1848–49 (Cambridge University Press 1979 ISBN 978-0-521-22077-4 ), p. 49 This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Lias, John James (1911). " Döllinger, Johann Joseph Ignaz von ". In Chisholm, Hugh (ed.).

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 8 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

390– 392.

v t e Modernism in the Catholic Church Issues Biblical exegesis Historical-critical exegesis of the Bible Biblical inerrancy Synoptic problem Quest for the historical Jesus Thomism Social doctrine People Prosper Alfaric Pierre Batiffol Maurice Blondel Joseph Bonsirven Henri Brémond Ernesto Buonaiuti Louis Duchesne Antonio Fogazzaro Marcel Hébert Albert Houtin Friedrich von Hügel Lucien Laberthonnière Lucien Lacroix Marie-Joseph Lagrange Alfred Loisy Eudoxe Irénée Mignot Romolo Murri Maude Petre Fernand Portal Antonin Sertillanges Joseph Turmel George Tyrrell Anti-modernist reaction Pope Pius IX Quanta cura Syllabus of Errors Pope Leo XIII Pontifical Biblical Commission Pope Pius X Lamentabili sane exitu Pascendi Dominici gregis Oath Against Modernism Sodalitium Pianum Twenty-four Thomistic theses Louis Billot Umberto Benigni Rafael Merry del Val José de Calasanz Vives y Tutó Réginald Garrigou-Lagrange Publications Annales de philosophie chrétienne La Justice sociale La Quinzaine Revue du clergé français Temps présent Le Sillon ( Marc Sangnier ) Protestant equivalents Fundamentalist–Modernist controversy Historians Giuseppe Alberigo Pierre Colin Avery Dulles Étienne Fouilloux Maurilio Guasco François Laplanche René Marlé Jean-Marie Mayeur Émile Poulat Christoph Theobald Catholicism portal Vatican City portal Name Media Category Templates WikiProject Portals : Catholic Church Liberalism Politics Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Liberal_Catholicism&oldid=1305800101 " Categories : Liberal Catholicism Christianity and political ideologies Liberalism and religion Hidden categories: Source attribution Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from June 2018 Use dmy dates from December 2020 Articles with excerpts Articles containing French-language text Articles to be expanded from November 2022 All articles to be expanded Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 04:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Liberal Catholicism 8 languages Add topic

