Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Approach and history 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 43 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית Lietuvių Македонски Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Română Русиньскый Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ) Online philosophy encyclopedia and collection of peer-reviewed papers Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Type of site Online encyclopedia of philosophy Owner The Metaphysics Research Lab, Center for the Study of Language and Information , Stanford University Created by Edward N. Zalta Editor Edward N. Zalta Uri Nodelman URL plato .stanford .edu Launched 1995 ; 30 years ago ( 1995 ) ISSN 1095-5054 OCLC number 643092515 The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy ( SEP ) is a freely available online philosophy resource published and maintained by Stanford University , encompassing both an online encyclopedia of philosophy and peer-reviewed original publication.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Each entry is written and maintained by an expert in the field, including professors from many academic institutions worldwide.

[ 3 ] Authors contributing to the encyclopedia give Stanford University the permission to publish the articles, but retain the copyright to those articles.

[ 4 ] Approach and history [ edit ] As of August 5, 2022, the SEP has 1,774 published entries. Apart from its online status, the encyclopedia uses the traditional academic approach of most encyclopedias and academic journals to achieve quality by means of specialist authors selected by an editor or an editorial committee that is competent (although not necessarily considered specialists) in the field covered by the encyclopedia and peer review .

[ 5 ] The encyclopedia was created in 1995 by Edward N. Zalta , [ 2 ] with the explicit aim of providing a dynamic encyclopedia that is updated regularly, and so does not become dated in the manner of conventional print encyclopedias.

[ 1 ] [ 6 ] The charter for the encyclopedia allows for rival articles on a single topic to reflect reasoned disagreements among scholars. Initially, the SEP was developed with U.S. public funding from the National Endowment for the Humanities and the National Science Foundation . A long-term fundraising plan to preserve open access to the encyclopedia is supported by many university libraries and library consortia.  These institutions contribute under a plan devised by the SEP in collaboration with the Scholarly Publishing and Academic Resources Coalition , the International Coalition of Library Consortia , and the Southeastern Library Network , with matching funding from the National Endowment for the Humanities.

[ 3 ] The logo depicts the initials of SEP in the shape of The Thinker , an original copy of which is co-owned by Stanford and which features across the university's iconography and culture.

[ 7 ] See also [ edit ] Encyclopedia of Philosophy Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Nelson's Perpetual Loose Leaf Encyclopaedia Routledge Encyclopedia of Philosophy List of online encyclopedias References [ edit ] ^ a b Sonnad, Nikhil (21 September 2015).

"This free online encyclopedia has achieved what Wikipedia can only dream of" .

Quartz . Retrieved 2018-12-07 .

^ a b Zalta, Edward (2006-09-01).

"The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: A university/library partnership in support of scholarly communication and open access" .

College & Research Libraries News .

67 (8): 502– 504.

doi : 10.5860/crln.67.8.7670 .

ISSN 2150-6698 .

^ a b Allen, Colin; Jagodzinski, Cecile (2013-11-04).

"From SEP to SEPIA: How and Why Indiana University is Helping the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

Against the Grain .

18 (4).

doi : 10.7771/2380-176x.4919 .

ISSN 2380-176X .

^ " Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Copyright Information" . Retrieved December 1, 2015 .

^ Tananbaum, Greg (2006).

"I Hear the Train A Comin' -- Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy" .

Against the Grain .

18 (1).

doi : 10.7771/2380-176x.4863 .

ISSN 2380-176X .

^ Allen, Colin; Nodelman, Uri; Zalta, Edward N. (2002). "The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy: A Developed Dynamic Reference Work".

Metaphilosophy .

33 (1&2): 210– 228.

doi : 10.1111/1467-9973.00225 .

ISSN 0026-1068 .

^ "Hmmm . . . Where Did He Go?" Stanford Magazine , April 2002. Retrieved 2024.

External links [ edit ] Official website Official mirror websites : Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy mirror from the Institute for Logic, Language and Computation of the University of Amsterdam Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy mirror from University of Sydney Library v t e Stanford University Located in : Stanford, California Schools Business Education Engineering Humanities and Sciences Law Medicine Sustainability Research Libraries ( Green , Branner , Lane , Lathrop ) Centers and institutes Cancer Institute Center for Advanced Study in the Behavioral Sciences Hasso Plattner Institute of Design Hoover Institution Hopkins Marine Station Institute for Economic Policy Research Institute for Theoretical Physics Jasper Ridge Biological Preserve Medical Center SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource Places Arboretum Arizona Cactus Garden Bing Concert Hall Braun Music Center Iris & B. Gerald Cantor Center for Visual Arts Clock Tower Dish Fire Truck House Frost Amphitheater Gates Computer Science Building Green Earth Sciences Haas Center for Public Service Hanna–Honeycomb House Hoover House Hoover Tower Lake Lagunita Main Quad Oval Stanford, California Mausoleum Memorial Auditorium Memorial Church Research Park Shopping Center Sweet Hall Public art Bedford Sentinels Boo-Qwilla Column I Gay Liberation Monument Luna Moth Walk I Old Union Fountain The Sieve of Eratosthenes The Stanford Legacy Statue of Alexander von Humboldt Statue of Benjamin Franklin Statue of Johannes Gutenberg Statue of Louis Agassiz Tanner Fountain White Memorial Fountain Publications Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy HighWire Press Stanford Law Review Stanford University Press Student life Student housing KZSU Stanford Band A cappella groups Stanford Chaparral The Stanford Flipside The Stanford Daily The Stanford Review The Fountain Hopper Stanford Tree Business Association of Stanford Entrepreneurial Students StartX Athletics Overview : Stanford Cardinal ( Pac-12 Conference and Atlantic Coast Conference ) Teams Baseball Basketball Men Women Football Big Game The Play Gymnastics Men Women Soccer Men Women Track and field Women's volleyball Facilities Arrillaga Family Rowing and Sailing Center Burnham Pavilion Klein Field at Sunken Diamond Maloney Field at Laird Q. Cagan Stadium Maples Pavilion Stanford Beach Volleyball Stadium Stanford Golf Course Stanford Stadium Taube Tennis Center Misc.

Stanford Axe NACDA Directors' Cup People President Jonathan Levin Provost Jenny Martínez Faculty and staff Alumni Companies founded by alumni Leland Stanford Jr.

Leland Stanford Jane Stanford Related History of Stanford University Dean of Stanford Law School Academic regalia Knight-Hennessy Scholars Stanford University Network (SUN) Orange County Stanford Cardinal Red Stanford University endowment (Stanford Management Company) Palo Alto Green Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Stanford_Encyclopedia_of_Philosophy&oldid=1290064091 " Categories : Encyclopedias of philosophy Stanford University publications Internet properties established in 1995 1995 establishments in the United States American online encyclopedias 20th-century encyclopedias Philosophy websites Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 12 May 2025, at 15:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy 43 languages Add topic

