Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Explanation Toggle Explanation subsection 1.1 Two-in 1.2 Two-out 2 Rapid intervention crew 3 Application in France 4 Germany 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Two-in, two-out 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia In firefighting , the policy of two-in, two-out refers to United States Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) policy 29 CFR 1910.134(g)(4)(i).

[ 1 ] The respiratory protection standard requires that workers engaged in fighting interior structural fires work in a buddy system; at least two workers must enter the building together, so that they can monitor each other's whereabouts as well as the work environment. There must also be at least two standby personnel outside the fire area prepared to rescue the inside firefighters should the need arise. One of these outside firefighters must actively monitor the status of the inside fighters but the second outside firefighter may perform a variety of other duties, such as pump operations, acting as Incident Commander , or outside hose line operation. There are no provisions in the standard to waive the requirements for either the "two-inside firefighters" or the "two-outside firefighters", although the circumstances under which this provision applies are more limited than generally understood.

[ 2 ] The standard does not require the "two-in/two-out" provision if the fire is still in the incipient stage, nor does it prohibit firefighters from fighting the fire from outside before sufficient personnel have arrived. It also does not prohibit firefighters from entering a burning structure to perform Search and Rescue operations when there is a reasonable belief that victims may be inside. It is only when firefighters are engaged in the interior attack of an interior structural firefighting that the "two-in/two-out" requirement applies. The interpretation covers the number of persons who must be on the scene before fire fighting personnel may begin the interior attack on an interior structural fire. Until those persons arrive on the scene, fire fighters may fight the blaze from outside the structure and carry out rescue activities. It is the incident commander's responsibility to judge whether a fire is an interior structural fire and how it will be attacked.

[ 2 ] Explanation [ edit ] Two-in [ edit ] The respiratory protection standard requires that workers engaged in fighting interior structural fires work in a buddy system; at least two workers must enter the building together, so that they can monitor each other's whereabouts as well as the work environment. An interior structural fire (an advanced fire that has spread inside of the building where high temperatures, "heat" and dense smoke are normally occurring) would present an "Immediately Dangerous to Life or Health" ( IDLH ) atmosphere and therefore, require the use of respirators. There should always be at least two firefighters together when they enter a location that is deemed a hazard area that is considered IDLH (i.e., the interior of the structure fire). Firefighters operating in the hazard area must operate in a buddy system and maintain voice or visual contact with one another at all times. This helps in assuring accountability within the team. They must operate together as a team  all the time they are in the hazard area. If one firefighter has to leave the hazard area, for any reason, such as air supply getting low, they must both exit.

Two-out [ edit ] OSHA requires that one of the two firefighters outside must be dedicated to accounting for the two firefighters inside, and, if necessary, initiate a fire fighter rescue. The other firefighter is permitted to take on other roles, such as incident commander in charge of the emergency incident, safety officer or equipment/ pump operator. However, the second firefighter outside cannot be assigned tasks that are critical to the safety and health of any other employee working at the incident.

These rules also apply to all training with live fires inside structures, and are even more important when inexperienced trainees are inside.

Incipient stage fire 
An incipient stage fire is defined as a fire that is in the initial or beginning stage and can be controlled or extinguished by portable fire extinguishers, Class II standpipe, or small hose systems without the need for protective clothing or breathing apparatus.

Note 2 to paragraph (g): Nothing in this section is meant to preclude firefighters from performing emergency rescue activities (Search) before an entire team has assembled.

Rapid intervention crew [ edit ] Main article: Firefighter assist and search team The National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) defines the policy that refers to a safety system to protect firefighters, known as rapid intervention crew (RIC) or firefighter assist and search team (FAST) , where two or more firefighters enter a building and at least two more remain outside, near the entrance, fully equipped and ready to help in case of emergency.

Firefighters enter a building in teams to extinguish the fire and/or make a rescue. When a team enters an IDLH atmosphere (the "two-in"), two more firefighters (the "two-out") stand by at the entrance in full personal protective equipment (to include bunker gear and self-contained breathing apparatus ), and ready with rescue tools, in order to rapidly enter the building if the team inside becomes endangered. By some interpretations, the rule requires at least two more firefighters to remain outside, even when the standby team has gone in to find and rescue the first team.  However, the rule specifically exempts an emergency rescue with fewer personnel on hand (i.e., no additional "two-out" required if they go in to find the "two-in"), although the increased risk to all four should be obvious if further backup is not on-scene.

The two firefighters who are specifically designated as standing by outside are referred to in different ways by many localities. The NFPA designated term is "RIC", [ 3 ] some are referred to as a rapid intervention team , and others are referred to as a F.A.S.T. truck (as in the Fire Department of New York ).

Where there are teams working inside multiple entrances of a large structure fire, there may be standby teams designated at each entry point, although the rule does not necessarily mean two firefighters ready outside for every two inside.

Other tactics work within the rule to "stage" the next team, ready to relieve the inside team when their air supplies run low. When the third team arrives to serve as the RIT, the second team enters, follows the hose line to the first team and relieves them. This is naturally smoother with good radio communications between officers.

Application in France [ edit ] Until 1999, the firefighting in France was performed according to the "Rules of instruction and maneuvers" ( Règlement d'instructions et de manoeuvres , RIM). The firefighters acted in teams of three members, called " trinomial " ( trinôme ): one chief, one deputy chief and one support; a fire engine with eight people thus had two trinom, an engine chief ( chef d'agrès ) and a driver. In the 1990s, the Paris Fire Brigade started to work with teams of two people, called " binomial teams" ( équipes en binôme ) or shortly "binomials" ( binômes ). This organisation was generalised to the whole France in a departmental order signed by the minister of Internal Affairs the 3 February 1999. An engine with eight people now has three binomials, an engine chief and a driver; an engine with six people has two binomials, an engine chief and a driver.

A binomial can be assigned two types of missions: exploration and attack mission ( binôme d'attaque , BAT); water supply and support mission ( binôme d'alimentation , BAL).

The mission can change during an intervention (i.e., an attack binomial can become a supply binomial or vice versa ).

The "usual" intervention (simple fire with only one fire engine and six people, no casualty, no specific risk) thus involves two binomials.

The engine chief makes a reconnaissance with an attack binomial. The other binomial stands by outside, ready to help the reconnaissance team.

The attack binomial unrolls the fire hoses at the "attack point" defined by the engine chief and prepare to go to the target also defined by the engine chief. The supply binomial joins the attack point to the fire engine with hoses.

The attack binomial starts the firefighting. The supply binomial joins the fire engine to the hydrant .

The supply binomial stands by, ready to help the attack binomial.

The overall organisation is the same when more engines are involved.

Germany [ edit ] German fire services regulations (FwDV) demand that firefighters must always operate in teams of two, called a Trupp ; and that an interior attack with breathing apparatus may only be undertaken if there's at least a Staffel on scene, which consists of six firefighters: two Trupps , a commander, and an engineer.

[ 4 ] Furthermore, every incident scene where breathing apparatus is in use must have at least one Trupp with breathing apparatus on standby as a dedicated rescue team, and more where appropriate.

[ 5 ] See also [ edit ] Fire service in France References [ edit ] ^ "OSHA 29 CFR 1910.134(g)(4)(i) Procedures for interior structural firefighting" . Occupational Safety and Health Administration.

^ a b "1910.134 - Respiratory Protection" .

www.osha.gov . US Occupational Safety and Health Administration . Retrieved 2021-03-22 .

This article incorporates text from this source, which is in the public domain .

^ "NFPA 1500: Standard on Fire Department Occupational Safety and Health Program 2013 Edition" . National Fire Protection Association . Retrieved 30 Jan 2013 .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ FwDV 3 (pdf, German) ^ FwDV 7 (pdf, German) External links [ edit ] OSHA Rule 1910.134(g)(4) Last Men Out ( ISBN 0-8050-7169-5 ) A book about Rescue Company 2 of the FDNY, whose job is to rescue other firefighters from burning buildings.

v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Two-in,_two-out&oldid=1288296565 " Category : Firefighting Hidden categories: Source attribution All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 1 May 2025, at 18:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Two-in, two-out 1 language Add topic

