Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Chronology 2 Content 3 Arabic and Latin translations 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Parts of Animals 15 languages বাংলা Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano 日本語 Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article may be confusing or unclear to readers .

Please help clarify the article . There might be a discussion about this on the talk page .

( September 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Parts of Animals (or On the Parts of Animals ; Greek Περὶ ζῴων μορίων; Latin De Partibus Animalium ) is one of Aristotle 's major texts on biology . It was written around 350 BC. The whole work is roughly a study in animal anatomy and physiology ; it aims to provide a scientific understanding of the parts ( organs , tissues , fluids , etc.) of animals and asks whether these parts were designed or arose by chance.

Chronology [ edit ] The treaty consists of four books whose authenticity has not been questioned, although its chronology is disputed. The consensus in placing it before the Generation of animals and perhaps later to History of animals . There are indications that Aristotle placed this book at the beginning of his biological works.

[ 1 ] Content [ edit ] In Book I, Aristotle applies his theory of causality to the study of life forms. Here, he proposed the methodology to study organisms, and emphasized the importance of the final cause, design or purpose seeking a teleological explanation in the life sciences. He criticized the dichotomous taxonomy practiced in Plato's Academy , since much of the time, it is superfluous and “pointless.” [ 2 ] He concludes by defending the study of animals as a science as important as that of celestial bodies .

[ 3 ] Aristotle affirmed that every living being consists of two intrinsic parts: [ 4 ] Primary matter (οὐσία) Substantial form (εἶδος) He used those principles to study the primordial elements of the nature of which the bodies of animals are composed and the intrinsic conditions that make bodies become what they are. First they start from the combination of the fundamental elements of nature (earth, water, air and fire) forming tissues and these organs.

In the rest of the books, Aristotle studies the internal and external parts of the blood and non-blood animals, comparing them with human beings, showing the common and the specific.

[ 1 ] For Aristotle, the material causes of an organism could not explain all its aspects. To explain phenomena such as the processes an organism or its adaptations to the environment of the organism had to resort to the final causes , teleological explanations of those phenomena. In his Generation of Animals , he explains teleologically reproduction and animal development.

[ 4 ] Arabic and Latin translations [ edit ] An Arabic translation of Parts of Animals is included as treatises 11–14 of the Kitāb al-Hayawān .

Michael Scot made a Latin translation, and Pedro Gallego a Latin adaptation ( Liber de animalibus ) made from both the Arabic and Latin versions.

See also [ edit ] Generation of Animals History of Animals History of embryology References [ edit ] ^ a b "Aristóteles - Obra biológica: De Partibus Animalium, De Motu Animalium, De Incessu Animalium" traducción al español Rosana Bartolomé ^ Parts of Animals , book I, chapter 2.

^ PA , Libro I, V, 644b - 645a, 24 - 25 ^ a b "Aristotle (384-322 BCE) | The Embryo Project Encyclopedia" .

embryo.asu.edu . Retrieved 2019-04-02 .

External links [ edit ] Works related to On the Parts of Animals at Wikisource Translation and Commentary by James G. Lennox (Clarendon Press) On the Parts of Animals , English translation by William Ogle On the Parts of Animals public domain audiobook at LibriVox De Partibus Animalium , English translation by William Ross and John Smith (Internet Archive) Greek text: Hodoi elektronikai (with parallel French translation), Greco interattivo v t e Aristotelianism Overview Aristotle Works Lyceum Ideas and interests Logic Apodicticity Category of being Future contingents Genus–differentia Irrelevant conclusion Syllogism Physics accident Active intellect Antiperistasis Essence Eternity of the world Four causes Hexis Horror vacui Hylomorphism Hypokeimenon Minima naturalia Ousia Passive intellect Potentiality and actuality Substance theory Substantial form Sublunary sphere Theory of universals Unmoved mover Biology Rational animal Ethics Akrasia Arete Eudaimonia Eutrapelia Golden mean Magnanimity Nemesis Philia Phronesis Pleonexia Practical syllogism Politics Mixed government Natural slavery Rhetoric Lexis Paradeigma Poetics Anagnorisis Catharsis Classical unities Diegesis Hamartia Mimesis Mythos Opsis Peripeteia Telos Tragic hero Works Organon Categories On Interpretation Prior Analytics Posterior Analytics Topics Sophistical Refutations Physics Physics On the Heavens On Generation and Corruption Meteorology On the Soul On Animals History Parts Movement Progression Generation Metaphysics Metaphysics Ethics and politics Nicomachean Ethics Eudemian Ethics Politics Constitution of the Athenians Rhetoric and poetics Rhetoric Poetics Parva Naturalia Sense and Sensibilia On Memory On Sleep On Dreams On Divination in Sleep On Length and Shortness of Life On Youth, Old Age, Life and Death, and Respiration Lost Protrepticus Pseudepigrapha On Breath On Colors On Plants On Indivisible Lines On Melissus, Xenophanes, and Gorgias On the Universe On Things Heard Physiognomonics On Marvellous Things Heard Mechanics Problems The Situations and Names of Winds On Virtues and Vices Economics Rhetoric to Alexander Magna Moralia Related topics Transmission of the Greek Classics Commentaries on Aristotle Conimbricenses Metabasis paradox Views on women Wheel paradox Mathematical realism List of writers influenced by Aristotle Category Philosophy portal Authority control databases International VIAF 2 3 National Germany United States 2 France BnF data Poland Vatican 2 Israel Other IdRef 2 Yale LUX This article about a book on zoology or animals is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Parts_of_Animals&oldid=1279152277 " Categories : Works by Aristotle Zoology books Zoology book stubs Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing clarification from September 2021 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Articles with LibriVox links All stub articles This page was last edited on 6 March 2025, at 21:16 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Parts of Animals 15 languages Add topic

