Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Motivation Toggle Motivation subsection 2.1 Personal or medical interest 2.2 Community or religious obligation 2.3 Establishing identity 2.4 Legal and forensic research 2.5 Scholarly research 2.6 Discrimination and persecution 3 History Toggle History subsection 3.1 Pre-modern genealogy 3.2 Modern times 3.3 India 3.4 United States 4 Research process Toggle Research process subsection 4.1 Genetic analysis 4.2 Collaboration 4.3 Volunteerism 4.4 Software 5 Records and documentation Toggle Records and documentation subsection 5.1 List of record types 5.2 FamilySearch collections 5.3 Indexing ancestral information 5.4 Record loss and preservation 6 Types of information Toggle Types of information subsection 6.1 Family names 6.2 Given names 6.3 Place names 6.4 Dates 6.5 Occupations 7 Reliability of sources Toggle Reliability of sources subsection 7.1 Knowledge of the informant 7.2 Motivation of the informant 7.3 The effect of time 7.4 Copying and compiling errors 7.5 Primary and secondary sources 8 Standards and ethics Toggle Standards and ethics subsection 8.1 Research standards 8.2 Ethical guidelines 9 See also 10 References 11 Further reading 12 External links Toggle the table of contents Genealogy 93 languages Afrikaans Ænglisc العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Corsu Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Lingua Franca Nova Magyar Македонски Malagasy മലയാളം Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Papiamentu پښتو Picard Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Sicilianu Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Sunda Suomi Svenska Taqbaylit ไทย ᏣᎳᎩ Türkçe Türkmençe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt Volapük Walon Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of individual descent and bloodline This article is about the study of family lineage, history and bloodline. For the philosophical technique developed by Nietzsche and Foucault, see Genealogy (philosophy) . For the sociocultural evolution of kinship, see History of the family . For family trees of scholars according to mentoring relationship, see Academic genealogy .

For other uses, see Genealogy (disambiguation) .

"Family history" redirects here. For medical family history, see Family history (medicine) . For other uses, see Family history (disambiguation) .

The family tree of Louis III, Duke of Württemberg (ruled 1568–1593) The family tree of "the Landas", a 17th-century family [ 1 ] Genealogy (from Ancient Greek γενεαλογία ( genealogía ) ' the making of a pedigree ' ) [ 2 ] is the study of families , family history, and the tracing of their lineages . Genealogists use oral interviews, historical records, genetic analysis, and other records to obtain information about a family and to demonstrate kinship and pedigrees of its members. The results are often displayed in charts or written as narratives. The field of family history is broader than genealogy, and covers not just lineage but also family and community history and biography .

[ 3 ] The record of genealogical work may be presented as a "genealogy", a "family history", or a " family tree ". In the narrow sense, a "genealogy" or a "family tree" traces the descendants of one person, whereas a "family history" traces the ancestors of one person, [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] but the terms are often used interchangeably.

[ 7 ] A family history may include additional biographical information, family traditions, and the like.

[ 3 ] The pursuit of family history and origins tends to be shaped by several motives, including the desire to carve out a place for one's family in the larger historical picture, a sense of responsibility to preserve the past for future generations , and self-satisfaction in accurate storytelling.

[ 8 ] Genealogy research is also performed for scholarly or forensic purposes, or to trace legal next of kin to inherit under intestacy laws.

Overview [ edit ] Twelve generations patrilineage of a Hindu Lingayat male from central Karnataka spanning over 275 years, depicted in descending order Amateur genealogists typically pursue their own ancestry and that of their spouses. Professional genealogists may also conduct research for others, publish books on genealogical methods, teach, or produce their own databases. They may work for companies that provide software or produce materials of use to other professionals and to amateurs. Both try to understand not just where and when people lived but also their lifestyles, biographies, and motivations. This often requires—or leads to—knowledge of antiquated laws, old political boundaries, migration trends, and historical socioeconomic or religious conditions.

Genealogists sometimes specialize in a particular group, e.g., a Scottish clan ; a particular surname , such as in a one-name study ; a small community, e.g., a single village or parish, such as in a one-place study ; or a particular, often famous, person.

Bloodlines of Salem is an example of a specialized family-history group. It welcomes members who can prove descent from a participant of the Salem Witch Trials or who simply choose to support the group.

Genealogists and family historians often join family history societies , where novices can learn from more experienced researchers. Such societies generally serve a specific geographical area. Their members may also index records to make them more accessible or engage in advocacy and other efforts to preserve public records and cemeteries. Some schools engage students in such projects as a means to reinforce lessons regarding immigration and history.

[ 9 ] Other benefits include family medical histories for families with serious medical conditions that are hereditary.

The terms "genealogy" and "family history" are often used synonymously, but some entities offer a slight difference in definition. The Society of Genealogists , while also using the terms interchangeably, describes genealogy as the "establishment of a pedigree by extracting evidence, from valid sources, of how one generation is connected to the next" and family history as "a biographical study of a genealogically proven family and of the community and country in which they lived".

[ 3 ] Motivation [ edit ] Individuals conduct genealogical research for a number of reasons.

Personal or medical interest [ edit ] Private individuals research genealogy out of curiosity about their heritage. This curiosity can be particularly strong among those whose family histories were lost or unknown due to, for example, adoption or separation from family through divorce, death, or other situations.

[ 10 ] In addition to simply wanting to know more about who they are and where they came from, individuals may research their genealogy to learn about any hereditary diseases in their family history.

[ 11 ] There is a growing interest in family history in the media as a result of advertising and television shows sponsored by large genealogy companies, such as Ancestry.com . This, coupled with easier access to online records and the affordability of DNA tests , has both inspired curiosity and allowed those who are curious to easily start investigating their ancestry.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Community or religious obligation [ edit ] In communitarian societies, one's identity is defined as much by one's kin network as by individual achievement, and the question "Who are you?" would be answered by a description of father, mother, and tribe. New Zealand Māori , for example, learn whakapapa (genealogies) to discover who they are.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] [ 16 ] [ 17 ] Family history plays a part in the practice of some religious belief systems. For example, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints (LDS Church) has a doctrine of baptism for the dead , which necessitates that members of that faith engage in family history research.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] [ 20 ] In East Asian countries that were historically shaped by Confucianism , many people follow a practice of ancestor worship as well as genealogical record-keeping. Ancestors' names are inscribed on tablets and placed in shrines, where rituals are performed. Genealogies are also recorded in genealogy books . This practice is rooted in the belief that respect for one's family is a foundation for a healthy society.

[ 21 ] Establishing identity [ edit ] Royal families , both historically and in modern times, keep records of their genealogies in order to establish their right to rule and determine who will be the next sovereign. For centuries in various cultures, one's genealogy has been a source of political and social status.

[ 22 ] [ 23 ] Some countries and indigenous tribes allow individuals to obtain citizenship based on their genealogy. In Ireland and in Greece , for example, an individual can become a citizen if one of their grandparents was born in that country, regardless of their own or their parents' birthplace. In societies such as Australia or the United States, by the 20th century, there was growing pride in the pioneers and nation-builders. Establishing descent from these was, and is, important to lineage societies , such as the Daughters of the American Revolution and The General Society of Mayflower Descendants .

[ 24 ] Modern family history explores new sources of status, such as celebrating the resilience of families that survived generations of poverty or slavery, or the success of families in integrating across racial or national boundaries. Some family histories even emphasize links to celebrity criminals, such as the bushranger Ned Kelly in Australia.

[ 25 ] Legal and forensic research [ edit ] Main article: Investigative genetic genealogy Lawyers involved in probate cases do genealogy to locate heirs of property.

[ 26 ] [ 27 ] Detectives may perform genealogical research using DNA evidence to identify victims of homicides or perpetrators of crimes.

[ 28 ] [ 29 ] [ 30 ] [ 31 ] [ 32 ] Scholarly research [ edit ] Historians and geneticists may carry out genealogical research to gain a greater understanding of specific topics in their respective fields, and some may employ professional genealogists in connection with specific aspects of their research. They also publish their research in peer-reviewed journals.

[ 33 ] The introduction of postgraduate courses in genealogy in recent years has given genealogy more of an academic focus, with the emergence of peer-reviewed journals in this area. Scholarly genealogy is beginning to emerge as a discipline in its own right, with an increasing number of individuals who have obtained genealogical qualifications carrying out research on a diverse range of topics related to genealogy, both within academic institutions and independently.

[ 34 ] Discrimination and persecution [ edit ] In the US, the " one-drop rule " asserted that any person with even one ancestor of black ancestry ("one drop" of "black blood") was considered black. It was codified into the law of some States (e.g. the Racial Integrity Act of 1924 ) to reinforce racial segregation.

Genealogy was also used in Nazi Germany to determine whether a person was considered a "Jew" or a "Mischling" ( Mischling Test ), and whether a person was considered as "Aryan" ( Ahnenpass ).

History [ edit ] Pre-modern genealogy [ edit ] A Medieval genealogy traced from Adam and Eve Hereditary emperors, kings and chiefs in several areas have long claimed descent from gods (thus establishing divine legitimacy). Court genealogists have preserved or invented appropriate genealogical pretensions - for example in Japan , [ 35 ] Polynesia , [ 36 ] and the Indo-European world from Scandinavia through ancient Greece to India.

[ 37 ] Historically, in Western societies, genealogy focused on the kinship and descent of rulers and nobles, often arguing or demonstrating the legitimacy of claims to wealth and power. Genealogy often overlapped with heraldry , which reflected the ancestry of noble houses in their coats of arms . Modern scholars regard many claimed noble ancestries as fabrications, such as the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle 's tracing of the ancestry of several English kings to the god Woden .

[ 38 ] With the coming of Christianity to northern Europe, Anglo-Saxon royal genealogies extended the kings' lines of ancestry from Woden back to reach the line of Biblical patriarchs : Noah [ 39 ] and Adam . (This extension offered the side-benefit of connecting pretentious rulers with the prestigious genealogy of Jesus .) [ 40 ] Modern historians and genealogists may regard manufactured pseudo-genealogies with a degree of scepticism. However, the desire to find ancestral links with prominent figures from a legendary or distant past has persisted. In the United States, for example, it does no harm to establish one's links to ancestors who boarded the Mayflower . And the popularity of the genealogical hypothesis of The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail (1982) demonstrates popular interest in ancient bloodlines, however dubious.

Some family trees have been maintained for considerable periods. The family tree of Confucius has been maintained for over 2,500 years and is listed in the Guinness Book of World Records as the largest extant family tree. The fifth edition of the Confucius Genealogy was printed in 2009 by the Confucius Genealogy Compilation Committee (CGCC).

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Modern times [ edit ] In modern times, genealogy has become more widespread, with commoners as well as nobility researching and maintaining their family trees.

[ 43 ] Genealogy received a boost in the late 1970s with the television broadcast of Roots: The Saga of an American Family by Alex Haley . His account of his family's descent from the African tribesman Kunta Kinte inspired many others to study their own lines.

[ 44 ] With the advent of the Internet , the number of resources readily accessible to genealogists has vastly increased, fostering an explosion of interest in the topic.

[ 45 ] Genealogy on the internet became increasingly popular starting in the early 2000s.

[ 46 ] The Internet has become a major source not only of data for genealogists but also of education and communication.

India [ edit ] In India, there are two broad types of traditional genealogists: those who work in places where the Ganges river flows and those who work in other locations.

[ 47 ] Each caste grouping in the Indian subcontinent has different kinds of genealogists, who have a set of inter-generational patrons, called jajmans .

[ 47 ] Usually, a traditional genealogist would visit their jajman’s house and record information in the presence of the patron family and other witnesses in their pothis (record-books), passed on from one to another. All the vital details about a particular family are recorded in the pothi, such as births, deaths, marriages, divisions in the family, and donations made for religious purposes.

[ 47 ] Traditional genealogists played a role in the 1857 rebellion , as they spread word door-to-door.

[ 47 ] Due to this, many genealogists were killed by the British and other migrated to different parts of India away from their hometown.

[ 47 ] However, traditional genealogy in India is a dying practice due to urbanization, migration abroad, the impact of the Internet, modern technology, and monetary and economic concerns.

[ 47 ] There are more than twenty-five places of pilgrimage across India where genealogical records on the families of visiting pilgrims are kept by pandas (Hindu priests).

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] Some notable places where traditional genealogy records are kept include Hindu genealogy registers at Haridwar (Uttarakhand) , Varanasi and Allahabad ( Uttar Pradesh ), Kurukshetra (Haryana) , Trimbakeshwar ( Maharashtra ), and Chintpurni ( Himachal Pradesh ).

[ 50 ] [ 48 ] [ 49 ] In February 2025, the National Archives of India announced it was planning on creating a publicly-accessible database of genealogical records sourced from pothis kept in the collection of pandas (priests) from Gaya, Kashi, Prayagraj, Kedarnath, Ujjain, Badrinath, and other places of pilgrimage where familial genealogical records are kept and maintained.

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] United States [ edit ] Genealogical research in the United States was first systematized in the early 19th century, especially by John Farmer (1789–1838).

[ 51 ] Before Farmer's efforts, tracing one's genealogy was seen as an attempt by the American colonists to secure a measure of social standing, an aim that was counter to the new republic's egalitarian, future-oriented ideals (as outlined in the Constitution ).

[ 51 ] As Fourth of July celebrations commemorating the Founding Fathers and the heroes of the Revolutionary War became increasingly popular, however, the pursuit of "antiquarianism", which focused on local history, became acceptable as a way to honor the achievements of early Americans.

[ citation needed ] Farmer capitalized on the acceptability of antiquarianism to frame genealogy within the early republic's ideological framework of pride in one's American ancestors. He corresponded with other antiquarians in New England, where antiquarianism and genealogy were well established, and became a coordinator, booster, and contributor to the growing movement. In the 1820s, he and fellow antiquarians began to produce genealogical and antiquarian tracts in earnest, slowly gaining a devoted audience among the American people. Though Farmer died in 1838, his efforts led to the founding in 1845 of the New England Historic Genealogical Society (NEHGS), one of New England's oldest and most prominent organizations dedicated to the preservation of public records.

[ 52 ] NEHGS publishes the New England Historical and Genealogical Register.

The Genealogical Society of Utah , founded in 1894, later became the Family History Department of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints . The department's research facility, the Family History Library , which Utah.com claims as "the largest genealogical library in the world", [ 53 ] was established to assist in tracing family lineages for special religious ceremonies which Latter-day Saints believe will seal family units together for eternity. Latter-day Saints believe that this fulfilled a biblical prophecy stating that the prophet Elijah would return to "turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of the children to their fathers." [ 54 ] There is a network of church-operated Family History Centers all over the United States and around the world, where volunteers assist the public with tracing their ancestors.

[ 55 ] Brigham Young University offers bachelor's degree, minor, and concentration programs in Family History and is the only school in North America to offer this.

[ 56 ] The American Society of Genealogists is the scholarly honorary society of the U.S. genealogical field. Founded by John Insley Coddington, Arthur Adams, and Meredith B. Colket Jr., in December 1940, its membership is limited to 50 living fellows. ASG has semi-annually published The Genealogist , a scholarly journal of genealogical research, since 1980.

Fellows of the American Society of Genealogists , who bear the post-nominal acronym "FASG", have written some of the most notable genealogical materials of the last half-century.

[ 57 ] Some of the most notable scholarly American genealogical journals include The American Genealogist , National Genealogical Society Quarterly , The New England Historical and Genealogical Register , The New York Genealogical and Biographical Record , and The Genealogist .

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] Research process [ edit ] 30 years of image research [ 60 ] arranged genealogically on a kitchen wall in Sweden 2019 Genealogical research is a complex process that uses historical records and sometimes genetic analysis to demonstrate kinship. Reliable conclusions are based on the quality of sources (ideally, original records), the information within those sources, (ideally, primary or firsthand information), and the evidence that can be drawn (directly or indirectly), from that information. In many instances, genealogists must skillfully assemble indirect or circumstantial evidence to build a case for identity and kinship. All evidence and conclusions, together with the documentation that supports them, is then assembled to create a cohesive genealogy or family history .

[ 61 ] Genealogists begin their research by collecting family documents and stories. This creates a foundation for documentary research , which involves examining and evaluating historical records for evidence about ancestors and other relatives, their kinship ties, and the events that occurred in their lives. As a rule, genealogists begin with the present and work backwards in time. Historical, social, and family context is essential to achieving correct identification of individuals and relationships. Source citation is also important when conducting genealogical research.

[ 62 ] [ 63 ] To keep track of collected material, family group sheets and pedigree charts are used. Formerly handwritten, these can now be generated by genealogical software.

[ 64 ] Genetic analysis [ edit ] Main article: Genetic genealogy Variations of VNTR allele lengths in six individuals Because a person's DNA contains information that has been passed down relatively unchanged from early ancestors, analysis of DNA is sometimes used for genealogical research. Three DNA types are of particular interest.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is contained in the mitochondria of the egg cell and is passed down from a mother to all of her children, both male and female; however, only females pass it on to their children.

Y-DNA is present only in males and is passed down from a father to his sons (direct male line) with only minor mutations occurring over time.

Autosomal DNA (atDNA), is found in the 22 non-sex chromosomes (autosomes) and is inherited from both parents; thus, it can uncover relatives from any branch of the family. A genealogical DNA test allows two individuals to find the probability that they are, or are not, related within an estimated number of generations. Individual genetic test results are collected in databases to match people descended from a relatively recent common ancestor. See, for example, the Molecular Genealogy Research Project . Some tests are limited to either the patrilineal or the matrilineal line.

[ 65 ] Collaboration [ edit ] Most genealogy software programs can export information about persons and their relationships in a standardized format called a GEDCOM . In that format, it can be shared with other genealogists, added to databases, or converted into family web sites.

Social networking service (SNS) websites allow genealogists to share data and build their family trees online. Members can upload their family trees and contact other family historians to fill in gaps in their research. In addition to the (SNS) websites, there are other resources that encourage genealogists to connect and share information, such as rootsweb.ancestry.com [ 66 ] and rsl.rootsweb.ancestry.com.

[ 67 ] Volunteerism [ edit ] Volunteer efforts figure prominently in genealogy.

[ 68 ] These range from the extremely informal to the highly organized.

On the informal side are the many popular and useful message boards such as Rootschat and mailing lists on particular surnames, regions, and other topics. These forums can be used to try to find relatives, request record lookups, obtain research advice, and much more. Many genealogists participate in loosely organized projects, both online and off. These collaborations take numerous forms. Some projects prepare name indexes for records, such as probate cases, and publish the indexes, either online or off. These indexes can be used as finding aids to locate original records. Other projects transcribe or abstract records. Offering record lookups for particular geographic areas is another common service. Volunteers do record lookups or take photos in their home areas for researchers who are unable to travel.

[ 69 ] Those looking for a structured volunteer environment can join one of thousands of genealogical societies worldwide. Most societies have a unique area of focus, such as a particular surname, ethnicity , geographic area, or descendancy from participants in a given historical event . Genealogical societies are almost exclusively staffed by volunteers and may offer a broad range of services, including maintaining libraries for members' use, publishing newsletters, providing research assistance to the public, offering classes or seminars, and organizing record preservation or transcription projects.

[ 70 ] Software [ edit ] Gramps is an example of genealogy software.

Main article: Genealogy software Genealogy software is used to collect, store, sort, and display genealogical data. At a minimum, genealogy software accommodates basic information about individuals, including births, marriages, and deaths. Many programs allow for additional biographical information, including occupation, residence, and notes, and most also offer a method for keeping track of the sources for each piece of evidence.

[ 71 ] Most programs can generate basic kinship charts and reports, allow for the import of digital photographs and the export of data in the GEDCOM format (short for GEnealogical Data COMmunication) so that data can be shared with those using other genealogy software. More advanced features include the ability to restrict the information that is shared, usually by removing information about living people out of privacy concerns; the import of sound files; the generation of family history books, web pages and other publications; the ability to handle same-sex marriages and children born out of wedlock; searching the Internet for data; and the provision of research guidance.  Programs may be geared toward a specific religion, with fields relevant to that religion, or to specific nationalities or ethnic groups, with source types relevant for those groups. Online resources involve complex programming and large data bases, such as censuses.

[ 72 ] Records and documentation [ edit ] A family history page from an antebellum era [ broken anchor ] family Bible Genealogists use a wide variety of records in their research. To effectively conduct genealogical research, it is important to understand how the records were created, what information is included in them, and how and where to access them.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] List of record types [ edit ] Records that are used in genealogy research include: Vital records Birth records Death records Marriage and divorce records Adoption records Biographies and biographical profiles (e.g.

Who's Who ) Cemetery lists Census records Church and Religious records Baptism or christening Brit milah or Baby naming certificates Confirmation Bar or bat mitzvah Marriage Funeral or death Membership City directories [ 75 ] and telephone directories Coroner 's reports Court records Criminal records Civil records Diaries , personal letters and family Bibles DNA tests [ 76 ] Emigration , immigration and naturalization records Hereditary & lineage organization records, e.g.

Daughters of the American Revolution records Land and property records, deeds Medical records Military and conscription records Newspaper articles Obituaries Occupational records Oral histories Passports Photographs Poorhouse , workhouse , almshouse , and asylum records School and alumni association records Ship passenger lists Social Security (within the US) and pension records Tax records Tombstones , cemetery records, and funeral home records Voter registration records Wills and probate records To keep track of their citizens, governments began keeping records of persons who were neither royalty nor nobility . In England and Germany, for example, such record keeping started with parish registers in the 16th century.

[ 77 ] As more of the population was recorded, there were sufficient records to follow a family. Major life events, such as births, marriages, and deaths, were often documented with a license, permit, or report. Genealogists locate these records in local, regional or national offices or archives and extract information about family relationships and recreate timelines of persons' lives.

In China, India and other Asian countries, genealogy books are used to record the names, occupations, and other information about family members, with some books dating back hundreds or even thousands of years. In the eastern Indian state of Bihar , there is a written tradition of genealogical records among Maithil Brahmins and Karna Kayasthas called " Panjis ", dating to the 12th century CE. Even today these records are consulted prior to marriages.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] [ 80 ] In Ireland, genealogical records were recorded by professional families of senchaidh (historians) until as late as the mid-17th century. Perhaps the most outstanding example of this genre is Leabhar na nGenealach / The Great Book of Irish Genealogies , by Dubhaltach MacFhirbhisigh (d. 1671), published in 2004.

FamilySearch collections [ edit ] The Family History Library, operated by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints , is the world's largest library dedicated to genealogical research.

The LDS Church has engaged in large-scale microfilming of records of genealogical value. Its Family History Library in Salt Lake City, Utah, houses over 2 million microfiche and microfilms of genealogically relevant material, which are also available for on-site research at over 4,500 Family History Centers worldwide.

[ 81 ] FamilySearch 's website includes many resources for genealogists: a FamilyTree database, historical records, [ 82 ] digitized family history books, [ 83 ] resources and indexing for African American genealogy such as slave and bank records, [ 84 ] and a Family History Research Wiki containing research guidance articles.

[ 85 ] Indexing ancestral information [ edit ] Indexing is the process of transcribing parish records, city vital records, and other reports, to a digital database for searching.  Volunteers and professionals participate in the indexing process.  Since 2006, the microfilm in the FamilySearch granite mountain vault is in the process of being digitally scanned, available online, and eventually indexed.

[ 86 ] [ 87 ] For example, after the 72-year legal limit for releasing personal information for the United States Census was reached in 2012, genealogical groups cooperated to index the 132 million residents registered in the 1940 United States census .

[ 88 ] Between 2006 and 2012, the FamilySearch indexing effort produced more than 1 billion searchable records.

[ 89 ] In 2022, FamilySearch and Ancestry partnered to use Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology to help the process of indexing more records. The process first began with the public release of the 1950 United States Census . The index of the census would at first be created by an AI trained on handwriting in old documents and then reviewed by thousands of volunteers using FamilySearch.

Record loss and preservation [ edit ] Sometimes genealogical records are destroyed, whether accidentally or on purpose. In order to do thorough research, genealogists keep track of which records have been destroyed so they know when information they need may be missing. Of particular note for North American genealogy is the 1890 United States census , which was destroyed in a fire in 1921. Although fragments survive, most of the 1890 census no longer exists. Those looking for genealogical information for families that lived in the United States in 1890 must rely on other information to fill that gap.

[ 90 ] War is another cause of record destruction. During World War II, many European records were destroyed.

[ 91 ] Communists in China during the Cultural Revolution and in Korea during the Korean War destroyed genealogy books kept by families.

[ 92 ] [ 93 ] Often records are destroyed due to accident or neglect. Since genealogical records are often kept on paper and stacked in high-density storage, they are prone to fire, mold, insect damage, and eventual disintegration. Sometimes records of genealogical value are deliberately destroyed by governments or organizations because the records are considered to be unimportant or a privacy risk. Because of this, genealogists often organize efforts to preserve records that are at risk of destruction. FamilySearch has an ongoing program that assesses what useful genealogical records have the most risk of being destroyed, and sends volunteers to digitize such records.

[ 91 ] In 2017, the government of Sierra Leone asked FamilySearch for help preserving their rapidly deteriorating vital records. FamilySearch has begun digitizing the records and making them available online.

[ 94 ] The Federation of Genealogical Societies also organized an effort to preserve and digitize United States War of 1812 pension records. In 2010, they began raising funds, which were contribute by genealogists around the United States and matched by Ancestry.com . Their goal was achieved and the process of digitization was able to begin. The digitized records are available for free online.

[ 95 ] Types of information [ edit ] Genealogists who seek to reconstruct the lives of each ancestor consider all historical information to be "genealogical" information. Traditionally, the basic information needed to ensure correct identification of each person are place names, occupations, family names , first names, and dates. However, modern genealogists greatly expand this list, recognizing the need to place this information in its historical context in order to properly evaluate genealogical evidence and distinguish between same-name individuals. A great deal of information is available for British ancestry [ 96 ] with growing resources for other ethnic groups.

[ 97 ] Family names [ edit ] Lineage of a family, c.

1809 Family names are simultaneously one of the most important pieces of genealogical information, and a source of significant confusion for researchers.

[ 98 ] In many cultures, the name of a person refers to the family to which they belong. This is called the family name , surname , or last name .

Patronymics are names that identify an individual based on the father's name. For example, Marga Olafsdottir is Marga, daughter of Olaf, and Olaf Thorsson is Olaf, son of Thor. Many cultures used patronymics before surnames were adopted or came into use. The Dutch in New York, for example, used the patronymic system of names until 1687 when the advent of English rule mandated surname usage.

[ 99 ] In Iceland, patronymics are used by a majority of the population.

[ 100 ] In Denmark and Norway patronymics and farm names were generally in use through the 19th century and beyond, though surnames began to come into fashion toward the end of the 19th century in some parts of the country. Not until 1856 in Denmark [ 101 ] and 1923 in Norway [ 102 ] were there laws requiring surnames.

The transmission of names across generations, marriages and other relationships, and immigration may cause difficulty in genealogical research. For instance, women in many cultures have routinely used their spouse's surnames. When a woman remarried, she may have changed her name and the names of her children; only her name; or changed no names. Her birth name ( maiden name ) may be reflected in her children's middle names; her own middle name; or dropped entirely.

[ 103 ] Children may sometimes assume stepparent, foster parent, or adoptive parent names. Because official records may reflect many kinds of surname change, without explaining the underlying reason for the change, the correct identification of a person recorded identified with more than one name is challenging.  Immigrants to America often Americanized their names.

[ 104 ] Surname data may be found in trade directories, census returns, birth, death, and marriage records.

Given names [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( April 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Genealogical data regarding given names (first names) is subject to many of the same problems as are family names and place names. Additionally, the use of nicknames is very common. For example, Beth, Lizzie or Betty are all common for Elizabeth, and Jack, John and Jonathan may be interchanged.

Middle names provide additional information. Middle names may be inherited, follow naming customs, or be treated as part of the family name. For instance, in some Latin cultures, both the mother's family name and the father's family name are used by the children.

Historically, naming traditions existed in some places and cultures. Even in areas that tended to use naming conventions, however, they were by no means universal. Families may have used them some of the time, among some of their children, or not at all. A pattern might also be broken to name a newborn after a recently deceased sibling, aunt or uncle.

An example of a naming tradition from England, Scotland and Ireland: Child Namesake 1st son paternal grandfather 2nd son maternal grandfather 3rd son father 4th son father's oldest brother 1st daughter maternal grandmother 2nd daughter paternal grandmother 3rd daughter mother 4th daughter mother's oldest sister Another example is in some areas of Germany, where siblings were given the same first name, often of a favourite saint or local nobility, but different second names by which they were known ( Rufname ). If a child died, the next child of the same gender that was born may have been given the same name. It is not uncommon that a list of a particular couple's children will show one or two names repeated.

Personal names have periods of popularity, so it is not uncommon to find many similarly named people in a generation, and even similarly named families; e.g., "William and Mary and their children David, Mary, and John".

Many names may be identified strongly with a particular gender; e.g., William for boys, and Mary for girls. Others may be ambiguous , e.g., Lee, or have only slightly variant spellings based on gender, e.g., Frances (usually female) and Francis (usually male).

Place names [ edit ] While the locations of ancestors' residences and life events are core elements of the genealogist's quest, they can often be confusing. Place names may be subject to variant spellings by partially literate scribes. Locations may have identical or very similar names. For example, the village name Brockton occurs six times in the border area between the English counties of Shropshire and Staffordshire . Shifts in political borders must also be understood. Parish, county, and national borders have frequently been modified. Old records may contain references to farms and villages that have ceased to exist. When working with older records from Poland, where borders and place names have changed frequently in past centuries, a source with maps and sample records such as A Translation Guide to 19th-Century Polish-Language Civil-Registration Documents can be invaluable.

Available sources may include vital records (civil or church registration), censuses, and tax assessments. Oral tradition is also an important source, although it must be used with caution. When no source information is available for a location, circumstantial evidence may provide a probable answer based on a person's or a family's place of residence at the time of the event.

Maps and gazetteers are important sources for understanding the places researched. They show the relationship of an area to neighboring communities and may be of help in understanding migration patterns.

Family tree mapping using online mapping tools such as Google Earth (particularly when used with Historical Map overlays such as those from the David Rumsey Historical Map Collection ) assist in the process of understanding the significance of geographical locations.

The study of the relationship between persons and their places of residence is also known as Residential Genealogy .

Dates [ edit ] It is wise to exercise extreme caution with dates. Dates are more difficult to recall years after an event, and are more easily mistranscribed than other types of genealogical data.

[ 105 ] Therefore, one should determine whether the date was recorded at the time of the event or at a later date. Dates of birth in vital records or civil registrations and in church records at baptism are generally accurate because they were usually recorded near the time of the event. Family Bibles are often a source for dates, but can be written from memory long after the event. When the same ink and handwriting is used for all entries, the dates were probably written at the same time and therefore will be less reliable since the earlier dates were probably recorded well after the event. The publication date of the Bible also provides a clue about when the dates were recorded since they could not have been recorded at any earlier date.

People sometimes reduce their age on marriage, and those under "full age" may increase their age in order to marry or to join the armed forces.

Census returns are notoriously unreliable for ages or for assuming an approximate death date. Ages over 15 in the 1841 census in the UK are rounded down to the next lower multiple of five years.

Although baptismal dates are often used to approximate birth dates, some families waited years before baptizing children, and adult baptisms are the norm in some religions. Both birth and marriage dates may have been adjusted to cover for pre-wedding pregnancies.

Calendar changes must also be considered. In 1752, England and her American colonies changed from the Julian to the Gregorian calendar . In the same year, the date the new year began was changed. Prior to 1752 it was 25 March ; this was changed to 1 January. Many other European countries had already made the calendar changes before England had, sometimes centuries earlier. By 1751 there was an 11-day discrepancy between the date in England and the date in other European countries.

For further detail on the changes involved in moving from the Julian to the Gregorian calendar, see: Gregorian calendar .

The French Republican Calendar or French Revolutionary Calendar was a calendar proposed during the French Revolution, and used by the French government for about 12 years from late 1793 to 1805, and for 18 days in 1871 in Paris. Dates in official records at this time use the revolutionary calendar and need "translating" into the Gregorian calendar for calculating ages etc. There are various websites which do this.

[ 106 ] Occupations [ edit ] Occupational information may be important to understanding an ancestor's life and for distinguishing two people with the same name. A person's occupation may have been related to his or her social status, political interest, and migration pattern. Since skilled trades are often passed from father to son, occupation may also be indirect evidence of a family relationship.

It is important to remember that a person may change occupations, and that titles change over time as well. Some workers no longer fit for their primary trade often took less prestigious jobs later in life, while others moved upwards in prestige.

[ 107 ] Many unskilled ancestors had a variety of jobs depending on the season and local trade requirements. Census returns may contain some embellishment; e.g., from labourer to mason , or from journeyman to master craftsman . Names for old or unfamiliar local occupations may cause confusion if poorly legible. For example, an ostler (a keeper of horses) and a hostler (an innkeeper) could easily be confused for one another. Likewise, descriptions of such occupations may also be problematic. The perplexing description "ironer of rabbit burrows" may turn out to describe an ironer (profession) in the Bristol district named Rabbit Burrows. Several trades have regionally preferred terms. For example, "shoemaker" and "cordwainer" have the same meaning. Finally, many apparently obscure jobs are part of a larger trade community, such as watchmaking, framework knitting or gunmaking.

Occupational data may be reported in occupational licences, tax assessments, membership records of professional organizations, trade directories, census returns, and vital records (civil registration). Occupational dictionaries are available to explain many obscure and archaic trades.

[ 108 ] Reliability of sources [ edit ] Information found in historical or genealogical sources can be unreliable and it is good practice to evaluate all sources with a critical eye. Factors influencing the reliability of genealogical information include: the knowledge of the informant (or writer); the bias and mental state of the informant (or writer); the passage of time and the potential for copying and compiling errors.

The quality of census data has been of special interest to historians, who have investigated reliability issues.

[ 105 ] [ 109 ] Knowledge of the informant [ edit ] The informant is the individual who provided the recorded information. Genealogists must carefully consider who provided the information and what they knew. In many cases the informant is identified in the record itself. For example, a death certificate usually has two informants: a physician who provides information about the time and cause of death and a family member who provides the birth date, names of parents, etc.

When the informant is not identified, one can sometimes deduce information about the identity of the person by careful examination of the source. One should first consider who was alive (and nearby) when the record was created. When the informant is also the person recording the information, the handwriting can be compared to other handwriting samples.

When a source does not provide clues about the informant, genealogists should treat the source with caution. These sources can be useful if they can be compared with independent sources. For example, a census record by itself cannot be given much weight because the informant is unknown. However, when censuses for several years concur on a piece of information that would not likely be guessed by a neighbor, it is likely that the information in these censuses was provided by a family member or other informed person. On the other hand, information in a single census cannot be confirmed by information in an undocumented compiled genealogy since the genealogy may have used the census record as its source and might therefore be dependent on the same misinformed individual.

Motivation of the informant [ edit ] Even individuals who had knowledge of the fact, sometimes intentionally or unintentionally provided false or misleading information. A person may have lied in order to obtain a government benefit (such as a military pension), avoid taxation, or cover up an embarrassing situation (such as the existence of a non-marital child). A person with a distressed state of mind may not be able to accurately recall information. Many genealogical records were recorded at the time of a loved one's death, and so genealogists should consider the effect that grief may have had on the informant of these records.

The effect of time [ edit ] The passage of time often affects a person's ability to recall information. Therefore, as a general rule, data recorded soon after the event are usually more reliable than data recorded many years later. However, some types of data are more difficult to recall after many years than others. One type especially prone to recollection errors is dates. Also the ability to recall is affected by the significance that the event had to the individual. These values may have been affected by cultural or individual preferences.

Copying and compiling errors [ edit ] Genealogists must consider the effects that copying and compiling errors may have had on the information in a source. For this reason, sources are generally categorized in two categories: original and derivative. An original source is one that is not based on another source. A derivative source is information taken from another source. This distinction is important because each time a source is copied, information about the record may be lost and errors may result from the copyist misreading, mistyping, or miswriting the information. Genealogists should consider the number of times information has been copied and the types of derivation a piece of information has undergone. The types of derivatives include: photocopies, transcriptions, abstracts, translations, extractions, and compilations.

In addition to copying errors, compiled sources (such as published genealogies and online pedigree databases) are susceptible to misidentification errors and incorrect conclusions based on circumstantial evidence. Identity errors usually occur when two or more individuals are assumed to be the same person. Circumstantial or indirect evidence does not explicitly answer a genealogical question, but either may be used with other sources to answer the question, suggest a probable answer, or eliminate certain possibilities. Compilers sometimes draw hasty conclusions from circumstantial evidence without sufficiently examining all available sources, without properly understanding the evidence, and without appropriately indicating the level of uncertainty.

Primary and secondary sources [ edit ] In genealogical research, information can be obtained from primary or secondary sources. Primary sources are records that were made at the time of the event, for example a death certificate would be a primary source for a person's death date and place. Secondary sources are records that are made days, weeks, months, or even years after an event.

Standards and ethics [ edit ] Organizations that educate and certify genealogists have established standards and ethical guidelines they instruct genealogists to follow.

Research standards [ edit ] Genealogy research requires analyzing documents and drawing conclusions based on the evidence provided in the available documents. Genealogists need standards to determine whether or not their evaluation of the evidence is accurate. In the past, genealogists in the United States borrowed terms from judicial law to examine evidence found in documents and how they relate to the researcher's conclusions. However, the differences between the two disciplines created a need for genealogists to develop their own standards. In 2000, the Board for Certification of Genealogists published their first manual of standards. The Genealogical Proof Standard created by the Board for Certification of Genealogists is widely distributed in seminars, workshops, and educational materials for genealogists in the United States. Other genealogical organizations around the world have created similar standards they invite genealogists to follow. Such standards provide guidelines for genealogists to evaluate their own research as well as the research of others.

Standards for genealogical research include: [ 110 ] [ 111 ] [ 112 ] Clearly document and organize findings.

Cite all sources in a specific manner so that others can locate them and properly evaluate them.

Locate all available sources that may contain information relevant to the research question.

Analyze findings thoroughly, without ignoring conflicts in records or negative evidence.

Rely on original, rather than derivative sources, wherever possible.

Use logical reasoning based on reliable sources to reach conclusions.

Acknowledge when a specific conclusion is only "possible" or "probable" rather than "proven".

Acknowledge that other records that have not yet been discovered may overturn a conclusion.

Ethical guidelines [ edit ] Genealogists often handle sensitive information and share and publish such information. Because of this, there is a need for ethical standards and boundaries for when information is too sensitive to be published. Historically, some genealogists have fabricated information or have otherwise been untrustworthy. Genealogical organizations around the world have outlined ethical standards as an attempt to eliminate such problems. Ethical standards adopted by various genealogical organizations include: [ 113 ] [ 114 ] [ 112 ] [ 111 ] [ 115 ] Respect copyright laws Acknowledge where one consulted another's work and do not plagiarize the work of other researchers.

Treat original records with respect and avoid causing damage to them or removing them from repositories.

Treat archives and archive staff with respect.

Protect the privacy of living individuals by not publishing or otherwise disclosing information about them without their permission.

Disclose any conflicts of interest to clients.

When doing paid research, be clear with the client about scope of research and fees involved.

Do not fabricate information or publish false or unproven information as proven.

Be sensitive about information found through genealogical research that may make the client or family members uncomfortable.

In 2015, a committee presented standards for genetic genealogy at the Salt Lake Institute of Genealogy. The standards emphasize that genealogists and testing companies should respect the privacy of clients and recognize the limits of DNA tests. It also discusses how genealogists should thoroughly document conclusions made using DNA evidence.

[ 116 ] In 2019, the Board for the Certification of Genealogists officially updated their standards and code of ethics to include standards for genetic genealogy.

[ 110 ] See also [ edit ] Ahnentafel Cluster genealogy One-place study Descent from antiquity Dynasty Genealogical numbering systems Genealogy tourism International Museum for Family History List of genealogy databases List of Mormon family organizations List of national archives References [ edit ] ^ "Généalogie de la famille de Landas" .

Lib.ugent.be (in French). Belgium . Retrieved 2020-08-27 .

^ "genealogy" .

etymonline.com .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

Archived from the original on 1 May 2019 . Retrieved 19 March 2016 .

from Greek genealogia 'the making of a pedigree', from genea 'generation, descent' ... + -logia (see -logy)... Meaning 'study of family trees' is from 1768.

^ a b c "Genealogy or Family History? What's the Difference?" . Society of Genealogists.

Archived from the original on 5 July 2013 . Retrieved 10 Aug 2013 .

^ "family tree" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 2021-02-26 .

^ "genealogy" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 2019-06-25 .

^ "family history" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 2019-06-25 .

^ "Interested in Family History? Are Genealogy and Family History different?" .

National Genealogical Society .

Archived from the original on 22 June 2019 . Retrieved 12 July 2019 .

^ Bishop, Ronald (2008). "In the Grand Scheme of Things: An Exploration of the Meaning of Genealogical Research".

Journal of Popular Culture .

41 (3): 393–412.

^ "Teacher's guide for PBS Ancestors series" . BYU.

Archived from the original on 2006-10-06 . Retrieved 2006-09-05 .

^ Bowen, Alison (19 April 2019).

"Genealogy sites are helping unite birth parents and adoptees — but not everyone wants to be found" .

SCNow Morning News .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2019 . Retrieved 12 July 2019 .

^ Tapp, Fiona (18 January 2019).

"What It's Like to Fill in the Gaps in Your Health History When You're Adopted" .

Self Magazine .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2019 . Retrieved 12 July 2019 .

^ Pearl, Diana (30 October 2018).

"How Ancestry Became a Best-Selling Amazon Product by Highlighting User's Emotional Stories" .

Adweek .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2019 . Retrieved 12 July 2019 .

^ Sokolove, Sofia (30 June 2018).

"How Did DNA Kits Become so Popular—and What's Next?" .

The Alcalde . Ex-Students Association of The University of Texas.

Archived from the original on 22 July 2019 . Retrieved 12 July 2019 .

^ "Mihi – Introductions" .

Māori ki Te Whare Wānanga o Ōtākou / Māori at the University of Otago . University of Otago.

Archived from the original on 30 January 2019 . Retrieved 11 November 2018 .

^ Himona, R.N. (2001).

"Whakapapa Maori:Structure, Terminology and Usage" .

from Hawaiki to Hawaiki: the Maori people of Aotearoa / New Zealand . Kingston Strategic (NZ) Ltd.

Archived from the original on 24 June 2019 . Retrieved 24 June 2018 .

"Papa" is anything broad, flat and hard such as a flat rock, a slab or a board. "Whakapapa" is to place in layers, lay one upon another. Hence the term Whakapapa is used to describe both the recitation in proper order of genealogies, and also to name the genealogies.

^ Taonui, Rāwiri (1 Jul 2015).

"Story: Whakapapa – genealogy" .

Te Ara, Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Research & Publishing Group, Manatū Taonga Ministry for Culture and Heritage, Wellington, New Zealand.

Archived from the original on 24 June 2019 . Retrieved 24 June 2019 .

^ Te Rito, Joseph.

"Whakapapa: A framework for understanding identity" .

MAI Review .

2007 (2).

Archived from the original on 24 June 2019 . Retrieved 24 June 2019 .

^ "Topic:Genealogy" .

The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints: Newsroom . The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. 23 May 2011.

Archived from the original on 24 June 2019 . Retrieved 24 June 2018 .

Latter-day Saints believe that the eternal joining of families is possible through sacred sealing ceremonies that take place in temples. These temple rites may also be performed by proxy for those who have died. Consequently, for Latter-day Saints, genealogical research or family history is the essential forerunner for temple work for the dead. In Latter-day Saint belief, the dead have the choice to accept or reject the services performed for them.

^ "Why does the Mormon Church want state records? And what do they do with them?" .

ABC News Australia . 4 Jul 2018.

Archived from the original on 8 July 2018 . Retrieved 24 June 2018 .

Members of the church use family history records to perform sacred temple ordinances, such as baptisms, eternal marriages and sealings of children to parents, for their kindred dead if the deceased family members were unable to perform the rites themselves. This gives deceased ancestors the opportunity to accept these ordinances in the afterlife.

^ "Religion Library: The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints: Rituals and Worship: Rites and Ceremonies" .

Patheos .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2019 . Retrieved 12 July 2019 .

^ Richey, Jeffrey.

"Religion Library: Confucianism: Rituals and Worship: Rites and Ceremonies" .

Patheos .

Archived from the original on 12 July 2019 . Retrieved 12 July 2019 .

^ Alison  Weir, Britain's royal families (2008).

^ Michael Lisle-Williams,  "Merchant banking dynasties in the English class structure: ownership, solidarity and kinship in the City of London, 1850–1960." British Journal of Sociology (1984): 333–362.

^ Carolyn Strange, "Sisterhood of Blood: The Will to Descend and the Formation of the Daughters of the American Revolution." Journal of Women's History 26.3 (2014): 105–128.

^ Fenella Cannell,  "English ancestors: the moral possibilities of popular genealogy." Journal of the Royal Anthropological Institute 17.3 (2011): 462–480.

^ Brennan, Harry (30 October 2018).

"Next of kin lose out on inheritances as local authorities outsource heir hunters" .

The Telegraph .

Archived from the original on 24 June 2019 . Retrieved 2 Jul 2019 .

^ Ghert-Zand, Renee.

"UK's Jewish 'heir hunter' tracks down missing relatives who now stand to inherit" .

The Times of Israel .

Archived from the original on 24 June 2019 . Retrieved 2 Jul 2019 .

^ Nolan, Caitlin (June 2019).

"GEDmatch Helped Give 'Annie Doe' Her Name Back. Some Fear She's Among the Last as Site Revamps Privacy Policy" .

Inside Edition .

Archived from the original on 24 June 2019 . Retrieved 2 Jul 2019 .

^ Molteni, Megan.

"A Murder Trial Will Allow DNA Evidence From a Genealogy Site" .

Wired .

Archived from the original on 19 June 2019 . Retrieved 2 Jul 2019 .

^ Weinman, Sarah.

"The Cold Case Factory" .

Topic Magazine .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2019 . Retrieved 2 Jul 2019 .

^ Almasy, Steve (8 May 2019).

"Thanks to DNA sleuths, a Jane Doe killed 37 years ago might finally get a headstone with her name on it" .

CNN .

Archived from the original on 16 May 2019 . Retrieved 2 Jul 2019 .

^ Johnson, Lizzie (29 April 2018).

"Arrest of suspected Golden State Killer through genealogy opens 'Pandora's box' " .

San Francisco Chronicle .

Archived from the original on 24 June 2019 . Retrieved 2 Jul 2019 .

^ Daley, Jason.

"Historians Identify 35 Descendants of Leonardo da Vinci" .

Smithsonian.com .

Archived from the original on 24 June 2019 . Retrieved 2 Jul 2019 .

^ Mills, Elizabeth Shown.

"QuickLesson 18: Genealogy? In the Academic World? Seriously?" .

Evidence Explained: Historical Analysis, Citation & Source Usage .

Archived from the original on 1 July 2019 . Retrieved 2 Jul 2019 .

^ Kitagawa, Joseph Mitsuo (21 October 1987). "Shinto".

On Understanding Japanese Religion . Asian studies. Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press. p. 149.

ISBN 9780691102290 . Retrieved 24 June 2024 .

Among all the clans, the most powerful was the Imperial clan, which claimed both religious and political authority by virtue of its divine and solar ancestry. [...] It was taken for granted that the imperial palace was also the shrine of the Sun Goddess Amaterasu, the ancestress of the Imperial clan and the kami of the Yamato region.

^ Williamson, Robert W.

(14 November 2013) [1924].

The Social and Political Systems of Central Polynesia . Vol. 1 (reprint ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 289.

ISBN 9781107625822 . Retrieved 24 June 2024 .

[...] it was a common custom for great Polynesian chiefs to claim ancient or divine descent [...] ^ Scharfe, Hartmut (1989). "The King and his court".

The State in Indian Tradition . Handbuch der Orientalistik: Indien, Part 2, Indien - ISSN 0169-9377, volume 3. Leiden: E. J. Brill. p. 37.

ISBN 9789004090606 . Retrieved 24 June 2024 .

The descent of royal families from gods such as Wodan/Oðin, Yngwi, Týr, and the divine ancestry claimed by Agamemnon, Menelaos  Priamos, Nestor and Helena has its parallel in the solar and lunar dynasties of India and in the claims by Pallavas, Candellas, etc. who trace their lineage back to Brahman and Visņu [...].

^ Barbara Yorke,  "Anglo-Saxon origin legends." in Myth, Rulership, Church and Charters ed by Julia Barrow and Andrew Wareham. (Routledge, 2017) pp: 29–44.

^ Chaney, William A.

(1999) [1970]. "The Woden-sprung kings: Germanic sacral kingship and divine descent".

The Cult of Kingship in Anglo-Saxon England: The Transition from Paganism to Christianity (reprint ed.). Manchester: Manchester University Press. p. 41.

ISBN 9780719003721 . Retrieved 24 June 2024 .

The pagan genealogies of the Woden-sprung kings were in time assimilated to Christianity. In the mythical lineage of King Aethelwulf of Wessex in the Anglo-Saxon Chronicle sub anno 855, Woden is sixteenth in descent from 'Sceaf, who is the son of Noah and was born in Noah's Ark'.

^ Chaney, William A.

(1999) [1970]. "The Woden-sprung kings: Germanic sacral kingship and divine descent".

The Cult of Kingship in Anglo-Saxon England: The Transition from Paganism to Christianity (reprint ed.). Manchester: Manchester University Press. pp.

41– 42.

ISBN 9780719003721 . Retrieved 24 June 2024 .

[...] this 'arcane' transition makes the West Saxon rulers collateral relatives, as Professor Magoun has pointed out, of our Lord.

^ "New Confucius Genealogy out next year" .

China Internet Information Center . 2008.

Archived from the original on 2008-11-03 . Retrieved 2008-11-01 .

^ "Updated Confucius family tree has two million members" .

Xinhua News Agency . February 16, 2008. Archived from the original on October 22, 2012 . Retrieved 2008-11-01 .

^ Elizabeth Shown Mills, "Genealogy in the 'Information Age': History's New Frontier?" Archived 2013-06-06 at the Wayback Machine National Genealogical Society Quarterly 91 (December 2003): 260–77.

^ Michelle Hudson, "The Effect of 'Roots' and the Bicentennial on Genealogical Interest among Patrons of the Mississippi Department of Archives and History", Journal of Mississippi History 1991 53(4): 321–336 ^ "Grow Your Family Tree in Salt Lake City – Genealogy is the Fastest Growing Hobby in North America" . Archived from the original on 2008-05-15 . Retrieved 2008-07-15 .

^ "Genealogy.com: Recent Maritz Poll Shows Explosion in Popularity of Genealogy" . Archived from the original on May 16, 2008 . Retrieved September 14, 2019 .

^ a b c d e f Kulshrestha, Parul (4 August 2024).

"How caste-based genealogists have been preserving India's history" .

Indian Express . Retrieved 13 June 2025 .

^ a b c Murari, Krishan (21 February 2025).

"Kashi, Ujjain, Prayagraj priests are now adding to National Archives of India" .

The Print . Retrieved 13 June 2025 .

^ a b c "Tradition, legacy and ancestry will meet Digital India" .

The Pioneer . 21 February 2025 . Retrieved 13 June 2025 .

^ Nijhawan, Surabhi 10 Places Across The World That Help You Trace Your Ancestors Archived 2017-08-02 at the Wayback Machine ; India Times , Published on 29-Jan-2016; Accessed on 8-May-2017 ^ a b François Weil, Family Trees: A History of Genealogy in America (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2013), Chapter 1.

^ François Weil, "John Farmer and the Making of American Genealogy", New England Quarterly 2007 80(3): 408–434.

^ "LDS Genealogy and Family History Library" .

Utah.com .

Archived from the original on 23 September 2016 . Retrieved 2 Jul 2019 .

^ James B. Allen et al. "Hearts Turned To The Fathers", BYU Studies 1994–1995 34(2): 4–392 ^ " Family History Centers Archived 2019-06-27 at the Wayback Machine ", The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints: Newsroom, Accessed 2 Jul 2019.

^ "Family History Program" . Archived from the original on 2018-06-28 . Retrieved 2018-06-28 .

^ American Society of Genealogists (ASG) (2014).

"Fellows of the American Society of Genealogists" . ASG.

Archived from the original on 1 December 2017 . Retrieved 20 November 2017 .

^ "5 Genealogical Journals You Should Be Reading" .

Archived from the original on April 16, 2019 . Retrieved September 14, 2019 .

^ David L. Greene, "Scholarly Genealogical Journals in America, The American Genealogist 61 (1985–86): 116–20.

^ GRENSTAM p. 6 ^ Board for Certification of Genealogists, The BCG Genealogical Standards Manual (Provo, Utah: Ancestry, 2000); National Genealogical Society, American Genealogy (Arlington, Virginia: 2005); Val D. Greenwood, The Researcher's Guide to American Genealogy, 3d ed. (Baltimore: Genealogical Publishing Co., 2000)" ^ Elizabeth Shown Mills, Evidence Explained: Citing History Sources from Artifacts to Cyberspace , (Baltimore: Genealogical Publishing Co., 2007).

^ Jeffry Peter La Marca, Simple Citations for Genealogical Sources , (Orting: Family Roots Publishing Co., 2024).

^ Drew Smith, Organize Your Genealogy: Strategies and Solutions for Every Researcher (F+ W Media, Inc., 2016).

^ CeCe Moore, "The History of Genetic Genealogy and Unknown Parentage Research: An Insider's View." Journal of Genetic Genealogy 8.1 (2016): 35–37.

^ "RootsWeb.com Home Page" .

Archived from the original on July 10, 2018 . Retrieved September 14, 2019 .

^ "Ancestry® | Genealogy, Family Trees & Family History Records" . Archived from the original on May 18, 2018 . Retrieved September 14, 2019 .

^ Peter Wayner (2004-04-22).

"From Shared Resources, Your Personal History" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 2009-01-14 .

^ Heather Lynn Willever-Farr, Finding Family Facts in the Digital Age: Family History Research and Production Literacies (Drexel University Press, 2017).

^ Adam Kriesberg,  "The future of access to public records? Public–private partnerships in US state and territorial archives." Archival Science 17.1 (2017): 5–25.

^ Drew Smith, Organize Your Genealogy: Strategies and Solutions for Every Researcher (F+ W Media, Inc., 2016).

^ Elizabeth Powell Crowe,  and William P. Mann.

Genealogy online (Osborne/McGraw-Hill, 2001).

^ Adam Kriesberg, "The future of access to public records? Public–private partnerships in US state and territorial archives." Archival Science 17.1 (2017): 5–25.

^ David Hey, The Oxford Companion to Family and Local History (2nd ed. 2008).

^ Peter R. Knights, "City Directories as Aids to Ante-Bellum Urban Studies: A Research Note", Historical Methods Newsletter, Sept. 1969 2:1–9 ^ "Documentation vs. DNA: The False Argument | Evidence Explained" .

www.evidenceexplained.com .

Archived from the original on July 2, 2019 . Retrieved September 14, 2019 .

^ Thea Miller, "The German registry: The evolution of a recordkeeping model", Archival Science Volume 3, Number 1 / March, 2003 pp 43–62; Michael Drake, "An Elementary Exercise in Parish Register Demography", Economic History Review Vol. 14, No. 3 (1962), pp. 427–445 in JSTOR Archived 2017-01-03 at the Wayback Machine ^ Verma, Binod Bihari (1973).

Maithili Karna Kayasthak Panjik Sarvekshan (A Survey of the Panji of the Karan Kayasthas of Mithila) . Madhepura: Krānti Bihārī Varmā.

OCLC 20044508 .

^ Carolyn Brown Heinz.

"Fieldnotes: First lesson of the Genealogist" . Department of Anthropology, California State University, Chico. Archived from the original on 2008-03-29 . Retrieved 2008-01-29 .

^ Pranava K Chaudhary (3 April 2007).

"Family records of Maithil Brahmins lost" .

India Times .

Archived from the original on 13 October 2007 . Retrieved 2008-01-29 .

^ Donald Harman Akenson, Some Family: The Mormons and How Humanity Keeps Track of Itself Montreal: McGill-Queen's University Press, 2007; Johni Cerny and Wendy Elliott, The Library: A Guide to the LDS Family History Library.

Salt Lake City: Ancestry Pub., 1988.

^ "Thanks A Billion" .

FamilySearch . April 22, 2013. Archived from the original on 2013-09-18 . Retrieved Apr 22, 2013 ; "News and Press: Official FamilySearch.org News and Press Releases" , Archived 2013-07-31 at the Wayback Machine FamilySearch. Retrieved 2013-5-26.

^ "FamilySearch Family History Books Reaches a New Milestone" , Archived 2013-08-15 at the Wayback Machine FamilySearch, 5 August 2013. Retrieved 2013-8-5.

^ "FamilySearch African American Genealogy Records" .

FamilySearch . February 3, 2015.

Archived from the original on March 21, 2016 . Retrieved May 9, 2016 .

^ "Research Wiki" , Archived 2013-05-27 at the Wayback Machine FamilySearch. Retrieved 2013-5-26; FamilySearch Wiki contributors, "Research Outlines" , Archived 2013-05-15 at the Wayback Machine FamilySearch Wiki.

Retrieved 2013-5-26.

^ "Mormon church's storied Granite Mountain vault opened for virtual tour" .

Deseret News . April 29, 2010. Archived from the original on August 12, 2014 . Retrieved July 29, 2014 .

^ "Granite Mountain Records Vault" . The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. March 14, 2014.

Archived from the original on July 8, 2019 . Retrieved July 18, 2019 .

^ "United States Census 1940" . FamilySearch. December 25, 2012.

Archived from the original on July 11, 2014 . Retrieved July 29, 2014 .

^ "Family History Volunteers Reach Billion-Record Milestone" . The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. April 22, 2013.

Archived from the original on June 29, 2019 . Retrieved July 18, 2019 .

^ Blake, Kellee (1996).

"First in the Path of the Firemen: The Fate of the 1890 Population Census" .

Prologue Magazine . Vol. 28, no. 1. Washington, D.C.: U.S. National Archives and Records Administration.

Archived from the original on 12 September 2013 . Retrieved 2 Aug 2019 .

^ a b Hutchinson, Angelyn (20 Apr 2018).

"FamilySearch's Strategy to Help Preserve the World's Archives" .

FamilySearch . The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Archived from the original on 13 July 2019 . Retrieved 2 Aug 2019 .

^ Yan, Alice (18 March 2018).

"Getting to the roots of the Confucius family tree: the cultural significance of knowing one's ancestry" .

South China Morning Post . Hong Kong.

Archived from the original on 2 August 2019 . Retrieved 2 Aug 2019 .

^ "Genealogy Important In Korea, Expert Says" .

The Deseret News . 13 Sep 1975 . Retrieved 2 Aug 2019 .

During the Korean War, the Communists tried to destroy genealogies and replace the strong family government with a dominant Communist figure. Refugees fleeing from the north brought their genealogies with them on their backs as one of their most precious possessions. Many of these genealogies are now found in fragmentary form in South Korea.

^ "Church Preserves Precious Records of African Nation" .

Newsroom . The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. 28 Sep 2017.

Archived from the original on 20 July 2019 . Retrieved 2 Aug 2019 .

^ "Preserve the Pensions: A project to digitize the War of 1812 Pension Files" .

Federation of Genealogical Societies .

Archived from the original on 13 July 2019 . Retrieved 2 Aug 2019 .

^ Mark D. Herber, Ancestral Trails: The Complete Guide to British Genealogy and Family History 2nd ed. Baltimore: Genealogical Publishing Company, 2006; David Hey, Family History and Local History in England.

London: Longman, 1987; Sherry Irvine, Scottish Ancestry: Research Methods for Family Historians , 2nd ed. Provo, UT: Ancestry, 2003; David Moody, Scottish Family History . Baltimore: Genealogical Pub. Co., 1990.

^ Trafford R. Cole, Italian Genealogical Records: How to Use Italian Civil, Ecclesiastical & Other Records in Family History Research Salt Lake City, Utah: Ancestry, 1995; Cruise, M. T. W., Guidelines For Ancestry Research With an Emphasis on African-American Genealogy Dublin, VA: Author, 2007; Jessie Carney Smith, Ethnic Genealogy: A Research Guide , Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1983.

^ G. J. A. Guth, "Surname Spellings and Computerised Record Linkage", Historical Methods Newsletter , vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 10–19, 1976.

^ Lorine McGinnis Schulze.

"Dutch Patronymics of the 1600s" . Olive Tree Genealogy.

Archived from the original on 2008-05-01 . Retrieved 2008-01-29 .

^ Surnames made their way into the language in the 19th and 20th century, but are not widely used. In order to protect the patronymics system, in Iceland it is forbidden by law to introduce a new surname.

"Lög um Mannanöfn" (in Icelandic).

Archived from the original on 2009-01-26 . Retrieved 2008-01-29 .

^ An earlier law was in effect in 1828, but was largely ignored in the rural areas.

^ "Lov av 9. februar 1923 nr. 2 om personnavn (Norwegian Name Law of 1923)" (in Norwegian). Archived from the original on 2007-06-10 . Retrieved 2008-01-29 .

^ E. A. Wrigley, English population history from family reconstitution, 1580–1837 (1997); Catherine Quantin et al., "Which are the best identifiers for record linkage?", Informatics for Health and Social Care 2004, Vol. 29, No. 3–4, Pages 221–227 ^ Marc Picard, "Genealogical Evidence and the Americanization of European Family Names", Names: American Name Society 2009 57(1): 30–51 ^ a b Peter R. Knights, "The Accuracy of Age Reporting in the Manuscript Federal Census of 1850 and 1860", Historical Methods Newsletter, 4 (1971), 79–83; Karen Oppenheim Mason and Lisa G. Cope, "Sources of Age and Date-of-Birth Misreporting in the 1900 U.S. Census", Demography vol. 24, no. 4 (Nov., 1987), pp. 563–573.

^ "Calendar Converter" . Fourmilab.ch.

Archived from the original on 2017-09-13 . Retrieved 2013-03-26 .

^ Robert M. Hauser, "Occupational Status in the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries" Archived 2010-06-21 at the Wayback Machine , Historical Methods (1982) vol. 15, no. 3, 111–126.

^ For example, United States Bureau of Employment Security, The Dictionary of Occupational Titles (1939) ^ Richard H. Steckel, "The Quality of Census Data for Historical Inquiry: A Research Agenda", Social Science History, vol. 15, no. 4 (Winter, 1991), pp. 579–599.

^ a b "Ethics and Standards" .

Board for Certification of Genealogists .

Archived from the original on 21 July 2019 . Retrieved 23 July 2019 .

^ a b "Hints & Tips Five: Standards and Good Practice in Genealogy" .

Society of Genealogists .

Archived from the original on 4 July 2019 . Retrieved 23 July 2019 .

^ a b "Code of Conduct/Ethics" .

International Association of Jewish Genealogical Societies .

Archived from the original on 2 July 2019 . Retrieved 23 July 2019 .

^ "Genealogist's Code of Ethics" .

Board for Certification of Genealogists .

Archived from the original on 3 June 2019 . Retrieved 23 July 2019 .

^ "Code of Ethics and Professional Practices" .

Association of Professional Genealogists .

Archived from the original on 4 July 2019 . Retrieved 23 July 2019 .

^ "Code of Ethics" .

The Australasian Federation of Family History Organisations .

Archived from the original on 4 July 2019 . Retrieved 23 July 2019 .

^ "The Genetic Genealogy Standards" .

The Genetic Genealogy Standards .

Archived from the original on 24 July 2019 . Retrieved 23 July 2019 .

[/] Further reading [ edit ] General Christian, Peter (2012).

The Genealogist's Internet (5th ed.). London, England: Bloomsbury.

ISBN 978-1-4081-5957-6 .

Hopwood, Nick, Rebecca Flemming , Lauren Kassell, eds.

Reproduction: Antiquity to the Present Day (Cambridge UP, 2018). Illustrations. xxxv + 730 pp.

excerpt also online review 44 scholarly essays by historians.

McClure, Rhonda (2002).

The Complete Idiot's Guide to Online Genealogy (2nd ed.). Indianapolis: Alpha.

ISBN 0-02-864267-8 .

Merriman, Brenda Dougall (2010).

Genealogical Standards of Evidence: A Guide for Family Historians (2nd ed.). Toronto: Ontario Genealogical Society .

ISBN 978-1-55488-451-3 .

Morgan, George G. (2009).

How to Do Everything: Genealogy . New York: McGraw-Hill.

ISBN 9780071625340 .

Simpson, Jack (2008).

Basics of Genealogy Reference: A Librarian's Guide . Westport, CT: Libraries Unlimited.

ISBN 978-1-59158-514-5 .

British Isles Durie, Bruce (2009).

Scottish Genealogy . Stroud, England: History Press.

Grenham, John (2006).

Tracing Your Irish Ancestors (3rd ed.). Baltimore: Genealogical Publishing Co.

Herber, Mark D.

(2004).

Ancestral Trails: The Complete Guide to British Genealogy and Family History (2nd ed.). Baltimore, MD: Genealogical Publishing Co.

Hey, David (2008).

The Oxford Companion to Family and Local History (2nd ed.). Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Kriesberg, Adam. "The future of access to public records? Public–private partnerships in US state and territorial archives." Archival Science 17.1 (2017): 5–25.

Ryan, James G. (1997).

Irish Records: Sources for Family and Local History . Salt Lake City, UT: Ancestry.

China Ching, Frank (1988).

Ancestors: 900 Years in the Life of a Chinese Family . New York City, NY: Morrow .

ISBN 0-688-04461-1 .

Yan, May (2010).

Research Guide to Chinese Genealogy (2nd ed.). Global Research and Archival Management.

Continental Europe Adams, Suzanne Russo (2008).

Finding Your Italian Ancestors: A Beginner's Guide . Provo, UT: Ancestry.

Chorzempa, Rosemary A. (1993).

Polish roots = Korzenie polskie . Baltimore, MD: Genealogical Publishing Co.

Malka, Jeffrey S. (2009).

Sephardic Genealogy: Discovering Your Sephardic Ancestors and Their World (2nd ed.). Bergenfield, NJ: Avotaynu.

Riemer, Shirley J.; Minert, Roger P.

(2010).

The German Research Companion (3rd ed.). Sacramento, CA: Lorelei Press.

Volkmar Weiss: German Genealogy in Its Social and Political Context.

KDP, 2020, ISBN 979-8667675457 .

North America Eales, Anne Bruner; Kvasnicka, Robert M., eds. (2000).

Guide to Genealogical Research in the National Archives of the United States . Washington, DC: National Archives .

Greenwood, Val. D. (2000).

The Researcher's Guide to American Genealogy (3rd ed.). Baltimore: Genealogical Publishing Co.

Kennedy, Patricia; Roy, Janine (1984).

Tracing Your Ancestors in Canada (8th, rev. ed.). Ottawa: Public Archives Canada .

ISBN 0-662-13339-0 .

Rose, Christine (2004).

Courthouse Research for Family Historians: Your Guide to Genealogical Treasures . San Jose, CA: CR Publications.

ISBN 0-929626-16-8 .

Smith, Marian L. (n.d.).

"American Names: Declaring Independence" .

Immigration Daily . American Immigration LLC.

Szucs, Loretto Dennis; Luebking, Sandra Hargreaves (2006).

The Source: A Guidebook of American Genealogy (3rd, rev. ed.). Provo, UT: Ancestry.

ISBN 9781593312770 .

Taylor, Robert M.; Crandall, Ralph S. (1986).

Generations and Change: Genealogical Perspectives in Social History . Mercer University Press.

Weil, François (2013).

Family Trees: A History of Genealogy in America . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Willard, Jim; Willard, Terry; Wilson, Jane (1997).

Ancestors: A Beginners Guide to Family History and Genealogy . Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

External links [ edit ] Genealogy at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Data from Wikidata Discussions from Meta-Wiki Documentation from MediaWiki Family History UK v t e Family History Rights Household Nuclear family Extended family Conjugal family Immediate family Matrifocal family First-degree relatives Parent mother father Child son daughter Sibling brother sister Second-degree relatives Grandparent Grandchild Uncle / Aunt Niece and nephew Third-degree relatives Great-grandparent Great-grandchild Great-uncle / Great-aunt Cousin Family-in-law Spouse wife husband Parent-in-law Sibling-in-law Child-in-law daughter-in-law son-in-law Stepfamily Stepparent stepfather stepmother Stepchild Stepsibling Kinship terminology Kinship Australian Aboriginal kinship Adoption Affinity Consanguinity Disownment Divorce Estrangement Family of choice Fictive kinship Marriage Nurture kinship Chinese kinship Hawaiian kinship Sudanese kinship Eskimo kinship Iroquois kinship Crow kinship Omaha kinship Genealogy and lineage Bilateral descent Cadet branch Common ancestor Family name Heirloom Heredity Inheritance Lineal descendant collateral descent Matrilineality Patrilineality Progenitor Clan Royal descent Family trees Pedigree chart Genogram Ahnentafel Genealogical numbering systems Seize quartiers Quarters of nobility Relationships Agape (parental love) Eros (marital love) Philia (brotherly love) Storge (familial love) Filial piety Polyfidelity Holidays Mother's Day U.S.

Father's Day Father–Daughter Day Siblings Day National Grandparents Day Parents' Day Children's Day Japan Family Day Canada American Family Day International Day of Families National Family Week UK National Adoption Day Related Breadwinner model Single parent Wedding anniversary Godparent Birth order Only child Middle child syndrome Sociology of the family Museum of Motherhood Astronaut family Dysfunctional family Domestic violence Incest Sibling abuse Sibling estrangement Sibling rivalry v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Spain Argentina Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland NARA Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐wljdd
Cached time: 20250814214806
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.387 seconds
Real time usage: 1.620 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12472/1000000
Revision size: 105428/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 534371/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11615/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 52/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 389790/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.831/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 26627914/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1283.507      1 -total
 39.21%  503.273      1 Template:Reflist
 24.96%  320.390     54 Template:Cite_web
 17.98%  230.715     18 Template:Navbox
 11.93%  153.150     30 Template:Cite_book
 11.62%  149.111      1 Template:Historiography
 11.44%  146.855      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  9.04%  115.968      1 Template:Etymology
  7.09%   90.989      1 Template:Wikt-lang
  6.76%   86.790     36 Template:Ill Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:12025:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814214806 and revision id 1301243041. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Genealogy&oldid=1301243041 " Categories : Genealogy Kinship and descent Family history Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Icelandic-language sources (is) CS1 Norwegian-language sources (no) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2010 Pages with broken anchors Articles needing additional references from April 2015 All articles needing additional references Pages using Sister project links with default search Pages using Sister project links with hidden wikidata Articles prone to spam from July 2015 This page was last edited on 18 July 2025, at 21:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Genealogy 93 languages Add topic

