Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Background 2 Organization Toggle Organization subsection 2.1 Earliest groups 2.2 Smaller groups 2.3 Tongmenghui 2.4 Later groups 2.5 Views 3 Society and class Toggle Society and class subsection 3.1 Overseas Chinese 3.2 Emerging intellectual class 3.3 Gentry and businessmen 3.4 Foreign supporters 3.5 Soldiers of the New Armies 4 Prelude Toggle Prelude subsection 4.1 First Guangzhou Uprising 4.2 Independence Army Uprising 4.3 Huizhou Uprising 4.4 Great Ming Uprising 4.5 Ping-liu-li Uprising 4.6 Beijing assassination attempt 4.7 Huanggang Uprising 4.8 Huizhou Qinühu Uprising, Huizhou 4.9 Anqing Uprising 4.10 Qinzhou Uprising 4.11 Zhennanguan Uprising 4.12 Qin-Lian Uprising 4.13 Hekou Uprising, Yunnan 4.14 Mapaoying Uprising, Anhui 4.15 Guangzhou 5 Wuchang Uprising 6 Provincial uprisings Toggle Provincial uprisings subsection 6.1 Changsha 6.2 Shaanxi 6.3 Jiujiang 6.4 Shanxi 6.5 Kunming 6.6 Nanchang 6.7 Shanghai 6.8 Guizhou 6.9 Zhejiang 6.10 Jiangsu 6.11 Anhui 6.12 Guangxi 6.13 Fujian 6.14 Guangdong 6.15 Shandong 6.16 Ningxia 6.17 Sichuan 6.18 Nanjing 6.19 Dihua and Yili Uprising 7 Territorial uprisings Toggle Territorial uprisings subsection 7.1 Tibet 7.2 Outer Mongolia 7.3 Tannu Uriankhai secession 8 Change of government Toggle Change of government subsection 8.1 North: Qing Court final transformation attempt 8.2 South: Provisional Government in Nanking 8.3 North–South Conference 9 Establishment of the Republic Toggle Establishment of the Republic subsection 9.1 Republic of China declared and national flag issued 9.2 Donghuamen Incident 9.3 Abdication of the Emperor 9.4 Capital location debate 10 Republican Government in Beijing 11 Proposed Han monarchy 12 Legacy Toggle Legacy subsection 12.1 Social influence 12.2 Historical significance 12.3 Modern evaluation 12.4 Media 13 See also 14 References 15 Sources 16 Further reading 17 External links Toggle the table of contents 1911 Revolution 61 languages አማርኛ العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Български Буряад Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Euskara فارسی Français 贛語 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latviešu Lietuvių Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Nordfriisk Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan پنجابی Polski Português Română Русский Shqip Simple English Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Republican revolution in China This article is about the historical event. For the Chinese television series, see 1911 Revolution (TV series) .

1911 Revolution 辛亥革命 Part of the anti-Qing movements Nanjing Road in Shanghai after the Shanghai Uprising , hung with the Five Races Under One Union flags used by revolutionaries in Shanghai and Northern China Date October 10, 1911 ( 1911-10-10 ) – February 12, 1912 ( 1912-02-12 ) Location China Result Revolutionary victory Belligerents Monarchists Imperial Armed Forces Beiyang Army Revolutionaries Tongmenghui Provincial governments Commanders and leaders Xuantong Emperor Empress Dowager Longyu Zaifeng, Prince Chun Yuan Shikai Ma Anliang Yang Zengxin Zhao Erfeng Ma Qi Sun Yat-sen Chiang Kai-shek Huang Xing Li Yuanhong Song Jiaoren Chen Qimei Cai E Hu Hanmin Strength 200,000 100,000 Casualties and losses est.

170,000 est.

50,000 1911 Revolution Chinese 辛亥革命 Literal meaning "Xinhai ( stem-branch ) revolution" Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Xīnhài gémìng Bopomofo ㄒㄧㄣ ㄏㄞˋ ㄍㄜˊ ㄇㄧㄥˋ Wade–Giles Hsin 1 -hai 4 ko 2 -ming 4 Tongyong Pinyin Sin-hài gé-mìng IPA [ɕín.xâɪ kɤ̌.mîŋ] Yue: Cantonese Yale Romanization Sān-hoih gaak-mihng Jyutping san1 hoi6 gaak3 ming6 IPA [sɐn˥ hɔj˨ kak̚˧ mɪŋ˨] Southern Min Hokkien POJ Sin-hāi kek-bēng Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e The 1911 Revolution , also known as the Xinhai Revolution or Hsinhai Revolution , ended China's last imperial dynasty , the Qing dynasty , and led to the establishment of the Republic of China (ROC). The revolution was the culmination of a decade of agitation, revolts, and uprisings. Its success marked the collapse of the Chinese monarchy , the end of over two millennia of imperial rule in China and the 267-year reign of the Qing, and the beginning of China's early republican era .

[ 1 ] The Qing had long struggled to reform the government and resist foreign aggression, but conservatives in the Qing court opposed the program of reforms after 1900 as too radical and reformers considered it too slow. Several factions, including underground anti-Qing groups , revolutionaries in exile, reformers who wanted to save the monarchy by modernizing it, and activists across the country debated how or whether to overthrow the Qing dynasty. The flashpoint came on 10 October 1911 with the Wuchang Uprising , an armed rebellion by members of the New Army . Similar revolts then broke out spontaneously around the country, and revolutionaries in every province renounced the Qing dynasty. On 1 November 1911, the Qing court appointed Yuan Shikai (leader of the Beiyang Army ) as prime minister, and he began negotiations with the revolutionaries.

In Nanjing, revolutionary forces created a provisional coalition government . On 1 January 1912, the National Assembly declared the establishment of the Republic of China, with Sun Yat-sen , leader of the Tongmenghui , as President of the Republic of China . A brief civil war between the North and the South ended in compromise. Sun resigned in favor of Yuan, who would become president of the new national government if he could secure the abdication of the Qing emperor. The edict of abdication of the six-year-old Xuantong Emperor was promulgated on 12 February 1912. Yuan was sworn in as president on 10 March 1912.

In December 1915, Yuan restored the monarchy and proclaimed himself the Hongxian Emperor, but the move was met with strong opposition by the population and the Army, leading to his abdication in March 1916 and the Republic's reinstatement. Yuan's failure to consolidate a legitimate central government before his death in June 1916 led to decades of political division and warlordism , including an attempt at imperial restoration of the Qing dynasty .

The name "Xinhai Revolution" derives from the traditional Chinese calendar , where "Xinhai" ( 辛亥 ) is the label corresponding to 1911 according to the sexagenary cycle .

[ 2 ] The governments of both Taiwan and China consider themselves the legitimate successors to the 1911 Revolution and honor the ideals of the revolution, including nationalism , republicanism , modernization of China, and national unity . 10 October is the National Day of the Republic of China on Taiwan, and the Anniversary of the 1911 Revolution in China.

Part of a series on Revolution Characteristics Bourgeois Colour Communist Counter-revolutionary Democratic Nonviolent Passive Permanent Proletarian From above Wave Social Methods Boycott Civil disorder Civil war Class struggle Contentious politics Coup d'état Demonstration Human chain Direct action Guerrilla warfare Insurgency Mass mobilization Mutiny Protest Rebellion Resistance Nonviolent Civil Disobedience Riot Samizdat Strike action Tax resistance Terror Examples English Atlantic American Brabant Liège French Haitian Spanish American Serbian Greek 1820s 1830 July Belgian Texas 1848 Italian states February German Hungarian Eureka Bulgarian unification Philippine Iranian First Second Young Turk Mexican Chinese Xinhai Communist Cultural 1917–1923 Russian German Siamese Spanish August Guatemalan Hungarian (1956) Cuban Rwandan Nicaraguan Argentine Carnation Saur People Power 1989 Yogurt Velvet Romanian Singing Bolivarian Bulldozer Rose Orange Tulip Kyrgyz Arab Spring Tunisian Egyptian Yemeni Euromaidan Second Arab Spring Sudanese Politics portal v t e Part of a series on Three Principles of the People Principles Anti-imperialism Republicanism Nationalism (Mínzú) Chinese unification Pan-Asianism Five Races Under One Union Zhonghua minzu Democracy (Mínquán) Five-Power Constitution Popular initiative Popular sovereignty Recall election Referendum Revolutionary people's rights [ zh ] Socialism (Mínshēng) Equalization of Land Ownership [ zh ] The International Development of China [ zh ] Land reform in Taiwan State-owned enterprise History 1911 Revolution First United Front History of the Kuomintang June 16 incident [ zh ] Kidnapped in London National Revolution [ zh ] National Revolutionary Army Nationalist government New Life Movement Northern Expedition Provisional Government of the Republic of China Second Revolution Parties Chinese Nationalist Party Chinese Pan-Blue Alliance Revolutionary Committee 123 Democratic Alliance Democratic Alliance Hong Kong and Kowloon Trades Union Council Revive China Society Tongmenghui Young China Party Organisations Blue Shirts Society Chinese Muslim Association Grand Alliance for China's Reunification under the Three Principles of the People Guominjun Kuomintang Youth League Reorganization Group Western Hills Group People Sun Chen Chiang (Ching-kuo) Chiang (Kai-shek) Chiang (Wei-shui) Dai Hu Huang Liao Shao Song Wang (Chonghui) Wang (Jingwei) Wu Yu Zhang [ zh ] Zhu Zou (Lu) [ zh ] Zou (Rong) Outside of mainland China Kokang Democracy and Unity Party Korea Nationalist Party Malaysian Chinese Association People's Power Party Restoration League of Vietnam Three Principles of the Equality Taiwanese People's Party Tibet Improvement Party Vietnamese Nationalist Party Related ideologies Anarchism Anti-communism (element) Chiangism Communitarianism Cultural conservatism Dai Jitao Thought Georgism Liberalism (element) Multiracialism Progressivism Economic Revolutionary nationalism Related topics Anti-Qing sentiment Constitution of the Republic of China Democratic centralism (Kuomintang) National Assembly National Anthem Pan-Blue Coalition mainland China Hong Kong Republic of China Military Academy Republic of China portal People's Republic of China portal v t e Background [ edit ] 1905 map of the Qing empire Empress Dowager Cixi (left, 1835–1908), who controlled court politics for 47 years, and the Guangxu Emperor (right, 1871–1908), who ruled over the Qing dynasty from 1875 until his death Kang Youwei (left, 1858–1927) and Liang Qichao (1873–1929) who fled into exile, and Tan Sitong (right, 1865–1898) was executed. After the 1911 Revolution, Liang became Minister of Justice of the Republic of China. Kang remained a royalist and supported restoring the last Qing emperor Puyi in 1917.

After suffering its first defeat by the West in the First Opium War in 1842, a conservative court culture constrained efforts to reform and did not want to cede authority to local officials. After its defeat in the Second Opium War in 1860, the Qing began efforts to modernize by adopting Western technologies through the Self-Strengthening Movement . In the wars against the Taiping (1851–1864), Nian (1851–1868), Yunnan (1856–1873) and Dungan (1862–1877), the court came to rely on armies raised by local officials.

[ 3 ] After a generation of relative success in importing Western naval and weapons technology, defeat in the First Sino-Japanese War in 1895 was all the more humiliating and convinced many of the need for institutional change.

[ 4 ] The court established the New Army under Yuan Shikai , and many concluded that Chinese society also needed to be modernized if technological and commercial advancements were to succeed.

In 1898, the Guangxu Emperor turned to reformers like Kang Youwei and Liang Qichao , who offered a program that was inspired in large part by the reforms in Japan . They proposed basic reform in education, military, and economy in the so-called Hundred Days' Reform .

[ 4 ] The reform was abruptly canceled by a conservative coup led by Empress Dowager Cixi .

[ 5 ] The Emperor was put under house arrest in June 1898, where he remained until his death in 1908.

[ 3 ] The reformers Kang and Liang exiled themselves to avoid being executed. The Empress Dowager controlled policy until her death in 1908, with support from officials such as Yuan. Attacks on foreigners and Chinese Christians in the Boxer Rebellion , which was encouraged by the Empress Dowager, prompted another foreign invasion of Beijing in 1900.

After the Allies imposed a punitive settlement , the Qing court carried out basic fiscal and administrative reforms , including local and provincial elections. The moves did not secure trust or wide support among political activists. Many of them like Zou Rong felt strong anti-Manchu prejudice and blamed the Qing for China's troubles. Kang Youwei and Liang Qichao formed the Emperor Protection Society in an attempt to restore the emperor, [ 3 ] but others, such as Sun Yat-sen organized revolutionary groups to overthrow the dynasty rather than reform it. They could operate only in secret societies and underground organizations, in foreign concessions, or exile overseas, but created a following among Overseas Chinese in North America and Southeast Asia, and within China, even in the new armies. The Chinese famine of 1906–1907 was also a major contributor to the revolution.

[ 6 ] Following the death of the Guangxu Emperor and Cixi in 1908, the throne was inherited by the two-year-old Xuantong Emperor , with Prince Chun as a regent. The prince continued the reform path of Cixi, but conservative Manchu elements in the court opposed it, which caused further support for revolutionaries.

History of the Republic of China Culture Economy Education Geography Politics 1912–1949 Mainland rule 1911 Revolution ( Sun Yat-sen ) Provisional Gov't Beiyang Government Warlord Era Northern Expedition Shanghai massacre Chinese Civil War Nationalist Government Second Sino-Japanese War ( Nanjing Massacre ) Second Kuomintang-Communist Civil War Constitutional government 1945–present Taiwan rule Retrocession of Taiwan February 28 incident White Terror Exodus to Taiwan Korean War First Taiwan Strait Crisis Vietnam War Second Taiwan Strait Crisis Project National Glory Three Noes Lieyu massacre Wild Lily student movement Third Taiwan Strait Crisis Anti-Secession Law 100th anniversary Sunflower Student Movement 2015 Ma–Xi meeting 2017 Summer Universiade History of China the PRC (1949–present) Taiwan (geographical) Taipei Kaohsiung Beijing the Kuomintang the Taiwan issue Taiwan portal v t e Organization [ edit ] Earliest groups [ edit ] Many revolutionaries and groups wanted to overthrow the Qing government to re-establish the Han-led government. The earliest revolutionary organizations were founded outside of China, such as Yeung Ku-wan 's Furen Literary Society , which was created in Hong Kong in 1890. There were 15 members, including Tse Tsan-tai , who made political satire such as "The Situation in the Far East", one of the first manhua , and who later became one of the core founders of the South China Morning Post .

[ 7 ] Sun Yat-sen in London Sun Yat-sen 's Revive China Society was established in Honolulu in 1894, the main purpose being raising funds for revolutions.

[ 8 ] The two organizations merged in 1894.

[ 9 ] Smaller groups [ edit ] The Huaxinghui (China Revival Society) was founded in 1904 by the notables Huang Xing , Zhang Shizhao , Chen Tianhua , Sun Yat-sen, and Song Jiaoren , and 100 others. Its motto was "Take one province by force, and inspire the other provinces to rise." [ 10 ] The Guangfuhui (Restoration Society) was also founded in 1904 in Shanghai, by Cai Yuanpei . Other notable members included Zhang Binglin and Tao Chengzhang.

[ 11 ] Despite professing the anti-Qing cause, the Guangfuhui was highly critical of Sun Yat-sen. One of the most famous female revolutionaries was Qiu Jin , who fought for women's rights and was also from the Guangfuhui.

[ 12 ] The Gelaohui (Elder Brother Society) was another group, with Zhu De , Wu Yuzhang , Liu Zhidan ( 劉志丹 ) and He Long . The revolutionary group would eventually develop a strong link with the later Chinese Communist Party .

[ citation needed ] Sun Yat-sen with members of the Tongmenghui Tongmenghui [ edit ] Sun Yat-sen successfully united the Revive China Society, the Huaxinghui, and the Guangfuhui and established the unified Tongmenghui (United League) in August 1905 in Tokyo.

[ 13 ] It had loose organizations distributed across and outside China. Sun Yat-sen was the leader of the unified group. Other revolutionaries who worked with the Tongmenghui include Wang Jingwei and Hu Hanmin . When the Tongmenghui was established, more than 90% of the Tongmenghui members were between 17 and 26 years old.

[ 14 ] Some of the work in the era includes manhua publications such as the Journal of Current Pictorial .

[ 15 ] Later groups [ edit ] In February 1906, Rizhihui ( 日知會 ) also had many revolutionaries, including Sun Wu ( 孫武 ), Zhang Nanxian ( 張難先 ), He Jiwei and Feng Mumin.

[ 16 ] [ 17 ] A nucleus of attendees at the conference evolved into the Tongmenghui's establishment in Hubei.

In July 1907, several members of Tongmenghui in Tokyo advocated a revolution in the area of the Yangtze . Liu Quiyi ( 劉揆一 ), Jiao Dafeng ( 焦達峰 ), Zhang Boxiang ( 張伯祥 ) and Sun Wu ( 孫武 ) established the Gongjinhui ( 共進會 ).

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] In January 1911, the revolutionary group Zhengwu Xueshe (振武學社) was renamed as Wenxueshe (Literary Society) ( 文學社 ).

[ 20 ] Jiang Yiwu ( 蔣翊武 ) was chosen as the leader.

[ 21 ] Both organizations would play a major role during the Wuchang Uprising.

Many young revolutionaries supported anarchism in China . In Tokyo, Liu Shipei proposed to overthrow the Manchus and return to Chinese classical values. In Paris , well-connected young intellectuals, Li Shizhen, Wu Zhihui and Zhang Renjie , agreed with Sun's revolutionary program and joined the Tongmenghui, but argued that simply replacing one government with another would not be progress. They believed that fundamental cultural change and a revolution in family, gender, and social values would remove the need for government and coercion.

Zhang Ji and Wang Jingwei were among the anarchists, who defended assassination and terrorism as means to awaken the people to revolution, but others insisted that education was the only justifiable strategy. Important anarchists included Cai Yuanpei . Zhang Renjie gave Sun major financial help. Many of the anarchists would later assume high positions in the Kuomintang .

[ 22 ] Views [ edit ] Main article: Anti-Qing sentiment Many revolutionaries promoted anti-Qing and anti-Manchu sentiments and revived memories of conflict between the ethnic minority Manchu and the ethnic majority Han Chinese from the late Ming dynasty (1368–1644). Leading intellectuals were influenced by books that had survived from the final years of the Ming dynasty, the last dynasty of Han Chinese . In 1904, Sun Yat-sen announced that his organization's goal was "to expel the Tatar barbarians, to revive Zhonghua , establish a republic, and distribute land equally among the people." ( 驅除韃虜, 恢復中華, 創立民國, 平均地權 ).

[ 13 ] Many underground groups promoted the ideas of "resist Qing and restore the Ming" (反清復明), which had been around since the days of the Taiping Rebellion .

[ 23 ] Others, such as Zhang Binglin , spread calls to "slay the Manchus" ( 興漢滅胡 ) [ citation needed ] and the concept of "Anti-Manchuism" ( 排滿主義 ).

[ 24 ] Society and class [ edit ] Many groups supported the 1911 Revolution, including students and intellectuals returning from abroad, participants of revolutionary organizations, Overseas Chinese, soldiers of the new army, local gentry, and farmers.

Overseas Chinese [ edit ] Assistance from the Overseas Chinese was important in the 1911 Revolution. In 1894, the first year of the Revive China Society, the first meeting ever held by the group was held in the home of Ho Fon, an Overseas Chinese who was the leader of the first Chinese Church of Christ.

[ 25 ] The Overseas Chinese supported and actively participated in funding revolutionary activities, especially the Southeast Asian Chinese of British Malaya . Many of those groups were reorganized by Sun, who was referred to as the "father of the Chinese revolution." [ 26 ] Emerging intellectual class [ edit ] The Qing government established new schools and encouraged students to study abroad as part of the Self-Strengthening movement . Many young people attended the new schools or went abroad to study in places like Japan.

[ 27 ] A new progressive class of intellectuals emerged from those students and contributed immensely to the 1911 Revolution. Besides Sun, key figures in the revolution, such as Huang Xing, Song Jiaoren , Hu Hanmin , Liao Zhongkai , Zhu Zhixin , and Wang Jingwei were all Chinese students in Japan. Some were young students like Zou Rong , known for writing Revolutionary Army , a book in which he talked about the extermination of the Manchus for the 260 years of oppression, sorrow, cruelty, and tyranny, and creating new revolutionary Han figures.

[ 28 ] Before 1908, revolutionaries focused on coordinating those organizations in preparation for uprisings they would launch; those these groups would provide most of the manpower needed to overthrow the Qing dynasty. After the 1911 Revolution, Sun recalled the days of recruiting support for the revolution and said, "The literati were deeply into the search for honors and profits, so they were regarded as having only secondary importance. By contrast, organizations like Sanhehui were able to sow widely the ideas of resisting the Qing and restoring the Ming." [ 29 ] Gentry and businessmen [ edit ] Prince Qing with royal cabinet members The gentry's strength in local politics became apparent. From December 1908, the Qing government created some apparatus to allow the gentry and businessmen to participate in politics. These middle-class people were originally supporters of constitutionalism. However, they became disenchanted when the Qing government created a cabinet with Prince Qing as prime minister .

[ 30 ] By early 1911, an experimental cabinet had thirteen members, nine of whom were Manchus selected from the imperial family.

[ 31 ] Foreign supporters [ edit ] Besides Chinese and overseas Chinese, some supporters and participants of the 1911 Revolution were foreigners; among them, the Japanese were the most active group. Some Japanese even became members of Tongmenghui.

Miyazaki Touten was the closest Japanese supporter; others included Heiyama Shu and Ryōhei Uchida .

Homer Lea , an American, who became Sun Yat-sen's closest foreign advisor in 1910, supported Sun Yat-sen's military ambitions.

[ 32 ] British soldier Rowland J. Mulkern also took part in the revolution.

[ 33 ] Some foreigners, such as English explorer Arthur de Carle Sowerby , led expeditions to rescue foreign missionaries in 1911 and 1912.

[ 34 ] Yuan Shikai (1859–1916) Beiyang Army being trained in Xiaozhan, Tianjin Yuan rose to power in north China and built the Beiyang Army .

The far right-wing Japanese ultra-nationalist Black Dragon Society supported Sun Yat-sen's activities against the Manchus, believing that overthrowing the Qing would help the Japanese take over the Manchu homeland and that Han Chinese would not oppose the takeover. Toyama believed that the Japanese could easily take over Manchuria and that Sun Yat-sen and other anti-Qing revolutionaries would not resist and help the Japanese take over and enlarge the opium trade in China, while the Qing was trying to destroy the opium trade. The Japanese Black Dragons supported Sun Yat-sen and anti-Manchu revolutionaries until the Qing collapsed.

[ 35 ] The far right-wing Japanese ultranationalist Gen'yōsha leader Tōyama Mitsuru supported anti-Manchu, anti-Qing revolutionary activities including the ones organized by Sun and supported Japanese taking over Manchuria. The anti-Qing Tongmenghui was founded and based in exile in Japan where many anti-Qing revolutionaries gathered.

The Japanese had been trying to unite anti-Manchu groups made out of Han people to take down the Qing. The Japanese were the ones who helped Sun Yat-sen unite all anti-Qing, anti-Manchu revolutionary groups together, and there were Japanese like Tōten Miyazaki inside of the anti-Manchu Tongmenghui revolutionary alliance. The Black Dragon Society hosted the Tongmenghui in its first meeting.

[ 36 ] The Black Dragon Society had very intimate, long term and influential relations with Sun Yat-sen who sometimes passed himself off as Japanese.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] [ 39 ] According to an American military historian, Japanese military officers were part of the Black Dragon Society. The Yakuza and Black Dragon Society helped arrange in Tokyo for Sun Yat-sen to hold the first Kuomintang meetings, and were hoping to flood China with opium and overthrow the Qing and deceive the Chinese into overthrowing the Qing to Japan's benefit. After the revolution was successful, the Japanese Black Dragons started infiltrating China and spreading opium. The Black Dragons pushed for the takeover of Manchuria by Japan in 1932.

[ 40 ] Sun Yat-sen was married to a Japanese woman, Kaoru Otsuki .

Soldiers of the New Armies [ edit ] The New Army was formed in 1901 after the defeat of the Qing in the First Sino-Japanese War . They were launched by a decree from eight provinces. New Army troops were by far the best trained and equipped. Recruits were of a higher quality than the old army and received regular promotions.

[ 27 ] Beginning in 1908, the revolutionaries began to shift their call to the new armies. Sun Yat-sen and the revolutionaries infiltrated the New Army.

[ 41 ] Prelude [ edit ] The central foci of the uprisings were mostly connected with the Tongmenghui and Sun Yat-sen, including subgroups. Some uprisings involved groups that never merged with the Tongmenghui. Sun Yat-sen may have participated in 8–10 uprisings; all uprisings failed before the Wuchang Uprising.

Flag of the First Guangzhou Uprising First Guangzhou Uprising [ edit ] In the spring of 1895, the Revive China Society , based in Hong Kong, planned the First Guangzhou Uprising [ zh ] .

Lu Haodong was tasked with designing the revolutionaries' Blue Sky with a White Sun flag.

[ 26 ] On 26 October 1895, Yeung Ku-wan and Sun Yat-sen led Zheng Shiliang and Lu Haodong to Guangzhou, preparing to capture Guangzhou in one strike. However, the details of their plans were leaked to the Qing government. The government began to arrest revolutionaries, including Lu Haodong, who was later executed.

[ 42 ] The First Guangzhou Uprising was a failure. Under pressure from the Qing government, the government of Hong Kong banned the two men from the territory for five years. Sun went into exile; and promoted revolution; and raised funds in Japan, the United States, Canada, and Britain. In 1901, following the Huizhou Uprising, Yeung Ku-wan was assassinated by Qing agents in Hong Kong. After his death, his family protected his identity by not putting his name on his tomb, just the number "6348." [ 43 ] Independence Army Uprising [ edit ] In 1900, after the Boxer Rebellion started, Tang Caichang ( 唐才常 ) and Tan Sitong of the previous Foot Emancipation Society organized the Independence Army. The Independence Army Uprising ( 自立軍起義 ) was planned to occur on 23 August 1900. Their goal was to overthrow Empress Dowager Cixi to establish a constitutional monarchy under the Guangxu Emperor. Their plot was discovered by the governors-general of Hunan and Hubei. About twenty conspirators were arrested and executed.

[ 44 ] Huizhou Uprising [ edit ] On 8 October 1900, Sun  ordered the launch of the Huizhou Uprising ( 惠州起義 ).

[ 45 ] The revolutionary army was led by Zheng Shiliang and initially included 20,000 men, who fought for half a month. However, after Japanese Prime Minister Hirobumi Ito prohibited Sun Yat-sen from carrying out revolutionary activities in Taiwan, Zheng Shiliang had no choice but to order the army to disperse. Accordingly, the uprising also failed. The British soldier Rowland J. Mulkern participated in the uprising.

[ 33 ] Zhang Zhidong Li Hongzhang Two important Qing figures at the time Great Ming Uprising [ edit ] Main article: Heavenly Kingdom of the Great Mingshun A very short uprising occurred from 25 to 28 January 1903 in an attempt to establish a "Great Ming Heavenly Kingdom" ( 大明順天國 ).

[ 46 ] It involved Tse Tsan-tai , Li Jitang ( 李紀堂 ), Liang Muguang ( 梁慕光 ), and Hong Quanfu ( 洪全福 ), who had taken part in the Jintian uprising during the Taiping Heavenly Kingdom era.

[ 47 ] Ping-liu-li Uprising [ edit ] Ma Fuyi ( 馬福益 ) and Huaxinghui was involved in an uprising in the areas of Pingxiang , Liuyang , and Liling ( 萍瀏醴起義 ) in 1905. The Ping-liu-li Uprising had recruited miners as early as 1903 to rise against the Qing ruling class. After the uprising failed, Ma Fuyi was executed.

[ 48 ] Beijing assassination attempt [ edit ] Wu Yue ( 吳樾) of the Guangfuhui carried out an assassination attempt at the Beijing Zhengyangmen East Railway station ( 正陽門車站 ) in an attack on five Qing officials on 24 September 1905.

[ 12 ] [ 49 ] Huanggang Uprising [ edit ] The Huanggang Uprising ( 黃岡起義 ) was launched on 22 May 1907, in Chaozhou .

[ 50 ] The revolutionary party, along with Xu Xueqiu ( 許雪秋 ), Chen Yongpo ( 陳湧波 ), and Yu Tongshi ( 余通實 ), launched the uprising and captured Huanggang city.

[ 50 ] After the uprising began, the Qing government quickly and forcefully suppressed it. Around 200 revolutionaries were killed.

[ 51 ] Huizhou Qinühu Uprising, Huizhou [ edit ] In the same year, Sun sent more revolutionaries to Huizhou to launch the "Huizhou Qinühu Uprising" ( 惠州七女湖起義 ).

[ 52 ] On 2 June, Deng Zhiyu ( 鄧子瑜 ) and Chen Chuan ( 陳純 ) gathered some followers, and together they seized Qing arms in the lake, 20 km (12 mi) from Huizhou.

[ 53 ] They killed several Qing soldiers and attacked Taiwei ( 泰尾 ) on 5 June.

[ 53 ] The Qing army fled in disorder, and the revolutionaries exploited the opportunity, captured several towns, and defeated the Qing army once again in Bazhiyie. Many organizations voiced their support after the uprising, and the number of revolutionary forces increased to two hundred men at its height. The uprising, however, ultimately failed.

Anqing Uprising [ edit ] A statue to honor revolutionary Qiu Jin On 6 July 1907, Xu Xilin of Guangfuhui led an uprising in Anqing , Anhui , which became known as the Anqing Uprising ( 安慶起義) .

[ 20 ] Xu, the police commissioner and the supervisor of the police academy, led an uprising that aimed to assassinate the provincial governor of Anhui, En Ming ( 恩銘 ).

[ 54 ] They were defeated after four hours of fighting. Xu was captured, and En Ming's bodyguards cut out his heart and liver and ate them.

[ 54 ] His cousin Qiu Jin was executed a few days later.

[ 54 ] Qinzhou Uprising [ edit ] From August to September 1907, the Qinzhou Uprising occurred (欽州防城起義) [ 55 ] against heavy taxation by the government. Sun sent Wang Heshun ( 王和順 ) there to assist the revolutionary army and captured the county in September.

[ 56 ] They attempted to besiege and capture Qinzhou but eventually had retreat to the area of Shiwandashan. Wang Heshun returned to Vietnam .

Zhennanguan Uprising [ edit ] On 1 December 1907, the Zhennanguan Uprising ( 鎮南關起事 ) took place at Zhennanguan along the Chinese-Vietnamese border. Sun Yat-sen sent Huang Mintang ( 黃明堂 ) to monitor the pass, which was guarded by a fort.

[ 56 ] With the assistance of supporters among the fort's defenders, the revolutionaries captured the cannon tower in Zhennanguan. Sun, Huang Xing . and Hu Hanmin personally went to the tower to command the battle.

[ 57 ] The Qing government sent troops led by Long Jiguang and Lu Rongting to counterattack, and the revolutionaries were forced to retreat into the mountainous areas. After the uprising's failure, Sun was forced to move to Singapore due to anti-Sun sentiments within the revolutionary groups.

[ 58 ] He returned to the mainland only after the Wuchang Uprising.

Qin-Lian Uprising [ edit ] On 27 March 1908, Huang Xing launched a raid, later known as the Qin-lian Uprising ( 欽廉上思起義 ), from a base in Vietnam and attacked the cities of Qinzhou and Lianzhou , in Guangdong . The rebels continued for fourteen days but were forced to end after the revolutionaries ran out of supplies.

[ 59 ] Hekou Uprising, Yunnan [ edit ] In April 1908, another uprising was launched in Yunnan , Hekou, called the Hekou Uprising ( 雲南河口起義 ). Huang Mingtang ( 黃明堂 ) led two hundred men from Vietnam and attacked Hekou on 30 April. Other participating revolutionaries included Wang Heshun ( 王和順 ) and Guan Renfu ( 關仁甫 ). They were outnumbered and defeated by government troops, however, and the uprising failed.

[ 60 ] Mapaoying Uprising, Anhui [ edit ] On 19 November 1908, the Mapaoying Uprising ( 馬炮營起義 ) was launched by the revolutionary group Yuewanghui ( 岳王會 ) member Xiong Chenggei ( 熊成基) in Anhui .

[ 61 ] The Yuewanghui was then of the Tongmenghui. The uprising also failed.

Guangzhou [ edit ] Main article: Second Guangzhou Uprising In February 1910, the Gengxu New Army Uprising ( 庚戌新軍起義 ), also known as the Guangzhou New Army Uprising ( 廣州新軍起義 ), took place.

[ 62 ] That involved a conflict between the citizens and local police against the New Army. After the revolutionary leader Ni Yingdian was killed by Qing forces, the remaining revolutionaries were quickly defeated, and the uprising failed.

The memorial for the 72 martyrs On 27 April 1911, an uprising occurred in Guangzhou, known as the Second Guangzhou Uprising ( 辛亥廣州起義 ) or Yellow Flower Mound Revolt ( 黃花岡之役 ). It ended in disaster, as 86 bodies were found (only 72 could be identified).

[ 63 ] The 72 revolutionaries were remembered as martyrs.

[ 63 ] Revolutionary Lin Juemin was one of the 72. On the eve of battle, he wrote "A Letter to My Wife" ( 與妻訣別書 ), later to be considered a masterpiece in Chinese literature.

[ 64 ] Wuchang Uprising [ edit ] The Iron Blood 18-star flag, used during the Wuchang Uprising Paths of the uprising Main articles: Wuchang Uprising and Battle of Yangxia The Literary Society ( 文學社 ) and the Progressive Association ( 共進會 ) were revolutionary organizations that involved in the uprising that began mainly by a Railway Protection Movement .

[ 19 ] In the late summer, some Hubei New Army units were ordered to neighboring Sichuan to quell the Railway Protection Movement, a mass protest against the Qing government's seizure and handover of local railway development ventures to foreign powers.

[ 65 ] [ better source needed ] Banner officers like Duanfang , the railway superintendent, [ 66 ] and Zhao Erfeng led the New Army against the Railway Protection Movement.

The New Army units of Hubei had originally been the Hubei Army, which had been trained by Qing official Zhang Zhidong .

[ 1 ] On 24 September, the Literary Society and Progressive Association convened a conference in Wuchang, along with sixty representatives from local New Army units. During the conference, they established a headquarters for the uprising. The leaders of the two organizations, Jiang Yiwu ( 蔣翊武 ) and Sun Wu ( 孫武 ), were elected as commander and chief of staff. Initially, the date of the uprising was to be 6 October 1911.

[ 67 ] It was postponed because of insufficient preparations.

Revolutionaries intent on overthrowing the Qing dynasty had built bombs, and on 9 October, one of them accidentally exploded.

[ 67 ] Sun had no direct part in the uprising and was traveling in the United States to recruit more support from Overseas Chinese. The Qing Viceroy of Huguang , Rui Cheng ( 瑞澂 ), tried to track down and arrest the revolutionaries.

[ 68 ] The squad leader Xiong Bingkun ( 熊秉坤 ) and others decided not to delay the uprising any longer and launched the revolt on 10 October 1911, at 7:00 p.m.

[ 68 ] The revolt was a success; the entire city of Wuchang had been captured by the revolutionaries on the morning of 11 October. That evening, they established a tactical headquarters and announced the establishment of the "Military Government of Hubei of Republic of China".

[ 68 ] The conference chose Li Yuanhong as the governor of the temporary government.

[ 68 ] Qing officers like the bannermen Duanfang and Zhao Erfeng were killed by the revolutionary forces.

Revolutionaries killed a German arms dealer in Hankou as he was delivering arms to the Qing.

[ 69 ] Revolutionaries killed 2 Germans and wounded 2 other Germans at the battle of Hanyang, including a former colonel.

[ 70 ] Provincial uprisings [ edit ] Map of uprisings during the 1911 Revolution After the success of the Wuchang Uprising, many other protests occurred throughout the country for various reasons. Some uprisings declared restoration (光復) of Han Chinese rule. Other uprisings were a step toward independence, and some were protests or rebellions against the local authorities.

[ citation needed ] Regardless of the reason for the uprising, the outcome was that all of the provinces renounced the Qing dynasty and joined the republicans.

Changsha [ edit ] Main article: Battle of Changsha (1911) On 22 October 1911, the Hunan Tongmenghui were led by Jiao Dafeng ( 焦達嶧 ) and Chen Zuoxin ( 陳作新 ).

[ 71 ] They headed an armed group, consisting partly of revolutionaries from Hongjiang and partly of defecting New Army units, in a campaign to extend the uprising into Changsha .

[ 71 ] They captured the city and killed the local Imperial general. They announced the establishment of the Hunan Military Government of the Republic of China and announced their opposition to the Qing Empire.

[ 71 ] Shaanxi [ edit ] On the same day, Shaanxi 's Tongmenghui, led by Jing Dingcheng ( 景定成 ) and Qian Ding ( 錢鼎 ) as well as Jing Wumu ( 井勿幕 ) and others including Gelaohui , launched an uprising and captured Xi'an after two days of fighting.

[ 72 ] The Hui Muslim community was divided in its support for the revolution. The Hui Muslims of Shaanxi supported the revolutionaries, and the Hui Muslims of Gansu supported the Qing. The native Hui of Xi'an joined the Han Chinese revolutionaries in slaughtering the Manchus.

[ 73 ] [ 74 ] The native Hui Muslims of Gansu province led by general Ma Anliang led more than twenty battalions of Hui troops to defend the Qing imperials and attacked Shaanxi, held by revolutionary Zhang Fenghui ( 張鳳翽 ).

[ 75 ] The attack was successful, and after news arrived that Puyi was about to abdicate, Ma agreed to join the new Republic.

[ 75 ] The revolutionaries established the "Qinlong Fuhan Military Government" and elected Zhang Fenghui, a member of the Yuanrizhi Society ( 原日知會 ), as new governor.

[ 72 ] After the Xi'an Manchu quarter fell on 24 October, Xinhai forces killed all the Manchus in the city, about 20,000. Many of its Manchu defenders committed suicide, including Qing General Wenrui ( 文瑞 ), who threw himself down a well. Only some wealthy Manchus who were ransomed and Manchu females survived. Wealthy Han Chinese seized Manchu girls to become their slaves, and poor Han Chinese troops seized young Manchu women to be their wives.

[ 76 ] Young Manchu girls were also seized by Hui Muslims of Xi'an during the massacre and brought up as Muslims.

[ 77 ] The Hui General Ma Anliang abandoned the Qing cause upon the Qing abdication in the Xinhai Revolution, and the Manchu governor general Shengyun was enraged at the revolution.

[ 78 ] [ 79 ] Pro-revolution Hui Muslims like Shaanxi Governor Ma Yugui and Beijing Imam Wang Kuan persuaded the Qing Hui General Ma Anliang to stop fighting by telling him that Muslims not should kill one another for the sake of the Qing monarchists but side with the republican revolutionaries. Ma Anliang then agreed to abandon the Qing under the combination of Yuan Shikai's actions and those messages from other Hui.

[ 80 ] [ 81 ] [ 82 ] [ 83 ] [ 84 ] [ 85 ] [ 86 ] [ 87 ] [ 88 ] [ 89 ] [ excessive citations ] A year before the massacre of Manchus in October 1911, an oath against Manchus had been sworn at the Great Goose Pagoda in Xi'an by the Gelaohui in 1911.

[ 90 ] [ 91 ] [ 92 ] Manchu banner garrisons were slaughtered in Nanjing, Zhenjiang, Taiyuan, Xi'an and Wuchang [ 93 ] [ 94 ] [ 95 ] [ 96 ] [ 97 ] The Manchu quarter was located in the northeastern part of Xi'an and walled off, and the Hui Muslim quarter was located in the northwestern part of Xi'an but did not have walls separating it from the Han parts. The southern part of Xi'an was entirely Han.

[ 98 ] [ 99 ] [ 100 ] [ 101 ] [ better source needed ] Xi'an had the biggest Manchu banner garrison quarter by area before its destruction.

[ 102 ] On 22 October 1911, the revolutionaries were led by students of the military academy who overcame the guards at the gates of Xi'an and shut them. They secured the arsenal, slaughtered all Manchus at their temple, and then stormed and slaughtered the Manchus in the Manchu banner quarter of the city. The Manchu quarter was set on fire, burning many Manchus alive. Many Manchus had stored gunpowder in their houses, which exploded from the fire, causing even more deaths. For three days, Manchu men, women and children alike were slaughtered. Only after that were Manchu women and girls spared, while Manchu men and boys continued to be slaughtered. Many Manchus committed suicide by overdosing on opium and throwing themselves into wells. It was estimated that between 10,000 to 20,000 Manchus were slaughtered.

[ 103 ] Ma Anliang was ordered to attack the revolutionaries in Shaanxi by the baoyi bondservant Chang Geng and Manchu Shengyun.

[ 104 ] [ 105 ] Eastern soldiers of the new republic were mobilized by Yuan Shikai when the attack against Shaanxi began by Ma Anliang, but news of the abdication of the Qing Emperor reached Ma Anliang before he attacked Xi'an. That made Ma end all military operations and change his allegiance to the Republic of China. All pro-Qing military activity in the northwest was then put to an end.

[ 106 ] Yuan Shikai managed to induce Ma to not attack Shaanxi after the Gelaohui took over the province and to accept the Republic of China under his presidency in 1912. During the National Protection War in 1916 between republicans and Yuan's monarchy, Ma readied his soldiers and informed the republicans that he and the Muslims would stick to Yuan until the end.

[ 107 ] Yuan Shikai ordered Ma Anliang to block Bai Lang (White Wolf) from going into Sichuan and Gansu by blocking Hanzhong and Fengxiangfu.

[ 108 ] The Protestant Shensi mission operated a hospital in Xian.

[ 109 ] Some American missionaries were reported killed in Xi'an.

[ 110 ] A report claimed Manchus massacred missionaries in the suburbs of Xi'an.

[ 111 ] Missionaries were reported killed in Xi'an and Taiyuan.

[ 112 ] Shaanxi joined the revolution on October 24.

[ 113 ] Sheng Yun was governor of Shaanxi in 1905.

[ 114 ] [ 115 ] [ 116 ] Some Gansu Hui, led by Ma Fuxiang , joined the republicans. General Ma Fuxiang did not participate with Ma Anliang in the battles with Shaanxi revolutionaries and refused to join the Qing Manchu Shengyun and Changgeng in their attempts to defend the Qing before their abdication, but the independence of Gansu from Qing control was jointly declared by non-Muslim gentry with Hui Muslim Ma Fuxiang.

[ 117 ] Jiujiang [ edit ] Flag used by naval fleet during the Jiujiang Uprising [ 118 ] [ better source needed ] On 23 October, Lin Sen , Jiang Qun ( 蔣群 ), Cai Hui ( 蔡蕙 ), and other members of the Tongmenghui in the province of Jiangxi plotted a revolt of New Army units.

[ 71 ] [ 119 ] A Qing naval fleet also revolted against the state, which solidified victory in the Wuchang Uprising.

[ 120 ] After they achieved victory, they announced their independence. The Jiujiang Military Government was then established.

[ 119 ] Shanxi [ edit ] On 29 October, Yan Xishan of the New Army led an uprising in Taiyuan , the capital city of the province of Shanxi .

[ 119 ] [ 121 ] The rebels in Taiyuan bombarded the streets where Banner people resided and killed all the Manchu.

[ 122 ] They managed to kill the Qing Governor of Shanxi, Lu Zhongqi ( 陸鍾琦 ).

[ 123 ] They then announced the establishment of Shanxi Military Government with Yan Xishan as the military governor.

[ 72 ] Kunming [ edit ] On 30 October, Li Genyuan ( 李根源 ) of the Tongmenghui in Yunnan joined with Cai E , Luo Peijin ( 羅佩金 ), Tang Jiyao , and other officers of the New Army to launch the Double Ninth Uprising ( 重九起義 ).

[ 124 ] They captured Kunming the next day, established the Yunnan Military Government, and chose Cai E as the military governor.

[ 119 ] Nanchang [ edit ] On 31 October, the Nanchang branch of the Tongmenghui-led New Army units in a successful uprising. They established the Jiangxi Military Government.

[ 71 ] Li Liejun was elected as the military governor.

[ 119 ] Li declared Jiangxi as independent and launched an expedition against Qing official Yuan Shikai.

[ 64 ] Shanghai [ edit ] Chen Qimei , military governor of Shanghai On 3 November, Shanghai's Tongmenghui and Guangfuhui and merchants led by Chen Qimei , Li Pingsu ( 李平書 ), Zhang Chengyou ( 張承槱 ), Li Yingshi ( 李英石 ), Li Xiehe ( 李燮和 ), and Song Jiaoren organized an armed rebellion in Shanghai.

[ 119 ] They received support from local police officers.

[ 119 ] The rebels captured the Jiangnan Workshop on the 4th and captured Shanghai soon afterward. On 8 November, they established the Shanghai Military Government and elected Chen Qimei as the military governor.

[ 119 ] He would eventually become one of the founders of the four big families of the Republic of China , along with some of the most well-known families of the era.

[ 125 ] Guizhou [ edit ] On 4 November, Zhang Bailin ( 張百麟 ) of the revolutionary party in Guizhou led an uprising, along with New Army units and students from the military academy. They immediately captured Guiyang , established the Great Han Guizhou Military Government, and chose Yang Jincheng ( 楊藎誠 ) and Zhao Dequan ( 趙德全 ) as respectively the chief and vice governor.

[ 126 ] Zhejiang [ edit ] Also on 4 November, revolutionaries in Zhejiang urged the New Army units in Hangzhou to launch an uprising.

[ 119 ] Zhu Rui ( 朱瑞 ), Wu Siyu ( 吳思豫 ), Lu Gongwang ( 吕公望 ) and others of the New Army captured the military supplies workshop.

[ 119 ] Other units, led by Chiang Kai-shek and Yin Zhirei ( 尹銳志 ), captured most of the government offices.

[ 119 ] Eventually, Hangzhou was under the control of the revolutionaries, and the constitutionalist Tang Shouqian ( 湯壽潛 ) was chosen as the military governor.

[ 119 ] Jiangsu [ edit ] On 5 November, Jiangsu constitutionalists and gentry urged Qing Governor Cheng Dequan ( 程德全 ) to declare independence and established the Jiangsu Revolutionary Military Government with Cheng himself as the governor.

[ 119 ] [ 127 ] Unlike some other cities, anti-Manchu violence began after the restoration on 7 November in Zhenjiang . Qing General Zaimu ( 載穆 ) agreed to surrender, but because of a misunderstanding, the revolutionaries were unaware that their safety was guaranteed. The Manchu quarters were ransacked, and an unknown number of Manchus were killed. Zaimu, feeling betrayed, committed suicide.

[ 128 ] This is regarded as the Zhenjiang Uprising ( 鎮江起義 ).

[ 129 ] [ 130 ] Anhui [ edit ] Members of Anhui 's Tongmenghui also launched an uprising on that day and laid siege to the provincial capital. The constitutionalists persuaded Zhu Jiabao , the Qing governor of Anhui, to declare independence.

[ 131 ] Guangxi [ edit ] On 7 November, the Guangxi political department decided to secede from the Qing government and declared Guangxi's independence. Qing Governor Shen Bingkun ( 沈秉堃 ) was allowed to remain, but Lu Rongting soon became the new governor.

[ 56 ] Lu Rongting would later rise to prominence during the Warlord Era, and his bandits controlled Guangxi for more than a decade.

[ 132 ] Under leadership of Huang Shaohong , the Muslim law student Bai Chongxi was enlisted into a Dare to Die unit to fight as a revolutionary.

[ 133 ] Fujian [ edit ] One of the old buildings occupied by the Guangfuhui in Lianjiang County , Fujian In November, members of Fujian 's branch of the Tongmenghui, along with Sun Daoren ( 孫道仁 ) of the New Army, launched an uprising against the Qing army.

[ 134 ] [ 135 ] The Qing viceroy, Song Shou ( 松壽 ), committed suicide.

[ 136 ] On 11 November, the entire Fujian province declared independence.

[ 134 ] The Fujian Military Government was established, and Sun Daoren was chosen as the military governor.

[ 134 ] Guangdong [ edit ] Near the end of October, Chen Jiongming , Deng Keng ( 鄧鏗 ), Peng Reihai ( 彭瑞海 ), and other members of Guangdong's Tongmenghui organized local militias to launch the uprising in Huazhou , Nanhai , Sunde and Sanshui in Guangdong Province.

[ 72 ] [ 137 ] On 8 November, after being persuaded by Hu Hanmin , General Li Zhun ( 李準 ) and Long Jiguang ( 龍濟光 ) of the Guangdong Navy agreed to support the revolution.

[ 72 ] The Qing viceroy of Liangguang , Zhang Mingqi ( 張鳴岐 ), was forced to discuss with local representatives a proposal for Guangdong's independence.

[ 72 ] They decided to declare it the next day. Chen Jiongming then captured Huizhou . On 9 November, Guangdong declare d its independence and established a military government.

[ 138 ] They elected Hu Hanmin and Chen Jiongming as Chief and Vice-Governor.

[ 139 ] Qiu Fengjia is known to have helped make the declaration of independence more peaceful.

[ 138 ] It was unknown at the time if representatives from the European colonies of Hong Kong and Macau would be ceded to the new government.

[ clarification needed ] Shandong [ edit ] On 13 November, after being persuaded by the revolutionary Ding Weifen and several other officers of the New Army, the Qing governor of Shandong , Sun Baoqi , agreed to secede from the Qing government and declared Shandong's independence.

[ 72 ] Ningxia [ edit ] On 17 November, Ningxia Tongmenghui launched the Ningxia Uprising ( 寧夏會黨起義 ). The revolutionaries sent Yu Youren to Zhangjiachuan to meet the Dungan Sufi master Ma Yuanzhang to persuade him not to support the Qing. However, Ma did not want to endanger his relationship with the Qings. He sent the eastern Gansu Muslim militia under the command of one of his sons to help Ma Qi fight the Ningxia Gelaohui.

[ 140 ] [ 141 ] Ma Anliang, Changgeng, and Shengyun failed to capture Shaanxi from the revolutionaries. In Ningxia, Qing forces were attacked by both Hui Muslim Gelaohui and Han Gelaohui members, and Hui General Ma Qi and Ma Yuanzhang were in the Qing forces fighting against them, Hoverver, Ma Yuanzhang defected to the republicans after Ma Anliang had given up on the Qing.

[ 142 ] However, the Ningxia Revolutionary Military Government was established on 23 November.

[ 72 ] Some revolutionaries involved included Huang Yue ( 黃鉞 ) and Xiang Shen ( 向燊 ), who gathered New Army forces at Qinzhou ( 秦州 ).

[ 143 ] [ 144 ] Sichuan [ edit ] On 21 November, Guang'an organized the Great Han Shu Northern Military Government.

[ 72 ] [ 145 ] On 22 November, Chengdu and Sichuan declared independence. By the 27th, the Great Han Sichuan Military Government had been established, headed by revolutionary Pu Dianzun ( 蒲殿俊 ).

[ 72 ] The Qing official Duanfang would also be killed.

[ 72 ] Nanjing [ edit ] 1911 battle at Ta-ping gate, Nanjing. Painting by T. Miyano.

On 8 November, supported by the Tongmenghui, Xu Shaozhen ( 徐紹楨 ) of the New Army announced an uprising in Molin Pass ( 秣陵關 ), 30 km (19 mi) away from Nanjing . Xu Shaozhen, Chen Qimei and other generals decided to form a united army under Xu to strike Nanjing together. On 11 November, the united army headquarters was established in Zhenjiang.

Between 24 November and 1 December, under the command of Xu Shaozhen, the united army captured Wulongshan ( 烏龍山 ), Mufushan ( 幕府山) ), Yuhuatai ( 雨花臺) ), Tianbao ( 天保城) ) among other Qing army strongholds. On 2 December, Nanjing was captured by the revolutionaries after the Battle of Nanjing.

[ 72 ] On 3 December, revolutionary Su Liangbi led troops in a massacre of a large number of Manchus. Shortly afterward, he was arrested, and his troops were disbanded.

[ 146 ] Dihua and Yili Uprising [ edit ] Main article: Xinhai Revolution in Xinjiang In Xinjiang on 28 December, Liu Xianzun ( 劉先俊 ) and revolutionaries started the Dihua Uprising ( 迪化起義 ).

[ 147 ] This was led by more than 100 members of Gelaohui.

[ 148 ] This uprising failed. On 7 January 1912, the Yili Uprising ( 伊犁起義 ) with Feng Temin [ zh ] began.

[ 147 ] [ 148 ] Qing governor Yuan Dahua [ zh ] (袁大化) fled and submitted his resignation to Yang Zengxin because he could not handle fighting the revolutionaries.

[ 149 ] On 8 January, a new Yili government was established for the revolutionaries. Some Chinese historians now believe that contributed to the Qing dynasty's fall because it prevented the Qing's plan to flee to the west.

[ 150 ] [ 148 ] The revolutionaries would be defeated at Jinghe in January and February; [ 149 ] [ 151 ] Eventually, the abdication to come would make Yuan Shikai recognize Yang Zengxin's rule and appoint him Governor of Xinjiang, and the province join the republicans.

[ 149 ] Eleven more former Qing officials would be assassinated in Zhenxi , Karashahr , Aksu , Kucha , Luntai , and Kashgar in April and May 1912.

[ 149 ] The revolutionaries printed new multilingual media.

[ 152 ] Territorial uprisings [ edit ] Tibet [ edit ] Main articles: Xinhai Lhasa turmoil and Tibet (1912–1951) In 1905, the Qing sent Zhao Erfeng to Tibet to retaliate against rebellions .

[ 153 ] By 1908, Zhao was appointed imperial resident in Lhasa .

[ 153 ] Zhao was beheaded in December 1911 by pro-Republican forces.

[ 154 ] The bulk of the area historically known as Kham was now claimed to be the Xikang Administrative District , created by the republican revolutionaries.

[ 155 ] By the end of 1912, the last Qing troops were forced out of Tibet through India.

Thubten Gyatso , the 13th Dalai Lama , returned to Tibet in January 1913 from Sikkim , where he had been residing. When the new Chinese government apologized for the actions of the Qing and offered to restore the Dalai Lama to his former position, he replied he was not interested in Chinese ranks, Tibet had never been subordinated to China, Tibet was an independent country, and he was assuming the spiritual and political leadership of Tibet. That has many read the reply as a formal declaration of independence. The Chinese side ignored the response, and Tibet had thirty years free of interference from China until 1951. Tibet is still ruled by China.

[ 156 ] Outer Mongolia [ edit ] Main articles: Mongolian Revolution of 1911 and Bogd Khanate of Mongolia At the end of 1911, Outer Mongolian took action with an armed revolt against Qing authorities but was unsuccessful. The independence movement that took place was not limited to Outer Mongolia but was a pan-Mongolian phenomenon.

[ 157 ] On 29 December 1911, Bogd Khan became the ruler of the Bogd Khanate.

Inner Mongolia became a contested terrain between the Bogd Khanate and China.

[ 158 ] In general, Russia supported the independence of Outer Mongolia (including Tannu Uriankhai ) during the time of the 1911 Revolution.

[ 159 ] Tibet and Outer Mongolia then recognized each other in a treaty. In 1919, the Republic of China regained Outer Mongolia but lost it again in 1921. China, a member of the United Nations , has officially recognized the independence of Outer Mongolia since 1949. Taiwan opened a cultural representative office and economy as part of its recognition of Mongolia in 2002.

[ citation needed ] Tannu Uriankhai secession [ edit ] Main article: Uryankhay Republic Change of government [ edit ] Presidential seal of the provisional government of the Republic of China North: Qing Court final transformation attempt [ edit ] On 1 November 1911, the Qing government appointed Yuan Shikai as Prime Minister of the imperial cabinet, replacing Prince Qing .

[ 160 ] On 3 November, after a proposition by Cen Chunxuan from the Constitutional Monarchy Movement [ zh ] , the Qing court passed the Nineteen Articles , which turned the Qing from an absolute monarchy to a constitutional monarchy.

[ 161 ] [ 162 ] On 9 November, Huang Xing even cabled Yuan Shikai and invited him to join the Republic.

[ 163 ] The changes were too late, and the Emperor was about to forced to abdicate.

South: Provisional Government in Nanking [ edit ] Main article: Provisional Government of the Republic of China (1912) On 28 November 1911, Wuchang and Hanyang had fallen back to the Qing army. For their safety, the revolutionaries convened their first conference at the British Concession in Hankou on 30 November.

[ 164 ] By 2 December, the revolutionary forces were able to capture Nanking in the uprising ; and the revolutionaries decided to make it the site of the new provisional government.

[ 165 ] At the time, Beijing was still the Qing capital.

North–South Conference [ edit ] Tang Shaoyi , left. Edward Selby Little, middle.

Wu Tingfang , right.

On 18 December, the North–South Conference [ zh ] was held in Shanghai to discuss issues in the north and the south.

[ 166 ] The reluctance of foreign financiers to give financial support to the Qing government or the revolutionaries contributed to both sides agreeing to start negotiations.

[ 167 ] Yuan Shikai selected Tang Shaoyi as his representative.

[ 166 ] Tang left Beijing for Wuhan to negotiate with the revolutionaries.

[ 166 ] The revolutionaries chose Wu Tingfang .

[ 166 ] With the intervention of six foreign powers, the United Kingdom, the United States, Germany, Russia, Japan, and France, Tang Shaoyi and Wu Tingfang began to negotiate a settlement at the British concession.

[ 168 ] The foreign businessman Edward Selby Little (李德立) acted as the negotiator and facilitated the peace agreement.

[ 169 ] They agreed that Yuan Shikai would force the Qing emperor to abdicate in exchange for the southern provinces' support of him as President of the Republic. After considering the possibility that the new republic might be defeated in a civil war or by foreign invasion, Sun agreed to Yuan's proposal to unify China under Yuan Shikai's Beijing government. Further decisions were made to let the Emperor rule over his small court in the New Summer Palace . He would be treated as a ruler of a separate country and have expenses of several million taels in silver.

[ 170 ] Establishment of the Republic [ edit ] Sun Yat-sen and other members of the Government of the Republic of China visited the mausoleum of the Hongwu Emperor of the Ming dynasty , 15 February 1912 Republic of China declared and national flag issued [ edit ] On 29 December 1911, Sun Yat-sen was elected as the first provisional president , and 1 January 1912 was set as the first day of the First Year of the Republic of China.

[ 171 ] On 3 January, the representatives recommended Li Yuanhong as the Provisional Vice-president.

[ 172 ] During and after the 1911 Revolution, many groups that participated wanted their own pennant as the national flag. During the Wuchang Uprising, the military units of Wuchang wanted the nine-star flag with a taijitu .

[ 173 ] Others in competition included Lu Haodong 's Blue Sky with a White Sun flag.

Huang Xing preferred a flag bearing the mythical "well-field" system of village agriculture. In the end, the assembly compromised: the national flag would be the banner of Five Races Under One Union .

[ 173 ] The Five Races Under One Union flag with horizontal stripes represented the five major nationalities of the republic.

[ 174 ] The red represented Han, the yellow represented Manchus, the blue for Mongols , the white for Muslims , and the black for Tibetans .

[ 173 ] [ 174 ] Despite the general target of the uprisings to be the Manchus, Sun Yat-sen, Song Jiaoren and Huang Xing unanimously advocated racial integration to be carried out from the mainland to the frontiers.

[ 175 ] Donghuamen Incident [ edit ] On 16 January, while returning to his residence, Yuan was ambushed in a bomb attack that was organized by the Tongmenghui in Donghuamen [ zh ] , Beijing.

[ 176 ] Eighteen revolutionaries were involved. About ten guards died, but Yuan himself was not seriously injured.

[ 176 ] He sent a message to the revolutionaries the next day that pledged his loyalty and askied them not to organize any more assassination attempts against him.

Abdication of the Emperor [ edit ] Main article: Puyi § Abdication Imperial edict for abdication Zhang Jian drafted an abdication proposal, which was approved by the Provisional Senate. On 20 January, Wu Tingfang of the Nanking Provisional Government officially delivered the Imperial Edict of Abdication to Yuan Shikai for the abdication of Puyi.

[ 162 ] On 22 January, Sun Yat-sen announced that he would resign the presidency in favor of Yuan Shikai if the latter supported the Emperor's abdication.

[ 177 ] Yuan then pressured Empress Dowager Longyu with the threat that the imperial family's lives would not be spared if abdication did not come before the revolutionaries reached Beijing, but if the Emperor agreed to abdicate, the provisional government would honor the terms proposed by the imperial family.

On 3 February, Longyu gave Yuan full permission to negotiate the abdication terms of the Qing emperor. Yuan then drew up his own version and forwarded it to the revolutionaries on 3 February.

[ 162 ] His version consisted of three sections, instead of two.

[ 162 ] On 12 February, after they were pressured by Yuan and other ministers, Puyi (age six) and Empress Dowager Longyu accepted Yuan's terms of abdication.

[ 171 ] Capital location debate [ edit ] See also: History of Beijing As a condition for ceding leadership to Yuan, Sun insisted that the provisional government remain in Nanjing. On 14 February, the Provisional Senate initially voted 20–5 for making Beijing the capital over Nanjing, with two votes going for Wuhan and one for Tianjin. The Senate majority wanted to secure the peace agreement by taking power in Beijing. Zhang Jian and others reasoned that having the capital in Beijing would check against Manchu restoration and Mongol secession . However, Sun and Huang Xing argued for Nanjing to balance against Yuan's power base in the north.

Li Yuanhong presented Wuhan as a compromise. The next day, the Provisional Senate voted again, this time 19–6, for Nanjing, with two votes for Wuhan.

Sun sent a delegation led by Cai Yuanpei and Wang Jingwei to persuade Yuan to move to Nanjing. Yuan welcomed the delegation and agreed to accompany the delegates back to the south. Then on the evening of 29 February, riots and fires broke out all over the city. They were allegedly started by disobedient troops of Cao Kun , a loyal officer of Yuan. The disorder gave Yuan a pretext to stay in the north to guard against unrest. On 10 March, Yuan was inaugurated in Beijing as the Provisional President of the Republic of China. On 5 April, the Provisional Senate in Nanjing voted to make Beijing the capital of the Republic and convened in Beijing at the end of the month.

[ 178 ] Republican Government in Beijing [ edit ] Main article: Beiyang Government Yuan Shikai swearing in as the Provisional President in Beijing On 10 March 1912, Yuan Shikai was sworn as the second Provisional President of the Republic of China in Beijing.

[ 179 ] The first National Assembly election took place according to the Provisional Constitution . While in Beijing, the Kuomintang was formed on 25 August 1912.

[ 180 ] The Nationalists held the majority of seats after the election.

Song Jiaoren was elected as premier. However, Song was assassinated in Shanghai on 20 March 1913 under a secret order by Yuan.

[ 181 ] Proposed Han monarchy [ edit ] Some advocated that an ethnic Han be installed as Emperor of China, either a descendant of Confucius who held the noble title of the Duke of Yansheng , [ 182 ] [ 183 ] [ 184 ] [ 185 ] [ 186 ] or a descendant of the Ming imperial family who had the title of the Marquis of Extended Grace .

[ 187 ] [ 188 ] The Duke of Yansheng was proposed as a candidate for emperorship by Liang Qichao .

[ 189 ] [ better source needed ] The Han hereditary aristocratic nobility, like the Duke of Yansheng, was retained by the new Republic of China, and the title's holders continued to receive their pensions.

A plan backed by foreign bankers was reportedly in place to declare the Duke of Yansheng as Emperor of China if the revolutionaries' republican cause failed.

[ 190 ] Legacy [ edit ] Social influence [ edit ] New Culture Movement Background Aftermath of the 1911 Revolution Second Revolution Coronation of Yuan Shikai National Protection War Manchu Restoration Constitutional Protection Movement Warlord Era Eastward spread of Western learning Scientific Revolution Boxer Indemnity Scholarship French Revolution Russian Revolution May Fourth Movement Ideologies Democracy Science Scientism Anti-Confucianism Social Darwinism Anarchism Modernism Liberalism Socialism Communism New humanism Practice Westernization East-west cultural debate Total Westernization Democratization Simplification of Chinese characters Romanization of Chinese languages Writing with vernacular Chinese National Language Movement Translation of foreign literature Sorting out national heritages Feminist movement Education reforms Schools of thought Doubting Antiquity School Xueheng School Chinese Communist Party Creation Society New Confucianism Crescent Moon Society League of Left-Wing Writers Major publications New Youth The Critical Review A Madman's Diary The Tiger Notable people Ba Jin Chen Duxiu Guo Moruo Hu Shih Lao She Li Dazhao Lu Xun Mao Dun Qian Xuantong Shen Congwen Yu Dafu Zhu Ziqing Kang Youwei Qian Xuantong v t e After the revolution, there was a huge outpouring of anti-Manchu sentiment through China, particularly in Beijing, where thousands died in anti-Manchu violence. Imperial restrictions on Han residency and behavior within the city crumbled with the Manchu's imperial power.

[ 191 ] Anti-Manchu sentiment is recorded in books like A Short History of Slaves ( 奴才小史 ) and The Biographies of Avaricious Officials and Corrupt Personnel ( 貪官污吏傳 ) by Laoli ( 老吏 ).

[ 192 ] [ 193 ] [ better source needed ] During the abdication of the last Emperor, Yuan Shikai and Sun Yat-sen tried to adopt the concept of "Manchu and Han as one family" ( 滿漢一家 .

[ 192 ] People started exploring and debating with themselves on the root cause of their national weakness. The new search of identity was the New Culture Movement .

[ 194 ] Manchu culture and language , on the contrary, became virtually extinct by 2007.

[ 195 ] Unlike revolutions in the West, the 1911 Revolution did not restructure society. Most participants in the 1911 Revolution were military personnel, traditional  bureaucrats, and local gentries. Those people still held regional power after the 1911 Revolution. Some became warlords. There were no major improvements in the standard of living . The writer Lu Xun commented in 1921 during the publishing of The True Story of Ah Q , ten years after the 1911 Revolution, that basically nothing had changed except "the Manchus have left the kitchen." [ 196 ] Economic problems were not addressed until the governance of Chiang Ching-kuo in Taiwan and Mao Zedong on the mainland.

[ 197 ] The 1911 Revolution mainly got rid of feudalism ( fengjian ) from the late imperial period. In the usual view of historians, there are two restorations of feudal power after the revolution: the first was Yuan Shikai; the second was Zhang Xun .

[ 198 ] The effects of anti-Manchu sentiment after the revolution caused the Manchus of the Metropolitan Banners to be driven into deep poverty. Manchu men were too impoverished to marry, Han men married Manchu women, and the Manchus stopped dressing in Manchu clothing and practicing Manchu traditions.

[ 199 ] Historical significance [ edit ] The 1911 Revolution overthrew the Qing government and four thousand years of monarchy.

[ 1 ] Throughout Chinese history, old dynasties had always been replaced by new dynasties. The 1911 Revolution, however, was the first to overthrow a monarchy completely and attempt to establish a republic to spread democratic ideas throughout China. In 1911 at the provisional government proclamation ceremony, Sun Yat-sen said, "The revolution is not yet successful, the comrades still need to strive for the future." ( 革命尚未成功，同志仍需努力 ).

[ 200 ] Since the 1920s, both Chinas have seen the 1911 Revolution quite differently.

[ 201 ] Both recognize Sun Yat-sen as the Father of the Nation , but in Taiwan, "Father of the Republic of China" is meant. In Mainland China, Sun Yat-sen was seen as the man who helped bring down the Qing, a precondition for the communist state that's was founded in 1949. Mainland China views Sun's work as the first step toward the real revolution in 1949, when the communists set up a truly-independent state, which expelled foreigners and built a military and industrial power. The father of Communist China is seen as Mao Zedong .

[ 201 ] In 1954, Liu Shaoqi was quoted as saying that the "1911 Revolution inserted the concept of a republic into common people." [ 202 ] [ 203 ] Zhou Enlai pointed out that the "1911 Revolution overthrew the Qing rule, ended 4,000 years of monarchy, and liberated the mind of people to a great extent, and opened up the path for the development of future revolution. This is a great victory." [ 204 ] Modern evaluation [ edit ] A change in the belief that the revolution had been a generally-positive change began in the late 1980s and 1990s, but Zhang Shizhao was quoted as arguing, "When talking about the 1911 Revolution, the theorist these days tends to overemphasize. The word 'success' was way overused." [ 205 ] The degree of success of democracy gained by the revolution can vary depending on one's view. Even after Sun Yat-sen died in 1925, for sixty years, the Nationalists controlled all five branches of the government, and none was independent.

[ 206 ] Yan Jiaqi , the founder of the Federation for a Democratic China , has said that Sun Yat-sen is to be credited as founding China's first republic in 1912, and the second republic is the people of Taiwan and the political parties there that now democratize the region.

[ 198 ] Meanwhile, the ideals of democracy are far from realised in mainland Chinese. For example, the former Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao once said in a speech that without real democracy, there is no guarantee of economic and political rights, but he led a 2011 crackdown against the peaceful Chinese jasmine protests .

[ 207 ] Others, such as Qin Yongmin of the Democracy Party of China , who was imprisoned for twelve years, do not praise the 1911 Revolution.

[ 208 ] [ 209 ] [ better source needed ] Qin said that te revolution only replaced one dictator with another and that Mao is not an emperor but worse than the emperor.

[ 208 ] [ 209 ] [ 210 ] Media [ edit ] One of Japan's earliest film companies ( M. Pathe , owned by Sun supporter Shōkichi Umeya ) documented the success of the revolution beginning with the Wuchang uprising and leading to Sun's inauguration. It produced three documentary films that covered the revolution.

[ 211 ] See also [ edit ] China portal 1911 (film) The Battle for the Republic of China Republic of China Armed Forces Republic of China calendar National Revolutionary Army Timeline of late anti-Qing rebellions Qiu Jin Monarchy of China References [ edit ] ^ a b c Li, Xiaobing (2007).

A History of the Modern Chinese Army . Lexington: University Press of Kentucky. pp. 13, 26– 27.

ISBN 978-0-8131-2438-4 .

^ Li, Xing (2010).

The Rise of China and the Capitalist World Order . Ashgate. p. 91.

ISBN 978-0-7546-7913-4 .

^ a b c Wang 1998 , pp. 106, 344.

^ a b Bevir, Mark (2010).

Encyclopedia of Political Theory . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. p. 168.

ISBN 978-1-4129-5865-3 .

^ Chang, Kang-i Sun ; Owen, Stephen (2010).

The Cambridge History of Chinese Literature . Vol. 2.

Cambridge University Press . p. 441.

ISBN 978-0-5211-1677-0 .

^ Dianda, Bas (2019).

Political Routes to Starvation: Why Does Famine Kill?

. Vernon. p. 45.

ISBN 978-1-6227-3508-2 – via Google Books.

^ "Hong Kong played a key role in the life of Sun Yat-sen".

South China Morning Post . 29 March 2011.

^ Lum, Yansheng Ma; Lum, Raymond Mun Kong (1999).

Sun Yat-sen in Hawaii . Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press. pp.

6– 7.

ISBN 978-0-8248-2179-1 .

^ Curthoys, Ann; Lake, Marilyn (2005).

Connected Worlds: History in Transnational Perspective . Canberra: ANU E-Press. p. 101.

ISBN 978-1-920942-44-1 .

^ Platt, Stephen R. (2007).

Provincial Patriots: The Hunanese and Modern China .

Harvard University Press . p. 128.

ISBN 978-0-6740-2665-0 .

^ Goossaert, Vincent; Palmer, David A. (2011).

The Religious Question in Modern China . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 978-0-226-30416-8 .

^ a b Wang 1998 , p. 287.

^ a b 計秋楓, 朱慶葆. (2001). 中國近代史, V. 1. Chinese University Press.

ISBN 978-9-6220-1987-4 . p. 468.

^ Etō, Shinkichi; Schiffrin, Harold Z. (1994).

China's Republican Revolution . University of Tokyo Press.

ISBN 978-4-13-027030-4 .

^ Wong, Wendy Siuyi. (2001) Hong Kong Comics: A History of Manhua . Princeton Architectural Press. New York.

ISBN 1-5689-8269-0 ^ 为君丘, 張運宗. (2003). 走入近代中國. 五南圖書出版股份有限公司.

ISBN 9789571131757 .

^ 蔣緯國. (1981). 建立民國, Vol. 2. 國民革命戰史: 第1部. 黎明文化事業公司. University of California. Digitized 14 February 2011.

^ 饒懷民. (2006). 辛亥革命與清末民初社會/中國近代史事論叢. 中華書局 publishing.

ISBN 978-7-1010-5156-8 .

^ a b Wang 1998 , pp. 390–391.

^ a b 張豈之, 陳振江, 江沛. (2002). 晚淸民國史. Volume 5 of 中國歷史, 張 豈之. 五南圖書出版股份有限公司.

ISBN 978-9-5711-2898-6 . pp. 178–186 ^ 蔡登山. 繁華落盡──洋場才子與小報文人. 秀威資訊科技股份有限公司.

ISBN 978-9-8622-1826-6 . p. 42.

^ Scalapino, Robert A.; Yu, George T. (1961).

The Chinese Anarchist Movement . Berkeley: Center for Chinese Studies, Institute of International Studies, University of California.

At The Anarchist Library ( Free Download ). The online version is unpaginated.

^ 楊碧玉. 洪秀全政治人格之研究. 秀威資訊科技股份有限公司 Publishing.

ISBN 978-9-8622-1141-0 .

^ Crossley, Pamela Kyle (1990).

Orphan Warriors . Princeton University Press. pp.

180– 181.

ISBN 978-0-691-00877-6 .

^ Lee, Khoon Choy (2005).

Pioneers of Modern China . World Scientific.

ISBN 981-256-618-X .

^ a b Gao 2009 , pp. 29, 156.

^ a b Fenby 2008 , pp. 96, 106.

^ Fenby 2008 , p. 109.

^ Complete works of Sun Yat-sen 《總理全集》 1st ed., p. 920 ^ Rhoads 2017 , p. 21.

^ Wang 1998 , p. 76.

^ Kaplan, Lawrence M. (2010).

Homer Lea American Soldier of Fortune . Lexington: University Press of Kentucky .

ISBN 978-0-8131-2617-3 – via Google Books.

^ a b Lau, Kit-ching Chan (1990).

China, Britain and Hong Kong, 1895–1945 .

Chinese University Press . p. 37.

ISBN 978-9-6220-1409-1 .

^ Borst-Smith, Ernest F. (1912).

Caught in the Chinese Revolution . T. Fisher Unwin.

^ Nash, Jay Robert (1997).

Spies: A Narrative Encyclopedia of Dirty Tricks and Double Dealing from Biblical Times to Today . M. Evans. pp. 99ff.

ISBN 978-1-4617-4770-3 .

^ Bergère, Marie-Claire; Lloyd, Janet (1998).

Sun Yat-sen .

Stanford University Press . pp.

132 .

ISBN 978-0-8047-4011-1 .

^ Horne, Gerald (2005).

Race War!: White Supremacy and the Japanese Attack on the British Empire .

New York University Press . p. 252.

ISBN 978-0-8147-3641-8 – via Google Books.

^ Chung, Dooeum (2000).

Élitist fascism: Chiang Kaishek's Blueshirts in 1930s China . Ashgate. p. 61.

ISBN 978-0-7546-1166-0 – via Google Books.

^ Chung, Dooeum (1997).

A re-evaluation of Chiang Kaishek's blueshirts: Chinese fascism in the 1930s .

University of London . p. 78 – via Google Books.

^ Carlisle, Rodney (2015).

Encyclopedia of Intelligence and Counterintelligence .

Routledge . p. 71.

ISBN 978-1-3174-7177-6 – via Google Books.

^ Spence, Jonathan D.

(1990).

The Search for Modern China . W. W. Norton. pp.

250– 256.

ISBN 0-3933-0780-8 .

^ 計秋楓, 朱慶葆. (2001). 中國近代史, Vol. 1. Chinese University Press.

ISBN 978-9-6220-1987-4 . p. 464.

^ South China Morning Post. 6 April 2011. Waiting may be over at the grave of an unsung hero.

^ Wang 1998 , p. 424.

^ Gao 2009 , Chronology section.

^ 陳錫祺. (1991). 孫中山年谱長編 Vol. 1. 中华书局.

ISBN 978-7-1010-0685-8 .

^ 申友良. (2002). 报王黃世仲. 中囯社会科学出版社 publishing.

ISBN 978-7-5004-3309-5 .

^ Judge, Joan (1996).

Print and politics: 'Shibao' and the culture of reform in late Qing China . Stanford University Press. p. 214.

ISBN 978-0-8047-2741-9 .

^ 清宮藏辛亥革命檔案公佈 清廷密追孫中山(圖)-新聞中心_中華網 [Archives of the 1911 Revolution in the Palace Collection of the Qing Dynasty Released].

China.com (in Chinese). Archived from the original on 7 May 2012 . Retrieved 16 October 2011 .

^ a b 張家鳳. (2010). 中山先生與國際人士. Vol. 1. 秀威資訊科技股份有限公司.

ISBN 978-9-8622-1510-4 . p. 195.

^ 公元1907年5月27日 黄冈起义失败 [On May 27, 1907, the Huanggang Uprising failed.].

Baojinews.com (in Chinese). 27 May 2011. Archived from the original on 7 April 2012 . Retrieved 16 October 2011 .

^ 張豈之, 陳振江, 江沛 . (2002).

晚淸民國史 . Volume 5 of 中國歷史 .

五南圖書出版股份有限公司 publishing.

ISBN 978-9-5711-2898-6 . p. 177.

^ a b 中国二十世紀通鉴编辑委员会 . (2002).

中国二十世紀通鉴 , 1901–2000, Vol. 1.

Threadneedle Book Bureau .

^ a b c Lu, Xun (2009).

Capturing Chinese (in Chinese). Capturing Chinese. p. 51.

ISBN 978-0-9842762-0-2 .

^ 鄭連根. (2009). 故紙眉批── 一個傳媒人的讀史心得. 秀威資訊科技股份有限公司 publishing.

ISBN 978-9-8622-1190-8 . p. 135.

^ a b c 辛亥革命武昌起義紀念館. (1991). 辛亥革命史地圖集. 中國地圖出版社 publishing.

^ 中華民國史硏究室. (1986). 中華民國史資料叢稿: 譯稿. Volumes 1–2 of 中華民國史資料叢稿. published by 中華書局.

^ Yan, Qinghuang. (2008).

The Chinese in Southeast Asia and Beyond: Socioeconomic and Political Dimensions . World Scientific Publishing.

ISBN 978-9-8127-9047-7 . pp. 182–187.

^ 廣西壯族自治區地方誌編纂委員會. (1994). 廣西通志: 軍事志. 廣西人民出版社 publishing. Digitized University of Michigan.  2009.

^ 中国百科年鉴. (1982). 中国大百科全书出版社. University of California. Digitized 2008.

^ 汪贵胜, 许祖范. Compiled by 程必定. (1989). 安徽近代经济史. 黄山书社. Digitized by the University of Michigan.  2007.

^ 张新民. (1993). 中国人权辞书. 海南出版社 publishing. Digitized by University of Michigan.  2009.

^ a b 王恆偉. (2005) (2006) 中國歷史講堂 No. 5 清. 中華書局.

ISBN 9-6288-8528-6 . pp. 195–198.

^ a b Langmead, Donald (2011).

Maya Lin . Santa Barbara, CA: Greenwood. pp.

5– 6.

ISBN 978-0-313-37853-9 .

^ Reilly, Thomas. (1997).

Science and Football III , Vol. 3. Taylor & Francis publishing.

ISBN 978-0-4192-2160-9 . pp. 105–106, 277–278.

^ Felsing, Robert H. (1979).

The heritage of Han: the Gelaohui and the 1911 revolution in Sichuan . University of Iowa. p. 156 . Retrieved 2 March 2012 .

The railway company's chief officer at Yichang was no longer listening to company directives and had turned company accounts over to Duanfang, Superintendent of the Chuan Han and Yue Han railroads. The situation of the Sichuanese ^ a b 王恆偉. [2005] (2006) 中國歷史講堂 No. 6 民國. 中華書局.

ISBN 9-6288-8529-4 . pp. 3–7.

^ a b c d 戴逸, 龔書鐸. (2003) 中國通史. 清. Intelligence Press.

ISBN 9-6287-9289-X . pp. 86–89.

^ Thomson, John Stuart (1913).

China Revolutionized . Bobbs-Merrill. p.

59 .

ISBN 9-3539-7226-4 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Thomson 1913 , p.

54 .

^ a b c d e 张创新. (2005). 中国政治制度史. 2nd ed., Tsinghua University Press.

ISBN 978-7-3021-0146-8 . p. 377.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l 武昌起義之後各省響應與國際調停 (in Chinese). Xinhua. Archived from the original on 21 May 2014 . Retrieved 16 October 2011 .

^ Backhouse, Edmund; Otway, John; Bland, Percy (1914).

Annals & Memoirs of the Court of Peking: (from the 16th to the 20th Century) (Repr. ed.). Houghton Mifflin. p.

209 .

^ The Atlantic . Vol. 112. Atlantic Monthly. 1913. p. 779.

^ a b Lipman, Jonathan N. (1998).

Familiar Strangers: A History of Muslims in Northwest China . Seattle: University of Washington Press. p.

170 .

ISBN 978-0-2959-7644-0 .

OL 8580403W .

^ Rhoads 2017 , pp. 190–193.

^ Fitzgerald, Charles Patrick; Kotker, Norman (1969). Kotker, Norman (ed.).

The Horizon history of China (Illustrated ed.). American Heritage. p. 365.

ISBN 978-0-8281-0005-2 .

^ Lipman 1998 , p.

170 , "Ma Anliang attacked Shaanxi successfully, and Yuan Shikai took the invasion seriously enough to alert eastern troops to move against him.".

^ Shan, Patrick Fuliang (2018).

Yuan Shikai: A Reappraisal . Contemporary Chinese Studies. University of British Columbia Press. p. 201.

ISBN 978-0-7748-3781-1 .

On his order, Wang was executed.66 According to Yuan Shikai, the most important ... to arrest bad elements and protect the people (chubao'anliang), ...

^ Israeli, Raphael (2017).

The Muslim Midwest in Modern China: The Tale of the Hui Communities in Gansu (Lanzhou, Linxia, and Lintan) and in Yunnan (Kunming and Dali) . Wipf & Stock. pp.

71 –72.

ISBN 978-1-5326-3754-4 .

This message by Wang may have contributed to breaking the resistance of Ma Anliang, who had in any case, come under strong pressure of Yuan Shikai's ...

^ Lipman, Jonathan Neaman (1980).

The Border World of Gansu, 1895–1935 . Stanford University Press. pp. 105, 208– 209.

... White Wolf and the "Hui protector and mediator," Ma Anliang. When Yuan Shikai died in 1916, Zhang Guangjian's control over Gansu did not decrease .

^ Frankel, James (2021).

Islam in China . Islam in Series. Bloomsbury. p.

93 .

ISBN 978-0-7556-3884-0 .

... thereupon supporting Yuan Shikai even when he declared himself emperor. Despite their close relationship, when his superior Ma Anliang tried to arrest ...

^ Mühlhahn, Klaus (2014).

Herrschaft und Widerstand in der "Musterkolonie" Kiautschou: Interaktionen zwischen China und Deutschland, 1897–1914 . Studien zur Internationalen Geschichte (in German). Vol. 8 (Illustrated ed.). Walter de Gruyter. p.

399 .

ISBN 978-3-4867-1369-5 .

tierte Yuan Shikai in bezug auf die Boxerbewegung, daß "Irrlehren (yaoyan) ... Revolte Ruhe und Frieden eintreten können" (chu bao nai ke anliang gaoshi).

^ Mueggler, Erik (2011).

The Paper Road: Archive and Experience in the Botanical Exploration of West China and Tibet (Illustrated ed.). University of California Press. p.

228 .

ISBN 978-0-5202-6902-6 .

When that army's commander, Dong Fuxiang died in 1908, Ma Anliang took control ... To curb the power of these warlords, Yuan Shikai sent his subordinates to ...

^ Jowett, Philip (2013).

China's Wars: Rousing the Dragon 1894–1949 (Ill. ed.). Bloomsbury. p.

87 .

ISBN 978-1-4728-0674-1 .

During the Second Revolution in 1913 he was persuaded by the southern Revolutionary leader Sun Yat-sen to join the anti-Yuan Shikai rebellion.

^ Hamrin, Carol Lee (2009). Hamrin, Carol Lee; Bieler, Stacey (eds.).

Salt and Light, Vol. 1: Lives of Faith That Shaped Modern China . Studies in Chinese Christianity. Wipf & Stock.

ISBN 978-1-6218-9291-5 .

Yuan Shikai, later to become the first President of the Republic of China, was in charge of foreign affairs (and much else) for this last decade of the ...

^ Shan, Patrick Fuliang (2018).

Yuan Shikai: A Reappraisal . Contemporary Chinese Studies. University of British Columbia Press. p.

201 .

ISBN 978-0-7748-3781-1 .

On his order, Wang was executed.66 According to Yuan Shikai, the most important ... to arrest bad elements and protect the people (chubao'anliang), ...

^ Dillon, Michael (2013).

China's Muslim Hui Community: Migration, Settlement and Sects . Routledge. p.

144 .

ISBN 978-1-1368-0933-0 .

... poor' and 'Down with Yuan Shikai,' the first president of the new Chinese ... Ma Anliang sent his subordinate Ma Qi to the old town of Taozhou on April ...

^ Sahay, R.K. (2016).

History of China's Military (Illustrated ed.). Vij Books India Pvt.

ISBN 978-9-3860-1990-5 .

... commanders such as Zeng Guofan, Zuo Zongtang, Li Hongzhang and Yuan Shikai. ... Ma Anliang, Ma Fuxiang, and Ma Fuxing who commanded the Kansu Braves.

^ Esherick, Joseph W. (2022).

Accidental Holy Land: The Communist Revolution in Northwest China (Illustrated ed.). University of California Press. pp.

29 , 197.

ISBN 978-0-5203-8532-0 .

^ ——— (2022).

Accidental Holy Land: The Communist Revolution in Northwest China . University of California Press. pp. 29, 197.

doi : 10.1525/luminos.117 .

ISBN 978-0-5203-8532-0 .

S2CID 244639814 .

^ Esherick, Joseph W. (2022).

Accidental Holy Land: The Communist Revolution in Northwest China (Illustrated ed.). Univ of California Press. p. 197.

doi : 10.1525/luminos.117 .

ISBN 978-0-5203-8532-0 .

S2CID 244639814 .

^ Rhoads 2017 , p. 204.

^ Li, Xue (2018).

Making Local China: A Case Study of Yangzhou, 1853–1928 . Berliner China-Studien. Vol. 56. LIT Verlag Münster. p.

237 .

ISBN 978-3-6439-0894-0 .

^ Shan, Patrick Fuliang (2018).

Yuan Shikai: A Reappraisal . Contemporary Chinese Studies. University of British Columbia Press. p.

151 .

ISBN 978-0-7748-3781-1 .

^ Witchard, Anne (2012).

Lao She in London . RAS China in Shanghai series of China Monographs. Vol. 1 (Illustrated ed.). Hong Kong University Press. p.

18 .

ISBN 978-9-8881-3960-6 .

^ Harper, Tim (2021).

Underground Asia: Global Revolutionaries and the Assault on Empire . Harvard University Press. p.

141 .

ISBN 978-0-6747-2461-7 .

^ China's Millions, Issues 79–90 . Morgan and Scott. 1882. p.

113 .

^ Broomhall, Marshall (1907).

The Chinese Empire: A General and Missionary Survey, Vol. 678–679 . The Chinese Empire: A General and Missionary Survey, Marshall Broomhall. Morgan at Scott. p. 201.

^ The Chinese Empire . p. 201.

^ China's Millions . Vol. 28. China Inland Mission. 1902. p. 18.

^ Schinz, Alfred (1996).

The Magic Square: Cities in Ancient China (Ill. ed.). Edition Axel Menges. p. 354.

ISBN 3-9306-9802-1 .

^ Borst-Smith, Ernest F. (1912).

Caught in the Chinese revolution: a record of risks and rescue . London: T. Fisher Unwin. pp.

18– 21.

^ Lipman, Jonathan Neaman (1980).

The Border World of Gansu, 1895–1935 . Stanford University. p. 184.

Sheng Yun, a Manchu, and Chang Geng, a life bondservant of the Qing house, agreed that an attack had to be undertaken swiftly , so Ma was... Chang needed the Hui, and that meant trusting the loyalty of Ma Anliang and Ma Fuxiang .

^ National Review: Zhongguo Gong Lun Xi Bao, Vol. 14 . 1913. p. 251.

... will enter the Ministry of Commerce which will be A Peking telegram also states that Sheng Yun, the reorganized... where is alleged to be coTsen Chun – hsuan. operating with General Ma An – liang in stirring up The " Peking Jih ...

^ Lipman 1998 , p.

170 .

^ Teichman, Eric (1921).

Travels of a Consular officer in North West China; with original maps of Shensi and Kansu and illus. by photographs . Cambridge University Press. pp.

120– 122.

^ The National Review, China: Literary and educational supplement, Vol. 15 . National Review. 1914. p. 482.

General Ma An-liang to take his Muhammadan requesting that the disbandment be postponed troops to Fenghsiangfu and... also that all latter reached Sianfu by forced marches from asking for information regarding the statements ....

^ Keyte, J. C. (1924).

Andrew Young of Shensi :Adventure in Medical Missions (PDF) . London: The Carey Press. p. vi.

^ Thomson 1913 , p.

64 .

^ Thomson 1913 , p.

46 .

^ Thomson 1913 , p.

53 .

^ Thomson 1913 , p.

37 , On October 24th, ancient Singan the capital of the northwestern province of Shensi, the original capital of China, where the empress dowager, Tse Hsi.

^ Japan Weekly Mail . 1905. p. 206.

That degradation of H. E. Sheng Yun, Governor of Shensi, a Peking correspondent, writing about the recent was delayed some three hours. A telegram was received on Feb. 18th in Japanese adventurers should be serving with to ihe post ...

^ Lipman 1998 , p.

263 .

^ Thomson 1913 , pp. 71, 449.

^ Lipman 1998 , pp. 171–172.

^ "中華民國海軍 – 旗海圖幟" . Retrieved 19 May 2024 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m 伍立杨. (2011). 中国1911 (辛亥年).

ISBN 978-7-5313-3869-7 . Chapter 连锁反应 各省独立.

^ 辛亥革命中的九江起义(3) (in Chinese). xhgmw.com . Retrieved 19 May 2024 .

^ 蒋顺兴, 李良玉. (1990). 山西王阎锡山/中华民国史丛书. Edition reprint. 河南人民出版社, 1990.

^ Remote Homeland, Recovered Borderland: Manchus, Manchoukuo, and Manchuria, 1907–1985 . p. 102.

^ 山西辛亥革命官僚階層——巡撫陸鍾琦之死_辛亥革命前奏_辛亥革命网 (in Chinese). Big5.xhgmw.org. Archived from the original on 5 April 2012 . Retrieved 16 October 2011 .

^ 中共湖南省委員會. (1981). 新湘評論, Issues 7–12. 新湘評論雜誌社.

^ "四大家族"后人:蒋家凋零落寞 宋、孔、陈家低调 (in Chinese). Chinanews.com.cn . Retrieved 16 October 2011 .

^ 张玉法, 中央硏究院. 近代史硏究所. (1985). 民国初年的政党. 中央硏究院近代史硏究所 Publishing.

^ 辛亥百年蘇州光復一根竹竿挑瓦革命 (in Chinese). Xinhua. Archived from the original on 21 May 2014 . Retrieved 16 October 2011 .

^ Rhoads 2017 , p. 194.

^ 辛亥革命大事記_時政頻道_新華網 . Xinhua News Agency. Archived from the original on 21 May 2014 . Retrieved 17 November 2011 .

^ 温馨提示 (in Chinese).

^ 國立臺灣師範大學. 歷史學系. (2003). Bulletin of historical research, Issue 31. 國立臺灣師範大學歷史學系 publishing.

^ Lary, Diana (2010).

Warlord Soldiers: Chinese Common Soldiers 1911–1937 . Cambridge University Press. p. 64.

ISBN 978-0-521-13629-7 .

^ Boorman, Howard L.; Howard, Richard C.; Cheng, Joseph K. H. (1967).

Biographical Dictionary of Republican China . Columbia University Press. p.

51 .

ISBN 978-0-2310-8957-9 .

pai ch'ung-hsi dare to die.

^ a b c 国祁李. (1990). 民国史论集, Volume 2. 南天書局 publishing.

^ (1979). 傳記文學, Volume 34. 傳記文學雜誌社 Publishing. University of Wisconsin– Madison. Digitized 11 April 2011.

^ Deng Zhicheng (鄧之誠) (1988).

中華二千年史 (in Chinese). Vol. 5. Beijing: Zhonghua shuju.

ISBN 978-7-101-00390-1 .

. (1983), Volume 5, Part 3, Issue 1. 中華書局.

ISBN 978-7-1010-0390-1 .

^ 广东省中山图书馆. (2002). 民国广东大事记. 羊城晚报出版社 Publishing.

ISBN 978-7-8065-1206-7 .

^ a b 徐博东, 黄志萍. (1987). 丘逢甲傳. 秀威資訊科技股份有限公司 publishing.

ISBN 978-9-8622-1636-1 . p. 175.

^ 居正, 羅福惠, 蕭怡. (1989). 居正文集, Volume 1. 華中師範大學出版社 publishing. Digitized by University of California. 15 December 2008.

^ Travels of a Consular Officer in North-West China . Cambridge University Press Archive. 1921. p.

188 .

OL 7625604W .

ma fu hsiang mongol an-liang.

^ Lipman 1998 , pp.

182 –183.

^ Lipman 1998 , pp. 181–182.

^ 粟戡时, 同明, 志盛, 雪云. (1981). 湖南反正追记. 湖南人民出版社.

^ 辛亥革命史地圖集. (1991). 辛亥革命武昌起義紀念館. 中國地圖出版社.

^ 中國地圖出版社. (1991). 辛亥革命史地圖集. 中國地圖出版社 publishing.

^ Rhoads 2017 , p. 198.

^ a b 近代中國歷史人物論文集 (in Chinese). Taipei: Institute of Modern History, Academia Sinica. 1993.

ISBN 978-957-671-150-3 .

^ a b c 新疆伊犁辛亥革命打破清王朝西遷夢 (in Chinese). Hkcna.hk. Archived from the original on 24 March 2020 . Retrieved 23 October 2011 .

^ a b c d Millward, James A. (2007).

Eurasian Crossroads . New York: Columbia University Press. pp. 168, 440.

ISBN 978-0-231-13924-3 .

^ "Xinhai Revolution in Xinjiang: Qing Dynasty's plan of moving westward shattered" .

China News Service . 7 October 2011.

^ Forbes, Andrew D. W. (1986).

Warlords and Muslims in Chinese Central Asia: a political history of Republican Sinkiang 1911–1949 . Cambridge University Press Archive. p. 376.

ISBN 978-0-5212-5514-1 . Retrieved 28 June 2010 .

^ Klimeš, Ondřej (2015).

Struggle by the Pen: The Uyghur Discourse of Nation and National Interest, c. 1900–1949 . Brill. pp. 83ff.

ISBN 978-9-0042-8809-6 .

^ a b Blondeau, Anne-Marie; Buffetrille, Katia; Jing, Wei (2008).

Authenticating Tibet: Answers to China's 100 Questions .

University of California Press . p. 230.

ISBN 978-0-5202-4464-1 .

^ Grunfeld, A. Tom. (1996).

The Making of Modern Tibet (2nd ed.). M. E. Sharpe. p. 63.

ISBN 978-1-5632-4714-9 .

^ Ma, Rong (2011).

Population and Society in Contemporary Tibet . Hong Kong University Press. p. 48.

ISBN 978-962-209-202-0 .

^ Mayhew, Bradley; Kohn, Michael (2005).

Tibet . St. Martin's. p. 32.

ISBN 1-74059-523-8 .

^ Onon, Urgungge; Pritchatt, Derrick (1989).

Asia's First Modern Revolution . Leiden: Brill. pp.

38– 40, 79.

ISBN 978-90-04-08390-5 .

^ Seminar, International Association for Tibetan Studies. (2007). "The Mongolia-Tibet interface: opening new research terrains in Inner Asia".

The Mongolia-Tibet Interface (in Tibetan). Leiden: Brill.

ISBN 978-90-04-15521-3 .

^ Zhao, Suisheng (2004).

Chinese Foreign Policy: pragmatism and strategic behavior . Armonk, NY: M. E. Sharpe. p. 207.

ISBN 978-0-7656-1284-7 .

^ Rhoads 2017 , p. 183.

^ Tung, William L. (1968).

The Political Institutions of Modern China . Springer. p. 18.

ISBN 978-90-247-0552-8 .

^ a b c d Rhoads 2017 , p. 228.

^ Pomerantz-Zhang, Linda (1992).

Wu Tingfang (1842–1922) . Hong Kong University Press. pp.

207– 209.

ISBN 978-962-209-287-7 .

^ Liew, K. S. (1971).

Struggle for Democracy . Berkeley: University of California Press. pp.

131– 136.

ISBN 978-0-520-01760-3 .

^ Wu, Yuzhang (2001).

Recollections of the Revolution of 1911 . Honolulu: Minerva. p. 132.

ISBN 978-0-89875-531-2 .

^ a b c d 李雲漢. (1996). 中國近代史. 三民書局 publishing.

ISBN 978-9-5714-0669-5 .

^ Moazzin, Ghassan (2020).

"Investing in the New Republic: Multinational Banks, Political Risk, and the Chinese Revolution of 1911" .

Business History Review .

94 (3): 507– 534.

doi : 10.1017/S0007680520000276 .

ISSN 0007-6805 .

S2CID 229609499 .

^ 中央硏究院近代史硏究所. (1971). 中央硏究院近代史硏究所集刊, Volume 2. Digitized on 2 August 2007 from the University of California.

^ 存萃學社. 周康燮. (1971). 辛亥革命研究論集: 1895–1929, Vol. 1. 崇文書店 publishing. Digitized on 16 August 2007 by the University of Michigan.

^ Feng, Youlan (2000).

The Hall of Three Pines . Translated by Denis C., Mair. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press. p. 45.

ISBN 978-0-8248-2220-0 .

^ a b Welland, Sasha Su-Ling (2007).

A Thousand Miles of Dreams . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 87.

ISBN 978-0-7425-5314-9 .

^ Yu Weichao Yu. (1997).

A Journey into China's Antiquity: Yuan Dynasty, Ming Dynasty, Qing Dynasty . Vol. 4. Morning Glory Publishers.

ISBN 978-7-5054-0514-1 .

^ a b c Fitzgerald, John (1996).

Awakening China . Stanford University Press. p. 180.

ISBN 978-0-8047-3337-3 .

^ a b 劉煒. 陳萬雄. 張債儀. (2002) Chinese civilization in a new light 中華文明傳真#10 清. Commercial press publishing company.

ISBN 9-6207-5316-X . pp. 92–93 ^ Lin, Hsiao-ting (2011).

Modern China's Ethnic Frontiers . London: Taylor & Francis. p. 7.

ISBN 978-0-415-58264-3 .

^ a b 邵建. (2008). 胡適前傳. 秀威資訊科技股份有限公司 publishing.

ISBN 978-9-8622-1008-6 . p. 236.

^ Boorman, Howard L. (1967).

Biographical Dictionary of Republican China . Vol. 3. New York: Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-231-08957-9 .

^ 温馨提示 .

dnspod.qcloud.com (in Chinese) . Retrieved 30 December 2021 .

^ Fu, Zhengyuan. (1993).

Autocratic tradition and Chinese politics: Zhengyuan Fu . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-5214-4228-2 . p. 154.

^ Hsueh, Chun-tu (1961).

Huang Hsing and the Chinese Revolution .

ISBN 978-0-8047-0031-3 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Hsueh, Chun-tu. Xue, Jundu. (1961).

Huang Hsing and the Chinese revolution . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-8047-0031-3 .

^ Fu, Zhengyuan (1993).

Autocratic Tradition and Chinese Politics . Cambridge University Press. pp.

153– 154.

ISBN 978-0-521-44228-2 .

^ Woodhouse, Eiko (2004).

The Chinese Hsinhai Revolution: G. E. Morrison and Anglo-Japanese Relations, 1897–1920 . Routledge. pp. 113ff.

ISBN 978-1-1343-5242-5 .

^ Spence, Jonathan D.

(1982).

The Gate of Heavenly Peace: The Chinese and Their Revolution . Penguin. p. 84.

ISBN 978-1-1011-7372-5 – via Google Books.

^ Hu, Shêng; Liu, Danian (1983).

The 1911 Revolution: A Retrospective After 70 Years . New World. p. 55 – via Google Books.

^ The National Review, China . 1913. p. 200 – via Google Books.

^ Monumenta Serica . H. Vetch. 1967. p. 67 – via Google Books.

^ Kent, Percy Horace Braund (1912).

The Passing of the Manchus . E. Arnold. pp.

382 ff.

^ Aldrich, M.A. (2008).

The Search for a Vanishing Beijing: A Guide to China's Capital Through the Ages .

Hong Kong University Press . p. 176.

ISBN 978-9-6220-9777-3 – via Google Books.

^ Modernisation of Chinese Culture: Continuity and Change (Rev. ed.). Cambridge Scholars Publishing. 2014. p. 74.

ISBN 978-1-4438-6772-6 .

^ Thomson 1913 , p. 61].

^ "Sun Yatsen and the 1911 Revolution" . Sinica. 13 October 2011 . Retrieved 14 March 2017 .

^ a b Rhoads 2017 , p. 266.

^ Theobald, Ulrich (28 September 2011).

"Chinese Literature: Man-Qing yeshi 滿淸野史" . chinaknowledge.de . Retrieved 17 November 2011 .

^ Tanner, Harold M. (2010).

China: A History . Indianapolis: Hackett. p. 123.

ISBN 978-1-60384-204-4 .

^ Lague, David (16 March 2007).

"China's Manchu speakers struggle to save language" .

The New York Times . Retrieved 17 November 2011 .

^ Fenby 2008 , p. 143.

^ O'Neill, Mark (4 July 2010).

"Who is the Father of China?" .

South China Morning Post .

^ a b Yan, Jiaqi (1992).

Toward a Democratic China . Translated by Hong, David S. K.; Mair, Denis C. Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press. pp. 189, 251.

ISBN 978-0-8248-1501-1 .

^ Rhoads 2017 , p. 270.

^ 陸韻葭. (2006). 上海玩全指南. Travelcom press.

ISBN 978-9-8671-4313-6 . p. 49.

^ a b South China morning post. 29 March 2011. Replacing chairman Mao with Sun Yat-sen.

^ "1911" . Takungpao.com. Archived from the original on 5 April 2012 . Retrieved 17 November 2011 .

^ 劉少奇談辛亥革命（摘要） .

People's Daily (in Chinese). 19 September 2011. Archived from the original on 17 June 2012 . Retrieved 17 November 2011 .

^ 王志昆講重慶辛亥革命：為什麼兵不血刃，一次成功_重慶_重慶站_鳳凰網 (in Chinese). Big5.ifeng.com. 30 December 2008. Archived from the original on 14 July 2012 . Retrieved 17 November 2011 .

^ Zhang Shizhao (章士釗) (2000) [1962].

孫、黃遺劄密詮 .

章士釗全集 (in Chinese). Vol. 8. Shanghai: Wenhui chubanshe. p. 341.

ISBN 978-7-8053-1543-0 .

^ O'Neill, Mark (4 July 2010). "Who is the Father of China?".

South China morning post .

^ Pomfret, James (27 June 2011).

"China's Wen calls for greater democracy, reforms" .

Reuters . Retrieved 17 November 2011 .

^ a b "China grapples with revolutionary past, 100 years on" . GEO.tv. Archived from the original on 11 November 2011 . Retrieved 17 November 2011 .

^ a b "Democracy Activist Qin Yongmin Released from Prison after 12-Year Sentence" . Human Rights in China. 29 November 2010. Archived from the original on 31 October 2011 . Retrieved 17 November 2011 .

^ "China grapples with revolutionary past, 100 years on" .

The West Australian . Yahoo! News. 9 October 2011. Archived from the original on 19 October 2017 . Retrieved 17 November 2011 .

^ Qian, Ying (2024).

Revolutionary Becomings: Documentary Media in Twentieth-Century China . New York: Columbia University Press . p. 1.

ISBN 978-0-2312-0447-7 .

Sources [ edit ] Fenby, Jonathan (2008).

The Penguin History of Modern China . London: A. Lane.

ISBN 978-0-7139-9832-0 .

Gao, James Zheng (2009).

Historical dictionary of modern China (1800–1949) . Scarecrow.

ISBN 978-0-8108-4930-3 .

Rhoads, Edward J. M. (2017).

Manchus and Han: Ethnic Relations and Political Power in Late Qing and Early Republican China, 1861–1928 . Studies on Ethnic Groups in China. University of Washington Press.

ISBN 978-0-2959-9748-3 .

Wang, Ke-wen (1998).

Modern China: An Encyclopedia of History, Culture, and Nationalism . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-8153-0720-4 .

Further reading [ edit ] Dingle, Edwin J.

(1912).

China's Revolution: 1911–1912: A Historical and Political Record of the Civil War . The Commercial Press.

Kent, Percy Horace Braund (1912).

The passing of the Manchus . London: Edward Arnold .

Edwards, Louise; Zhou, Lili (2011). "Gender and the 'Virtue of Violence': Creating a New Vision of Political Engagement through the 1911 Revolution".

Frontiers of History in China .

6 (4): 485– 504.

doi : 10.1007/s11462-011-0138-8 .

ISSN 1673-3401 .

Esherick, Joseph W. (June 2012). "Reconsidering 1911: Lessons of a sudden revolution".

Journal of Modern Chinese History .

6 (1): 1– 14.

doi : 10.1080/17535654.2012.670511 .

ISSN 1753-5654 .

Esherick, Joseph (1976).

Reform and revolution in China: the 1911 revolution in Hunan and Hubei . Michigan studies on China. Berkeley: University of California Press .

ISBN 978-0-5200-3084-8 .

Fenby, Jonathan (October 2011).

"The Birth of China's Tragedy" .

History Today . Vol. 61, no. 10. pp.

29– 35.

Fung, Edmund S. K. (1980).

The military dimension of the Chinese revolution: the new army and its role in the revolution of 1911 . Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press .

ISBN 978-0-7748-0129-4 .

Goldstein, Melvyn C.; Rimpoche, Gelek (1991).

A history of modern Tibet. Vol. 1: 1913–1951: the demise of the Lamaist state / Melvyn C. Goldstein with the help of Gelek Rimpoche . Vol. 1. Berkeley: University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-5200-7590-0 .

Hsieh, Winston (1975).

Chinese historiography on the revolution of 1911: a critical survey and a selected bibliography . Stanford, CA: Hoover Institution Press .

ISBN 978-0-8179-3341-8 .

Kaplan, Lawrence Martin (2010).

Homer Lea: American soldier of fortune . American warriors. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky .

ISBN 978-0-8131-2616-6 .

Ma, L. E. (1990).

Revolutionaries, monarchists, and Chinatowns: Chinese politics in the Americas and the 1911 revolution . Honolulu: University of Hawaiʻi Press.

ISBN 978-0-8248-1239-3 .

Mitter, Rana (2011). "1911: The Unanchored Chinese Revolution".

The China Quarterly .

208 : 1009– 1020.

doi : 10.1017/S0305741011001123 .

ISSN 0305-7410 .

Paulès, Xavier (2023).

The Republic of China: 1912 to 1949 . Translated by Lightfoot, Lindsay.

John Wiley & Sons .

ISBN 978-1-5095-5259-7 .

Rankin, Mary Backus (1986).

Elite activism and political transformation in China: Zhejiang Province, 1865–1911 .

Stanford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8047-1321-4 .

Rhoads, Edward J. M. (2000).

Manchus and Han: Ethnic Relations and Political Power in Late Qing and Early Republican China, 1861–1928 . Studies on ethnic groups in China. Seattle: University of Washington Press .

ISBN 978-0-2959-8040-9 .

Shan, Patrick Fuliang (2018).

Yuan Shikai: a reappraisal . Contemporary Chinese studies. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press.

ISBN 978-0-7748-3778-1 .

Shinkichi, Eto; Schiffrin, Harold Z. (1994). Etō, Shinkichi; Schiffrin, Harold Z. (eds.).

China's republican revolution .

University of Tokyo Press .

ISBN 978-4-1302-7030-4 .

Wright, Mary Clabaugh (1978). Wright, Mary Clabaugh (ed.).

China in revolution: the first phase 1900–1913 . New Haven, CT: Yale University Press .

ISBN 978-0-3000-1460-0 .

Young, Ernest P. (1977).

The presidency of Yuan Shih-k'ai: Liberalism and dictatorship in early republican China . Michigan studies on China. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press .

ISBN 978-0-4720-8995-6 .

Yu, George T. (October 1991).

"The 1911 Revolution: Past, Present, and Future" (PDF) .

Asian Survey .

31 (10): 895– 904.

doi : 10.2307/2645062 .

ISSN 0004-4687 .

JSTOR 2645062 .

Zheng, Xiaowei (2018).

The politics of rights and the 1911 Revolution in China .

Stanford University Press .

ISBN 978-0-8047-9667-5 .

Online review .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Xinhai Revolution at Wikimedia Commons v t e China articles History Overviews History Timeline Historiography Military history Language Economic before 1912 1912–1949 1949–present Ethnic groups Foreign relations Dynasties Monarchs Prehistoric Paleolithic Neolithic Yellow River Yangtze Liao Ancient Xia Shang Late Zhou Western Zhou Spring and Autumn Warring States Imperial Qin Han Three Kingdoms Wei Han Wu Jin (266–420) Sixteen Kingdoms Northern and Southern dynasties Sui Tang Five Dynasties and Ten Kingdoms Liao Song Jin (1115–1234) Yuan Ming Qing High Qing Century of humiliation Taiping Rebellion Eunuch Modern 1911 Revolution Republic of China Chinese Civil War Chinese Communist Revolution People's Republic of China Cultural Revolution Reform and opening up Tiananmen Square COVID-19 persecution of Uyghurs List of massacres in China Geography Borders Extreme points Geology Natural disasters Regions East Northeast North South Central Central South Western Northwestern Southwestern Terrain Bays Canyons Caves Deserts Grasslands Hills Islands Mountains ranges passes Peninsulas Northeast / North / Central Plains Valleys Volcanoes Water Canals Lakes Rivers Waterfalls Wetlands Water resources Seas Bohai Yellow East China South China Environment Climate change Climate policy Environmental issues Environmental policy Protected areas National parks Nature reserves UNESCO Biosphere Reserves Wildlife Fauna Flora Subdivisions Baseline islands Border crossings Cities Province-level subdivisions Politics Law Judicial system Human rights LGBT in Tibet Law enforcement Penal system Naming laws Nationality law Terrorism Government Civil service Constitution Democracy Pro-democratisation Elections Environmental policy Foreign relations Laogai National People's Congress Standing Committee National security Political parties and movements Chinese Communist Party General Secretary Politburo Democratic parties (China) United front Political Consultative Conference System of multi-party cooperation and political consultation Socialism with Chinese characteristics Primary stage of socialism President Vice President State Council Premier Vice Premier Whole-process people's democracy One country, two systems Military Outline of military history Central Military Commission Cyberwarfare and China Ministry of National Defense People's Liberation Army Ground Navy Air Rocket Strategic Support People's Armed Police Coast Guard Militia Maritime Militia Economy Agriculture Aquaculture Banking Central bank Chinese property sector crisis (2020–present) Currency Economic history Reform and opening up Special economic zones E-commerce Online advertising Economic inequality in China Energy Coal Petroleum Renewable Forced evictions Foreign aid received Foreign aid program Historical GDP Housing Income inequality in China Industry Chemical Gold mining Semiconductors Steel Textiles Labor relations Poverty Real estate Standard of living Taxation Tourism Trade Underoccupied developments Unemployment Infrastructure Architecture Housing Telecommunications Internet Water supply and sanitation Transport Automotive industry Civil aviation Rail Shipping industry Space program Society Abortion Censorship Chinese Dream Chinese language Standard Chinese Written Chinese Crime Corruption Prostitution Sex trafficking Education Literacy Freedom of the press Harmonious Society Health Food safety incidents HIV/AIDS Intellectualism Internment camps Martyrdom Surveillance Propaganda Protest ”Mass incidents” Public holidays Rural society Science and technology history Sexuality Social issues Patriarchy Racism Regional discrimination Suicide Social relations Structure Tang ping Time Urban society Welfare Culture Archaeology Archives Art Calligraphy Cinema Cuisine Dance Libraries Literature Poetry Martial arts Mass media Music Names Philosophy Smoking Sport Tea culture Variety art Major Historical and Cultural Sites World Heritage Sites Fours of China Four Treasures of the Study Four Great Inventions Four Gentlemen Flowers of the Four Seasons Four Beauties Four Classic Novels Four arts Four Symbols Four Holy Beasts Four Pillars of Destiny Four Paragons of the Early Tang Four Masters of the Ming dynasty Four Masters of the Yuan dynasty Four Wangs Gang of Four Four Olds Four Pests campaign Demographics Emigration Ethnic groups Eunuchs Internal migration Languages Life expectancy Statistics Population history " Post-80s " " Post-90s " Urbanization Women Religion Buddhism Chinese Buddhism Tibetan Buddhism Confucianism Folk religion Christianity Catholic Church in China Protestantism Freedom of religion History of religion Irreligion Islam Taoism Symbols Anthem Emblem Flag Outline Index Category Portal v t e Qing dynasty topics History Early (1616–1683) Jurchen unification Later Jin Seven Grievances Later Jin invasion of Joseon Qing invasion of Joseon Transition from Ming to Qing Battle of Shanhai Pass Great Clearance Battle of Penghu Revolt of the Three Feudatories High Qing (1683–1799) Sino-Russian border conflicts Dzungar–Qing Wars Chinese expedition to Tibet (1720) Chinese Rites controversy Ten Great Campaigns Miao Rebellion (1735–1736) Lhasa riot of 1750 Revolt of the Altishahr Khojas Afaqi Khoja revolts Durrani-Qing relations Sino-Burmese War Lin Shuangwen rebellion Battle of Ngọc Hồi-Đống Đa Sino-Nepalese War Miao Rebellion (1795–1806) White Lotus Rebellion 19th century (1801–1900) Eight Trigrams uprising of 1813 First Opium War Dogra–Tibetan war (Sino-Sikh war) Taiping Rebellion Nian Rebellion Red Turban Rebellion (1854–1856) Small Swords Society Miao Rebellion (1854–1873) Nepal–Tibet War (1855–1856) Panthay Rebellion Second Opium War Punti–Hakka Clan Wars Amur Annexation Self-Strengthening Movement Tongzhi Restoration Dungan Revolt (1862–1877) Mudan incident Tianjin Massacre Margary Affair Japanese invasion of Taiwan (1874) Northern Chinese Famine Qing reconquest of Xinjiang Sino-French War Sikkim expedition Jindandao incident First Sino-Japanese War Gongche Shangshu movement Dungan Revolt (1895–1896) Hundred Days' Reform Third plague pandemic Boxer Rebellion Red Lanterns Eight-Nation Alliance Declaration of war 20th century (1901–1912) Late Qing reforms British expedition to Tibet 1905 Batang uprising Preparative Constitutionalism 1909 Parliamentary election 1909 Provincial Assembly elections Chinese expedition to Tibet (1910) Manchurian plague Railway Protection Movement 1911 Revolution Wuchang Uprising Xinhai Lhasa turmoil Mongolian Revolution of 1911 1911 Revolution in Xinjiang Imperial Edict of the Abdication of Puyi Articles of Favourable Treatment Manchu Restoration Government Emperor List Family tree Advisory Council Amban Consultative Bureau Cup of Solid Gold Dates of establishment of diplomatic relations Da-Qing Bank Deliberative Council Diplomatic missions Flag of the Qing dynasty Grand Council Great Qing Legal Code Imperial Clan Court Imperial Commissioner Imperial Household Department Lifan Yuan Ministry of Posts and Communications Nine Gates Infantry Commander Provincial governor Provincial military commander Principles of the Constitution (1908) Royal and noble ranks of the Qing dynasty Ejen Administrative divisions Viceroys Zhili Shaan-Gan Liangjiang Huguang Sichuan Min-Zhe Liangguang Yun-Gui Three Eastern Provinces Zongli Yamen Military Beiyang Army Eight Banners Ever Victorious Army Green Standard Army Imperial Guards Firearm Battalion Peking Field Force New Army Hushenying Shuishiying Wuwei Corps Yong Ying Chu Army Huai Army Xiang Army Navy Special regions Inner Asia Manchuria Mongolia Administrative divisions Tibet Golden Urn List of ambans Xinjiang Timeline General of Ili Taiwan Guest House of Imperial Envoys Palaces & mausoleums Chengde Mountain Resort Forbidden City Hetu Ala Mukden Palace Old Summer Palace Summer Palace Eastern Qing tombs Western Qing tombs Fuling Mausoleum Zhao Mausoleum (Qing dynasty) Imperial Tombs of the Ming and Qing Dynasties Society & culture Booi Aha Changzhou School of Thought Complete Classics Collection of Ancient China Dibao Economy performance criticism Four Wangs History of Ming Kangxi Dictionary Kaozheng Literary inquisition Manchu Han Imperial Feast Peiwen Yunfu Pentaglot Dictionary Qing official headwear Qing poetry Complete Tang Poems Queue Researches on Manchu Origins Sacred Edict of the Kangxi Emperor Shamanism during the Qing dynasty Islam during the Qing dynasty Complete Library of the Four Treasuries Annotated Bibliography Treaties Treaty of Kyakhta (1727) Treaty of Nerchinsk Unequal treaties Boxer Protocol Burlingame Treaty Chefoo Convention Convention Between Great Britain and China Respecting Tibet Convention for the Extension of Hong Kong Territory Convention of Peking Convention of Tientsin Li–Lobanov Treaty Sino-Portuguese Treaty of Peking Treaty of Aigun Treaty of the Bogue Treaty of Canton Treaty of Kulja Treaty of Nanking Treaty of Saint Petersburg (1881) Treaty of Shimonoseki Treaty of Tarbagatai Treaty of Tientsin Treaty of Wanghia Treaty of Whampoa Currency Coinage Zhiqian Kangxi Tongbao Qianlong Tongbao Hongqian Great Qing Copper Coin Great Qing Gold Coin Paper money Great Qing Treasure Note Hubu Guanpiao Banknotes of the Da Qing Bank Other topics Aisin Gioro Anti-Qing sentiment Canton System Chuang Guandong Draft History of Qing History of Qing (People's Republic) Imperial hunt of the Qing dynasty Legacy of the Qing dynasty Manchu people Names of the Qing dynasty New Qing History Timeline of late anti-Qing rebellions Treaty ports Willow Palisade Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=1911_Revolution&oldid=1306494028 " Categories : 1911 Revolution 1911 in China 1912 in China 20th-century revolutions Civil wars in China Revolution-based civil wars Revolutions in China Eight Banners Hidden categories: CS1 uses Chinese-language script (zh) CS1 Chinese-language sources (zh) Articles containing Chinese-language text CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Tibetan-language sources (bo) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2020 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from November 2024 All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from October 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2014 Citation overkill Articles tagged with the inline citation overkill template from June 2025 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2017 Articles with unsourced statements from October 2022 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 18 August 2025, at 01:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents 1911 Revolution 61 languages Add topic

