Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Object permanence 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Peekaboo 22 languages Dansk Deutsch فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Bahasa Melayu Minangkabau Nederlands 日本語 ਪੰਜਾਬੀ Plattdüütsch Русский සිංහල کوردی Svenska ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Game played primarily with babies For other uses, see Peekaboo (disambiguation) .

Two children playing peekaboo (1895 painting by Georgios Jakobides ) Peekaboo (also spelled peek-a-boo ) is a form of play played with an infant . To play, one player hides their face, pops back into the view of the other, and says Peekaboo!

, sometimes followed by I see you!

There are many variations: for example, where trees are involved, "Hiding behind that tree!" is sometimes added. Another variation involves saying "Where's the baby?" while the face is covered and "There's the baby!" when uncovering the face.

Peekaboo uses a joke-like structure: surprise, balanced with expectation.

[ 1 ] Linguist Iris Nomikou has compared the game to a dialogue given the predictable back-and-forth pattern.

[ 2 ] Other researchers have called the game “protoconversation" – a way to teach an infant the timing and the structure of social exchanges.

[ 3 ] Object permanence [ edit ] Peekaboo is a prime example of an object permanence test in childhood cognition.

[ 4 ] Peekaboo is thought by developmental psychologists to demonstrate an infant's inability to understand object permanence .

[ 5 ] Object permanence is an important stage of cognitive development for infants . In early sensorimotor stages , the infant is completely unable to comprehend object permanence. Psychologist Jean Piaget conducted experiments with infants which led him to conclude that this awareness was typically achieved at eight to nine months of age.

[ 6 ] He said that infants before this age are too young to understand object permanence. A lack of object permanence can lead to A-not-B errors , where children reach for a thing at a place where it should not be.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Hide-and-seek List of children's games References [ edit ] ^ Stafford, Tom (April 18, 2014).

"Why All Babies Love Peekaboo" .

BBC .

^ Nomikou, Iris; Leonardi, Giuseppe; Radkowska, Alicja; Rączaszek-Leonardi, Joanna; Rohlfing, Katharina J. (2017-10-10).

"Taking Up an Active Role: Emerging Participation in Early Mother–Infant Interaction during Peekaboo Routines" .

Frontiers in Psychology .

8 : 1656.

doi : 10.3389/fpsyg.2017.01656 .

ISSN 1664-1078 .

PMC 5641350 .

PMID 29066985 .

^ "PsycNET" .

psycnet.apa.org . Retrieved 2019-08-13 .

^ Kitajima, Yoshio; Kumoi, Miyoshi; Koike, Toshihide (1998).

"Developmental changes of anticipatory heart rate responses in human infants" .

Japanese Journal of Physiological Psychology and Psychophysiology .

16 (2): 93– 100.

doi : 10.5674/jjppp1983.16.93 .

ProQuest 619539004 .

^ Mayers, David (2011).

Exploring Psychology . New York, NY: Worth.

ISBN 978-1-4292-1635-7 .

^ Wellman, Henry M.; et al. (1986), "Infant Search and Object Permanence: A Meta-Analysis of the A-Not-B Error.", Monographs of the Society for Research in Child Development , 51 (3): i-67, doi : 10.2307/1166103 , JSTOR 1166103 , PMID 3683418 Further reading [ edit ] Bruner, J. S. & Sherwood, V. (1976). "Peek-a-boo and the learning of rule structures". In Bruner, J.; Jolly, A. & Sylva, K. (eds.).

Play: Its Role in Development and Evolution . Middlesex: Penguin. pp.

277– 287.

ISBN 0-14-081126-5 .

External links [ edit ] Peekaboo at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons v t e Infants and their care Health ( pediatrics ) Baby food Birth weight Breast pump Breastfeeding Breastfeeding and medications Breastfeeding and mental health Bottle feeding Colic Cradle cap Esotropia Failure to thrive Immunization Infant and toddler safety Infant bathing Infant feeding Infant food safety Infant formula Infant massage Infant respiratory distress syndrome Infant sleep training Neonatal intensive care unit Newborn care and safety Oral rehydration therapy Pedialyte Preterm birth Shaken baby syndrome Soy formula SIDS Development Attachment parenting Baby-led weaning Baby talk Babbling Birth defect Childbirth Crawling Gestational age Infant visual development Irritant diaper dermatitis Infant cognitive development Infant crying Kangaroo care Mother Nursery rhyme Object permanence Parent Parenting Peekaboo Play Prenatal development Prenatal development table Teething Walking Weaning Socialization and culture Attachment Babysitting Child abuse Child care Child custody Children's rights UN Child rights Circumcision Foster care Grandparent visitation Infant swimming Milk bank Nanny Wet nurse Infant care and equipment Baby bouncer Baby gate Baby monitor / Hidden camera Baby powder Baby shampoo Baby toy Baby walker Bib Baby swing Baby transport Bassinet Car seat safety Child vehicular heat stroke deaths Cloth diaper Cradle board Diaper Diaper bag Baby wipes Haberman Feeder High chair Infant bed (American 'crib' and 'cradle', British 'cot') Infant carrier Infant clothing Pacifier Playpen Stroller Supplemental nursing system Swaddling Swim diaper Teether Travel cot Other topics Baby shower Babywearing Child neglect Closed adoption Cry room Fetal alcohol spectrum disorder Infant ear piercing Open adoption Prenatal cocaine exposure Neonatal withdrawal syndrome Parental child abduction Parental responsibility Parenting plan Paternity Paternity fraud Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peekaboo&oldid=1282290205 " Category : Children's games Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2024 This page was last edited on 25 March 2025, at 14:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peekaboo 22 languages Add topic

