Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Beliefs and principles Toggle Beliefs and principles subsection 1.1 Tradition 1.2 Hierarchy 1.3 Authority 2 Historical background 3 Ideological variants Toggle Ideological variants subsection 3.1 Authoritarian conservatism 3.2 Liberal conservatism 3.3 National conservatism 3.4 Paternalistic conservatism 3.5 Progressive conservatism 3.6 Reactionary conservatism 3.7 Religious conservatism 3.8 Social conservatism 3.9 Traditionalist conservatism 4 National variants Toggle National variants subsection 4.1 Asia 4.1.1 China 4.1.2 India 4.1.3 Iran 4.1.4 Israel 4.1.5 Japan 4.1.6 Singapore 4.1.7 South Korea 4.2 Europe 4.2.1 Austria 4.2.2 Belgium 4.2.3 Denmark 4.2.4 Finland 4.2.5 France 4.2.6 Germany 4.2.7 Greece 4.2.8 Hungary 4.2.9 Iceland 4.2.10 Ireland 4.2.11 Italy 4.2.12 Luxembourg 4.2.13 Netherlands 4.2.14 Norway 4.2.15 Poland 4.2.16 Russia 4.2.17 Spain 4.2.18 Sweden 4.2.19 Switzerland 4.2.20 Ukraine 4.2.21 United Kingdom 4.3 Latin America 4.3.1 Brazil 4.3.2 Chile 4.3.3 Colombia 4.4 North America 4.4.1 Canada 4.4.2 United States 4.5 Oceania 4.5.1 Australia 4.5.2 New Zealand 5 Psychology Toggle Psychology subsection 5.1 Conscientiousness 5.2 Disgust sensitivity 5.3 Authoritarianism 5.4 Ambiguity intolerance 5.5 Social dominance orientation 5.6 Happiness 6 Prominent figures Toggle Prominent figures subsection 6.1 Statesmen 6.2 Intellectuals 6.3 Artists 7 See also Toggle See also subsection 7.1 National variants 7.2 Ideological variants 7.3 Related topics 8 References 9 Bibliography 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Conservatism 133 languages Afrikaans Alemannisch አማርኛ العربية Aragonés অসমীয়া Asturianu Avañe'ẽ Авар Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Буряад Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Fiji Hindi Føroyskt Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Igbo Ilokano Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Íslenska Italiano עברית Къарачай-малкъар ქართული Қазақша Kernowek Kiswahili Kriyòl gwiyannen Kurdî Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Limburgs Lingua Franca Nova Lombard Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी მარგალური مصرى مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu Мокшень Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Нохчийн Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Patois ភាសាខ្មែរ Piemontèis Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Rumantsch Русиньскый Русский Саха тыла Shqip සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça తెలుగు ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vèneto Tiếng Việt Winaray 吴语 ייִדיש 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Batak Mandailing Yerwa Kanuri Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Conservative ) Political philosophy based on tradition and social order "Conservatives" redirects here. For specific political parties, see Conservative Party .

This article is about conservatism as a political and social philosophy. For other uses of conservatism and conservative, see Conservatism (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Conservation movement .

Part of a series on Conservatism Variants Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Libertarian Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Balance of power Class collaboration Collective identity Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family as a state model Family values Fundamentalism Gender roles Complementarianism Essentialism Historism Honour Imperialism Law and order Loyalty Maternalism Monarchism Royalism Moral absolutism Natalism Nationalism Nativism Natural law Norms Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organised religion State Orthodoxy Patriarchy Patriarchalism Patriotism Peace through strength Property rights Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Sovereignty Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Johnson Hume Burke More Maistre Bonald Chateaubriand Czartoryski Coleridge Karamzin Savigny Carlyle Ranke Newman Tocqueville Dostoevsky Taine Le Bon Nordau Belloc Iorga Chesterton Spengler Jabotinsky Ilyin Savarkar Schmitt Eliot Mannheim Jünger Evola Strauss Röpke Gadamer Freyre Voegelin Oakeshott Burnham Lefebvre Qutb Kuehnelt-Leddihn Gómez Dávila Kirk Solzhenitsyn Koselleck Mishima Buckley Sowell Mansfield Scruton Hoppe Dugin Peterson Politicians Adams Pitt Canning Metternich Disraeli Bismarck Salisbury Dmowski Mannerheim Baldwin Maurras Horthy Metaxas Churchill Adenauer De Gasperi Chiang Salazar De Gaulle Dollfuss Franco Khomeini Reagan Powell Pinochet Marcos Park Smith Reza Shah Suharto Lee Zia Vajpayee Thatcher Kohl Fujimori Trump Bush Kaczyński Netanyahu Modi Putin Erdoğan Abe Sarkozy Bolsonaro Yoon Orbán Milei Meloni Bukele Religion Christian democracy Christian right Confucianism Clericalism Hindutva Islamism Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Theravada Buddhism Traditionalist Catholicism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Personal variants Berlusconism Bukelism Cameronism Chiangism Erdoğanism Francoism Fujimorism Gaullism Janismo Kaczyzm Maurrassisme Mellismo Metaxism Powellism Pinochetism Putinism Qutbism Khomeinism Reaganism Sarkozysm Thatcherism Trumpism Ziaism National variants Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Belize Brazil Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Cuba Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Guatemala Hungary Iceland India Iran Israel Italy Japan Luxembourg Malaysia Mexico Netherlands New Zealand Norway Pakistan Panama Peru Poland Russia Serbia Singapore Sweden Switzerland South Korea Taiwan Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Toryism United States Related ideologies Agrarianism Black conservatism In US Conservative feminism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Conservative socialism Corporatism Hispanic conservatism In US LGBTQ conservatism Ordoliberalism Para-fascism Related topics Anti-communism White Terror Anti-gender movement Anti-immigration Catholic social teaching Conservative wave NatCon Radical right Europe US Right realism Right-wing politics Alt Authoritarianism Centre Dictatorship Far New Small-c conservative Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Conservatism is a cultural , social , and political philosophy and ideology that seeks to promote and preserve traditional institutions , customs , and values .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] The central tenets of conservatism may vary in relation to the culture and civilization in which it appears.

[ 4 ] In Western culture , depending on the particular nation, conservatives seek to promote and preserve a range of institutions, such as the nuclear family , organized religion , the military , the nation-state , property rights , rule of law , aristocracy , and monarchy .

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] The 18th-century Anglo-Irish statesman Edmund Burke , who opposed the French Revolution but supported the American Revolution , is credited as one of the forefathers of conservative thought in the 1790s along with Savoyard statesman Joseph de Maistre .

[ 7 ] The first established use of the term in a political context originated in 1818 with François-René de Chateaubriand during the period of Bourbon Restoration that sought to roll back the policies of the French Revolution and establish social order.

[ 8 ] Conservatism has varied considerably as it has adapted itself to existing traditions and national cultures.

[ 9 ] Thus, conservatives from different parts of the world, each upholding their respective traditions, may disagree on a wide range of issues.

[ 10 ] One of the three major ideologies along with liberalism and socialism , [ 11 ] conservatism is the dominant ideology in many nations across the world, including Hungary , India , Iran , Israel , [ 12 ] Italy , Japan , Poland , Russia , Singapore , and South Korea . Historically associated with right-wing politics , the term has been used to describe a wide range of views . Conservatism may be either libertarian or authoritarian , [ 13 ] populist or elitist , [ 14 ] progressive or reactionary , [ 15 ] [ dubious – discuss ] moderate or extreme .

[ 16 ] Beliefs and principles [ edit ] Russell Kirk , whose 1953 book The Conservative Mind identified five canons of conservatism Scholars have tried to define conservatism as a set of beliefs or principles. Political scientist Andrew Heywood argues that the five central beliefs of conservatism are tradition, human imperfection, organic society, authority/hierarchy, and property.

[ 17 ] Historian Russell Kirk developed five canons of conservatism in The Conservative Mind , published in 1953, which include: A belief in a transcendent order, which Kirk described variously as based in tradition, divine revelation , or natural law ; An affection for the "variety and mystery" of human existence; A conviction that society requires orders and classes that emphasize natural distinctions; A belief that property and freedom are closely linked; A faith in custom, convention , and prescription, and a recognition that innovation must be tied to existing traditions and customs, which entails a respect for the political value of prudence .

[ 18 ] Some political scientists, such as Samuel P. Huntington , a government professor at Harvard University , have seen conservatism as situational. Under this definition, conservatives are seen as defending the established institutions of their time.

[ 19 ] According to Quintin Hogg , the chairman of the British Conservative Party in 1959: "Conservatism is not so much a philosophy as an attitude, a constant force, performing a timeless function in the development of a free society, and corresponding to a deep and permanent requirement of human nature itself." [ 20 ] Conservatism is often used as a generic term to describe a "right-wing viewpoint occupying the political spectrum between [classical] liberalism and fascism ".

[ 1 ] Conservatism has been called a "philosophy of human imperfection" by political scientist Noël O'Sullivan , reflecting among its adherents a negative view of human nature and pessimism of the potential to improve it through 'utopian' schemes.

[ 21 ] Political philosopher Thomas Hobbes , the "intellectual godfather of the realist right", argued that the state of nature for humans was "poor, nasty, brutish, and short", requiring centralized authority with royal sovereignty to guarantee law and order .

[ 22 ] Political philosopher Edmund Burke , often called the father of modern conservatism, believed that human beings are steeped in original sin and that society therefore needs traditional institutions, such as an established church and a landed aristocracy , in order to function.

[ 23 ] Tradition [ edit ] Despite the lack of a universal definition, certain themes can be recognized as common across conservative thought. According to philosopher Michael Oakeshott : To be conservative […] is to prefer the familiar to the unknown, to prefer the tried to the untried, fact to mystery, the actual to the possible, the limited to the unbounded, the near to the distant, the sufficient to the superabundant, the convenient to the perfect, present laughter to utopian bliss.

[ 24 ] Such traditionalism may be a reflection of trust in time-tested methods of social organization, giving 'votes to the dead'.

[ 25 ] Traditions may also be steeped in a sense of identity .

[ 25 ] Hierarchy [ edit ] In contrast to the tradition-based definition of conservatism, some left-wing political theorists like Corey Robin define conservatism primarily in terms of a general defense of social and economic inequality .

[ 26 ] From this perspective, conservatism is less an attempt to uphold old institutions and more "a meditation on—and theoretical rendition of—the felt experience of having power, seeing it threatened, and trying to win it back".

[ 27 ] On another occasion, Robin argues for a more complex relation: Conservatism is a defense of established hierarchies, but it is also fearful of those established hierarchies. It sees in their assuredness of power the source of corruption, decadence and decline. Ruling regimes require some kind of irritant, a grain of sand in the oyster, to reactivate their latent powers, to exercise their atrophied muscles, to make their pearls.

[ 28 ] In Conservatism: A Rediscovery (2022), political philosopher Yoram Hazony argues that, in a traditional conservative community, members have importance and influence to the degree they are honored within the social hierarchy, which includes factors such as age, experience, and wisdom.

[ 29 ] Conservatives often glorify hierarchies, as demonstrated in an aphorism by conservative philosopher Nicolás Gómez Dávila : "Hierarchies are celestial. In hell all are equal." [ 30 ] The word hierarchy has religious roots and translates to 'rule of a high priest.' [ 31 ] Authority [ edit ] Authority is a core tenet of conservatism.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] More specifically, conservatives tend to believe in traditional authority . According to sociologist Max Weber , this form of authority is "resting on an established belief in the sanctity of immemorial traditions and the legitimacy of those exercising authority under them".

[ 35 ] [ 36 ] Philosopher Alexandre Kojève distinguishes between two different forms of traditional authority: The Authority of the Father—represented by actual fathers as well as conceptual fathers such as priests and monarchs.

The Authority of the Master—represented by aristocrats and military commanders.

[ 37 ] Sociologist Robert Nisbet acknowledges that the decline of traditional authority in the modern world is partly linked with the retreat of old institutions such as guild , order , parish , and family —institutions that formerly acted as intermediaries between the state and the individual.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] Philosopher Hannah Arendt argues that the modern world suffers an existential crisis with a "dramatic breakdown of all traditional authorities," which are needed for the continuity of an established civilization.

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] Historical background [ edit ] Anglo-Irish statesman Edmund Burke has been widely regarded as the philosophical founder of modern conservatism.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] He served as the private secretary to the Marquis of Rockingham and as official pamphleteer to the Rockingham branch of the Whig party .

[ 44 ] Together with the Tories, they were the conservatives in the late 18th century United Kingdom.

[ 45 ] Edmund Burke , widely regarded as the philosophical founder of modern conservatism Burke's views were a mixture of conservatism and republicanism. He supported the American Revolution of 1775–1783 but abhorred the violence of the French Revolution of 1789–1799. He accepted the conservative ideals of private property and the economics of Adam Smith , but he thought that capitalism should remain subordinate to the conservative social ethic and that the business class should be subordinate to aristocracy.

[ 46 ] He insisted on standards of honor derived from the medieval aristocratic tradition and saw the aristocracy as the nation's natural leaders.

[ 47 ] That meant limits on the powers of the Crown, since he found the institutions of Parliament to be better informed than commissions appointed by the executive. He favored an established church, but allowed for a degree of religious toleration .

[ 48 ] Burke ultimately justified the social order on the basis of tradition: tradition represented the wisdom of the species, and he valued community and social harmony over social reforms.

[ 49 ] Joseph de Maistre , a French philosopher and proponent of the Counter-Enlightenment Another form of conservatism developed in France in parallel to conservatism in Britain. It was influenced by Counter-Enlightenment works by philosophers such as Joseph de Maistre and Louis de Bonald .

[ 50 ] Many continental conservatives do not support separation of church and state , with most supporting state cooperation with the Catholic Church , such as had existed in France before the Revolution. Conservatives were also early to embrace nationalism , which was previously associated with liberalism and the Revolution in France.

[ 51 ] Another early French conservative, François-René de Chateaubriand , espoused a romantic opposition to modernity, contrasting its emptiness with the 'full heart' of traditional faith and loyalty.

[ 52 ] Elsewhere on the continent, German thinkers Justus Möser and Friedrich von Gentz criticized the Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen that came of the Revolution. Opposition was also expressed by German idealists such as Adam Müller and Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel , the latter inspiring both leftist and rightist followers.

[ 53 ] Both Burke and Maistre were critical of democracy in general, though their reasons differed. Maistre was pessimistic about humans being able to follow rules, while Burke was skeptical about humans' innate ability to make rules. For Maistre, rules had a divine origin, while Burke believed they arose from custom. The lack of custom for Burke, and the lack of divine guidance for Maistre, meant that people would act in terrible ways. Both also believed that liberty of the wrong kind led to bewilderment and political breakdown. Their ideas would together flow into a stream of anti-rationalist, romantic conservatism, but would still stay separate. Burke was more open to argumentation and disagreement, while Maistre sought faith and authority, leading to a more illiberal strain of thought.

[ 54 ] Ideological variants [ edit ] Authoritarian conservatism [ edit ] Main article: Authoritarian conservatism See also: Far-right politics and Ultraconservatism Authoritarian conservatism refers to autocratic regimes that portray authority as absolute and unquestionable.

[ 34 ] [ 55 ] [ 56 ] Authoritarian conservative movements show strong devotion towards religion, tradition, and culture while also expressing fervent nationalism akin to other far-right nationalist movements.

[ 57 ] [ 58 ] Examples of authoritarian conservative dictators include Marshal Philippe Pétain in France, [ 59 ] Regent Miklós Horthy in Hungary, [ 60 ] General Ioannis Metaxas in Greece, [ 61 ] King Alexander I in Yugoslavia, [ 62 ] Prime Minister António de Oliveira Salazar in Portugal, [ 63 ] Chancellor Engelbert Dollfuss in Austria, [ 64 ] Generalissimo Francisco Franco in Spain, [ 65 ] King Carol II in Romania, [ 66 ] and Tsar Boris III in Bulgaria.

[ 67 ] King Alexander I of Yugoslavia and Chancellor Engelbert Dollfuss of Austria, authoritarian conservative dictators who were assassinated by fascist and Nazi political enemies Authoritarian conservative movements were prominent in the same era as fascism , with which they sometimes clashed.

[ 68 ] Although both ideologies shared core values such as nationalism and had common enemies such as communism , there was nonetheless a contrast between the traditionalist and elitist nature of authoritarian conservatism and the revolutionary and populist nature of fascism—thus it was common for authoritarian conservative regimes to suppress rising fascist and Nazi movements.

[ 66 ] The hostility between the two ideologies is highlighted by the struggle for power in Austria, which was marked by the assassination of the ultra-Catholic dictator Engelbert Dollfuss by Austrian Nazis . Likewise, Croatian fascists assassinated King Alexander I of Yugoslavia .

[ 69 ] In Romania, as the fascist Iron Guard was gaining popularity and Nazi Germany was making advances on the European political stage, King Carol II ordered the execution of Corneliu Zelea Codreanu and other top-ranking Romanian fascists.

[ 70 ] The exiled German Emperor Wilhelm II was an enemy of Adolf Hitler and stated that Nazism made him ashamed to be a German for the first time in his life.

[ 71 ] The Catholic seminarian António de Oliveira Salazar , who was Portugal's dictator for 40 years, denounced fascism and Nazism as a "pagan Caesarism " that did not recognize legal, religious, or moral limits.

[ 72 ] Political scientist Seymour Martin Lipset has examined the class basis of right-wing extremist politics in the 1920–1960 era. He reports: Conservative or rightist extremist movements have arisen at different periods in modern history, ranging from the Horthyites in Hungary, the Christian Social Party of Dollfuss in Austria, Der Stahlhelm and other nationalists in pre-Hitler Germany, and Salazar in Portugal, to the pre-1966 Gaullist movements and the monarchists in contemporary France and Italy. The right extremists are conservative, not revolutionary. They seek to change political institutions in order to preserve or restore cultural and economic ones, while extremists of the centre [fascists/Nazis] and left [communists/anarchists] seek to use political means for cultural and social revolution. The ideal of the right extremist is not a totalitarian ruler, but a monarch, or a traditionalist who acts like one. Many such movements in Spain, Austria, Hungary, Germany, and Italy have been explicitly monarchist […] The supporters of these movements differ from those of the centrists, tending to be wealthier, and more religious, which is more important in terms of a potential for mass support.

[ 73 ] Edmund Fawcett states that fascism is totalitarian, populist, and anti- pluralist , whereas authoritarian conservatism is somewhat pluralist but most of all elitist and anti-populist. He concludes: "The fascist is a nonconservative who takes anti-liberalism to extremes. The right-wing authoritarian is a conservative who takes fear of democracy to extremes." [ 74 ] During the Cold War , right-wing military dictatorships were prominent in Latin America, with most nations being under military rule by the middle of the 1970s.

[ 75 ] One example of this was General Augusto Pinochet , who ruled over Chile from 1973 to 1990.

[ 76 ] According to Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn , military dictatorships arise in democratic systems in order to stop leftist parties from becoming totalitarian.

[ 77 ] The most recent instance occurred in Bolivia in 2024, when General Juan José Zúñiga staged a coup in order to overthrow the far-left president Luis Arce .

[ 78 ] In the 21st century, the authoritarian style of government experienced a worldwide renaissance with conservative politicians such as President Vladimir Putin in Russia, President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan in Turkey, Prime Minister Viktor Orbán in Hungary, Prime Minister Narendra Modi in India, and President Donald Trump in the United States.

[ 79 ] Liberal conservatism [ edit ] Main article: Liberal conservatism Not to be confused with Conservative liberalism .

Liberal conservatism is a variant of conservatism that is strongly influenced by liberal stances.

[ 80 ] It incorporates the classical liberal view of minimal economic interventionism , meaning that individuals should be free to participate in the market and generate wealth without government interference.

[ 81 ] However, individuals cannot be thoroughly depended on to act responsibly in other spheres of life; therefore, liberal conservatives believe that a strong state is necessary to ensure law and order, and social institutions are needed to nurture a sense of duty and responsibility to the nation.

[ 81 ] Originally opposed to capitalism and the industrial revolution , [ 82 ] [ 83 ] the conservative ideology in many countries adopted economic liberalism , especially in the United States where this ideology is known as fiscal conservatism .

[ 84 ] [ 85 ] National conservatism [ edit ] Main article: National conservatism Giorgia Meloni , leader of Brothers of Italy , a national conservative party, the first female Prime Minister of Italy , and president of the European Conservatives and Reformists Party National conservatism prioritizes the defense of national and cultural identity , often based on a theory of the family as a model for the state .

[ 86 ] National conservatism is oriented towards upholding national sovereignty , which includes limited immigration and a strong national defense.

[ 87 ] In Europe, national conservatives are usually eurosceptics .

[ 88 ] [ 89 ] Political philosopher Yoram Hazony has argued for national conservatism in his work The Virtue of Nationalism (2018).

[ 90 ] Paternalistic conservatism [ edit ] Main article: Paternalistic conservatism Paternalistic conservatism is a strand in conservatism which reflects the belief that societies exist and develop organically and that members within them have obligations towards each other.

[ 91 ] There is particular emphasis on the paternalistic obligation ( noblesse oblige ) of those who are privileged and wealthy to the poorer parts of society, which is consistent with principles such as duty , organicism , and hierarchy .

[ 92 ] Its proponents often stress the importance of a social safety net to deal with poverty, supporting limited redistribution of wealth along with government regulation of markets in the interests of both consumers and producers.

[ 93 ] Part of a series on One-nation conservatism Principles Class collaboration Conservatism Muscular liberalism Noblesse oblige Progressive Paternalism Pragmatism Social policy Responsibility Subsidiarity Welfare state People Disraeli Burke Churchill (Lord Randolph) Churchill (Winston) Baldwin Macmillan Butler Howard Cameron May Osborne Johnson Sunak Documents Sybil, or The Two Nations Coningsby, or The New Generation Industrial Charter Organisations Conservative Party Tory Reform Group Bright Blue One Nation Conservatives caucus Conservatism portal Politics portal United Kingdom portal v t e Paternalistic conservatism first arose as a distinct ideology in the United Kingdom under Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli 's " One Nation " Toryism .

[ 94 ] There have been a variety of one-nation conservative governments in the United Kingdom with exponents such as Prime Ministers Disraeli, Stanley Baldwin , Neville Chamberlain , Winston Churchill , and Harold Macmillan .

[ 95 ] In 19th-century Germany , Chancellor Otto von Bismarck adopted a set of social programs, known as state socialism , which included insurance for workers against sickness, accident, incapacity, and old age. The goal of this conservative state-building strategy was to make ordinary Germans, not just the Junker aristocracy, more loyal to state and Emperor .

[ 23 ] Chancellor Leo von Caprivi promoted a conservative agenda called the "New Course".

[ 96 ] Progressive conservatism [ edit ] Main article: Progressive conservatism In the United States, President Theodore Roosevelt has been identified as the main exponent of progressive conservatism. Roosevelt stated that he had "always believed that wise progressivism and wise conservatism go hand in hand".

[ 97 ] The Republican administration of President William Howard Taft was progressive conservative, and he described himself as a believer in progressive conservatism.

[ 97 ] President Dwight D. Eisenhower also declared himself an advocate of progressive conservatism.

[ 98 ] In Canada , a variety of conservative governments have been part of the Red Tory tradition, with Canada's former major conservative party being named the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada from 1942 to 2003.

[ 99 ] Prime Ministers Arthur Meighen , R. B. Bennett , John Diefenbaker , Joe Clark , Brian Mulroney , and Kim Campbell led Red Tory federal governments.

[ 99 ] Reactionary conservatism [ edit ] Main article: Reactionary conservatism Italian esotericist Julius Evola and Colombian aphorist Nicolás Gómez Dávila —prominent reactionary critics of modernity Reactionary conservatism, also known as reactionism, opposes policies for the social transformation of society.

[ 100 ] In popular usage, reactionism refers to a staunch traditionalist conservative political perspective of a person who supports the status quo and opposes social, political, and economic change.

[ 101 ] Some adherents of conservatism, rather than opposing change, seek to return to the status quo ante and tend to view the modern world in a negative light, especially concerning mass culture and secularism , although different groups of reactionaries may choose different traditional values to revive.

[ 23 ] [ 102 ] Some political scientists, such as Corey Robin , treat the words reactionary and conservative as synonyms.

[ 103 ] Others, such as Mark Lilla , argue that reactionism and conservatism are distinct worldviews.

[ 104 ] Francis Wilson defines conservatism as "a philosophy of social evolution, in which certain lasting values are defended within the framework of the tension of political conflict".

[ 105 ] Some reactionaries favor a return to the status quo ante , the previous political state of society, which that person believes possessed positive characteristics absent from contemporary society. An early example of a powerful reactionary movement was German Romanticism , which centred around concepts of organicism, medievalism , and traditionalism against the forces of rationalism, secularism, and individualism that were unleashed in the French Revolution .

[ 106 ] In political discourse, being a reactionary is generally regarded as negative; Peter King observed that it is "an unsought-for label, used as a torment rather than a badge of honor".

[ 107 ] Despite this, the descriptor has been adopted by intellectuals such as Italian esoteric traditionalist Julius Evola , [ 108 ] Austrian monarchist Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn , [ 109 ] Colombian political theologian Nicolás Gómez Dávila , and American historian John Lukacs .

[ 110 ] Religious conservatism [ edit ] See also: Christian right , Hindutva , Integralism , Islamism , and Religious Zionism Religious conservatism principally applies the teachings of particular religions to politics—sometimes by merely proclaiming the value of those teachings, at other times by having those teachings influence laws.

[ 111 ] In most democracies, political conservatism seeks to uphold traditional family structures and social values. Religious conservatives typically oppose abortion, LGBT behavior (or, in certain cases, identity), drug use, [ 112 ] and sexual activity outside of marriage. In some cases, conservative values are grounded in religious beliefs, and conservatives seek to increase the role of religion in public life.

[ 113 ] Part of a series on Christian democracy Principles Catholic social teaching Christian corporatism Christian ethics Christian humanism Common good Communitarianism Conservatism Christian Compassionate Liberal Progressive Social Consistent life ethic Cultural mandate Culture of life Dignity of labor Distributism Economic progressivism Familialism Human dignity Just war theory Liberalism Christian Catholicism Conservative Ordo Social Mixed economy Multiculturalism Neo-Calvinism Neo-Thomism Option for the poor Pan-European identity Person Dignity Theory Popularism Public morality Religious liberty Friendly separation of church and state Religious pluralism Social Gospel Social justice Social market economy Solidarity Sphere sovereignty Stewardship Environmentalism Environmental protection Subsidiarity in Catholicism Welfare State Philosophers Arizmendiarrieta Baader Barth Belloc Benedict XV Berggrav Blond Bonhoeffer Brague Cardijn Chesterton Day Dooyeweerd Escrivá Gebhardt Gilson Görres Groen Guardini Habsburg John XXIII John Paul II Ketteler De Koninck Korfanty Lamennais Leo XIII Leo XIV Lewis Manning Maritain Merton Milani Mounier Müller-Armack Murray Nell-Breuning Newman Ozanam Paul VI Pesch Pieper Pius XI Pottier Röpke Sheen Spaemann Stein Stomma Sturzo Tawney Tischner Toniolo Vogelsang Weigel Williams Politicians Adenauer Andreotti Antall Aznar Bayrou Beel Bidault Biden Bondevik Busch Buzek Caldera Clerides Cosgrave Daul De Gasperi Dehaene Donnelly Dzurinda Erhard Erzberger Fenech Adami Field Frei Gemayel Groen Haller Joseph Juncker Kaas Ketteler Klausener Kohl Komorowski Korfanty Kramp-Karrenbauer Kurz Kuyper Lacalle Pou Laschet Letta Leuger Lipinski Lubbers Martens Mattarella Mazowiecki Merkel Merz Metsola Mikołajczyk Moro Nile Quadros Pastrana Peterle Pethrus Popiel Portas Pöttering Prodi Raab Schäffer Schuman Schüssel Seipel Söder Stegerwald Stomma Strauss Sturzo Tajani Tindemans Vogelsang von der Leyen Wałęsa Weber Werner Windthorst Parties American Solidarity Party Austrian People's Party Christian Democracy Christian Democratic Appeal Christian Democratic and Flemish Christian Democratic Party Christian Democratic Party of Uruguay Christian Democratic People's Party Christian-Democratic Rebirth Party Christian Democratic Union of Germany Christian Social People's Party Christian Social Union in Bavaria Christian Union Centre Party Centrists for Europe Civic Platform Croatian Democratic Union Democratic Rally Democrats Fianna Fáil Fine Gael Kataeb Party National Action Party National Party Nationalist Party New Democracy Patriotic Union People's Party Polish People's Party Popular Republican Movement Prohibition Party VMRO-DPMNE Organizations Catholic Action Centrist Democrat International Christian Democrat Organization of America European People's Party European Christian Political Party Konrad Adenauer Foundation Conservative Christian Fellowship Centre for European Studies European Ideas Network Schuman Foundation Center for Public Justice Paneuropean Union World Movement of Christian Workers SIPDIC Documents Rerum novarum Populorum progressio Graves de communi re Quadragesimo anno Laborem exercens Sollicitudo rei socialis Centesimus annus Laudato si' Related topics Catholic Church and politics Christian left Christian anarchism Christian communism Christian socialism Christian right Christian libertarianism Christian nationalism Theoconservatism Clerical philosophers Ethical socialism Integralism Illiberal democracy Progressive Christianity Religious democracy Buddhist Islamic Jewish Mormon Social democracy Traditionalist Catholicism Christianity portal Politics portal v t e Christian democracy is a center to center-right ideology inspired by Christian social teaching that tends to be moderately conservative.

[ 114 ] It originated as a reaction against the industrialization and urbanization associated with laissez-faire -capitalism .

[ 115 ] In post-war Europe, Christian-democratic parties dominated politics in several nations—the Christian People's Party in Belgium, CDU and CSU in Germany, Fine Gael and Fianna Fáil in Ireland, and Christian Democracy in Italy.

[ 116 ] Many post-war Europeans saw Christian democracy as a moderate alternative to the extremes of right-wing nationalism and left-wing communism.

[ 117 ] Christian-democratic parties were especially popular among European women, who often voted for these parties to a large extent due to their pro-family policies.

[ 118 ] Social conservatism [ edit ] Main article: Social conservatism A March for Life rally in Paris in 2012 Social conservatives believe that society is built upon a fragile network of relationships which need to be upheld through duty, traditional values, and established institutions; and that the government has a role in encouraging or enforcing traditional values or practices. A social conservative wants to preserve traditional morality and social mores , often by opposing what they consider radical policies or social engineering .

[ 119 ] Some social-conservative stances are the following: Support of a culture of life and opposition to the destruction of human life at any stage, including abortion , embryonic stem cells research, and euthanasia .

Support of bioconservatism and opposition to both eugenics and transhumanism .

[ 120 ] Support of traditional family values , viewing the nuclear family model as society's foundational unit.

Support of a traditional definition of marriage as being one man and one woman, and opposition to expansion of civil marriage and child adoption to couples in same-sex relationships .

Support of public morality with prohibition of drugs and prostitution and censorship of pornography .

Support of organized religion and opposition to atheism and secularism , especially when militant.

[ 121 ] [ 122 ] [ 123 ] Traditionalist conservatism [ edit ] Main article: Traditionalist conservatism Traditionalist conservatism, also known as classical conservatism, emphasises the need for the principles of natural law , transcendent moral order, tradition , hierarchy , organicism , agrarianism , classicism , and high culture as well as the intersecting spheres of loyalty .

[ 124 ] Some traditionalists have embraced the labels reactionary and counter-revolutionary , defying the stigma that has attached to these terms since the Enlightenment . Having a hierarchical view of society, many traditionalist conservatives, including a few notable Americans such as Ralph Adams Cram , [ 125 ] William S. Lind , [ 126 ] and Charles A. Coulombe , [ 127 ] defend the monarchical political structure as the most natural and beneficial social arrangement.

National variants [ edit ] Conservative parties vary widely from country to country in the goals they wish to achieve.

[ 4 ] Both conservative and classical liberal parties tend to favor private ownership of property, in opposition to communist , socialist , and green parties, which favor communal ownership or laws regulating responsibility on the part of property owners. Where conservatives and liberals differ is primarily on social issues, where conservatives tend to reject behavior that does not conform to some social norm . Modern conservative parties often define themselves by their opposition to liberal or socialist parties. The United States usage of the term conservative is unique to that country, where its first modern usage was for pro-free enterprise opponents of the New Deal .

[ 128 ] Asia [ edit ] Part of a series on Conservatism in East and Southeast Asia Ideologies Authoritarian conservatism Buddhist democracy Communitarianism Confucianism Neo New Islamic democracy Legalism Monarchism#Asia Paternalistic conservatism Social conservatism State capitalism Principles Asian values Authority Authoritarianism Bureaucracy Drug prohibition Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Familialism Filial piety Gender roles Law and order Patriotism Respect Royalism Public morality Rule of law Statism Technocracy Social hierarchy Social order Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Confucius Shang Dong Zhu Kakuzō Hu Dai Mishima Yi Wang Literature Analects Classic of Filial Piety Hagakure (recorded 1709–1716) Bushido: The Soul of Japan (1899) The Malay Dilemma (1970) Farewell to Revolution (1995) Politicians Lin Rhee Chiang (Kai-shek) Ngo Chiang (Ching-kuo) Kittikachorn Marcos Park Nakasone Tinsulanonda Suharto Hussein Sihanouk Lee (Kuan Yew) Mahathir Jiang Lee (Allen) Koizumi Tsang Ma Subianto Lee (Hsien Loong) Xi Prayut Abe Organizations Asia Pacific Democracy Union Nippon Kaigi Unification Church World League for Freedom and Democracy Personal variants Chiangism Lee Kuan Yew Thought Mahathirism Park Chung Hee Thought Sihanoukism Suhartoism National variants China Hong Kong Japan Malaysia Singapore South Korea Taiwan History 1955 System Chinese Civil War CIA activities in Japan Empire of Japan History of the Kuomintang Nationalist government Imperial China Tributary system Korean War New Order (Indonesia) October Restoration Reform and opening up Republic of China (1912–1949) Related topics Anti-communism in China Antifeminism Anti-LGBTQ Anti-gender movement Eastern philosophy Fascism in Asia Minzu (anthropology) Ultraconservatism#Asia Conservatism portal Politics portal Asia portal v t e Conservatism in Asia differs according to regions.

East Asia and some Southeast Asian regions are deeply linked to Confucian traditions.

Asian values is a political ideology that attempts to define elements of society, culture and history common to the nations of Southeast and East Asia, particularly values of commonality and collectivism for social unity and economic good — contrasting with perceived European ideals of the universal rights of all individuals.

China [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in China This article is part of a series on Conservatism in China Ideologies Authoritarian Capitalism Party-state Chiangism Communitarianism Cultural Dai Jitao Thought Monarchism Nationalist Han Neo Ultra Neoauthoritarianism Social Traditionalist Confucianism Neo New Legalism Ultra Principles Ancestral worship Asian values Authority Bureaucracy Civilization state Chinese culture Genealogy book Great Unity Duty Elitism Meritocracy Exceptionalism Familialism Filial piety Mandate of Heaven Hierarchy Humaneness Irredentism Law and order Rectification of names Respect Sinicization Sinocentrism Social order Sovereignty Tradition Technocracy Zhonghua minzu History 1992 Consensus Boluan Fanzheng Boxer Rebellion Chinese Civil War Chinese Cultural Renaissance Dang Guo Dynasties of China Han Empire of China (1915–1916) History of the Kuomintang Nationalist government Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Imperial China Imperial examination Tributary system Manchu Restoration Nanjing decade Martial law in Taiwan Language policy New Life Movement Project National Glory Reform and opening up Republic of China (1912–1949) Shanghai massacre Strike Hard Against Crime Campaign Tongzhi Restoration Self-Strengthening Movement White Terror in Taiwan Xueheng School Intellectuals Bell Chang (Ya-chung) Chen (Yuan) Chao Confucius Dai Dong Gan Gu Hu (Hanmin) Hu (Xijin) Jaw Jiang (Qing) Jiang (Shigong) Jin Kang Li (Ao) Li (Hongzhi) Li (Zehou) Liang Liu Pan Liu Shang Tam Tan Wang Wu Xiao Xiong Zhang (Weiwei) Zheng (Yongnian) Zhu Zou Politicians Imperial China Chao Duke Shao Wen Emperor Wu (Han) Yang Yongle Yuan Zhang Duke Zhou Republic of China (before 1949) Chen Chiang (Ching-kuo) Chiang (Kai-shek) Chiang (Wei-kuo) Dai (Jitao) Dai (Li) Hu (Hanmin) Li Lin Soong Yuan People's Republic of China (Mainland) Hu Huang Jiang Wang Xi Hong Kong Chan (Gary) Chan (Joephy) Chow Fok Ho Ip (Kwok-him) Ip (Regina) Kwok Lam Lee (Dominic) Lee (John) Lee (Starry) Leung Liao Quat Tsang (Donald) Tsang (Yok-sing) Tung Yung Macau Chui Ho (Edmund) Ho (Iat Seng) Sam Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chen Chiang (Ching-kuo) Chiang (Kai-shek) Chiang (Wan-an) Chiang (Wei-kuo) Chiu Chu Gou Han Hau (Lung-pin) Hau (Pei-tsun) Hung Jaw Lee Lien Lin Ma Soong (James) Soong (Mei-ling) Sun Yu Extant parties Mainland China Chinese Communist Party ( factions ) Hong Kong Business and Professionals Alliance Civil Force Democratic Alliance for the Betterment and Progress Federation of Public Housing Estates Hong Kong Federation of Education Workers Hong Kong Federation of Trade Unions Kowloon West New Dynamic Liberal Party New Century Forum New People's Party New Prospect New Territories Association of Societies Politihk Social Strategic Roundtable Silent Majority Macau Alliance for Change Macau-Guangdong Union New Macau Development Union United Citizens Association Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chinese Nationalist Party Chinese New Party Chinese Unification Promotion Party For Public Good Party Patriot Alliance Association People First Party Young China Party Overseas Malaysian Chinese Association Historical parties Progressive Party Republican Party Royalist Party Unity Party Hong Kong Co-operative Resources Centre Federation for the Stability Hong Kong Alliance of Chinese and Expatriates Hong Kong Progressive Alliance Liberal Democratic Federation New Hong Kong Alliance Professional Forum Progressive Hong Kong Society Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Congress Party Alliance Republican Party The Motorists' Party of ROC Overseas Ryukyu Guomindang Tibet Improvement Party Alliances Pro-Kuomintang camp Republic of China mainland China Hong Kong Pro-Beijing camp Hong Kong Macau Literature America Against America Analects Classic of Filial Piety The China Wave Farewell to Revolution Organisations Active China Youth Service & Recreation Center Institute of Revolutionary Practice Defunct Blue Shirts Society Group of 89 National Revolutionary Army Tsotanhui Clique Western Hills Group Media Mainland China Economic Daily Global Times Guancha Hong Kong Headline Daily Hong Kong Economic Times Oriental Daily News Sing Tao Daily The Standard Republic of China (Taiwan) (groups of pro-Chinese identity) Chung T'ien Television China Television China Times Commercial Times TVBS United Daily News Overseas The Epoch Times Former Central Daily News Shen Bao By region Hong Kong Taiwan (Republic of China) Variants and movements Anti-communism Conservative localism in Hong Kong Hanfu Movement Related ideologies Authoritarian capitalism Fascism Han chauvinism Hui pan-nationalism Imperialism State nationalism Related topics Anti-national sentiments Japanese Taiwanese Tibetan Baizuo Falun Gong Four big families of Hong Kong Liberalism in China (opposing) Pro-ROC sentiment " Straight man cancer " Taishang Taiwanese nationalism (opposing) World League for Freedom and Democracy Conservatism portal China portal Hong Kong portal Taiwan portal v t e Chinese conservatism can be traced back to Confucius , whose philosophy is based on the values of loyalty, duty, and respect. He believed in a hierarchically organized society, modeled after the patriarchal family and headed by an absolute sovereign . However, Confucius also believed that the state should employ a meritocratic class of administrators and advisers, recruited by civil service exams . An alternative school of thought called Legalism argued that administrative discipline, not Confucian virtue, was crucial for the governance of the state.

[ 129 ] For thousands of years, China was ruled by monarchs of various imperial dynasties. The Mandate of Heaven theory was invoked in order to legitimize the absolute authority of the Emperor.

[ 130 ] The Xinhai Revolution of 1911 overthrew Puyi , the last Chinese Emperor, and ushered in the Republic of China . Between 1927 and 1949, China was ruled by the nationalist party Kuomintang , which became right-wing after General Chiang Kai-shek purged communists from his party. Following his defeat in the Chinese Civil War by the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), Chiang continued ruling the island of Taiwan until his death in 1975.

[ 131 ] On the mainland, Chinese conservatism was vehemently opposed and suppressed by the CCP, especially during the Cultural Revolution . Members of the " Five Black Categories "—landlords, rich farmers, counter-revolutionaries, bad influencers, and right-wingers—were violently persecuted. Young people formed cadres of Red Guards throughout the country and sought to destroy the Four Olds : old ideas, old culture, old customs, and old habits—leading to the destruction of a large part of China's cultural heritage , including historical artifacts and religious sites.

[ 132 ] Among them, some Red Guards who embraced local officials were pejoratively called " conservatives ".

[ 133 ] In recent decades, Chinese conservatism has experienced a national revival.

[ 134 ] The ancient schools of Confucianism and Legalism have made a return into mainstream Chinese thought.

[ 135 ] [ 136 ] [ 137 ] Wang Huning , widely regarded as the grey eminence and chief ideologue of the CCP, has criticized aspects of Marxism and recommended that China combine its historical and modern values.

[ 138 ] General Secretary Xi Jinping has called traditional Chinese culture the "soul" of the nation and the "foundation" of the CCP.

[ 139 ] [ 140 ] China has also developed a form of authoritarian capitalism in recent years, further breaking with the orthodox communism of its past.

[ 141 ] Neoauthoritarianism is a current of political thought that advocates a powerful state to facilitate market reforms .

[ 142 ] A major concern of modern Chinese conservatism is the preservation of traditional culture.

[ 143 ] India [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in India Indian politics has long been dominated by aristocratic and religious elites in one of the most hierarchically stratified nations in the world.

[ 144 ] [ 145 ] In modern times, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP), led by Narendra Modi , represents conservative politics. With over 170 million members as of October 2022, the BJP is by far the world's largest political party .

[ 146 ] [ 147 ] [ 148 ] It promotes Hindu nationalism , quasi-fascist Hindutva , a hostile foreign policy against Pakistan, and a conservative social and fiscal policy.

[ 149 ] [ 150 ] The BJP movement is both elitist and populist, attracting privileged groups that fear encroachment on their dominant positions as well as "plebeian" groups that seek recognition around a majoritarian rhetoric of cultural pride, social order, and national strength.

[ 151 ] Iran [ edit ] Part of a series on Conservatism in Iran Ideologies Authoritarian Monarchism National Deviant current Religious Qutbism Shia Islamism Fundamentalism Khomeinism Principlist Ultra Principles Anti-communism Anti-MEK Anti-Arabism Anti-Kurdism Authority Duty Elitism Familialism Hierarchy Law and order Militarism Pan-Iranism Patriotism Social order Sovereignty Tradition Principlist groups Anti-imperialism American Zionist Anti-LGBTQ sentiment Antisemitism Anti-Sunnism Clericalism Opposition to women's rights Palestinianism Republicanism Sharia Theocracy Twelver Shi'ism Vilayat Faqih Monarchist groups (pre-1979) Anti-clericalism Iranian nationalism Pro-Americanism Royalism Secular state Westernization History 1953 coup d'état Iranian Revolution Pahlavi dynasty Persecution of Baháʼís Safavid conversion to Shia Islam Sex segregation White Revolution Intellectuals Abbasi Alamolhoda Amoli Fardid Khalkhali Khomeini Larijani (Ali) Larijani (Sadiq) Modarres Motahhari Safavi Tabataba'i Velayati Yazdi Politicians Principlists Ahmadinejad Asgaroladi Ghalibaf Ghazizadeh Jalili Jannati Khamenei Khomeini Larijani Mojtahedzadeh Pourmohammadi Raisi Rezaee Soleimani Zakani Monarchists (pre-1979) Hoveyda Mansur Palevi I Palevi II Commentators Marandi Shariatmadari Talebzadeh Literature Islamic Government (1970) Parties Active Executives of Construction Party Front of Islamic Revolution Stability Islamic Coalition Party Society of Devotees of the Islamic Revolution Society of Seminary Teachers of Qom Voice of the Nation YEKTA Front Defunct Iran Novin Party Iran-e-No Party Islamic Republican Party Learned Council National Will Party Nationalists' Party Progress Party Rastakhiz Party Reformers' Party Organisations Combatant Clergy Association Hojjatie Society Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps Restart SAVAK Media Abrar Islamic Republican Kayhan Partow-e Sokhan Rajanews Resalat Vatan-e-Emrooz Yalasarat Related topics Death to America Great Civilization Greater Iran Holocaust denial Islam in Iran Judicial system Nuclear program of Iran Politics of Iran Liberalism Socialism Shia crescent Conservatism portal Iran portal v t e The Pahlavi dynasty replaced the Qajar dynasty in 1925 after a coup d'état , ruling Iran as a constitutional monarchy from 1925 until 1953 and then as an autocratic monarchy from the U.S.-instigated 1953 coup d'état until 1979.

[ 152 ] In an attempt to introduce reform from above while preserving traditional relations of hierarchy, the Shah , Mohammad Reza Pahlavi , launched the White Revolution in 1963 as a series of reforms of aggressive modernization, resulting in a great redistribution of wealth from the aristocratic landlord class to Iran's working class and explosive economic growth in subsequent decades.

[ 153 ] The Iranian Revolution of 1979, supported by the clergy and the aristocracy, overthrew the monarchy and transformed the Imperial State of Iran to the Islamic Republic of Iran , thus replacing the progressive conservatism of the Shah monarchy with the reactionary conservatism of Islamic theocracy.

[ 154 ] The two main political camps in today's Iran are ultra-conservative [ 155 ] Principlists and moderate-conservative Reformists .

[ 156 ] Israel [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in Israel This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Israel Variants Liberal Economic National Cultural Religious Ultra Religious Social Ideologies Conservative Judaism Jewish conservatism Jewish fundamentalism Zionism Cultural Nietzschean Neo Religious Revisionist Minority Haredi anti-Zionism Islamism Principles Agrarianism Authority Familialism Hebrew revival Homeland for the Jewish people Jewish culture Jewish state Judeo-Christianity Judeo-Christian ethics Halachic state Jewish values Law of Return Aliyah Militarism Begin Doctrine Gadna Natalism Orthodoxy Patriotism Pro-Americanism Property rights Sovereignty Theocracy Third Temple Three Oaths Tradition Veneration of the dead History Nation-State Bill 2023 Israeli judicial reform Intellectuals Eldad Ginsburgh Ahad Ha'am Hazony Jabotinsky Klein Kook Levin Lieberman Ruppin Samson Sharansky Shoval Talmon Yosef Politicians Begin Bennett Dayan Edelstein Eitam Kahane Lieberman Netanyahu Peretz Shaked Shamir Smotrich Yosef Ze'evi Commentators Levy Magal Seaman Segal Yemini Literature " Iron Wall " (1923) The Case for Israel (2003) Defending Identity (2008) The Virtue of Nationalism (2018) Conservatism: A Rediscovery (2022) Parties Active Agudat Yisrael Degel HaTorah Likud National Religious Party–Religious Zionism New Hope New Right Noam Shas United Arab List Yisrael Beiteinu Defunct Ahi Eretz Yisrael Shelanu Hatikva Hatzohar Herut The Jewish Home Moledet National Religious Party Religious Zionist Party Tehiya Yisrael BaAliyah Alliances National Union National Unity Union of Right-Wing Parties United Torah Judaism Yamina Organisations Active Betar Hilltop Youth Im Tirtzu Institute for Zionist Strategies Jewish Defense League Jewish Internet Defense Force Kohelet Policy Forum Lehava Machon Meir Mercaz Olami My Israel Defunct Gush Emunim Irgun Manhigut Yehudit Media Arutz Sheva B'Sheva Channel 14 HaTzofe i24NEWS Israel Hayom Makor Rishon Mida The Jerusalem Post Related topics Antimilitarism in Israel Non-conscription Torato Umanuto Refusal Anti-national sentiments Arab Iranian Palestinian Far-right politics in Israel Haredi Judaism Immigration to Israel African Citizenship and Entry into Israel Law Prevention of Infiltration Law Jewish political movements National camp Politics of Israel Liberalism Refusenik Torat Eretz Yisrael Conservatism portal Israel portal v t e After the declaration of the State of Israel , politics was initially dominated by left-wing parties, but overtime, right-wing parties became increasingly powerful, with conservatism now being the dominant ideology.

[ 157 ] In the 2022 election , right-wing parties received 75 percent of the popular vote, a centrist party 17 percent, and left-wing parties 7 percent, and the subsequent government has been variously described as the most right-wing, as well as the most religious, in Israeli history.

[ 158 ] [ 159 ] Israeli conservatism is based around upholding Jewish culture , Jewish religious traditions, promotion of forms of Zionism that tend to be more irredentist in nature (i. e.

Revisionist and Neo-Zionism , which promote the idea of Greater Israel , as compared to Liberal or Labor Zionism , which are supportive of a two-state solution ), promoting Israeli national security , maintaining the role of religion and the Rabbinate in the public sphere , support for the free market , and close ties with the United States .

[ 12 ] Japan [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in Japan Part of a series on Conservatism in Japan Ideologies Capitalist Fiscal State Corporate Liberal Economic Nationalist Minzoku Populist Shōwa Statism Ultra Neo Paternalistic Religious State Shinto Social Ultra Principles Anti-communism Asian values Authority Bureaucracy Bushido Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Familialism Filial piety Heroism Hierarchy Japanese culture Japanization Kokutai Law and order Loyalty Monarchism Bansei ikkei Nativism Nihonjinron Patriotism Shinto Social order Sovereignty Tradition Wa History 1955 System Abenomics Anti-Comintern Pact CIA activities Empire of Japan Emperor system Hakkō ichiu Peace Preservation Law Tenkō Red Purge Red Scare Satsuma Rebellion State Secrecy Law U.S.-Japan Security Treaty Intellectuals Aida Etō Fukuda Fujii Hasuda Hayashi Hirata Hyakuta Inazō Kanokogi Koizumi Kobayashi Kosaka Kuga Kakuzō Motoori Masaki Mayuzumi Minobe Mizushima Mishima Miyake Nishibe Nishio Ōen Oh Okazaki Ōkawa Oshikawa Sakurai Shiono Shiga Shigeki Sono Sōseki Sugiyama Suzuki Takeyama Tadayuki Tsunetomo Watsuji Watanabe Yamazaki Yoshikawa Yasuoka Yanagita Literature Man'yōshū (759) Kokin Wakashū (905) Hagakure (recorded 1709–1716) Imperial Rescript on Education (1890) Bushido: The Soul of Japan (1899) The Book of Tea (1906) Patriotism (1960) Sun and Steel (1968) ” The Japan That Can Say No ” (1989) The Dignity of the Nation (2005) Politicians Abe Asō Fukuda Hara Hashimoto Hatoyama Hiranuma Hirohito Inada Ishiba (Shigeru) Ishiba (Jirō) Ishihara Itō Kamiya Kaneko Katsura Kawamura Kiichirō Kishi Kishida Koike Koizumi (Junichiro) Koizumi (Shinjirō) Kowashi Konoe Mori Makino Nakagawa Nakasone Ōhira Ōkubo Saigō Saionji Suga Sugita Takaichi Tamaki Tojo (Hideki) Tojo (Yuko) Yoshida Parties Active Conservative Party of Japan Constitutional Democratic Party of Japan ( rignt-wing factions ) Kaseikai Democratic Party for the People Greater Japan Patriotic Party Happiness Realization Party Japan First Party Japan Innovation Party Osaka Restoration Association Liberal Democratic Party Tokyoites First Party Restoration Political Party Sanseitō Komeito Defunct Constitutional Government Association Imperial Rule Assistance Association Japan Renewal Party Japan Restoration Party New Conservative Party New Frontier Party Party for Japanese Kokoro Party of Hope People's New Party Sunrise Party Your Party Alliances LDP–Komeito coalition Organisations Active Ganbare Nippon Japanese Society for History Textbook Reform Nippon Kaigi Zaitokukai Conservative Political Action Conference (J-CPAC) Defunct Black Dragon Society Genyōsha Kenkokukai Kokuryūkai Sakurakai Tatenokai Media Bungei Shunjū Shokun!

Fujisankei Communications Group Fuji Television Sankei Shimbun Seiron Hanada WiLL The Yomiuri Shimbun Holdings Yomiuri Shimbun Chūō Kōron Japanese Culture Channel Sakura Shūkan Shinchō Movements Action Conservative Movement Anti-Americanism Green Kaikaku hoshu Minzoku-ha Netto-uyoku National essentialism Nihon shugi Shukyū-ha Shōwa Restoration Trumpism Related ideologies Fascism Emperor-system Para- Historical negationism History textbooks Liberalism Classical Conservative Libertarian conservatism ( factions ) Reactionism Statism Corporate Related topics Anti-national sentiments Chinese Korean Kurdish Russian Anti-PRC sentiment Constitutional reform in Japan Nobility Daimyo Kazoku Kuge Samurai Kokugaku Politics in Japan Pro-Americanism (post-war) Pro-ROC sentiment (post-war) Satō–Kishi–Abe family Uyoku dantai Yamato nadeshiko Zaibatsu Conservatism portal Japan portal v t e Conservatism has been the dominant political ideology throughout modern Japanese history.

[ 160 ] [ 161 ] The right-wing conservative Liberal Democratic Party has been the dominant ruling party since 1955, often referred to as the 1955 System .

[ 162 ] Therefore, some experts consider Japan a democratically elected one-party state since the populace always votes for the same conservative party.

[ 163 ] Up until 1868, Japan was largely a feudal state ruled by members of the aristocratic Samurai order with its bushido code of honor. In the Meiji era , a process of modernization, industrialization, and nationalization was initiated.

[ 164 ] Power struggles between the old decentralized Samurai aristocracy and the new centralized imperial monarchy culminated in the Satsuma Rebellion in 1877 with imperial victory.

[ 165 ] During the era of World War II , Japan was transformed into an ultranationalist, imperialist state that conquered much of east and southeast Asia.

[ 166 ] Contemporary conservatives, notably during the second premiership of Shinzo Abe from 2012 to 2020, advocate for revising the country's constitution, particularly Article 9 which renounces war and prohibits Japan from maintaining a military.

[ 167 ] Japan is the oldest continuing monarchy in the history of mankind, with Naruhito currently serving as Emperor of Japan .

[ 168 ] In accordance with the principle of monarchy, Japanese society has an authoritarian family structure with a traditionalist fatherly authority that is primarily transferred to the oldest son.

[ 169 ] Anti-communist and anti-Chinese sentiment is widespread in Japan.

[ 170 ] In 1925 the Peace Preservation Law was enacted with the aim of allowing the Special Higher Police to suppress socialists and communists more effectively.

[ 171 ] In 1936 the Empire of Japan and Nazi Germany opposed the Communist International by signing the Anti-Comintern Pact —a pact later joined by the Kingdom of Italy , Francoist Spain , and the Kingdom of Hungary .

[ 172 ] The Japanese term tenkō refers to the coerced ideological conversions of Japanese socialists who were induced to renounce leftist ideology and enthusiastically embrace the monarchist, capitalist, and imperialist ideology favored by the state.

[ 173 ] In the late 1940s and early 1950s, during the Red Purge , tens of thousands of supporters of left-wing groups, especially those affiliated with the Japanese Communist Party , were removed from their jobs in government, schools, and universities.

[ 174 ] Nippon Kaigi is an ultraconservative and ultranationalist organization that exerts a significant influence over contemporary Japanese politics. In 2014, a majority of National Diet members were part of the group. Many ministers and a few prime ministers, including Fumio Kishida , Tarō Asō , Shinzō Abe , and Yoshihide Suga , have been members.

[ 175 ] A highly developed and industrialized nation, Japan is more capitalistic and Western-oriented than other Asian nations. Therefore, some experts consider Japan part of the Western world .

[ 176 ] In 1960 a treaty was signed that established a military alliance between the United States and Japan . However, the ultraconservative reactionary traditionalist Yukio Mishima feared that his fellow Japanese were too enamored of modernization and Western-style capitalism to protect traditional Japanese culture .

[ 177 ] Singapore [ edit ] Singapore's conservative party is the People's Action Party (PAP), which promotes conservative values in the form of Asian democracy and Asian values .

[ 178 ] These values include: nation before community and society above self; family as the basic unit of society; regard and community support for the individual; consensus instead of contention, and racial and religious harmony. They are a contrast against the "more Westernised, individualistic, and self-centred outlook on life" and uphold the "traditional Asian ideas of morality, duty and society".

[ 179 ] The PAP is currently in government and has been since independence in 1965. Having governed for over six decades, the PAP is the longest uninterrupted governing party among modern multiparty parliamentary democracies.

[ 180 ] Singapore is a city state and has a reputation as a nanny state , owing to the considerable number of government regulations and restrictions on its citizens' lives.

[ 181 ] Former Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew , the architect of the modern Singapore, observed: "If Singapore is a nanny state, then I am proud to have fostered one".

[ 182 ] In an interview in the Straits Times in 1987, Lee said: I am often accused of interfering in the private lives of citizens. Yes, if I did not, had I not done that, we wouldn't be here today. And I say without the slightest remorse, that we wouldn't be here, we would not have made economic progress, if we had not intervened on very personal matters–who your neighbour is, how you live, the noise you make, how you spit, or what language you use. We decide what is right. Never mind what the people think.

[ 183 ] South Korea [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in South Korea Part of a series on Conservatism in South Korea Schools Authoritarian Ilminism Corporate Fiscal Libertarian National State-aligned Paternalistic Populist Social Traditional Hongik Ingan neo-Confucian Principles Anti-communism Anti-North sentiment Asian values Confucianism Communitarianism Elitism Meritocracy Familialism Free trade Hierarchy Japanophilia " New Right " Japanophobia "Old Right" Moral absolutism Pro-Americanism Protectionism South Korea nationalism Tradition History First Republic Korean War Mutual Defense Treaty Supreme Council for National Reconstruction Third Republic October Restoration Fourth Republic Fifth Republic Four Major Rivers Project Taegukgi rallies Intellectuals Ch'oe Kim (Seong-su) Park (Heong-joon) Yi Yoo Politicians Chun Chung Choung Hwang Kim (Du-han) Lee (Beom-seok) Lee (Hoi-chang) Lee (Jun-seok) Lee (Myung-bak) Kim (Chong-in) Kim (Gu) Kim (Jin-pyo) Kim (Jong-pil) Kim (Kyu-sik) Kim (Moo-sung) Kim (Young-sam) Na Oh Park (Chung Hee) Park (Geun-hye) Roh Syngman Suh Yoon Activists Ha Park (Sang-hak) Parties Active Liberal Unification Party New National Participation Party Our Republican Party (2020) People Power Party Reform Party Saenuri Party Defunct Bareun Party Bareunmirae Party Dawn of Liberty Party Democratic Republican Party Democratic Justice Party Free Korea 21 Future Korea Party Korea Democratic Party Korea Independence Party Korea Nationalist Party Korean National Party Korean National Youth Association Liberal Party Liberty Unification Party Liberty Korea Party National Association New Conservative Party New Korea Party Our Republican Party (2017) People First Party People Future Party People Party Unification National Party United Liberal Democrats Media The Chosun Ilbo TV Chosun The Dong-A Ilbo Channel A JoongAng Ilbo JTBC The Korea Economic Daily Kukmin Ilbo Maeil Business Newspaper MBN Munhwa Ilbo Segye Ilbo Organizations Active Center for Free Enterprise Christian Council of Korea FFNK Korean Federation of Teachers' Associations NKnet Unification Church Defunct Hanahoe North-West Youth Association White Shirts Society Related topics Anti-Chinese sentiment Anti-PRC Chaebol Chojoongdong Controversy over National Foundation Day Ilbe Storehouse National Security Act Politics of South Korea Liberalism Progressivism Pro-ROC sentiment Conservatism portal South Korea portal v t e South Korean army general Park Chung Hee seized power in the May 16 coup of 1961, after which he was elected as the third President of South Korea . He introduced the highly authoritarian Yushin Constitution , ushering in the Fourth Republic . He ruled the country as a dictator until his assassination by a fellow army general in 1979.

[ 184 ] Right-wing conservative parties have dominated South Korean politics for most of its modern history, while the main opposition parties have been moderate centrist and not left-wing. South Korea's major conservative party, the People Power Party , has changed its form throughout its history. First it was the Democratic-Liberal Party and its first head was Roh Tae-woo , who was the first President of the Sixth Republic of South Korea . Democratic-Liberal Party was founded by the merging of Roh Tae-woo 's Democratic Justice Party , Kim Young Sam 's Reunification Democratic Party and Kim Jong-pil 's New Democratic Republican Party .

Kim Young-sam became the fourteenth President of Korea.

When the conservative party was beaten by the opposition party in the general election, it changed its form again to follow the party members' demand for reforms. It became the New Korea Party , but it changed again one year later since the President Kim Young-sam was blamed by the citizen for the International Monetary Fund .

[ clarification needed ] It changed its name to Grand National Party (GNP). Since the late Kim Dae-jung assumed the presidency in 1998, GNP had been the opposition party until Lee Myung-bak won the presidential election of 2007 .

Europe [ edit ] Part of a series on Conservatism in Europe Ideologies Christian democracy Christian right Counter-revolution Counter-enlightenment Integralism Liberal conservatism Economic Ordo Monarchism New Right Nouvelle Droite One-nation conservatism Perennialism Postliberalism Radical conservatism Toryism Principles Chivalry Christian values Civilizational impact Protestant work ethic Cultural heritage Culture of life Pro-Life Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethnofuturism Ethnic pluralism Europe of 100 Flags Familialism Gender roles Complementarianism Law and order Medievalism Monarchism Royalism Opposition to immigration Ordered liberty Organicism Paideia Pan-European identity Euroscepticism Nationalist Federalist Patriotism Property rights Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Sovereignty State religion Subsidiarity Tradition Metamodern Western values Occidentalism Intellectuals Johnson Hume Burke More Maistre Bonald Haller Chateaubriand Coleridge Savigny Carlyle Newman Tocqueville Cortés Taine Le Bon Belloc Iorga Chesterton Spengler Gini Schmitt Jünger Evola Röpke Oakeshott Voegelin Lefebvre Eliade Kuehnelt-Leddihn Fouéré Koselleck Ye'or Scruton Hitchens Dugin Peterson Literature Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Christianity or Europe (1799) Considerations on France (1796) Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism (1798) The Genius of Christianity (1802) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835) The Decline of the West (1918, 1922) The Concept of the Political (1932) " The Peace " (1943) The Death of the West (2001) While Europe Slept (2006) Reflections on the Revolution in Europe (2009) We Are Doomed (2009) How to Be a Conservative (2014) The Strange Death of Europe (2017) Politicians Pitt Canning Metternich Disraeli Bismarck Salisbury Dmowski Mannerheim Baldwin Maurras Horthy Metaxas Churchill Adenauer De Gasperi Salazar De Gaulle Franco von Coudenhove-Kalergi Powell von Habsburg Thatcher Kohl Fortuyn Putin Orbán Wilders Meloni Organizations Center for European Renewal Centrist Democrat International Edmund Burke Stichting European Conservatives Group and Democratic Alliance European Democrats Europe of Sovereign Nations Group Europe of Sovereign Nations (party) European Conservatives and Reformists Group European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party European People's Party Group International Monarchist League Libertas.eu The Movement Movement for European Reform NatCon Patriots for Europe Pegida Stop Islamisation of Europe Media The European Conservative EU Le Figaro (Fr) ' Nouvelle École (FR) ' NZZ (CH) Personal variants Berlusconism Bonapartism Cameronism Fortuynism Francoism Gaullism Maurrassisme Mellismo Metaxism Powellism Putinism Sarkozysm Thatcherism National variants Austria Belgium Denmark Finland France Germany Greece Hungary Iceland Italy Luxembourg Netherlands New Zealand Norway Poland Russia Serbia Sweden Switzerland Ukraine United Kingdom Historical background Ancien Régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment Counter-revolution German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related topics Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-immigration Demographic futures Eurabia Great Replacement Population decline Sub-replacement fertility Educational inflation Elite overproduction Historism Intelligence and public policy Managerial state Metapolitics Movements Counter-jihad Men's movement Men's rights Multiculturalism and Islam Muslim immigration ban Remigration Conservatism portal Politics portal Europe portal v t e European conservatism has taken many different expressions. Early forms were often reactionary and romantic , idealizing the Middle Ages and its feudal social order with aristocratic rule and an established church.

[ 185 ] [ 186 ] In the late 19th century, conservatism became increasingly progressive , adopting capitalism and espousing nationalism—which up until now had been anti-traditionalist and anti-imperialist forces.

[ 187 ] During the first half of the 20th century, as socialist movements were becoming more powerful and the Tsarist regime was overthrown in the Russian Revolution , conservatism in Austria, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Italy, Portugal, Spain, and Romania transformed into the far-right , becoming more authoritarian and extreme .

[ 188 ] In the post-war era, conservatism assumed a more moderate form with center-right Christian-democratic parties dominating politics across Western Europe throughout the rest of the century, [ 116 ] although the authoritarian regimes of Francoist Spain and Salazarian Portugal survived for a few more decades.

[ 189 ] Towards the end of the century, after the collapse of the Soviet Union , conservatism took on a more liberal form. In recent decades, nationalist parties have been on the rise across Europe in opposition to globalism .

[ 190 ] European nations, with the exception of Switzerland , have had a long monarchical tradition throughout history. Today, existing monarchies are Andorra , Belgium , Denmark , Liechtenstein , Luxembourg , Monaco , the Netherlands , Norway , Spain , Sweden , and the United Kingdom . Some reactionary movements in republican nations, such as Action Française in France, the Monarchist National Party in Italy, and the Black-Yellow Alliance in Austria, have advocated a restoration of the monarchy.

Austria [ edit ] Part of a series on Conservatism in Austria Ideologies Austrian nationalism Christian democracy Conservative corporatism Green conservatism Liberal conservatism Principles Austrian culture Catholic social teaching Class collaboration Clericalism Duty Family values Imperialism Liberty Monarchism Organicism Political Catholicism Subsidiarity Tradition History Austria-Hungary Austrian Civil War Austrian Empire Carlsbad Decrees Congress of Vienna Federal State of Austria Habsburg monarchy Intellectuals Berger Burger von Gentz von Hayek Höbelt von Hofmannsthal Kaltenbrunner von Kuehnelt-Leddihn Mannheim Müller Schoeck Spann von Vogelsang Winter Literature Sex and Character (1903) The Menace of the Herd (1943) Envy: A Theory of Social Behavior (1966) Politicians von Coudenhove-Kalergi Dollfuss Figl von Gentz von Habsburg Haider von Hohenwart Kickl Klaus Kurz Nehammer Schuschnigg von Metternich de Paula Maria Raab Rosenkranz Seipel Schüssel Stadler Starhemberg Strache Taaffe von Vogelsang Waldheim Activists Dichand Feigl Sabaditsch-Wolff Schönfeld Tschugguel Winter Parties Active Alliance for the Future of Austria Austrian People's Party Christian Party of Austria Freedom Party of Austria Defunct Catholic People's Party Christian Social Party Fatherland Front The Reform Conservatives Team Stronach Organisations Black-Yellow Alliance Heimwehr Identitäre Bewegung Österreich Viennese Association of Academics Media Kleine Zeitung Neues Volksblatt Salzburger Nachrichten Tiroler Tageszeitung Wiener Zeitung Österreich Related topics Austrian nobility Conservatism in Germany German nationalism in Austria Pan Germanism Remigration Überfremdung Conservatism portal Austria portal v t e Austrian conservatism originated with Prince Klemens von Metternich , who was the architect behind the monarchist and imperialist Conservative Order that was enacted at the Congress of Vienna in the aftermath of the French Revolution and the Napoleonic Wars .

[ 23 ] The goal was to establish a European balance of power that could guarantee peace and suppress republican and nationalist movements.

[ 191 ] During its existence, the Austrian Empire was the third most populous monarchy in Europe after the Russian Empire and the United Kingdom . Following its defeat in the Austro-Prussian War , it transformed into the Austro-Hungarian Empire , which was the most diverse state in Europe with twelve nationalities living under a unifying monarch.

[ 192 ] The Empire was fragmented in the aftermath of World War I , ushering in the democratic First Austrian Republic .

The Austrian Civil War in 1934 saw a series of skirmishes between the right-wing government and socialist forces. When the insurgents were defeated, the government declared martial law and held mass trials, forcing leading socialist politicians, such as Otto Bauer , into exile.

[ 193 ] The conservatives banned the Social Democratic Party and replaced parliamentary democracy with a corporatist and clerical constitution. The Patriotic Front , into which the paramilitary Heimwehr and the Christian Social Party were merged, became the only legal political party in the resulting authoritarian regime, the Federal State of Austria .

[ 194 ] While having close ties to Fascist Italy , which was still a monarchy as well as a fellow Catholic nation, Austrian conservatives harbored strong anti-Prussian and anti-Nazi sentiment. Austria's most prominent conservative intellectual, the Catholic aristocrat Erik von Kuehnelt-Leddihn , published several books in which he interpreted Nazism as a leftist , ochlocratic , and demagogic ideology opposed to the traditional rightist ideals of aristocracy, monarchy, and Christianity.

[ 195 ] Austria's dictator Engelbert Dollfuss saw Nazism as another form of totalitarian communism , and he saw Adolf Hitler as the German version of Joseph Stalin . The conservatives banned the Austrian Nazi Party and arrested many of its activists, causing tens of thousands of Nazi sympathisers to flee to Nazi Germany in order to avoid persecution.

[ 196 ] A few months later, Nazi forces initiated the July Putsch and managed to assassinate Chancellor Dollfuss in an attempt to overthrow the conservative government.

[ 197 ] In response, Benito Mussolini mobilized a part of the Italian army on the Austrian border and threatened Hitler with war in the event of a German invasion of Austria. In 1938, when Nazi Germany annexed Austria in the Anschluss , conservative groups were suppressed: members of the Austrian nobility and the Catholic clergy were arrested and their properties were confiscated.

[ 198 ] [ 199 ] Otto von Hapsburg , the last Crown Prince of Austria-Hungary, was a fervent anti-Nazi, for which reason the Nazi regime ordered that he was to be executed immediately if caught.

[ 200 ] Following World War II and the return to democracy, Austrian conservatives and socialists alike abandoned their extremism, believing in political compromise and seeking consensus in the middle.

[ 201 ] The conservatives formed the Austrian People's Party , which has been the major conservative party in Austria ever since. In contemporary politics, the party was led by Sebastian Kurz , whom the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung nicknamed the "young Metternich ".

[ 202 ] Belgium [ edit ] Having its roots in the conservative Catholic Party , the Christian People's Party retained a conservative edge through the 20th century, supporting the King in the Royal Question , supporting nuclear family as the cornerstone of society, defending Christian education, and opposing euthanasia . The Christian People's Party dominated politics in post-war Belgium. In 1999, the party's support collapsed, and it became the country's fifth-largest party.

[ 203 ] [ 204 ] [ 205 ] Since 2014, the Flemish nationalist and conservative New Flemish Alliance is the largest party in Belgium.

[ 206 ] Denmark [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Denmark Principles Agrarianism Danish culture Canon Lutheranism Monarchism National romanticism Nationalism Nativism Patriotism Populism Property rights Rule of law State church Tradition Intellectuals Bjørnvig Eichberg Kierkegaard Kraft Krarup Langballe Løgstrup Møller Oehlenschläger Politicians Kjærsgaard Kraft Krarup Langballe Mikkelsen Møller (Aksel) Møller (John) Møller (Per) Reedtz-Thott Schlüter Støjberg Vermund Ørsted Parties Conservative People's Party Danish People's Party Denmark Democrats Free Conservatives Højre New Right People's Party Progress Party Media Billed Bladet Dags-Telegrafen Det nye Danmark Heretica Jyllands-Posten Punch Tidehverv Related topics Danish Realm Hate speech laws in Denmark Jyllands-Posten controversy Nordic sexual morality debate Conservatism portal Denmark portal v t e Danish conservatism emerged with the political grouping Højre (literally "Right"), which due to its alliance with King Christian IX of Denmark dominated Danish politics and formed all governments from 1865 to 1901. When a constitutional reform in 1915 stripped the landed gentry of political power, Højre was succeeded by the Conservative People's Party of Denmark , which has since then been the main Danish conservative party.

[ 207 ] Another Danish conservative party was the Free Conservatives , who were active between 1902 and 1920. Traditionally and historically, conservatism in Denmark has been more populist and agrarian than in Sweden and Norway, where conservatism has been more elitist and urban .

[ 208 ] The Conservative People's Party led the government coalition from 1982 to 1993. The party had previously been member of various governments from 1916 to 1917, 1940 to 1945, 1950 to 1953, and 1968 to 1971. The party was a junior partner in governments led by the Liberals from 2001 to 2011 [ 209 ] and again from 2016 to 2019. The party is preceded by 11 years by the Young Conservatives (KU) , today the youth movement of the party.

The Conservative People's Party had a stable electoral support close to 15 to 20% at almost all general elections from 1918 to 1971. In the 1970s it declined to around 5%, but then under the leadership of Poul Schlüter reached its highest popularity level ever in 1984 , receiving 23% of the votes. Since the late 1990s the party has obtained around 5 to 10% of the vote. In 2022 , the party received 5.5% of the vote.

[ 210 ] Conservative thinking has also influenced other Danish political parties. In 1995, the Danish People's Party was founded, based on a mixture of conservative, nationalist, and social-democratic ideas.

[ 207 ] In 2015, the party New Right was established, professing a national-conservative attitude.

[ 211 ] The conservative parties in Denmark have always considered the monarchy a central institution in Denmark.

[ 212 ] [ 213 ] Finland [ edit ] The conservative party in Finland is the National Coalition Party . The party was founded in 1918, when several monarchist parties united. Although right-wing in the past, today it is a moderate liberal-conservative party. While advocating economic liberalism, it is committed to the social market economy .

[ 214 ] There has been strong anti-Russian and anti-communist sentiment in Finland due to its long history of being invaded and conquered by Russia and the Soviet Union.

[ 215 ] [ 216 ] In the Finnish Civil War of 1918, White Finland defeated the leftist Red Finland .

[ 217 ] The Finnish Defence Forces and the paramilitary White Guard , led by Baron Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim , were assisted by the German Imperial Army at the request of the Finnish civil government. The far-right Lapua movement continued to terrorize communists in post-war Finland, but it was banned after a failed coup d'etat attempt in 1932.

[ 218 ] France [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in France Part of a series on Conservatism in France Ideologies Bonapartism Christian democracy Gaullism Integralism nationalist Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Royalism Sarkozysm Ultramontanism Principles Anti-communism Counter-revolution Dirigisme Elitism Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethnopluralism Family values French culture Imperialism Monarchism Metapolitics Nationalism Nativism Natural order Patriotism Social hierarchy Social order Souverainisme Traditional authority History Ancien Régime Monarchiens Feuillant Catholic and Royal Armies War in the Vendée Thermidorian Reaction Chouannerie Chouan First White Terror Companions of Jehu Muscadins Second White Terror Bourbon Restoration Ultra-royalists Dreyfus affair Second French Empire Philippe Daudet affair Vichy France Algiers putsch of 1961 2024 The Republicans alliance crisis Intellectuals Ballanche Bainville Barbey d'Aurevilly Barruel Barrès Baudelaire de Benoist Blanc de Saint-Bonnet de Bonald Boutang Bruckner Brunetière Brague Cau de Chateaubriand Fustel de Coulanges Cochin Daudet Delsol Dumézil Faguet Faye Freund Girardet Guénon de Gobineau Houellebecq de Jouvenel Lamennais (early) Le Bon Lefebvre Lemaître Le Play Lugan Madiran de Maistre Morel Maffesoli Massis Maurras Maulnier Marcel Nimier Poulat Rémond Renan de Rivarol Rohmer Rueff Siegfried Taine de Tocqueville Thibon Literature Considerations on France (1796) Memoirs Illustrating the History of Jacobinism (1797) The Genius of Christianity (1802) The Pope (1819) St Petersburg Dialogues (1821) Democracy in America (1835) The Ancient City (1864) " What Is a Nation?

" (1882) The Crowd (1895) Inquiry into the Monarchy (1900) "The Future of the Intelligentsia" (1905) My Political Ideas (1937) The Reign of Quantity (1945) The Opium of the Intellectuals (1955) Violence and the Sacred (1972) The Camp of the Saints (1973) The Tyranny of Guilt (2006) The French Suicide (2014) Submission (2015) Politicians Bardella Bellamy de Bonald Boulanger Cathelineau de Chateaubriand Ciotti Flandin Fouéré de Gaulle Holeindre Juppé de Kérillis Le Pen (Jean-Marie) Le Pen (Marine) Maurras Malraux MacMahon Maréchal Messiha Messmer Pécresse Pétain Peyrefitte Pichegru Poincaré Poisson de Polignac Pompidou Retailleau de La Rocque de La Tour du Pin Sarkozy Schuman de Vaublanc de Villèle de Villiers Zemmour Commentators Barbier Buisson Camus Cassen Jean Giesbert de Girardin d'Escufon Jamet Lasserre Lévy Marmin Massis Maulnier Ménard Mougeotte Nay Obertone d'Orcival d'Ornellas Pauwels Pujo Sastre Sérant Tasin Venner Parties Active Alliance Royale Debout la France French Future The Nationalists National Republican Movement Future with Confidence National Centre of Independents & Peasants National Rally Reconquête The Republicans Senate Republicans Soyons libres VIA, the Way of the People Defunct Democratic Republican Alliance Feuillants French Agrarian and Peasant Party French Social Party Movement for France Independent Radicals Independent Republicans Party of Order Rally of the French People Popular Liberal Action Rally for France Rally for the Republic Republican Federation Resistance Party Union for a Popular Movement Union for the New Republic Organisations Active Action Française Carrefour de l'Horloge Cité catholique Groupement de Recherche et d'Études pour la Civilisation Européenne Initiative and Liberty Movement La Manif pour tous Les Identitaires March for Life Nouvelle Action Royaliste Rassemblement national de la jeunesse Student Cockade UDR group Union Nationale Inter-universitaire Defunct Action Française (pre Liberation) Camelots du Roi Cercle Proudhon Civitas Croix-de-Feu Independent Republicans Hussards Service d'Action Civique Media Active Atlantico CNews Éléments Famille chrétienne L'Écho du Sud La Croix Le Figaro Le Figaro Magazine Le Point Nouvelle École Radio Courtoisie Valeurs actuelles Defunct La Liberté La Presse La Nation française Le Quotidien de Paris Minute Présent Related topics Archeofuturism Clerical philosophers European New Right Far-right movements in France France profonde French–German enmity French Revolution " Islamo-leftism " List of French conservatives Maurrassisme in Argentina Ligues d'extrême droite Politics of France Remigration Sinistrisme Sovereigntist Right Tocqueville effect Conservatism portal France portal v t e Early conservatism in France focused on the rejection of the secularism of the French Revolution, support for the role of the Catholic Church, and the restoration of the monarchy.

[ 219 ] After the first fall of Napoleon in 1814, the House of Bourbon returned to power in the Bourbon Restoration .

Louis XVIII and Charles X , brothers of the executed King Louis XVI , successively mounted the throne and instituted a conservative government intended to restore the proprieties, if not all the institutions, of the Ancien Régime .

[ 220 ] After the July Revolution of 1830, Louis Philippe I , a member of the more liberal Orléans branch of the House of Bourbon, proclaimed himself as King of the French. The Second French Empire saw an Imperial Bonapartist regime of Napoleon III from 1852 to 1870.

[ 221 ] The Bourbon monarchist cause was on the verge of victory in the 1870s, but then collapsed because the proposed king, Henri, Count of Chambord , refused to fly the tri-colored flag.

[ 222 ] The turn of the century saw the rise of Action Française —an ultraconservative, reactionary, nationalist, and royalist movement that advocated a restoration of the monarchy.

[ 223 ] Tensions between Christian rightists and secular leftists heightened in the 1890–1910 era, but moderated after the spirit of unity in fighting World War I.

[ 224 ] An authoritarian form of conservatism characterized the Vichy regime of 1940–1944 under Marshal Philippe Pétain with heightened antisemitism, opposition to individualism, emphasis on family life, and national direction of the economy.

[ 59 ] Conservatism has been the major political force in France since World War II, [ 225 ] although the number of conservative groups and their lack of stability defy simple categorization.

[ 164 ] Following the war, conservatives supported Gaullist groups and parties, espoused nationalism , and emphasised tradition, social order, and the regeneration of France.

[ 226 ] Unusually, post-war conservatism in France was formed around the personality of a leader—army general and aristocrat Charles de Gaulle who led the Free French Forces against Nazi Germany—and it did not draw on traditional French conservatism, but on the Bonapartist tradition.

[ 227 ] Gaullism in France continues under The Republicans (formerly Union for a Popular Movement ), a party previously led by Nicolas Sarkozy , who served as President of France from 2007 to 2012 and whose ideology is known as Sarkozysm .

[ 228 ] In 2021, the French intellectual Éric Zemmour founded the nationalist party Reconquête , which has been described as a more rightist version of Marine Le Pen 's National Rally .

[ 229 ] Germany [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in Germany This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Germany Ideologies Agrarian Christian democracy Liberal Ordo Ritter School Monarchism Nationalist Neue Rechte Völkisch Paternalistic Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Romanticism Right-Hegelianism Historical School Value Principles Authority Christian values Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Federalism Gemeinschaft Geopolitik Germanisation Heimat Imperialism In Treue fest Kultur Medievalism Monarchism Organicism Patriotism Political theology Prussian virtues Sittlichkeit Social market economy Sonderweg Subsidiarity Volk Volksgeist History Holy Roman Empire The Junkers German Confederation Carlsbad Decrees Anti-Socialist Laws German Reich German Empire State Socialism Völkisch movement George-Kreis Leipzig school Freikorps Monarchism in Bavaria after 1918 Perceived Weimar decadence Conservative Revolution Oster conspiracy 20 July plot Historikerstreit Heidelberg Manifesto German reunification Erklärung 2018 Intellectuals Fichte Freyer Gadamer von Galen George Gehlen Gogarten Görres Hamann Hartmann Heidegger Hegel Herder Hielscher von Hildebrand Hoppe Jünger (Ernst) Jünger (Friedrich) Kantorowicz Klages Kommerell Koselleck Langbehn von Lilienfeld Lorenz Löwith Lübbe Mann (early) Maschke Moeller van den Bruck Müller Nolte Novalis Otto Pieper Plessner von Ranke Reck-Malleczewen Ritter (Gerhard) Ritter (Joachim) Röpke Rüstow von Salomon Scheler Schelsky Schlegel Schmitt Sieferle Sloterdijk Sombart Spaemann Spengler Steinbuch von Treitschke Voegelin Weber Literature Addresses to the German Nation (1806) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) The National System (1837) Degeneration (1892) Ressentiment (1912) Reflections of a Nonpolitical Man (1918) The Decline of the West (1918, 1922) Ideology and Utopia (1929) Man and Technics (1931) The Concept of the Political (1932) On the Marble Cliffs (1939) Man (1940) Diary of a Man in Despair (1947) Man in the Age of Technology (1949) The Questionnaire (1951) Fascism in Its Epoch (1963) Envy (1966) Moral und Hypermoral (1969) Germany Abolishes Itself (2010) Finis Germania (2017) Commentators Anrich Aust Bolz Broder Deschner Thomas Fasbender Herman Höhler Hoven Joffe Krause Landt Kuby Hermann Löns Löwenthal Mann (Golo) Maurer Nagel Nebel Noelle-Neumann Otte Pirinçci Röhl Safranski Sarrazin von Schrenck-Notzing Schwilk Stein Strauss (Botho) Stürmer Tichy Weißmann Zehrer Zitelmann Politicians Adenauer Ancillon Barschel von Bismarck von Bose Brüning Fehrenbach Filbinger von Gerlach Goerdeler Held von Hindenburg Hugenberg Jongen Jung Kapp Kohl Krah Lengsfeld Maaßen von Merkatz Merz Michaelis von Papen Petry von Radowitz Rauschning Ritter von Kahr von Roon Schäffer Schäffler von Schleicher Stresemann vom Stein Stoecker von Storch Strauss Wagener Weidel von Westarp Wilhelm II Winnig Jurists Böckenförde von Gierke Möser Quabbe von Savigny Schmitt Stahl Wackenroder Wagener Activists Kohlmann Kubitschek Seibt Billy Six von Stauffenberg Stürzenberger von Thurn und Taxis (Elisabeth) von Thurn und Taxis (Gloria) Parties Active Alternative for Germany (AfD) Bavaria Party (BP) Bündnis Deutschland (BD) Christian Democratic Union of Germany (CDU) Christian Social Union in Bavaria (CSU) Centre Party Ecological Democratic Party (ÖDP) Family Party of Germany The Republicans (REP) Values Union (WU) We Citizens (WB) Defunct Bavarian People's Party (BVP) Conservative Party Free Conservative Party (FKP) German Conservative Party (DkP) German Freedom Party German National People's Party (DNVP) German Party (DP) German People's Party (DVP) Organizations Aufbau Vereinigung Bibliothek des Konservatismus Desiderius-Erasmus-Stiftung Die Deutschen Konservativen Forum of German Catholics Gerhard Löwenthal Prize German Burschenschaft German Taxpayers Federation Citizens' Movement Pax Europa Hanns Seidel Foundation Hans Filbinger Foundation Identitäre Aktion Institut für Staatspolitik Konrad Adenauer Foundation PEGIDA Studienzentrum Weikersheim Tradition und Leben Defunct Der Stahlhelm, Bund der Frontsoldaten Germany Foundation Queen Louise League Media Die Achse des Guten Antaios (Defunct) Bild Cato Cicero COMPACT Deutsche Rundschau Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung Junge Freiheit Kreuzzeitung (Defunct) Politically Incorrect Preußische Allgemeine Zeitung Süddeutsche Monatshefte Der Türmer Verlag Antaios Die Welt Welt am Sonntag Related topics Alternative Mitte Bavarian nationalism Böckenförde dilemma European New Right Conservatism in Austria Conservatism in Switzerland Criticism of multiculturalism Cultural pessimism Freischwebende Intelligenz Immigration to Germany Criminality Remigration Metapolitics Politics of Germany Liberalism Stahlhelm-Fraktion Conservatism portal Germany portal v t e Germany was the heart of the reactionary Romantic movement that swept Europe in the aftermath of the progressive Age of Enlightenment and its culmination in the anti-conservative French Revolution.

[ 106 ] German Romanticism was deeply organicist and medievalist , finding expression philosophically among the Old Hegelians and judicially in the German historical school .

[ 230 ] Prominent conservative exponents were Friedrich Schlegel , Novalis , Wilhelm Heinrich Wackenroder , Friedrich Carl von Savigny , and Adam Müller .

[ 231 ] During the second half of the 19th century, German conservatism developed alongside nationalism , culminating in Germany's victory over France in the Franco-Prussian War , the creation of the unified German Empire in 1871, and the simultaneous rise of ”Iron Chancellor” Otto von Bismarck on the European political stage. Bismarck's balance of power model maintained peace in Europe for decades at the end of the 19th century.

[ 232 ] His "revolutionary conservatism" was a conservative state-building strategy, based on class collaboration and designed to make ordinary Germans—not just the Junker aristocracy—more loyal to state and Emperor .

[ 23 ] He created the modern welfare state in Germany in the 1880s.

[ 233 ] According to scholars, his strategy was: granting social rights to enhance the integration of a hierarchical society, to forge a bond between workers and the state so as to strengthen the latter, to maintain traditional relations of authority between social and status groups, and to provide a countervailing power against the modernist forces of liberalism and socialism.

[ 234 ] Bismarck also enacted universal manhood suffrage in the new German Empire in 1871.

[ 235 ] He became a great hero to German conservatives, who erected many monuments to his memory after he left office in 1890.

[ 236 ] During the interwar period —after Germany's defeat in World War I, the abdication of Emperor Wilhelm II , and the introduction of parliamentary democracy—German conservatives experienced a cultural crisis and felt uprooted by a progressively modernist world.

[ 237 ] This angst was expressed philosophically in the Conservative Revolution movement with prominent exponents such as historian Oswald Spengler , jurist Carl Schmitt , and author Ernst Jünger .

[ 238 ] The major conservative party of this era was the reactionary German National People's Party , who advocated a restored monarchy.

[ 239 ] With the rise of Nazism in 1933, traditional agrarian movements faded and were supplanted by a more command-based economy and forced social integration.

Adolf Hitler succeeded in garnering the support of many German industrialists; but prominent traditionalists, including military officers Claus von Stauffenberg and Henning von Tresckow , pastor Dietrich Bonhoeffer , Bishop Clemens August Graf von Galen , and monarchist Carl Friedrich Goerdeler , openly and secretly opposed his policies of euthanasia, genocide, and attacks on organized religion.

[ 240 ] The former German Emperor Wilhelm II was highly critical of Hitler, writing in 1938: There's a man alone, without family, without children, without God ... He builds legions, but he doesn't build a nation. A nation is created by families, a religion, traditions: it is made up out of the hearts of mothers, the wisdom of fathers, the joy and the exuberance of children ... This man could bring home victories to our people each year, without bringing them either glory or danger. But of our Germany, which was a nation of poets and musicians, of artists and soldiers, he has made a nation of hysterics and hermits, engulfed in a mob and led by a thousand liars or fanatics.

[ 71 ] Post- World War II Germany developed a special form of conservatism called ordoliberalism , which is centred around the concept of ordered liberty .

[ 241 ] Neither socialist nor capitalist, it promotes a compromise between state and market, and argues that the national culture of a country must be taken into account when implementing economic policies.

[ 242 ] Alexander Rüstow and Wilhelm Röpke were two prominent exponents of this economic theory, and its implementation is largely credited as a reason behind the German miracle —the rapid reconstruction and development of the war-wrecked economies of West Germany and Austria after World War II.

[ 243 ] More recently, the work of conservative Christian Democratic Union leader and Chancellor Helmut Kohl helped bring about German reunification , along with the closer European integration in the form of the Maastricht Treaty . Today, German conservatism is often associated with politicians such as Chancellor Angela Merkel , whose tenure was marked by attempts to save the common European currency ( Euro ) from demise. The German conservatives were divided under Merkel due to the refugee crisis in Germany, and many conservatives in the CDU/CSU opposed the immigration policies developed under Merkel.

[ 244 ] The 2020s also saw the rise of the right-wing populist Alternative for Germany .

[ 245 ] Greece [ edit ] Part of a series on Conservatism in Greece Ideologies Greek nationalism Metaxism Monarchism Principles Authority Christian values Greek culture Family values Hellenocentrism Laconophilia Orthodoxy Private property Social market economy Social order Protectionism Tradition History Kingdom of Greece 4th of August Regime Greek Civil War Greek economic miracle Greek language question Greek monarchy referendum, 1935 Greek referendum, 1946 Greek Resistance Leonardopoulos–Gargalidis coup d'état attempt Metapolitefsi National Schism Intellectuals Bardis Dragoumis Elytis Kondylis Theodoracopulos Tsatsos Vlachos Politicians Averoff Dragoumis Gounaris Kalogeropoulos Kanellopoulos Karamanlis Kapodistrias Koumoundouros Metaxas Papagos Protopapadakis Rallis (Dimitrios) Rallis (Georgios) Samaras Stefanopoulos Stephanopoulos Tsaldari Tsaldaris (Konstantinos) Latinopoulou Tsaldaris (Panagis) Tsatsos Velopoulos Parties Active Democratic Revival Greek Solution National Hope National Unity Association New Democracy Niki Popular Orthodox Rally Spartans Voice of Reason Defunct Democratic Renewal Freethinkers' Party Independent Greeks Greek Rally Napist Party National Radical Union People's Party Political Spring Popular Social Party Union of Populars Organisations Panhellenic Liberation Organization Media Eleftheros Kosmos Estia Kathimerini Related Ethnarch Oikos Conservatism portal Greece portal v t e The main inter-war conservative party was called the People's Party (PP), which supported constitutional monarchy and opposed the republican Liberal Party . Both parties were suppressed by the authoritarian, arch-conservative, and royalist 4th of August Regime of General Ioannis Metaxas in 1936–1941. The PP was able to re-group after World War II as part of a United Nationalist Front which achieved power campaigning on a simple anti-communist, nationalist platform during the Greek Civil War in 1946–1949. However, the vote received by the PP declined during the so-called "Centrist Interlude" in 1950–1952.

In 1952, Marshal Alexandros Papagos created the Greek Rally as an umbrella for the right-wing forces. The Greek Rally came to power in 1952 and remained the leading party in Greece until 1963. After Papagos' death in 1955, it was reformed as the National Radical Union under Konstantinos Karamanlis . Right-wing governments backed by the palace and the army overthrew the Centre Union government in 1965 and governed the country until the establishment of the far-right Greek junta (1967–1974). After the regime's collapse in August 1974, Karamanlis returned from exile to lead the government and founded the New Democracy party. The new conservative party had four objectives: to confront Turkish expansionism in Cyprus , to reestablish and solidify democratic rule, to give the country a strong government, and to make a powerful moderate party a force in Greek politics.

[ 246 ] The Independent Greeks , a newly formed political party in Greece , has also supported conservatism, particularly national and religious conservatism . The Founding Declaration of the Independent Greeks strongly emphasises the preservation of the Greek state and its sovereignty, the Greek people , and the Greek Orthodox Church .

[ citation needed ] Hungary [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Hungary Ideologies Authoritarian conservatism Horthyism Christian democracy Christian right Liberal conservatism National liberalism Monarchism National conservatism Orbánism Postliberalism Illiberalism Principles Anti-communism Anti-LGBT anti-gender movement laws Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Hungarian nobility Euroscepticism Huxit Familialism Family policies Natalism Nationalism Christian Neo- Hungarian culture Hungarian irredentism Trianon syndrome Székely autonomy movement Illiberal democracy Nativism Anti-immigration Hungarian border barrier Sovereignty History Austria-Hungary White Terror Horthy era Hungarian Revolution of 1956 End of communism Antall Government Intellectuals Apponyi Furedi Habsburg-Lothringen Kolnai Lezsák Mannheim Maszak Mindszenty Molnar Pappin Tisza Wass Politicians Andrássy Antall Apponyi Bethlen Csurka Friedrich Gömbös Horthy Huszár von Klebelsberg Lezsák Márki-Zay Orbán Slachta Teleki Tildy Tisza Toroczkai Volner Vona Zichy Parties Active Christian Democratic People's Party Civic Response Everybody's Hungary People's Party Fidesz National Self-Government of Germans in Hungary New Start Our Homeland Movement Jobbik Defunct Catholic People's Party Christian National Union Party Conservative Party Freedom Party Hungarian Democratic Forum Hungarian Independence Party Hungarian Justice and Life Party Independent Smallholders Party Unity Party Organisations Danube Institute Fidelitas Fidesz–KDNP Media Central European Press and Media Foundation Figyelő Hír TV Magyar Nemzet Mandiner Origo Szabad Föld Világgazdaság Echo TV Hetek Heti Válasz Magyar Demokrata Magyar Hírlap The European Conservative Related topics Liberalism and radicalism in Hungary Diet of Hungary Szeged Idea The War Against the West (1928) Conservatism portal Hungary portal v t e The dominance of the political right of inter-war Hungary , after the collapse of a short-lived communist regime, was described by historian István Deák : Between 1919 and 1944 Hungary was a rightist country. Forged out of a counter-revolutionary heritage, its governments advocated a " nationalist Christian " policy; they extolled heroism, faith, and unity; they despised the French Revolution, and they spurned the liberal and socialist ideologies of the 19th century. The governments saw Hungary as a bulwark against bolshevism and bolshevism's instruments: socialism , cosmopolitanism , and Freemasonry . They perpetrated the rule of a small clique of aristocrats, civil servants, and army officers, and surrounded with adulation the head of the state, the counterrevolutionary Admiral Horthy .

[ 247 ] Horthy's authoritarian conservative regime suppressed communists and fascists alike, banning the Hungarian Communist Party as well as the fascist Arrow Cross Party . The fascist leader Ferenc Szálasi was repeatedly imprisoned at Horthy's command.

[ 60 ] Since 2010, Viktor Orbán of the Fidesz party has been Prime Minister of Hungary . Orbán's positions are a blend of soft Euroscepticism , right-wing populism , and national conservatism .

[ 248 ] [ 249 ] [ 250 ] Iceland [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in Iceland Part of a series on Conservatism in Iceland Ideologies Compassionate Green Liberal Moderate Nationalist Progressive Principles Duty Elitism Meritocracy European values Free trade Christian values Icelandic culture Law and order Moderation National romanticism Nationalism Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Prudence Rule of law Social market economy Social order Sovereignty Tradition Western values History Kingdom of Iceland Icelandic literature Intellectuals Einar Gröndal Guðbrandur Hannes Jón (Sigurðsson) Snorri Stefansson Politicians Áslaug Bergþór Bjarni (Benediktsson Jr.) Bjarni (Benediktsson Sr.) Davíð Geir (Haarde) Geir (Hallgrímsson) Guðrún Hannes Jón (Magnússon) Jón (Þorláksson) Ólafur Sigmundur Davíð Sigurður Snorri Sveinn Þórdís Þorgerður Þorsteinn Parties Active Independence Party Centre Party Progressive Party Democratic party Defunct Home Rule Party Right-Green People's Party Conservative Party Icelandic National Front Citizen's Party Organisations RCIEG Young Independents Media Morgunblaðið Related topics Nordic sexual morality debate Conservatism portal Iceland portal v t e Founded in 1924 as the Conservative Party , Iceland's Independence Party adopted its current name in 1929 after the merger with the Liberal Party . From the beginning, they have been the largest vote-winning party, averaging around 40%. They combined liberalism and conservatism, supported nationalization of infrastructure, and advocated class collaboration . While mostly in opposition during the 1930s, they embraced economic liberalism, but accepted the welfare state after the war and participated in governments supportive of state intervention and protectionism. Unlike other Scandanivian conservative (and liberal) parties, it has always had a large working-class following.

[ 251 ] After the financial crisis in 2008, the support level has dropped to 20–25%.

Ireland [ edit ] Conservatism in Ireland historically revolved around social policies relating to the Catholic Church as well as a commitment to Irish republicanism , Irish neutrality , anti-abortion , anti-communism , pro-Europeanism , and, more recently, anti-immigration .

During the presidency of Éamon de Valera , a broad array of Catholic social policies were enacted, mostly with the goals of winning devout, rural, conservative voters, most of whom welcomed these policies.

[ 252 ] [ 253 ] Such policies included writing into the Constitution of Ireland that a woman's place was in the home, prohibiting the importation or sale of contraceptives , and enactment of strict censorship laws.

[ 254 ] Fianna Fáil and its historic rival, Fine Gael , are both considered historically to be conservative parties. However, there are some differences: mainly, Fianna Fáil is usually considered more republican, [ 255 ] [ 256 ] while Fine Gael tends to be more classically liberal.

[ 257 ] [ 258 ] Starting in 2022, a series of protests calling for a reduction in illegal immigration have become more commonplace in Ireland, mostly over the status of temporary asylum seeker shelters were unable to accommodate the more than 65,000 refugees.

[ 259 ] Italy [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in Italy This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Italy Ideologies Berlusconism Italian nationalism Padanian Italian school of elitism Liberal conservatism Liberismo Neo-Bourbonism Ultramontanism Populism Principles Agrarianism Anti-communism Christian values Clericalism Familialism Italian culture Maternalism Metapolitics Monarchism Patriotism Property rights Subsidiarity History 1946 Italian institutional referendum Black nobility Historical Right Italian Empire Kingdom of Italy Lateran Treaty Papal States Risorgimento Sanfedismo Propaganda Due Intellectuals Adinolfi Bresciani Cuoco Evola Fini Giannini Giubilei Lampedusa Leopardi Locchi Lombroso Longanesi Maistre Mattei Margotti Montanelli Mordini Mosca Mughini Papini Pareto Pera Romano Salandra Sogno Taparelli Zolla Literature The Rise and Fall of the Elites (1900) Political Parties (1911) The Mind and Society (1916) Revolt Against the Modern World (1934) The Rage and the Pride (2001) Politicians Andreotti Berlusconi Cacciari Fini Forlani De Gasperi Di Cavour Meloni Pera Procaccini Salandra Salvini Sogno Tatarella Parties Active Brothers of Italy Coraggio Italia Forza Italia (2013) Future and Freedom Identity and Action Lega Nord Monarchist Alliance Popular Alternative Us with Italy Defunct Cambiamo!

Common Man's Front Conservatives and Reformists Direction Italy Economic Party Forza Italia (1994) Italian Democratic Party of Monarchist Unity Italian Nationalist Association Liberal Constitutional Party Monarchist National Party New Centre-Right The People of Freedom People's Monarchist Party Think tanks FareFuturo Foundation for Subsidiarity Liberal Foundation Machiavelli Center Magna Carta Foundation New Italy The Republicans Media Annabella L'Armonia Il Borghese Candido Corriere della Sera (formerly) Epoca Eurasia, Rivista di Studi Geopolitici Il Foglio Il Giornale L'Italia settimanale Libero Secolo d'Italia La Verità Il Tempo Related European New Right Immigrant criminality Italian school of criminology Metapolitics Politics of Italy Socialism Roman question Conservatism portal Italy portal v t e After the unification of Italy , the country was governed successively by the Historical Right , which represented conservative, liberal-conservative, and conservative-liberal positions, and the Historical Left . After World War I , the country saw the emergence of its first mass parties, notably including the Italian People's Party (PPI), a Christian-democratic party that sought to represent the Catholic majority, which had long refrained from politics. The PPI and the Italian Socialist Party decisively contributed to the loss of strength and authority of the old liberal ruling class, which had not been able to structure itself into a proper party: the Liberal Union was not coherent and the Italian Liberal Party came too late.

In 1921, Benito Mussolini founded the National Fascist Party (PNF), and the next year, through the March on Rome , he was appointed Prime Minister by King Victor Emmanuel III . Fascism originated as a populist, revolutionary, anti-royalist, anti-clerical, anti-capitalist, and anti-conservative ideology, [ 260 ] viewed by many socialists as a leftist heresy rather than a rightist opponent, but it transformed and became distinctly right-wing when it made compromises with the conservative establishment in order to consolidate authority and suppress communist movements.

[ 261 ] [ 262 ] Mussolini commented on the dynamic pragmatism of fascism: We do not believe in dogmatic programs. ... We permit ourselves the luxury of being aristocratic and democratic, conservative and progressive, reactionary and revolutionary, legalists and illegalists, according to the circumstances of the moment, the place and the environment.

[ 263 ] In 1926, all parties were dissolved except the PNF, which remained the only legal party in the Kingdom of Italy until the fall of the regime in July 1943. By 1945, fascists were discredited, disbanded, and outlawed, while Mussolini was executed in April that year.

[ 264 ] The 1946 Italian institutional referendum concerned the fate of the monarchy. While southern Italy and parts of northern Italy were royalist, other parts, especially in central Italy, were predominantly republican. The outcome was 54–46% in favor of a republic, leading to a collapse of the monarchy.

[ 265 ] After World War II , the center-right was dominated by the centrist party Christian Democracy (DC), which included both conservative and center-left elements.

[ 266 ] With its landslide victory over the Italian Socialist Party and the Italian Communist Party in 1948, the political center was in power. In Denis Mack Smith 's words, it was "moderately conservative, reasonably tolerant of everything which did not touch religion or property, but above all Catholic and sometimes clerical ".

[ 267 ] DC dominated politics until its dissolution in 1994, having governed for 47 out of 52 years.

[ 116 ] Among DC's frequent allies there was the conservative-liberal Italian Liberal Party . At the right of DC stood parties like the royalist Monarchist National Party and the post-fascist Italian Social Movement .

In 1994, entrepreneur and media tycoon Silvio Berlusconi founded the liberal-conservative party Forza Italia (FI). He won three elections in 1994 , 2001 , and 2008 , governing the country for almost ten years as prime minister. FI formed a coalitions with several parties, including the national-conservative National Alliance (AN), heir of the MSI, and the regionalist Lega Nord (LN). FI was briefly incorporated, along with AN, in The People of Freedom party and later revived in the new Forza Italia .

[ 268 ] After the 2018 general election , the LN and the Five Star Movement formed a populist government, which lasted about a year.

[ 269 ] In the 2022 general election , a center-right coalition came to power, this time dominated by Brothers of Italy (FdI), a new national-conservative party born on the ashes of AN. Consequently, FdI, the re-branded Lega , and FI formed a government under FdI leader Giorgia Meloni .

Luxembourg [ edit ] Luxembourg's major conservative party, the Christian Social People's Party , was formed as the Party of the Right in 1914 and adopted its present name in 1945. It was consistently the largest political party in Luxembourg and dominated politics throughout the 20th century.

[ 270 ] Netherlands [ edit ] Liberalism has been strong in the Netherlands. Therefore, rightist parties are often liberal-conservative or conservative-liberal. One example is the People's Party for Freedom and Democracy . Even the right-wing populist and far-right Party for Freedom , which dominated the 2023 election , supports liberal positions such as gay rights, abortion, and euthanasia.

[ 271 ] Norway [ edit ] The Conservative Party of Norway (Norwegian: Høyre , literally "Right") was formed by the old upper-class of state officials and wealthy merchants to fight the populist democracy of the Liberal Party , but it lost power in 1884, when parliamentarian government was first practiced. It formed its first government under parliamentarism in 1889 and continued to alternate in power with the Liberals until the 1930s, when Labour became the dominant party. It has elements both of paternalism , stressing the responsibilities of the state, and of economic liberalism . It first returned to power in the 1960s.

[ 272 ] During Kåre Willoch's premiership in the 1980s, much emphasis was laid on liberalizing the credit and housing market and abolishing the NRK TV and radio monopoly, while supporting law and order in criminal justice and traditional norms in education.

[ 273 ] Poland [ edit ] Part of a series on Conservatism in Poland Schools Old Conservatives Austrian Partition: Podolacy [ pl ] , Stańczycy [ pl ] Prussian partition: Neoconservatives Russian partition: Biali , Realists, Żubry [ pl ] New Conservatives Endecja Chadecja Ideologies Christian democracy Civic nationalism Golden Liberty Monarchism National Democracy National conservatism Nationalism Christian Populism Kaczyzm Traditionalism Principles Catholic social teaching Familialism Germanophobia Nobility Szlachta Patriotism Polish culture Sovereignty History Januszajtis putsch Polish Messianism National League November Uprising Romanticism in Poland Christ of Europe Winkelriedism [ pl ] Sarmatism Targowica Confederation Intellectuals Balicki Bobrzyński Chrzanowski Czartoryski Dmowski Doboszyński Giertych Głąbiński Gumplowicz Jeske-Choińskis Koneczny Konopczyński Krasiński Krasnodębski Legutko Cat-Mackiewicz Nawrocki Ossendowski Piasecki Sienkiewicz Szujski Tarnowski Tyrmand Rydzyk Wielomski Politicians Bobrzyński Bałażak Braun Czartoryski Dmowski Duda Głąbiński Grabski Hall Kaczyński (Lech) Kaczyński (Jarosław) Kucharzewski Jaworski Morawiecki (Kornel) Morawiecki (Mateusz) Nawrocki Popławski Rybarski Szujski Szydło Wielopolski Zamoyski Ziobro Literature The Trilogy (1884–1888) Quo Vadis (1895–1896) The Knights of the Cross (1900) The Demon in Democracy (2016) Parties Active Agreement Centre for Poland Law and Justice‎ League of Polish Families Renewal of the Republic of Poland Repair Poland Movement Right Wing of the Republic Defunct Centre Agreement Christian National Union Movement for the Reconstruction of Poland Movement for the Republic National Party Poland Comes First Poland Together Solidarity Electoral Action Sovereign Poland‎ The Republicans‎ There is One Poland Historical Hetmans' Party National-Democratic Party National Party Państwowe Zjednoczenie na Kresach Polish Party Polish Electoral Society in Silesia Popular National Union Organisations Fighting Solidarity Camp of Great Poland Conservative-Monarchist Club Institute for Legacy of Polish National Thought National Union Ordo Iuris Polish Coalition Polish League Polish League Against Defamation Polish Nobility Association United Right Media Do Rzeczy Gazeta Polska Najwyższy Czas!

Nasz Dziennik Radio Maryja Sieci Uważam Rze Related topics Fourth Polish Republic Politics of Poland Liberalism March for Life and Family Mohair berets Sejm cross Conservatism portal Poland portal v t e The dominant conservative party in Poland is Law and Justice (PiS). Polish conservatism is characterized by social and cultural conservatism, patriotism, adherence to Catholic social teaching , and cooperation with the Catholic Church .

[ 274 ] Contemporary Polish conservatives believe in Atlanticism and strong relations with the United States, meanwhile taking a stand against Russia.

[ 275 ] PiS has taken a populist and statist approach to economics, expanding regulations, state control over industries and media, greatly expanding social welfare and applying Keynesian -esque "anti-crisis shields", [ 274 ] differentiating itself from previous conservative political parties and movements like AWS or Endecja [ 276 ] which believed in economic liberalism. Another difference to AWS is PiS' euroscepticism.

[ 274 ] Though not opposing European Union membership, PiS pursues an assertive policy of conflict with the European Commission , [ 275 ] which, in reaction, took a hostile stance against PiS. In the European Parliament, PiS belongs to the European Conservatives and Reformists group. Liberal media in Poland is vehemently biased against PiS and opposed to its rule, often calling it authoritarian.

[ 274 ] Liberal scholar Antoni Dudek rejects giving PiS the authoritarian label, suggesting that PiS rejects the ideals of liberal democracy and instead embraces a "national democratic" or illiberal democratic form of governance.

[ 274 ] In the preceding interwar period , Poland's conservative movement was split between the "Old" Galician and Kresy conservatives, usually landowners, which formed minor parties like the State Unity in the Kresy , and the "New Conservative" movement of National Democracy (Endecja) under Roman Dmowski , which was oriented around the urban intelligentsia and petite bourgeoise . The latter sometimes cooperated with the right-wing factions of the Polish peasant movement , affiliated under the PSL "Piast" that cooperated with Endecja, creating a common government under the Lanckorona Pact , although the peasant movement was still not a part of the conservative movement. Endecja espoused Russophilia and believed in cooperation with the Russian Empire and later the White Army . They also advocated maintenance of democracy, civic nationalism , and parliamentarism , opposing Józef Piłsudski 's BBWR 's attempts at empowering the presidency and later its absolute seizure of power.

[ 276 ] In contrast, many Old Conservatives, such as Stanisław Cat-Mackiewicz , found themselves as allies of Marshal Piłsudski.

[ 276 ] Endecja rejected Romanticism and Messianism , concepts which were important to the Old Conservatives.

[ 277 ] Russia [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in Russia This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Russia Ideologies Eurasianism Duginism Monarchism Tsarism Populism Putinism Russian nationalism All-Russian Christian Ultra Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Traditionalist conservatism Principles Authority Autocracy Bureaucracy Byzantinism Duty Economic interventionism Familialism Imperialism Irredentism Law and order Orthodox values Nuclear Orthodoxy Moscow, third Rome Patriotism Reactionism Russian culture Russification Sobornost Social hierarchy Social order Sovereign democracy Statism History Black Hundreds Great Russia Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationality Russian Empire White movement White Army White émigré Zemstvo Intellectuals Aksakov Boot Chudinova Danilevsky Dostoevsky Dugin Frank Ilyin Karamzin Katkov Khomyakov Leontiev von Lilienfeld Obolensky Pobedonostsev Prokhanov Rozanov Semyonov Shafarevich Shcherbatov Solovyov Solzhenitsyn Sorokin Strakhov Surkov Tarkovsky Tikhomirov Tikhon Trubetskoy Uvarov Vikulov von Wrangel Yuryev Zhukovsky Literature St Petersburg Dialogues (1821) The Organic Theory of Societies (1873) Sociology of Revolution (1925) The Gulag Archipelago (1973) Foundations of Geopolitics (1997) The Notre Dame de Paris Mosque (2005) The Fourth Political Theory (2009) Politicians Alexander I Alexander III Butina Dubrovin Durnovo Gryzlov Kolchak Kornilov von Lilienfeld Luzhkov Malyshkin Mizulina Nicholas I Nicholas II Pikhno Pobedonostsev Putin Rodzianko Rogozin Rostopchin Sadovnichiy Shulgin Slutsky Surkov Tolstoy von Ungern Uvarov Vladimir Volodin Yuryev Zhirinovsky Parties Active Eurasia Party Great Russia Liberal Democratic Party of Russia Monarchist Party of Russia Rodina Russian All-People's Union Union of Right Forces United Russia Defunct For Truth Liberal Democratic Party of the Soviet Union People's Union Pamyat Society Union of the Russian People Organisations All-Russia People's Front Izborsky Club Krepostniki National Alliance of Russian Solidarists Union of the Russian People Media Elementy (Defunct) Kievlyanin Kozma Minin Nash Sovremennik Russkoye Znamya Zavtra Znamya Related topics Anti-communism Anti-socialism Anti-Islamism Anti-national sentiments American Chechen Jew Polish Romanian Tatar Turkish Ukrainian Opposition to LGBTQ rights Politics of Russia Liberalism Russia for Russians Russia under Vladimir Putin Serfdom in Russia Silovik Conservatism portal Russia portal v t e Russian conservatism has experienced a revival in recent decades.

[ 278 ] Under Vladimir Putin , the dominant leader since 1999, Russia has promoted explicitly conservative policies in social, cultural, and political matters, both at home and abroad.

[ 279 ] Putin has criticized globalism and economic liberalism, claiming that "liberalism has become obsolete" and that the vast majority of people in the world oppose multiculturalism , free immigration , and rights for LGBT people .

[ 280 ] Russian conservatism is special in some respects as it supports a mixed economy with economic intervention , combined with a strong nationalist sentiment and social conservatism which is largely populist . As a result, Russian conservatism opposes right-libertarian ideals such as the aforementioned concept of economic liberalism found in other conservative movements around the world.

Putin has also promoted new think tanks that bring together like-minded intellectuals and writers. For example, the Izborsky Club , founded in 2012 by Alexander Prokhanov , stresses Russian nationalism , the restoration of Russia's historical greatness, and systematic opposition to liberal ideas and policies.

[ 281 ] Vladislav Surkov , a senior government official, has been one of the key ideologues during Putin's presidency.

[ 282 ] In cultural and social affairs, Putin has collaborated closely with the Russian Orthodox Church .

[ 283 ] [ 284 ] Under Patriarch Kirill of Moscow , the Church has backed the expansion of Russian power into Crimea and eastern Ukraine.

[ 285 ] More broadly, The New York Times reports in September 2016 how the Church's policy prescriptions support the Kremlin's appeal to social conservatives: A fervent foe of homosexuality and any attempt to put individual rights above those of family, community, or nation, the Russian Orthodox Church helps project Russia as the natural ally of all those who pine for a more secure, illiberal world free from the tradition-crushing rush of globalization, multiculturalism, and women's and gay rights.

[ 286 ] Spain [ edit ] Part of a series on Conservatism in Spain Ideologies Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism Sociological National Catholicism Integrism Maurism Mellismo Neocatólicos Noucentisme Spanish nationalism Traditionalism Principles Anti-communism Anti-Masonry Authority Familialism Family values Hispanidad Honour Spain Monarchy Patriotism Social hierarchy Spanish unionism Tradition History Spanish Empire Carlist Wars Bourbon Restoration 1923 Spanish coup d'état Dictatorship of Primo de Rivera Spanish Civil War Bando nacional White Terror Francoist Spain Búnker 20-N Intellectuals Albiñana Balmes Bleiberg Cela Donoso Cortés Entralgo Gonzalo Fernández de la Mora Gambra Gambra Gutiérrez Gaos Gil Robles Hervás de Maeztu Maravall Marías Menéndez d'Ors (Álvaro) Ortega y Gasset Panero Pradera Roca Barea Santayana de Tejada de Unamuno Vigón Vidal Vázquez de Mella Zubiri Literature Liberalism Is a Sin (1884) The Dehumanization of Art (1925) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The New State (1935) Manifesto Against the Death of the Spirit and the Earth (2002) Politicians Abascal Ayuso Aznar Casado Carrero Donoso Cortés Cosidó Fal Fernández-Miranda Fraga Franco Gambra Gil-Robles Girón Goicoechea González-Camino Marhuenda Maura Navarro Pérez Piñar Pradera Rajoy de Rivera Rodezno Ruiz-Jarabo Serrano Solana González-Camino de Tejada Tejero Utrera Valiente Vázquez de Mella Commentators Aznar Zubigaray Franco (Carmen) Losantos Marhuenda Torres d'Ors (Eugenio) Pemán Dalí Parties Active' Navarrese People's Union (UPN) People's Party (PP) Spanish Catholic Movement (MCE) Vox Workers' Front Defunct CEDA Conservative Party Democratic Union of Catalonia FET y de las JONS (factions) Liberal Republican Right New Force Patriotic Union People's Alliance Popular Action Regionalist League of Catalonia Spanish Renovation Traditionalist Communion Organisations Acción Española CitizenGo FAES Francisco Franco National Foundation Madrid Forum Movimiento Nacional (factions) Requeté Media ABC Arriba Época El Alcázar Heraldo de Aragón La Razón Revista Contemporánea Revista de Occidente Telva Trece Related topics Art and culture Immigration and crime Peronism Politics of Spain Liberalism Spanish irredentism Iberism Conservatism portal Spain portal v t e Conservatism in Spain is represented by the center-right People's Party and ultra-right Vox party . The People's Party has its roots in the People's Alliance founded on 9 October 1976 by former Francoist minister Manuel Fraga . Although Fraga was a member of the reformist faction of the Franco regime, he supported an extremely gradual transition to democracy. However, he badly underestimated the public's distaste for Francoism. Additionally, while he attempted to convey a reformist image, the large number of former Francoists in the party led the public to perceive it as both reactionary and authoritarian . In the June 1977 general election , the AP garnered only 8.3 percent of the vote, putting it in fourth place.

The PP joined the European People's Party in 1991.

[ 287 ] The PP became the largest party for the first time in 1996, and José María Aznar became Prime Minister with the support of the Basque Nationalist Party , the Catalan Convergence and Union and the Canarian Coalition . In the 2000 elections, the PP gained an absolute majority .

In August 2003, Mariano Rajoy was appointed Secretary General by Aznar. Thus, Rajoy became the party's candidate for Prime Minister in the 2004 general election , held three days after the 11 March 2004 Madrid train bombings , and which Rajoy lost by a big margin to Spanish Socialist Workers' Party (PSOE) leader José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero .

The PP under Mariano Rajoy opposed the PSOE government after the PP lost the general election in 2004 , arguing that this victory was influenced by the Madrid bombings of 11 March 2004. At a national level, its political strategy has followed two main axes, both linked to Spain's delicate regional politics: first, opposing further administrative devolution to Catalonia by means of the newly approved "Estatut" or Statute of Catalonia that lays out the powers of the Catalan regional government. Second, it remains opposed to political negotiations with the Basque separatist organisation ETA .

The prospect of increased demands for autonomy in the programs of Catalan and Basque parties, and Zapatero's alleged favouring of them, became a focus for the party's campaign for the March 2008 general election .

Basque President Juan José Ibarretxe 's proposal for a unilateral referendum for the solution of the Basque Conflict was another important issue.

The People's Party under Rajoy has an increasingly patriotic, or nationalist , [ citation needed ] element to it, appealing to the sense of "Spanishness" and making strong use of national symbols such as the Spanish flag . Prior to the national celebrations of Spanish Heritage Day, Rajoy made a speech asking Spaniards to "privately or publicly" display their pride in their nation and to honor their flag, an action which received some criticism from many political groups of the Congress.

Vox was founded in December 2013, splitting from the People's Party (PP).

[ 288 ] The party platform called for the rewriting of the Spanish constitution so as to curb regional autonomy and abolish regional parliaments.

[ 288 ] Several founding members of the party (for example, Alejo Vidal-Quadras , José Antonio Ortega Lara , and Santiago Abascal ) had been members of the platform "reconversion.es", which had issued a manifesto in 2012 calling for a recentralization of the State.

[ 289 ] Vidal-Quadras was proclaimed as the first chairman in March 2014.

[ 290 ] Sweden [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in Sweden Part of a series on Conservatism in Sweden Ideologies Christian democracy Liberal Moderate Nationalist Principles Cameralism Duty Elitism Meritocracy Law and order Moderation Lagom Monarchism National romanticism Nationalism Folkhemmet Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Prudence Rule of law Social order State church Swedish culture Tradition History Swedish Empire Hats Swedish Romanticism Gothicism Peasant armament support march Courtyard Speech Kristersson cabinet Tidö Agreement Intellectuals Ahlberg Almqvist Arnstberg Boström Böök Geijer Heckscher (Eli) Heckscher (Gunnar) Heberlein Heidenstam Hjärne Karlsson Kjellén Lagerkvist Lindbom Nordin Pethrus Ryn Sandelin Stolpe Tegnér Zetterberg Politicians Åkesson Bildt Bohman Busch Hägglund Järta Karlsson Kasselstrand Kjellén Kristersson Krönmark Lindman Lundeberg Malmer Stenergard Pethrus Trygger Wallmark Weimers Commentators Arpi Martinsson Teodorescu Måwe Parties Active Alternative for Sweden Centre Party (formerly) Christian Democrats Citizens' Coalition Moderate Party Sweden Democrats Defunct National Party New Democracy Party of the Rural People Protectionist Party The Royal Court Party Organisations Captus Jarl Hjalmarson Foundation Oikos Young Christian Democrats Young Swedes SDU Media Active Axess magasin Barometern Bulletin Det Bästa Fria Tider Gotlands Allehanda Nya Wermlands-Tidningen Nyheter Idag Riks Samhällsnytt Smålandsposten Svenska Dagbladet Defunct Det Nya Sverige Nya Dagligt Allehanda OBS!

Salt Stockholms Dagblad Related topics Swedish Bible Belt The Dwarf (1944) Frithiof's Saga Nordic sexual morality debate Conservatism portal Sweden portal v t e In the early 19th century, Swedish conservatism developed alongside Swedish Romanticism . The historian Erik Gustaf Geijer , an exponent of Gothicism , glorified the Viking Age and the Swedish Empire , [ 291 ] and the idealist philosopher Christopher Jacob Boström became the chief ideologue of the official state doctrine, which dominated Swedish politics for almost a century.

[ 292 ] Other influential Swedish conservative Romantics were Esaias Tegnér and Per Daniel Amadeus Atterbom .

Early parliamentary conservatism in Sweden was explicitly elitist. The Conservative Party was formed in 1904 with one major goal in mind: to stop the advent of universal suffrage , which they feared would result in socialism. Yet, it was a Swedish admiral, the conservative politician Arvid Lindman , who first extended democracy by enacting male suffrage , despite the protests of more traditionalist voices, such as the later prime minister, the arch-conservative and authoritarian statesman Ernst Trygger , who railed at progressive policies such as the abolition of the death penalty .

[ 293 ] Once a democratic system was in place, Swedish conservatives sought to combine traditional elitism with modern populism. Sweden's most renowned political scientist, the conservative politician Rudolf Kjellén , coined the terms geopolitics and biopolitics in relation to his organic theory of the state .

[ 294 ] He also developed the corporatist -nationalist concept of Folkhemmet ('the people's home'), which became the single most powerful political concept in Sweden throughout the 20th century, although it was adopted by the Social Democratic Party who gave it a more socialist interpretation.

[ 295 ] After a brief grand coalition between Left and Right during World War II, the center-right parties struggled to cooperate due to their ideological differences: the agrarian populism of the Centre Party , the urban liberalism of the Liberal People's Party , and the liberal-conservative elitism of the Moderate Party (the old Conservative Party). However, in 1976 and in 1979 , the three parties managed to form a government under Thorbjörn Fälldin —and again in 1991 under aristocrat Carl Bildt and with support from the newly founded Christian Democrats , the most conservative party in contemporary Sweden.

[ 296 ] In modern times, mass immigration from distant cultures caused a large populist dissatisfaction, which was not channeled through any of the established parties, who generally espoused multiculturalism .

[ 297 ] Instead, the 2010s saw the rise of the right-wing populist Sweden Democrats , who were surging as the largest party in the polls on several occasions.

[ 298 ] [ 299 ] Due to its fascist roots, the party was ostracized by the other parties until 2019 when Christian Democrat leader Ebba Busch reached out for collaboration, after which the Moderate Party followed suit.

[ 300 ] In 2022 , the center-right parties formed a government with support from the Sweden Democrats as the largest party.

[ 301 ] The subsequent Tidö Agreement , negotiated in Tidö Castle , incorporated authoritarian policies such as a stricter stance on immigration and a harsher stance on law and order.

[ 302 ] Switzerland [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Switzerland Principles Agrarianism Capitalism Economic liberalism Federalism Heimat Liberty Limited government Multiculturalism Populism Property rights Republicanism Subsidiarity Swiss neutrality Intellectuals J. Burckhardt T. Burckhardt Gasser von Haller Mohler Ye'or Politicians Blocher Furgler Gnägi Maurer von Moos Schwarzenbach Stauffer Widmer-Schlumpf Parties Christian Democratic People's Party of Switzerland Conservative Democratic Party of Switzerland Evangelical People's Party of Switzerland Federal Democratic Union of Switzerland Freedom Party of Switzerland Geneva Citizens' Movement Party of Farmers, Traders and Independents Republican Movement (Defunct) Swiss People's Party Organisations AUNS Pro Libertate Media Die Weltwoche Neue Zürcher Zeitung Related topics The Civilization of the Renaissance in Italy (1860) Culture of Switzerland Eurabia conspiracy theory Islam and Dhimmitude (2001) Dhimmitude Far-right politics in Switzerland Politics of Switzerland Überfremdung Conservatism portal Switzerland portal v t e In some aspects, Swiss conservatism is unique, as Switzerland is an old federal republic born from historically sovereign cantons , comprising three major nationalities and adhering to the principle of Swiss neutrality .

There are a number of conservative parties in Switzerland's parliament, the Federal Assembly . These include the largest ones: the Swiss People's Party (SVP), [ 303 ] the Christian Democratic People's Party (CVP), [ 304 ] and the Conservative Democratic Party of Switzerland (BDP), [ 305 ] which is a splinter of the SVP created in the aftermath to the election of Eveline Widmer-Schlumpf as Federal Council.

[ 305 ] The SVP was formed from the 1971 merger of the Party of Farmers, Traders and Citizens , formed in 1917, and the smaller Democratic Party, formed in 1942. The SVP emphasised agricultural policy and was strong among farmers in German-speaking Protestant areas. As Switzerland considered closer relations with the European Union in the 1990s, the SVP adopted a more militant protectionist and isolationist stance. This stance has allowed it to expand into German-speaking Catholic mountainous areas.

[ 306 ] The Anti-Defamation League , a non-Swiss lobby group based in the United States has accused them of manipulating issues such as immigration, Swiss neutrality, and welfare benefits, awakening antisemitism and racism.

[ 307 ] The Council of Europe has called the SVP " extreme right ", although some scholars dispute this classification. For instance, Hans-Georg Betz describes it as "populist radical right".

[ 308 ] The SVP has been the largest party since 2003.

Ukraine [ edit ] The authoritarian Ukrainian State was headed by Cossack aristocrat Pavlo Skoropadskyi and represented the conservative movement. The 1918 Hetman government, which appealed to the tradition of the 17th–18th century Cossack Hetman state , represented the conservative strand in Ukraine's struggle for independence. It had the support of the proprietary classes and of conservative and moderate political groups.

Vyacheslav Lypynsky was a main ideologue of Ukrainian conservatism.

[ 309 ] United Kingdom [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in the United Kingdom This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United Kingdom Ideologies Burkean Cameronism Muscular liberalism Civic Compassionate Euroscepticism Green Liberal Classical Thatcherism Neo One-nation Powellism Progressive Toryism High Red Social Ultra Principles Anglo-Saxonism British unionism Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Familialism Imperialism Loyalism Moral absolutism Victorian Nationalism British English Northern Irish Scottish Welsh Ordered liberty Protectionism Royalism Social hierarchy Social market economy Sovereignty State church Tradition History Cavalier Stuart Restoration Tories Jacobitism 1794 Treason Trials Old Whigs Corn Laws Oxford Movement Young England Neo-Jacobite Revival New Right Wets and dries Brexit Intellectuals Bagehot Belloc Biggar Blond Burke Butterfield Carlyle Chesterton Clark Coleridge Conquest Dalrymple Dawson Eliot Elton Ferguson Filmer Galton Gibbon Gray Haldane Hayek Hulme Hume Johnson (Paul) Johnson (Samuel) Kipling Kedourie Laslett Lawrence Ludovici More Newman Oakeshott (Michael) Parvini Ruskin Scott Scruton Southey Stephen Trueman Unwin Waugh Williamson Wordsworth Politicians Anderson Badenoch Baldwin Balfour Braverman Burke Butler Cameron Canning Cazalet Chamberlain Churchill Clarke Disraeli Goldsmith Gove Hannan Hayes Hogg Howard Jenrick Johnson (Boris) Joseph Leigh Liverpool Lowe Macmillan Major May Peel Pitt Powell Rees-Mogg Salisbury Thatcher Whittle Willetts Commentators Amis Benjamin Bowden Burton Clarkson Cohen Forsyth (Frederick) Goodwin Hanbury-Tracy Hitchens Johnson (Paul) Kisin Liddle Lunn Moore Morgan Murray Nelson Oakeshott (Isabel) O'Sullivan Pearce Perry Roberts Smith Starkey Sullivan Turner Watson Welch West Worsthorne Young Literature Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) " Tamworth Manifesto " (1834) On Heroes (1841) Coningsby (1844) Sybil (1845) Latter-Day Pamphlets (1850) Culture and Anarchy (1867–68) Orthodoxy (1908) The Servile State (1912) " Tradition and the Individual Talent " (1919) The Whig Interpretation of History (1931) The Abolition of Man (1943) The Left Was Never Right (1945) " Rivers of Blood " (1968) The Abolition of Britain (1999) Our Culture, What's Left of It (2005) The Rage Against God (2010) The Great Degeneration (2013) How to Be a Conservative (2014) Conservatism (2017) The Strange Death of Europe (2017) Parties Active Alliance EPP: European People's Party UK Christian Party Christian Peoples Alliance Conservative and Unionist Party Common Sense Group Conservative Future (Defunct) Young Conservatives Democratic Unionist Party Heritage Party Reform UK Social Democratic Party (UK, 1990–present) Traditional Unionist Voice UK Independence Party Ulster Unionist Party Workers Party of Britain Defunct For Britain Movement Tories Veterans and People's Party Activists Booth-Smith Bowden Forsyth (James) Goldsmith Hitchens Keen-Minshull Littlewood Marshall Montgomerie Murray Payne Shawcross Stroud Sullivan Worsthorne Organisations 55 Tufton Street Centre for Policy Studies IEA LGB Alliance Migration Watch UK Policy Exchange Bright Blue Blue Collar Conservativism Conservative Democratic Alliance (Defunct) Conservative Philosophy Group Cornerstone Group CSC European Research Group The Freedom Association Henry Jackson Society London Swinton Circle Monday Club (Defunct) NATCON One Nation Conservatives Orange Order Oxford University Conservative Association Right Book Club (Defunct) Revolutionary Conservative Caucus (Defunct) Social Affairs Unit (Defunct) Tory Reform Group Traditional Britain Group Turning Point UK Western Goals Institute (Defunct) Media Anti-Jacobin Review (Defunct) Catholic Herald ConservativeHome The Critic Daily Express Sunday Express Daily Mail The Daily Sceptic The Daily Telegraph Evening Standard GB News Guido Fawkes The Mail on Sunday The Salisbury Review The Spectator The Sun The Sun on Sunday The Sunday Telegraph The Sunday Times Talk The Times UnHerd Related Anglo-Catholicism Antidisestablishmentarianism Blue Labour Cambridge Analytica " Constructive conservatism " List of British conservatives Merry England O'Sullivan's first law Philosophy of Thomas Carlyle Politics of the United Kingdom Liberalism Libertarianism Socialism Public schools in the UK Remigration Conservatism portal United Kingdom portal v t e Part of a series on Toryism Principles Agrarianism Classicism Counterrevolution High Church Anglicanism High culture Interventionism Loyalism Monarchism Noblesse oblige Royalism Traditionalism Unionism Variants Blue High Pink Red Socialist General topics Cavaliers Cavalier Parliament Château Clique Conservative corporatism Divine right of kings Family Compact Jacobitism Oxford Movement Powellism Intellectuals Chesterton Bolingbroke Filmer Grant Johnson L'Estrange Scott Politicians Baldwin Bolingbroke Bute Churchill Clarendon Powell Rochester Wellington Related topics Carlism Chouans Cristeros Conservatism Distributism Legitimism Loyalism Miguelism Reactionism Spanish American royalism Sanfedismo Traditionalist conservatism Ultra-Tories Vendéens Viva Maria Veronese Easter Conservatism portal Politics portal v t e Modern English conservatives celebrate Anglo-Irish statesman Edmund Burke as their intellectual father. Burke was affiliated with the Whig Party , which eventually split among the Liberal Party and the Conservative Party , but the modern Conservative Party is generally thought to derive primarily from the Tories , and the MPs of the modern conservative party are still frequently referred to as Tories.

[ 310 ] Shortly after Burke's death in 1797, conservatism was revived as a mainstream political force as the Whigs suffered a series of internal divisions. This new generation of conservatives derived their politics not from Burke, but from his predecessor, the Viscount Bolingbroke , who was a Jacobite and traditional Tory, lacking Burke's sympathies for Whiggish policies such as Catholic emancipation and American independence (famously attacked by Samuel Johnson in "Taxation No Tyranny").

[ 310 ] In the first half of the 19th century, many newspapers, magazines, and journals promoted loyalist or right-wing attitudes in religion, politics, and international affairs. Burke was seldom mentioned, but William Pitt the Younger became a conspicuous hero. The most prominent journals included The Quarterly Review , founded in 1809 as a counterweight to the Whigs' Edinburgh Review , and the even more conservative Blackwood's Magazine . The Quarterly Review promoted a balanced Canningite Toryism, as it was neutral on Catholic emancipation and only mildly critical of Nonconformist dissent ; it opposed slavery and supported the current poor laws; and it was "aggressively imperialist ". The high-church clergy of the Church of England read the Orthodox Churchman's Magazine , which was equally hostile to Jewish, Catholic, Jacobin , Methodist and Unitarian spokesmen. Anchoring the ultra-Tories , Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine stood firmly against Catholic emancipation and favored slavery, cheap money, mercantilism , the Navigation Acts , and the Holy Alliance .

[ 310 ] Conservatism evolved after 1820, embracing free trade in 1846 and a commitment to democracy, especially under Benjamin Disraeli . The effect was to significantly strengthen conservatism as a grassroots political force. Conservatism no longer was the philosophical defense of the landed aristocracy, but had been refreshed into redefining its commitment to the ideals of order, both secular and religious, expanding imperialism, strengthened monarchy , and a more generous vision of the welfare state as opposed to the punitive vision of the Whigs and liberals.

[ 311 ] As early as 1835, Disraeli attacked the Whigs and utilitarians as slavishly devoted to an industrial oligarchy , while he described his fellow Tories as the only "really democratic party of England", devoted to the interests of the whole people.

[ 312 ] Nevertheless, inside the party there was a tension between the growing numbers of wealthy businessmen on the one side and the aristocracy and rural gentry on the other.

[ 313 ] The aristocracy gained strength as businessmen discovered they could use their wealth to buy a peerage and a country estate.

Some conservatives lamented the passing of a pastoral world where the ethos of noblesse oblige had promoted respect from the lower classes. They saw the Anglican Church and the aristocracy as balances against commercial wealth.

[ 314 ] They worked toward legislation for improved working conditions and urban housing.

[ 315 ] This viewpoint would later be called Tory democracy .

[ 316 ] However, since Burke, there has always been tension between traditional aristocratic conservatism and the wealthy liberal business class.

[ 317 ] In 1834, Tory Prime Minister Robert Peel issued the " Tamworth Manifesto ", in which he pledged to endorse moderate political reform. This marked the beginning of the transformation from High Tory reactionism towards a more modern form of conservatism. As a result, the party became known as the Conservative Party —a name it has retained to this day. However, Peel would also be the root of a split in the party between the traditional Tories (by the Earl of Derby and Benjamin Disraeli ) and the "Peelites" (led first by Peel himself, then by the Earl of Aberdeen ). The split occurred in 1846 over the issue of free trade , which Peel supported, versus protectionism , supported by Derby. The majority of the party sided with Derby while about a third split away, eventually merging with the Whigs and the radicals to form the Liberal Party . Despite the split, the mainstream Conservative Party accepted the doctrine of free trade in 1852.

In the second half of the 19th century, the Liberal Party faced political schisms, especially over Irish Home Rule . Leader William Gladstone (himself a former Peelite) sought to give Ireland a degree of autonomy, a move that elements in both the left and right-wings of his party opposed. These split off to become the Liberal Unionists (led by Joseph Chamberlain ), forming a coalition with the Conservatives before merging with them in 1912. The Liberal Unionist influence dragged the Conservative Party towards the left as Conservative governments passed a number of progressive reforms at the turn of the 20th century. By the late 19th century, the traditional business supporters of the Liberal Party had joined the Conservatives, making them the party of business and commerce as well.

After a period of Liberal dominance before World War I, the Conservatives gradually became more influential in government, regaining full control of the cabinet in 1922. In the inter-war period, conservatism was the major ideology in Britain [ 318 ] [ 319 ] [ 320 ] as the Liberal Party vied with the Labour Party for control of the left. After World War II, the first Labour government (1945–1951) under Clement Attlee embarked on a program of nationalization of industry and the promotion of social welfare. The Conservatives generally accepted those policies until the 1980s.

In the 1980s, the Conservative government of Margaret Thatcher , guided by neoliberal economics, reversed many of Labour's social programmes, privatized large parts of the UK economy, and sold state-owned assets.

[ 321 ] The Conservative Party also adopted soft eurosceptic politics and opposed Federal Europe . Other conservative political parties, such as the Democratic Unionist Party (DUP, founded in 1971), and the United Kingdom Independence Party (UKIP, founded in 1993), began to appear, although they have yet to make any significant impact at Westminster. As of 2014, the DUP is the largest political party in the ruling coalition in the Northern Ireland Assembly , and from 2017 to 2019 the DUP provided support for the Conservative minority government under a confidence-and-supply arrangement.

Latin America [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in Latin America Conservative elites have long dominated Latin American nations. Mostly, this has been achieved through control of civil institutions, the Catholic Church, and the military, rather than through party politics. Typically, the Church was exempt from taxes and its employees immune from civil prosecution. Where conservative parties were weak or non-existent, conservatives were more likely to rely on military dictatorship as a preferred form of government.

[ 322 ] However, in some nations where the elites were able to mobilize popular support for conservative parties, longer periods of political stability were achieved. Chile, Colombia, and Venezuela are examples of nations that developed strong conservative parties. Argentina, Brazil, El Salvador, and Peru are examples of nations where this did not occur.

[ 323 ] Political scientist Louis Hartz explained conservatism in Latin American nations as a result of their settlement as feudal societies.

[ 324 ] Brazil [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in Brazil This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Brazil Ideologies Bolsonarism Christian right Coronelism Integralism Janismo Liberal conservatism Free Brazil Movement Monarchism Patrianovism Nationalism Populism Principles Agrarianism Anti-communism Authority Family values Federalism Gun rights Law and order Lusotropicalism Militarism Multiracialism Patriotism Traditionalism History Jair Bolsonaro campaign Brazilian Miracle Colonial Brazil Empire of Brazil Kingdom of Brazil Military dictatorship in Brazil Intellectuals Campos Carpeaux Carvalho Corção Corrêa de Oliveira Francis Freyre Lacombe Léo Lobato Mourão Oliveira Lima Oliveira Torres Paulo Ricardo Pinto Reale Roquette-Pinto Rodríguez Santos Silva Simonsen Tolentino Viana Politicians Andrada e Silva Araújo Lima Bolsonaro Carneiro Castelo Branco Ferreira Fidelix Freitas Lacerda Maluf Médici Nabuco Santos Getúlio Vargas (early) Zema Parties Active Brazil Union Brazilian Labour Renewal Party Brazilian Woman's Party Christian Democracy Democratic Renewal Party Liberal Party New Resistance Progressistas Republicans Defunct Alliance for Brazil Brazilian Integralist Action Brazilian Labour Party Conservative Party Conservative Republican Party Democratic Social Party Democrats Fluminense Republican Party National Democratic Union Party of the Reconstruction of the National Order Patriota Popular Representation Party Social Christian Party Social Liberal Party Organisations Black Guard Diretório Monárquico do Brasil Evangelical Caucus Imperial Patrianovist Guard União Democrática Ruralista Media Gazeta do Povo O Tempo Related topics BBB Bench Bolsominion Brazilian nobility Fidalgo O Presidente Negro (1926) Politics of Brazil Liberalism Socialism Conservatism portal Brazil portal v t e Conservatism in Brazil originates from the cultural and historical tradition of Brazil, whose cultural roots are Luso - Iberian and Roman Catholic .

[ 325 ] More traditional conservative historical views and features include belief in political federalism and monarchism . Brazil is the only Latin American nation with a relatively strong royalist sentiment, and throughout modern history a significant minority of the population has always supported a monarchical restoration.

[ 77 ] [ 326 ] The military dictatorship in Brazil was established on April 1, 1964, after a coup d'état by the Brazilian Army with support from the United States government, and it lasted for 21 years, until March 15, 1985. The coup received support from almost all high-ranking members of the military along with conservative sectors in society, such as the Catholic Church and anti-communist civilian movements among the Brazilian middle and upper classes. The dictatorship reached the height of its popularity in the 1970s with the so-called Brazilian Miracle . Brazil's military government provided a model for other military regimes throughout Latin America , being systematized by the "National Security Doctrine", which was used to justify the military's actions as operating in the interest of national security in a time of crisis.

[ 327 ] In contemporary politics, a conservative wave began roughly around the 2014 Brazilian presidential election .

[ 328 ] According to commentators, the National Congress of Brazil elected in 2014 may be considered the most conservative since the re-democratisation movement, citing an increase in the number of parliamentarians linked to more conservative segments, such as ruralists , the military , the police , and religious conservatives . The subsequent economic crisis of 2015 and investigations of corruption scandals led to a right-wing movement that sought to rescue ideas from capitalism in opposition to socialism. At the same time, fiscal conservatives such as those that make up the Free Brazil Movement emerged among many others. Military officer Jair Bolsonaro of the Social Liberal Party was the winner of the 2018 Brazilian presidential election .

[ 329 ] Chile [ edit ] Chile's conservative party, the National Party , disbanded in 1973 following a military coup and did not re-emerge as a political force after the return to democracy.

[ 330 ] During the military dictatorship of Chile , the country was ruled by a military junta headed by General Augusto Pinochet . His ideology, known as Pinochetism , was anti-communist, militaristic, nationalistic, and laissez-faire capitalistic.

[ 331 ] Under Pinochet, Chile's economy was placed under the control of a group of economists known collectively as the Chicago Boys , whose liberalizing policies have been described as neoliberal .

[ 332 ] Colombia [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in Colombia The Colombian Conservative Party , founded in 1849, traces its origins to opponents of General Francisco de Paula Santander 's 1833–1837 administration. While the term "liberal" had been used to describe all political forces in Colombia, the conservatives began describing themselves as "conservative liberals" and their opponents as "red liberals". From the 1860s until the present, the party has supported strong central government and the Catholic Church, especially its role as protector of the sanctity of the family, and opposed separation of church and state . Its policies include the legal equality of all men, the citizen's right to own property, and opposition to dictatorship. It has usually been Colombia's second largest party, with the Colombian Liberal Party being the largest.

[ 333 ] North America [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in North America North American conservatism, combining traditionalist conservatism , economic liberalism , and right-wing populism , is different from European conservatism and can be traced back to the classical liberalism of the 18th and 19th centuries, [ 334 ] although Canada developed an American-style conservatism that competed with the older Tory conservatism .

[ 335 ] According to political scientist Louis Hartz , French Canada is a fragment of feudal Europe, whereas the United States and English Canada are liberal fragments.

[ 336 ] Sociologist Reginald Bibby asserts that conservatism has been strong and enduring throughout North America because of the propagation of religious values from generation to generation.

[ 337 ] Canada [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in Canada This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Canada Schools Calgary School Christian right Clerico-nationalism Right-wing populism Trumpism Social conservatism Social credit Toryism Blue Red Pink Principles Canadian values Federalism Economic liberalism Limited government Loyalism Monarchism Nationalism Property rights Protectionism Rule of law Tradition History Château Clique Family Compact Lower Canada Tories National Policy Port Hope Conference Unite the Right United Empire Loyalist Upper Canada Tories Canada convoy protest Intellectuals Alexander Black Blackwood Bouchard Byfield Brodie Cooper Duchesne Dart Farthing Flanagan Furedi Gilley Granatstein Grant Groulx Gwyn Kaufmann Kirkconnell Leacock McLuhan Pageau Packer Peterson Stackhouse Jr.

Strachan Tiger Politicians Aberhart Bennett (Bill) Bennett (R. B.) Bennett (W. A. C.) Bernier Borden Campbell De Cosmos Diefenbaker Duplessis D. Ford R. Ford Haliburton Harper Harris Kenney Klein Legault Lougheed Macdonald Manning (Ernest) Manning (Preston) McGee Mulroney O'Toole Poilievre Rustad Scheer Smith Stanfield Vander Zalm Wall Commentators Camp Chen Crowder Frum Jivani Lester Levant Lilley McIntyre Murphy Segal Speer Steyn Literature Canada and the Canadian Question (1891) Lament for a Nation (1965) Who Killed Canadian History?

(1998) Maps of Meaning (1999) The Black Book of English Canada (Series; 2001–2003) The Uniqueness of Western Civilization (2011) Harperism (2014) " The Case for Colonialism " (2017) 12 Rules for Life (2018) Whiteshift (2018) Active parties Federal Christian Heritage Party of Canada Conservative Party of Canada Libertarian Party of Canada People's Party of Canada Provincial BC United Coalition Avenir Québec Conservative Party of British Columbia Conservative Party of Quebec Progressive Conservative Party of Manitoba Progressive Conservative Party of NB Progressive Conservative Party of NL Progressive Conservative Party of Nova Scotia Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario Progressive Conservative Party of PEI Progressive Conservative Party of Sask.

Saskatchewan Party Social Credit Party of Canada United Conservative Party Yukon Party Defunct parties Federal Canadian Alliance Conservative Party of Canada (1867–1942) Liberal-Conservative Party Progressive Conservative Party of Canada Reform Party of Canada Social Credit Party of Canada Unionist Party Provincial Action démocratique du Québec British Columbia Social Credit Party Conservative Party of Quebec (historical) Parti bleu Progressive Conservative Assoc. of Alberta Union Nationale Upper Canada Tories Wildrose Party Media CFRA Climate Audit Free Dominion LifeSiteNews National Post The Post Millennial Rebel News Sun News Network The Dorchester Review Toronto Sun Western Standard Winnipeg Sun Other organizations Campaign Life Coalition Canadian Centre for Bio-Ethical Reform Canadian Coalition for Democracies Canadian Taxpayers Federation Catholic Civil Rights League Focus on the Family Canada Fraser Institute Institute for Research on Public Policy LGBTory Macdonald–Laurier Institute Mackenzie Institute Montreal Economic Institute National Citizens Coalition Orange Order Progressive Group for Independent Business REAL Women of Canada Rumble Three Percenters True North Centre for Public Policy Voice of Canadians Related Common Sense Revolution Conservatism in the United Kingdom Conservatism in the United States Censorship under the Canadian Human Rights Act Illegal immigration to Canada Old Stock Canadians Pure laine Western alienation Alberta Agenda Alberta separatism Canada portal Conservatism portal v t e Canada's conservatives had their roots in the Tory loyalists who left America after the American Revolution .

[ 338 ] They developed in the socio-economic and political cleavages that existed during the first three decades of the 19th century and had the support of the mercantile, professional, and religious elites in Ontario and to a lesser extent in Quebec. Holding a monopoly over administrative and judicial offices, they were called the Family Compact in Ontario and the Chateau Clique in Quebec.

John A. Macdonald 's successful leadership of the movement to confederate the provinces, and his subsequent tenure as prime minister for most of the late 19th century, rested on his ability to bring together the English-speaking Protestant aristocracy and the ultramontane Catholic hierarchy of Quebec and to keep them united in a conservative coalition.

[ 339 ] The conservatives combined Toryism and pro-market liberalism. They generally supported an activist government and state intervention in the marketplace, and their policies were marked by noblesse oblige —a paternalistic responsibility of the elites for the less well-off.

[ 340 ] The party was known as the Progressive Conservatives from 1942 until 2003, when the party merged with the Canadian Alliance to form the Conservative Party of Canada .

[ 341 ] The conservative and autonomist Union Nationale , led by Maurice Duplessis , governed the province of Quebec in periods from 1936 to 1960 and in a close alliance with the Catholic Church, small rural elites, farmers, and business elites. This period, known by liberals as the Great Darkness , ended with the Quiet Revolution and the party went into terminal decline.

[ 342 ] By the end of the 1960s, the political debate in Quebec centred around the question of independence, opposing the social democratic and sovereignist Parti Québécois and the centrist and federalist Quebec Liberal Party , therefore marginalizing the conservative movement. Most French Canadian conservatives rallied either the Quebec Liberal Party or the Parti Québécois , while some of them still tried to offer an autonomist third-way with what was left of the Union Nationale or the more populists Ralliement créditiste du Québec and Parti national populaire , but by the 1981 provincial election politically organized conservatism had been obliterated in Quebec. It slowly started to revive at the 1994 provincial election with the Action démocratique du Québec , who served as Official opposition in the National Assembly from 2007 to 2008, before merging in 2012 with François Legault 's Coalition Avenir Québec , which took power in 2018. The modern Conservative Party of Canada has rebranded conservatism and, under the leadership of Stephen Harper , added more conservative policies.

Yoram Hazony , a scholar on the history and ideology of conservatism, identified Canadian psychologist Jordan Peterson as the most significant conservative thinker to appear in the English-speaking world in a generation.

[ 343 ] United States [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in the United States This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e The meaning of conservatism in the United States is different from the way the word is used elsewhere. Following the American Revolution , Americans rejected the core ideals of European conservatism, which were based on landed nobility, hereditary monarchy, established churches, and powerful armies. However, the prominent American conservative historian Russell Kirk argued, in his influential work The Conservative Mind (1953), that conservatism had been brought to the United States and he interpreted the American Revolution as a "conservative revolution" against royal innovation.

[ 344 ] The revolution was also supported by Anglo-Irish statesman Edmund Burke , widely known as the father of conservatism, although Burke and a few Founding Fathers , most notably John Adams , were highly critical of the French Revolution .

[ 345 ] American conservatism is a broad system of political beliefs in the United States , which is characterized by respect for American traditions, support for Judeo-Christian values , economic liberalism, anti-communism, and a defense of Western culture .

Liberty within the bounds of conformity to conservatism is a core value, with a particular emphasis on strengthening the free market , limiting the size and scope of government, and opposing high taxes as well as government or labor union encroachment on the entrepreneur.

The 1830s Democratic Party became divided between Southern Democrats , who supported slavery, secession, and later segregation, and the Northern Democrats , who tended to support the abolition of slavery, union, and equality.

[ 346 ] Many Democrats were conservative in the sense that they wanted things to be like they were in the past, especially as far as race was concerned. They generally favored poorer farmers and urban workers, and were hostile to banks, industrialization, and high tariffs.

[ 347 ] The post-Civil War Republican Party had conservative factions, but was not uniformly conservative. The Southern Democrats united with pro-segregation Northern Republicans to form the Conservative Coalition , which successfully put an end to Blacks being elected to national political office until 1967, when Edward Brooke was elected Senator from Massachusetts.

[ 348 ] [ 349 ] Conservative Democrats influenced US politics until 1994's Republican Revolution , as the American South shifted from solid Democrat to solid Republican , while maintaining its conservative values.

In late 19th century, the Democratic Party split into two factions; the more conservative Eastern business faction (led by Grover Cleveland ) favored gold, while the South and West (led by William Jennings Bryan ) wanted more silver in order to raise prices for their crops.  In 1892, Cleveland won the election on a conservative platform, which supported maintaining the gold standard, reducing tariffs, and taking a laissez-faire approach to government intervention. A severe nationwide depression ruined his plans.  Many of his supporters in 1896 supported the Gold Democrats when liberal William Jennings Bryan won the nomination and campaigned for bimetallism , money backed by both gold and silver. The conservative wing nominated Alton B. Parker in 1904, but he got very few votes.

[ 350 ] [ 351 ] The major conservative party in the United States today is the Republican Party, also known as the GOP (Grand Old Party). Modern American conservatives often consider individual liberty as the fundamental trait of democracy, as long as it conforms to conservative values, small government , deregulation of the government, and economic liberalism—which contrasts with modern American liberals , who generally place a greater value on social equality and social justice .

[ 352 ] [ 353 ] Other major priorities within American conservatism include support for the nuclear family, law and order, the right to bear arms , Christian values , anti-communism, and a defense of "Western civilization from the challenges of modernist culture and totalitarian governments".

[ 354 ] Economic conservatives and libertarians favor small government, low taxes, limited regulation, and free enterprise. Some social conservatives see traditional social values threatened by secularism; so, they support school prayer , and oppose abortion .

[ 355 ] Neoconservatives want to expand American ideals throughout the world, and show a strong support for Israel.

[ 356 ] Paleoconservatives oppose multiculturalism and press for restrictions on immigration.

[ 357 ] The conservative movement of the 1950s attempted to bring together the divergent conservative strands, stressing the need for unity to prevent the spread of "godless communism", which Reagan later labeled an " evil empire ".

[ 358 ] [ 359 ] During the Reagan administration , conservatives also supported the so-called Reagan Doctrine , under which the US as part of a Cold War strategy provided military and other support to guerrilla insurgencies that were fighting governments identified as socialist or communist. The Reagan administration also adopted neoliberalism and Reaganomics (pejoratively referred to as trickle-down economics ), resulting in the 1980s economic growth and trillion-dollar deficits. Other modern conservative positions include anti-environmentalism .

[ 360 ] On average, American conservatives desire tougher foreign policies than liberals do.

[ 361 ] The Tea Party movement , founded in 2009, proved a large outlet for populist American conservative ideas. Their stated goals included rigorous adherence to the US constitution, lower taxes, and opposition to a growing role for the federal government in health care. Electorally, it was considered a key force in Republicans reclaiming control of the US House of Representatives in 2010.

[ 362 ] [ 363 ] Long-term shifts in conservative thinking following the election of Donald Trump have been described as a "new fusionism" of traditional conservative ideology and right-wing populist themes.

[ 364 ] These have resulted in shifts towards greater support for national conservatism , [ 365 ] protectionism , [ 366 ] cultural conservatism , a more realist foreign policy, a repudiation of neoconservatism , reduced efforts to roll back entitlement programs, and a disdain for traditional checks and balances.

[ 364 ] Oceania [ edit ] Australia [ edit ] Main article: Conservatism in Australia This article is part of a series on Conservatism in Australia Ideologies Agrarianism Australian nationalism Christian right Liberal conservatism Right-wing populism Hansonism Principles Familialism Federalism Free market Free trade (factions) Limited government Loyalism Monarchism Property rights Protectionism (factions) Rule of law Intellectuals Blainey Coleman Donnelly Finnis Flint Harries Henderson Melluish Minogue Oldmeadow Santamaria Stove Windschuttle Jurists Allan Barton Callinan Craven Dawson Gleeson Gibbs Hayne Heydon Myers Steward Commentators Akerman Albrechtsen Bolt Credlin Dean Devine (Frank) Devine (Miranda) Hadley Jones Kenny Kerr Lehmann McGuinness Mundine Murray van Onselen Panahi de Percy Price Shelton Politicians Abbott Anderson Anning Barton [ citation needed ] Bernardi Bonner [ citation needed ] Canavan Christensen Petersen Dutton Hanson Howard Joyce Katter Kelly Lyons [ citation needed ] Menzies McMahon Morrison Mundine Newman Nile Palmer Price Reid Vanstone [ citation needed ] Parties Active Australian Christians Democratic Labour Party Family First (2021) Katter's Australian Liberal–National Coalition Liberal LNP National Country Liberal Party Libertarian Party Pauline Hanson's One Nation Shooters, Fishers and Farmers Trumpet of Patriots United Australia Party Defunct Christian Democratic Party Commonwealth Liberal Party Conservatives Conservative Party Conservative National Party Family First (2002) Liberal (Queensland) National (Queensland) National Defence League Nationalist Party United Australia Party Organisations Active Advance Australia Australians for Constitutional Monarchy Australian Christian Lobby Australian Jewish Association Coalition for Marriage CPAC Australia Cormack Foundation National Civic Council Ramsay Centre for Western Civilisation Defunct Australian Academy of Art Australian National Flag Association King and Empire Alliance Old Guard Think tanks Centre for Independent Studies Institute of Public Affairs Menzies Research Centre Page Research Centre Samuel Griffith Society H. R. Nicholls Society Media ADH TV The Australian Counterpoint The Daily Telegraph Herald Sun News Weekly Quadrant Quillette Sky News Australia The Argus (Defunct) Related topics Conservatism in New Zealand The Fabrication of Aboriginal History (2002) Far-right politics in Australia (factions) Liberal Party factions Moderates Centre Right National Right One Australia Politics of Australia Liberalism Conservatism portal Australia portal v t e The Liberal Party of Australia adheres to the principles of social conservatism and liberal conservatism .

[ 367 ] It is liberal in the sense of economics. Commentators explain: "In America, 'liberal' means left-of-center, and it is a pejorative term when used by conservatives in adversarial political debate. In Australia, of course, the conservatives are in the Liberal Party." [ 368 ] The National Right is the most organized and reactionary of the three factions within the party.

[ 369 ] Political scientist James Jupp writes that "[the] decline in English influences on Australian reformism and radicalism, and appropriation of the symbols of Empire by conservatives continued under the Liberal Party leadership of Sir Robert Menzies , which lasted until 1966".

[ 370 ] Other conservative parties are the National Party of Australia (a sister party of the Liberals), Family First Party , Democratic Labor Party , Shooters, Fishers and Farmers Party , Australian Conservatives , and the Katter's Australian Party .

The largest party in the country is the Australian Labor Party , and its dominant faction is Labor Right , a socially conservative element. Australia undertook significant economic reform under the Labor Party in the mid-1980s. Consequently, issues like protectionism, welfare reform, privatization, and deregulation are no longer debated in the political space as they are in Europe or North America.

New Zealand [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in New Zealand Principles Agrarianism Economic liberalism Familialism Law and order Limited government Loyalism Monarchism Property rights Protectionism Rule of law Tradition History Continuous Ministry Historic conservatism in New Zealand (pre–1930s) Politicians Whitaker Atkinson Russell Massey Bell Coates Forbes Hamilton Holland Holyoake Marshall Muldoon Bolger Richardson Shipley Birch Copeland English Brash Key Bridges Muller Collins Luxon Activists Ormond Farrar McCoskrie Slater Williams Parties Active ACT New Zealand National Party New Zealand First New Conservatives Party Defunct Reform Party United Party Democrat Party New Zealand Party Christian Heritage Party Conservative Party Christian Democrats Progressive Greens Destiny New Zealand The Kiwi Party Focus NZ The Family Party Organisations and media Auckland Future Citizens' Association Communities and Residents Coalition of Concerned Citizens Family First New Zealand Investigate Monarchy New Zealand National Front New Zealand Legion Taxpayers' Union Young Nationals Related Christian politics in New Zealand Conservatism in Australia Liberalism in New Zealand Listener letter on science (2021) Politics of New Zealand Conservatism portal New Zealand portal v t e Historic conservatism in New Zealand traces its roots to the unorganized conservative opposition to the New Zealand Liberal Party in the late 19th century. In 1909 this ideological strand found a more organized expression in the Reform Party , a forerunner to the contemporary New Zealand National Party , which absorbed historic conservative elements.

[ 371 ] The National Party, established in 1936, embodies a spectrum of tendencies, including conservative and liberal. Throughout its history, the party has oscillated between periods of conservative emphasis and liberal reform. Its stated values include "individual freedom and choice" and "limited government".

[ 372 ] In the 1980s and 1990s both the National Party and its main opposing party, the traditionally left-wing Labour Party , implemented free-market reforms.

[ 373 ] The New Zealand First party, which split from the National Party in 1993, espouses nationalist and conservative principles.

[ 374 ] Psychology [ edit ] See also: Biology and political orientation Conscientiousness [ edit ] The Big Five personality model has applications in the study of political psychology . It has been found by several studies that individuals who score high in Conscientiousness (the quality of working hard and being careful) are more likely to possess a right-wing political identification.

[ 375 ] [ 376 ] [ 377 ] Since conscientiousness is positively related to job performance, [ 378 ] [ 379 ] a 2021 study found that conservative service workers earn higher ratings, evaluations, and tips than social liberal ones.

[ 380 ] Disgust sensitivity [ edit ] A number of studies have found that disgust is tightly linked to political orientation. People who are highly sensitive to disgusting images are more likely to align with the political right and value traditional ideals of bodily and spiritual purity, tending to oppose, for example, abortion and gay marriage .

[ 381 ] [ 382 ] [ 383 ] [ 384 ] Research in the field of evolutionary psychology has also found that people who are more disgust sensitive tend to favor their own in-group over out-groups .

[ 385 ] A proposed reason for this phenomenon is that people begin to associate outsiders with disease while associating health with people similar to themselves.

[ 386 ] The higher one's disgust sensitivity is, the greater the tendency to make more conservative moral judgments. Disgust sensitivity is associated with moral hypervigilance , which means that people who have higher disgust sensitivity are more likely to think that suspects of a crime are guilty. They also tend to view them as evil, if found guilty, and endorse harsher punishment in the setting of a court.

[ 387 ] Authoritarianism [ edit ] Right-wing authoritarianism (RWA) is a set of attitudes that describe somebody who is highly submissive to their authority figures, acts aggressively in the name of said authorities, and is conformist in thought and behavior.

[ 388 ] According to psychologist Bob Altemeyer , individuals who are politically conservative tend to score high on RWA.

[ 389 ] Altemeyer's research on RWA builds on earlier work by philosopher Theodor W. Adorno , whose book The Authoritarian Personality (1950) introduced the F-scale to measure authoritarian traits.

A study done on Israeli and Palestinian students in Israel found that RWA scores of right-wing party supporters were significantly higher than those of left-wing party supporters.

[ 390 ] However, a 2005 study by psychologist H. Michael Crowson and colleagues suggested a moderate gap between RWA and other conservative positions, stating that their "results indicated that conservatism is not synonymous with RWA".

[ 391 ] According to political scientist Karen Stenner , who specializes in authoritarianism, conservatives will embrace diversity and civil liberties to the extent that they are institutionalized traditions in the social order, but they tend to be drawn to authoritarianism when public opinion is fractious and there is a loss of confidence in public institutions.

[ 392 ] Ambiguity intolerance [ edit ] In 1973, psychologist Glenn Wilson published an influential book providing evidence that a general factor underlying conservative beliefs is "fear of uncertainty".

[ 393 ] A meta-analysis of research literature found that many factors, such as intolerance of ambiguity and need for cognitive closure , contribute to the degree of one's political conservatism and its manifestations in decision-making.

[ 394 ] [ 395 ] A study by Kathleen Maclay stated that these traits "might be associated with such generally valued characteristics as personal commitment and unwavering loyalty". The research also suggested that while most people are resistant to change, social liberals are more tolerant of it.

[ 396 ] Social dominance orientation [ edit ] Social dominance orientation (SDO) is a personality trait measuring an individual's support for social hierarchy and the extent to which they desire their in-group be superior to out-groups . Psychologist Felicia Pratto and her colleagues have found evidence to support the claim that a high SDO is strongly correlated with conservative views and opposition to social engineering to promote equality. Pratto and her colleagues also found that high SDO scores were highly correlated with measures of prejudice .

[ 397 ] However, psychologist David J. Schneider argued for a more complex relationships between the three factors, writing that "correlations between prejudice and political conservatism are reduced virtually to zero when controls for SDO are instituted, suggesting that the conservatism–prejudice link is caused by SDO".

[ 398 ] British conservative political theorist Kenneth Minogue criticized Pratto's work, saying: It is characteristic of the conservative temperament to value established identities, to praise habit and to respect prejudice, not because it is irrational, but because such things anchor the darting impulses of human beings in solidities of custom which we do not often begin to value until we are already losing them. Radicalism often generates youth movements, while conservatism is a condition found among the mature, who have discovered what it is in life they most value.

[ 399 ] A 1996 study by Pratto and her colleagues examined the topic of racism . Contrary to what these theorists predicted, correlations between conservatism and racism were strongest among the most educated individuals, and weakest among the least educated. They also found that the correlation between racism and conservatism could be accounted for by their mutual relationship with SDO.

[ 400 ] Happiness [ edit ] In his book Gross National Happiness (2008), Arthur C. Brooks presents the finding that conservatives are roughly twice as happy as social liberals.

[ 401 ] A 2008 study suggested that conservatives tend to be happier than social liberals because of their tendency to justify the current state of affairs and to remain unbothered by inequalities in society.

[ 402 ] A 2012 study disputed this hypothesis, demonstrating that conservatives expressed greater personal agency (e.g., personal control, responsibility), more positive outlook (e.g., optimism, self-worth), and more transcendent moral beliefs (e.g., greater religiosity, greater moral clarity).

[ 403 ] Prominent figures [ edit ] This section contains an excessive or unencyclopedic gallery of images .

Please help improve it by removing unnecessary or indiscriminate images , and by moving relevant images beside adjacent text in accordance with Wikipedia's Manual of Style .

( March 2025 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Statesmen [ edit ] President John Adams of the United States [ 404 ] Prince Klemens von Metternich of the Austrian Empire [ 405 ] Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli of the United Kingdom [ 406 ] Chancellor Otto von Bismarck of the German Empire [ 407 ] Marshal Carl Gustaf Emil Mannerheim of Finland [ 408 ] Regent Miklós Horthy of the Kingdom of Hungary [ 409 ] Prime Minister Winston Churchill of the United Kingdom [ 410 ] Chancellor Konrad Adenauer of Germany [ 411 ] Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek of Republic of China [ 412 ] Prime Minister António de Oliveira Salazar of Portugal [ 413 ] General Charles de Gaulle of France [ 414 ] Generalissimo Francisco Franco of Spain [ 415 ] President Ronald Reagan of the United States [ 416 ] President Park Chung Hee of South Korea [ 417 ] Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew of Singapore [ 418 ] General Augusto Pinochet of Chile [ 419 ] Shah Mohammad Reza Pahlavi of the Imperial State of Iran [ 420 ] Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee of India [ 421 ] Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher of the United Kingdom [ 422 ] Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan [ 423 ] Intellectuals [ edit ] Edmund Burke [ 424 ] Hannah More [ 425 ] Joseph de Maistre [ 426 ] François-René de Chateaubriand [ 427 ] Samuel Taylor Coleridge [ 428 ] Thomas Carlyle [ 429 ] John Henry Newman [ 430 ] Alexis de Tocqueville [ 431 ] Vilfredo Pareto [ 432 ] George Santayana [ 433 ] Hu Hanmin [ 434 ] Ze'ev Jabotinsky [ 435 ] Ernst Jünger [ 436 ] Leo Strauss [ 437 ] Michael Oakeshott [ 438 ] Marcel Lefebvre [ 439 ] Russell Kirk [ 440 ] Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn [ 441 ] Thomas Sowell [ 442 ] Roger Scruton [ 443 ] Artists [ edit ] John Constable [ 444 ] Fyodor Dostoevsky [ 445 ] Paul Cézanne [ 446 ] Edith Wharton [ 447 ] W. B. Yeats [ 448 ] Igor Stravinsky [ 449 ] T. S. Eliot [ 450 ] Carl Theodor Dreyer [ 451 ] H. P. Lovecraft [ 452 ] John Ford [ 453 ] Frank Capra [ 454 ] [ 455 ] Jorge Luis Borges [ 456 ] Walt Disney [ 457 ] Salvador Dalí [ 458 ] Francis Bacon [ 459 ] [ 460 ] Ingmar Bergman [ 461 ] [ 462 ] [ 463 ] Jack Kerouac [ 464 ] [ 465 ] Yukio Mishima [ 466 ] [ 467 ] Karlheinz Stockhausen [ 468 ] [ 469 ] See also [ edit ] National variants [ edit ] Conservatism in Australia Conservatism in Bangladesh Conservatism in Brazil Conservatism in Canada Conservatism in China Conservatism in Colombia Conservatism in Germany Conservatism in Hong Kong Conservatism in India Conservatism in Japan Conservatism in Malaysia Conservatism in New Zealand Conservatism in Pakistan Conservatism in Peru Conservatism in Russia Conservatism in Serbia Conservatism in South Korea Conservatism in Taiwan Conservatism in Turkey Conservatism in the United Kingdom Conservatism in the United States Ideological variants [ edit ] Authoritarian conservatism Black conservatism Corporatist conservatism Cultural conservatism Feminist conservatism Fiscal conservatism Green conservatism LGBTQ conservatism Liberal conservatism Libertarian conservatism Moderate conservatism National conservatism Neoconservatism Paternalistic conservatism Pragmatic conservatism Progressive conservatism Populist conservatism Social conservatism Traditionalist conservatism Ultraconservatism Related topics [ edit ] Christian democracy Christian right Communitarianism Counter-revolutionary Familialism Historism Neopatriarchy Reactionary Right realism Small-c conservative Toryism Traditionalist Catholicism References [ edit ] ^ a b Hamilton, Andrew (2019).

"Conservatism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

^ Encyclopædia Britannica : "Conservatism, political doctrine that emphasizes the value of traditional institutions and practices." ^ Heywood 2004 , pp. 166–167: "In particular, conservatives have emphasized that society is held together by the maintenance of traditional institutions such as the family and by respect for an established culture, based upon religion, tradition and custom." ^ a b O'Hara, Kieron (2011).

Conservatism . London: Reaktion.

ISBN 978-1-86189-812-8 .

It is clear that conservatives are influenced not only by their ideology, but also by the political context – no surprise there – but contexts vary and so, therefore, do conservatives.

^ Neill 2021 , p. 2: "[C]onservatives favour the importance of ‘natural’ forms of authority, such as the monarchy, the church, the nation and the family." ^ Giubilei 2019 , p. 37: "Conservatives aim to conserve the natural and fundamental elements of society, which are: private property, family, the homeland, and even religion […] the right-wing conservative is such not because he wants to conserve any regime and any institutions, but rather specific institutions and particular values." ^ Fawcett 2020 , pp. 3–18.

^ Muller 1997 , p. 26.

^ Heywood 2017 , p. 63.

^ Vincent, Andrew (2009).

Modern Political Ideologies . John Wiley & Sons. p. 79.

ISBN 978-1-4443-1105-1 .

^ Nisbet 2002 , p. 15.

^ a b Kaplan, Seth D.; Klein, Yitzhak (August 20, 2020).

"The Rise of Conservatism in Israel" .

American Affairs Journal .

^ Heywood 2017 , p. 74: "While contemporary conservatives are keen to demonstrate their commitment to democratic, particularly liberal-democratic, principles, there is a tradition within conservatism that has favoured authoritarian rule, especially in continental Europe." ^ Micklethwait, John; Wooldridge, Adrian (2004).

The Right Nation: Conservative Power in America . Penguin Books Limited.

ISBN 1594200203 .

Americans who describe themselves as 'conservatives' nevertheless disagree on almost all the most fundamental questions of life. […] The Straussians at the Weekly Standard are philosophical elitists who believe that the masses need to be steered by an educated intelligentsia. The antitax crusaders who march behind Grover Norquist are populists who believe that pointy-headed intellectuals need to be given a good ducking.

^ Heywood 2017 , p. 63: "The Canadian Conservative Party adopted the title Progressive Conservative precisely to distance itself from reactionary ideas." ^ Fawcett 2020 , p. 59: "Conservatives can be radical or moderate. It depends on the state of the contest, on the stakes in the contest, and on which party is attacking, which defending." ^ Heywood 2017 , pp. 65–73.

^ Scruton, Roger (2017).

Conservatism: Ideas in Profile . Profile. pp.

137– 138.

ISBN 9781782833109 .

^ Winthrop, Norman (1983).

Liberal Democratic Theory and Its Critics . Croom Helm. pp.

163– 166.

ISBN 978-0-7099-2766-2 .

^ Hogg Baron Hailsham of St. Marylebone, Quintin (1959).

The Conservative Case . Penguin Books.

^ Heywood 2017 , p. 67.

^ Fawcett 2020 , p. 48.

^ a b c d e Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ Heywood 2004 , p. 346.

^ a b Heywood 2017 , p. 66.

^ Robin, Corey (January 8, 2012).

"The Conservative Reaction" .

The Chronicle of Higher Education . Retrieved December 23, 2016 .

^ Finseraas, Henning (2010). "What if Robin Hood is a social conservative? : How the political response to increasing inequality depends on party polarization".

Socio-Economic Review .

8 (2): 283– 306.

doi : 10.1093/ser/mwp012 .

ISSN 1475-1461 .

^ Farrell, Henry (February 1, 2018).

"Trump is a typical conservative" .

The Washington Post . Retrieved August 29, 2023 .

^ Hazony, Yoram (2022).

Conservatism: A Rediscovery . Swift. pp.

125– 133.

ISBN 9781800752344 .

^ Gómez Dávila, Nicolás (2004) [1977].

"Escolios a un Texto Implicito" . Archived from the original on November 17, 2006.

^ "hierarchy" .

Online Etymology Dictionary .

^ Giubilei 2019 , pp. 18–19.

^ Ashford, Nigel; Davies, Stephen, eds. (2011).

A Dictionary of Conservative and Libertarian Thought . Routledge. pp.

14– 17.

ISBN 978-0-415-67046-3 .

^ a b Heywood 2017 , p. 72.

^ Weber, Max (1922).

Economy and Society . p. 215.

^ Reinhard, Bendix (1977).

Max Weber: An Intellectual Portrait . University of California Press. p. 295.

ISBN 978-0-520-03194-4 .

^ Kojève 2020 , pp. 14–28.

^ Nisbet, Robert A. (1993) [1966].

The Sociological Tradition . New York: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-56000-667-1 .

^ Kojève 2020 , p. xvii.

^ Arendt, Hannah (1954).

Between Past and Future: Six Exercises in Political Thought . Viking. pp.

91– 92.

^ Kojève 2020 , pp. xviii–xix.

^ Heywood, Andrew (2003).

Political Ideologies: An Introduction (3 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan. p. 74.

ISBN 978-0-333-96178-0 .

^ Lock, F. P. (2006).

Edmund Burke. Volume II: 1784–1797 . Clarendon. p. 585.

^ Stanlis, Peter J. (2009).

Edmund Burke: Selected Writings and Speeches . Transaction. p. 18.

^ Auerbach 1959 , p. 33.

^ Kopalyan, Nerses (2010).

In Defense of Edmund Burke's Aristocratic Order . Lambert Academic Publishing.

ISBN 9783843375436 .

^ Auerbach 1959 , pp. 37–40.

^ Auerbach 1959 , pp. 52–54.

^ Auerbach 1959 , p. 41.

^ Neill 2021 , pp. 38–43.

^ Adams, Ian (2002).

Political Ideology Today (2 ed.). Manchester University Press. p. 46.

^ Fawcett 2020 , p. 20.

^ Fawcett 2020 , pp. 25–30.

^ Fawcett 2020 , pp. 5–7.

^ Pinto, António; Kallis, A. (2014).

Rethinking Fascism and Dictatorship in Europe . Springer.

ISBN 978-0-7190-2354-5 .

^ Lewis, David.

Illusions of Grandeur: Mosley, Fascism, and British Society, 1931-81 . Manchester University Press. p. 218.

^ Freeden, Sargent & Stears 2013 , pp. 294–297.

^ Kater, Michael H. (2008).

Never Sang for Hitler: The Life and Times of Lotte Lehmann, 1888–1976 . Cambridge University Press. p. 167.

ISBN 978-0521873925 .

^ a b Hoffmann, Stanley (1974). "The Vichy Circle of French Conservatives".

Decline or Renewal? : France since 1930s . Viking. pp.

3– 25.

ISBN 0670262358 .

^ a b Lojkó, Miklós (2005).

Meddling in Middle Europe: Britain and the 'Lands Between, 1919–1925 . Central European University Press. p. 180.

ISBN 9637326235 .

^ Sørensen, Gert; Mallett, Robert (2002).

International Fascism,1919-45 . Routledge. p. 159.

ISBN 978-0714682624 .

^ Graham, Malbone W. (1929).

"The "Dictatorship" in Yugoslavia" .

American Political Science Review .

23 (2): 449– 459.

doi : 10.2307/1945227 .

JSTOR 1945227 .

^ Howard J. Wiarda, Margaret MacLeish Mott.

Catholic Roots and Democratic Flowers: Political Systems in Spain and Portugal.

Westport, CT: Greenwood Publishing Group, 2001. p. 49 ^ Bischof 2003 , p. 26.

^ Stanley G. Payne.

Fascism in Spain, 1923–1977 . Madison: Wisconsin University Press, 1999. pp. 77–102.

^ a b Blamires, Cyprian (2006).

World Fascism: A Historical Encyclopedia, Volume 1 . ABC-CLIO. p. 21.

ISBN 1576079406 .

^ Pashanko, Dimitroff (1993).

King of Mercy: Boris III of Bulgaria, 1894–1943 . Wexford & Barrow. p. 243.

ISBN 9781879593695 .

^ Blinkhorn 1990 , p. 10.

^ Tomasevich, Jozo (2001).

War and Revolution in Yugoslavia, 1941–1945: Occupation and Collaboration . Stanford University Press. pp.

33– 34.

ISBN 978-0-8047-3615-2 .

^ Butnaru, Ion C., The Silent Holocaust: Romania and Its Jews (1992), Praeger/Greenwood: Westport, pp. 62–63 ^ a b Balfour, Michael (1964).

The Kaiser and his Times . Houghton Mifflin. p. 409.

^ Kay, Hugh (1970).

Salazar and Modern Portugal . Hawthorn Books. p. 68.

ISBN 0413267008 .

^ Seymour M. Lipset, "Social Stratification and 'Right-Wing Extremism ' " British Journal of Sociology 10#4 (1959), pp. 346–382 on-line Archived April 22, 2022, at the Wayback Machine ^ Fawcett 2020 , p. 263.

^ Remmer 1989 , p. 10.

^ Remmer 1989 , pp. 5–6.

^ a b von Kuehnelt-Leddihn, Erik (April 1, 1968).

"Latin America In Perspective" .

Foundation for Economic Education .

^ Vock, Ido (June 27, 2024).

"Bolivia: Soldiers storm presidential palace in apparent coup attempt" .

BBC .

Archived from the original on June 27, 2024 . Retrieved June 29, 2024 .

^ Rachman, Gideon (2022).

The Age of The Strongman . Vintage.

ISBN 9781847926418 .

^ Grigsby, Ellen (2008).

Analyzing Politics . Cengage Learning. pp.

108– 109, 112, 347.

ISBN 978-0-495-50112-1 .

^ a b McAnulla, Stuart (2006).

British Politics: A Critical Introduction . A&C Black. p. 71.

ISBN 978-0-8264-6155-1 .

^ Giubilei 2019 , p. 21.

^ Nisbet 2002 , pp. 28–31.

^ Ribuffo, Leo P. (January 14, 2011).

"Twenty Suggestions for Studying the Right Now that Studying the Right Is Trendy" .

Historically Speaking .

12 (1): 6.

doi : 10.1353/hsp.2011.0013 .

^ Freeman, Robert M. (1999).

Correctional Organization and Management: Public Policy Challenges, Behavior, and Structure . Elsevier. p. 109.

ISBN 978-0-7506-9897-9 .

^ Heywood 2017 , p. 92.

^ Freeden, Sargent & Stears 2013 , pp. 465–469.

^ Heywood 2017 , p. 90.

^ Mandal, V. C. (2007).

Dictionary of Public Administration . Sarup & Sons. p. 306.

ISBN 978-81-7625-784-8 .

^ "In Defense of Nations" .

National Review . September 13, 2018.

Archived from the original on June 22, 2022 . Retrieved October 29, 2018 .

^ Heywood, Andrew (2013).

Politics . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 34.

ISBN 978-1-137-27244-7 .

^ Heywood 2017 , pp. 76–77.

^ Dunleavy, Patrick; et al. (2000).

British Political Science: Fifty Years of Political Studies . Wiley-Blackwell. pp.

107– 108.

^ Robert Blake (1967).

Disraeli (2 ed.). Eyre & Spottiswoode. p. 524.

^ Russel, Trevor (1978).

The Tory Party: Its Policies, Divisions and Future . Penguin. p. 167.

^ John Alden Nichols.

Germany after Bismarck, the Caprivi era, 1890–1894: Issue 5 . Harvard University Press, 1958. p. 260 ^ a b Jonathan Lurie. William Howard Taft: The Travails of a Progressive Conservative. New York, New York, US: Cambridge University Press, 2012. p.196 ^ Bischof, Günter, ed. (1995).

Eisenhower: A Centenary Assessment . LSU Press. p. 98.

ISBN 9780807119426 .

^ a b Hugh Segal. The Right Balance. Victoria, British Columbia, Canada: Douglas & McIntyre, 2011. pp. 113–148 ^ Bullock, Alan; Trombley, Stephen; Lawrie, Alf (1999).

The New Fontana Dictionary of Modern Thought (3 ed.). HarperCollins. p. 729.

ISBN 978-0-00-255871-6 .

^ "reactionary" .

Merriam-Webster . May 9, 2023.

^ McLean & McMillan 2009 .

^ Robin, Corey (2018).

The Reactionary Mind: Conservatism from Edmund Burke to Donald Trump . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0190692001 .

This book is about the second half of the story, the demarche, and the political ideas – variously called conservative, reactionary, revanchist, counterrevolutionary – that grow out of and give rise to it.

^ Lilla, Mark (2016). "Introduction".

The Shipwrecked Mind: On Political Reaction . New York Review of Books. pp. xii.

ISBN 978-1590179024 .

Reactionaries are not conservatives. This is the first thing to be understood about them. They are, in their way, just as radical as revolutionaries and just as firmly in the grip of historical imaginings.

^ Wilson, Francis (1951).

The Case for Conservatism . Transaction. p. 2.

ISBN 978-1412842341 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ a b Siegfried, Heit; Johnston, Otto W. (1980). "German Romanticism: An Ideological Response to Napoleon".

Consortium on Revolutionary Europe 1750–1850: Proceedings . Vol. 9. pp.

187– 197.

^ King, Peter (2012).

Reaction: Against the Modern World . Andrews UK Limited.

^ Ferraresi, Franco (1987). "Julius Evola: Tradition, Reaction, and the Radical Right".

European Journal of Sociology .

28 (1): 107– 151.

doi : 10.1017/S0003975600005415 .

^ Campbell, Francis Stuart. "Credo of a Reactionary".

The American Mercury .

^ Lukacs, John (2000).

Confessions of an Original Sinner . St. Augustine's Press.

ISBN 9781890318123 .

^ Andersen, Margaret L., Taylor, Howard Francis.

Sociology: Understanding a Diverse Society Archived December 5, 2022, at the Wayback Machine Cengage Learning, 4th Ed. (2005), pp. 469–470.

ISBN 978-0-534-61716-5 ^ "So Christians do not approve of the taking of illegal drugs, including most recreational drugs, especially those which can alter the mind and make people incapable of praying or being alert to God" . Archived from the original on October 20, 2017.

^ Petersen, David L. (2005). "Genesis and Family Values".

Journal of Biblical Literature .

124 (1).

^ Caciagli, Mario; Robeck, Cecil M; Yong, Amos (2008). "Christian democracy".

The Cambridge History of Twentieth-Century Political Thought . Cambridge University Press. pp.

165– 180.

ISBN 9781139053600 .

^ Riff, Michael (1987).

Dictionary of Modern Political Ideologies . Manchester University Press. p. 34.

ISBN 0-7190-3289-X .

^ a b c Kselman, Thomas; Buttigieg, Thomas, eds. (2003).

European Christian Democracy: Historical Legacies and Comparative Perspectives . University of Notre Dame Press. p. 122.

^ Layton-Henry, Zig, ed. (1982).

Conservative Politics in Western Europe . St. Martin's. pp.

131– 133.

ISBN 9780312164188 .

^ Hanley, David, ed. (1994).

Christian Democracy in Europe: A Comparative Perspective . Pinter Publishers. pp.

56– 57.

ISBN 9781855670860 .

^ Heywood 2017 , p. 69.

^ The Next Digital Divide Archived June 6, 2011, at the Wayback Machine (utne article) ^ "The World & I" .

The World & I . Vol. 1, no. 5. Washington Times Corp. 1986 . Retrieved August 19, 2011 .

militant atheism was incompatible with conservatism ^ Davies, Peter; Lynch, Derek (2002).

The Routledge Companion to Fascism and the Far Right . Psychology.

ISBN 978-0-415-21494-0 .

In addition, conservative Christians often endorsed far-right regimes as the lesser of two evils, especially when confronted with militant atheism in the USSR.

^ Berger, Peter L.; Davie, Grace; Fokas, Effie (2008).

Religious America, Secular Europe?: A Theme and Variations . Ashgate.

ISBN 978-0-7546-6011-8 . Retrieved August 19, 2011 .

If anything the reverse is true: moral conservatives continue to oppose secular liberals on a wide range of issues.

^ Frohnen 2006 , pp. 870–875.

^ Cram, Ralph Adams (1936).

"Invitation to Monarchy" .

^ Lind, William S. (2006).

"The Prussian Monarchy Stuff" .

LewRockwell.com . Center for Libertarian Studies.

^ Leslie Wayne (January 6, 2018).

"What's the Cure for Ailing Nations? More Kings and Queens, Monarchists Say" .

The New York Times .

^ Ware 1996 , pp. 25–26.

^ Kelly, P. J. (2013).

The Politics Book . DK. pp.

23– 24.

ISBN 978-1-4093-6445-0 .

OCLC 828097386 .

^ Harari, Yuval Noah (2015).

Sapiens: A Brief History of Humankind . Penguin Random House. p. 219.

ISBN 978-0-09-959008-8 .

^ Reilly, Michael (October 17, 2021).

"Taiwan: Will it retain independence or be taken over?" .

The Island Online .

Archived from the original on November 12, 2021 . Retrieved May 30, 2024 .

^ Lu, Xing (2004).

Rhetoric of the Chinese Cultural Revolution: The Impact on Chinese Thought . p. 2.

^ Yin, Hongbiao (November 1996).

"Ideological and political tendencies of factions in the red guard movement" .

Journal of Contemporary China .

5 (13): 269– 280.

doi : 10.1080/10670569608724255 . Retrieved June 11, 2023 .

^ "The Communist Party is redefining what it means to be Chinese" .

The Economist . August 17, 2017 . Retrieved May 30, 2024 .

^ Schneider, David K. (2016). "China's New Legalism".

The National Interest (143): 19– 25.

JSTOR 26557304 .

^ Johnson, Ian (October 18, 2017).

"Forget Marx and Mao. Chinese City Honors Once-Banned Confucian" .

The New York Times . Retrieved May 30, 2024 .

^ Melvin, Sheila (August 29, 2007).

"Yu Dan and China's Return to Confucius" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on September 8, 2014 . Retrieved August 18, 2024 .

^ Lyons, N.S. (October 11, 2021).

"The Triumph and Terror of Wang Huning" .

Palladium . Retrieved June 19, 2024 .

^ Zi, Yang (July 6, 2016).

"Xi Jinping and China's Traditionalist Restoration" .

The Jamestown Foundation . Retrieved June 22, 2024 .

^ Cai, Jane (June 12, 2023).

"How China's Xi Jinping promotes mix of Marxism and traditional culture to further Communist Party and 'Chinese dream' " .

South China Morning Post .

Archived from the original on June 12, 2023 . Retrieved June 22, 2024 .

^ Witt, Michael A.; Redding, Gordon (2013). "China: Authoritarian Capitalism".

The Oxford Handbook of Asian Business Systems . OUP Oxford.

ISBN 9780199654925 .

^ Bramall, Chris (2008).

Chinese Economic Development . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-134-19051-5 .

^ Xu, Aymeric (2020).

"What Made Chinese Conservatism a Cultural Movement: A Case Study of the Southern Society" .

Twentieth-Century China .

45 (3): 331– 350.

doi : 10.1353/tcc.2020.0028 .

ISSN 1940-5065 .

^ "Right wing politics in India, by Archana Venkatesh" . osu.edu. October 1, 2019 . Retrieved March 14, 2024 .

^ Rao, Jaithirth (2019).

The Indian Conservative : A History of Indian Right-Wing Thought . Juggernaut. p. 280.

ISBN 978-9353450625 .

^ "BJP v CCP: The rise of the world's biggest political party" .

Sydney Morning Herald . October 16, 2022.

Archived from the original on July 1, 2023 . Retrieved July 1, 2023 .

^ "How BJP became world's largest political party in 4 decades" .

The Times of India . April 16, 2022.

Archived from the original on June 28, 2023 . Retrieved July 1, 2023 .

^ "Narendra Modi's Message to America" .

National Review . June 23, 2022.

Archived from the original on July 1, 2023 . Retrieved July 1, 2023 .

His Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP, or "Indian People's Party") is on the right of the Indian political spectrum. It is the largest political party in the world, with more members than the Chinese Communist Party, and supports Hindu nationalist ideology and economic development.

^ Kumari, Abhilasha; Kidwai, Sabina (1998).

Crossing the Sacred Line: Women's Search for Political Power . Orient Blackswan. p. 83.

ISBN 978-81-250-1434-8 .

^ Chatterji, Angana P.; Hansen, Thomas Blom; Jaffrelot, Christophe (2019).

Majoritarian State: How Hindu Nationalism Is Changing India . Oxford University Press. pp.

100– 130.

ISBN 978-0-19-007817-1 .

Archived from the original on April 14, 2023 . Retrieved June 22, 2024 .

^ Hansen, Thomas Blom (2001).

The Saffron Wave: Democracy and Hindu Nationalism in Modern India . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9781400803422 .

^ Cyrus Ghani; Sīrūs Ghanī (January 6, 2001).

Iran and the Rise of the Reza Shah: From Qajar Collapse to Pahlavi Power . I.B.Tauris. pp. 147–.

ISBN 978-1-86064-629-4 .

^ "1979: Iran and America" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

^ Afkhami, Gholam-Reza (2009).

The Life and Times of the Shah . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0-520-94216-5 .

Archived from the original on January 19, 2023 . Retrieved July 2, 2024 .

^ Barbara Ann Rieffer-Flanagan, ed. (March 22, 2013).

Evolving Iran: An Introduction to Politics and Problems in the Islamic Republic . Georgetown University Press. p. 69.

On the political spectrum neoconservatives, also sometimes referred to as hard-line conservatives or principlists, are on the far right. Reformists, sometimes called the Islamic left, are the furthest away from the neoconservatives, with pragmatic conservatives falling somewhere in between the two.

^ Kazemzadeh, Masoud (2008), "Intra-Elite Factionalism and the 2004 Majles Elections in Iran", Middle Eastern Studies , 44 (2): 189– 214, doi : 10.1080/00263200701874867 ^ Shindler, Colin (2015).

The Rise of the Israeli Right: from Odessa to Hebron . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521193788 .

^ Kershner, Isabel; Kingsley, Patrick (November 1, 2022).

"Israel Election: Exit Polls Show Netanyahu With Edge in Israel's Election" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved November 6, 2022 .

^ Maltz, Judy (November 3, 2022).

"Will Israel Become a Theocracy? Religious Parties Are Election's Biggest Winners" .

Haaretz . Retrieved November 6, 2022 .

^ Thayer, N. B. (2015).

How the Conservatives Rule Japan . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9781400871414 .

^ Pempel, T. J. (1982).

Policy and Politics in Japan: Creative Conservatism . Temple University Press.

ISBN 978-0-87722-250-7 .

^ Heywood 2017 , pp. 63–64.

^ "Japan as a One-Party State: The Future for Koizumi and Beyond" . Wilson Center. February 15, 2021. Archived from the original on February 15, 2021 . Retrieved April 19, 2024 .

^ a b "Conservatism" .

Encyclopædia Vritannica . June 26, 2024 . Retrieved August 18, 2024 .

^ Mounsey, Augustus (1879).

The Satsuma Rebellion: An Episode of Modern Japanese History .

^ "1930s Japan: A Time of Turmoil and Transformation" .

Wrightwood 659 . Retrieved May 27, 2024 .

^ Sieg, Linda (November 19, 2019).

"Mission unaccomplished — Abe's drive to revise pacifist Constitution" .

The Japan Times . Retrieved April 18, 2024 .

^ "5 Things to know about Japan's emperor and imperial family" .

The Seattle Times . August 8, 2016 . Retrieved April 19, 2024 .

^ Todd, Emmanuel (1985).

The Explanation of Ideology: Family Structures and Social Systems . Blackwell.

^ "Overview of the Public Opinion Survey on Diplomacy (page 4)" (PDF) .

Public Relations Office, Government of Japan . December 2017.

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 1, 2021.

^ McClain, James L. (2002).

Japan: A Modern History . W. W. Norton & Company. p. 390.

ISBN 0393041565 .

^ Waddington, Lorna L. (2007). "The Anti-Komintern and Nazi Anti-Bolshevik Propaganda in the 1930s".

Journal of Contemporary History .

42 (4): 573– 594.

doi : 10.1177/0022009407081488 .

^ Kapur, Nick (2018).

"The Empire Strikes Back? : The 1968 Meiji Centennial Celebrations and the Revival of Japanese Nationalism" .

Japanese Studies .

38 (3): 307.

doi : 10.1080/10371397.2018.1543533 .

^ Kapur, Nick (2018).

Japan at the Crossroads: Conflict and Compromise after Anpo . Harvard University Press. p. 10.

ISBN 978-0674984424 .

^ "Abe's reshuffle promotes right-wingers" .

koreajoongangdaily.joins.com . September 4, 2014 . Retrieved April 19, 2024 .

^ "The Western World" .

WorldAtlas . April 26, 2021.

^ Inose, Naoki; Sato, Hiroaki (2012).

Persona: A Biography of Yukio Mishima . Stone Bridge Press. pp.

521– 522.

ISBN 978-1-61172-524-7 .

^ Mutalib, Hussin (2004).

Parties and Politics. A Study of Opposition Parties and the PAP in Singapore . Marshall Cavendish. p. 20.

ISBN 981-210-408-9 .

^ Tin Seng, Lim.

"Shared Values" .

www.nlb.gov.sg .

National Library Board . Archived from the original on January 8, 2024 . Retrieved January 8, 2024 .

^ Oliver, Steven; Ostwald, Kai (2018).

"Explaining Elections in Singapore: Dominant Party Resilience and Valence Politics" .

Journal of East Asian Studies .

18 (2): 129– 156.

doi : 10.1017/jea.2018.15 .

^ Time for Singapore to Grow Up , Bloomberg News , March 29, 2015 ^ Lee Kuan Yew: Singapore's 'founding father' dies in hospital aged 91 after suffering with pneumonia , Daily Mirror , March 22, 2015 ^ 5 Quotes From Singapore's Lee Kuan Yew , 23 March 2015 ^ Kim, Byung-Kook; Vogel, E. F. (2013).

The Park Chung Hee Era: The Transformation of South Korea . Harvard University Press. pp.

200– 205.

ISBN 978-0-674-06106-4 .

^ von Kuehnelt-Leddihn 1943 , p. 124.

^ Nisbet 2002 , pp. 34–36.

^ Neill 2021 , pp. 70–76.

^ Blinkhorn 1990 , p. 7.

^ Heywood 2017 , p. 82.

^ "Nationalism and Europe's Turn to the Right" .

IWM WEBSITE . Retrieved June 23, 2024 .

^ Gordon Craig, "The System of Alliances and the Balance of Power." in J.P.T. Bury, ed., The New Cambridge Modern History, Vol. 10: The Zenith of European Power, 1830–70 (1960), p. 266.

^ von Kuehnelt-Leddihn 1943 , pp. 139–140.

^ Brook-Shepherd, Gordon (1996).

The Austrians: A Thousand-Year Odyssey . HarperCollins. p. 283.

ISBN 0-00-638255-X .

^ Pyrah, Robert (2007).

"Enacting Encyclicals? Cultural Politics and 'Clerical Fascism' in Austria, 1933–1938" .

Totalitarian Movements and Political Religions .

8 (2): 369– 382.

doi : 10.1080/14690760701321338 – via Taylor & Francis Online.

^ Congdon, Lee (March 26, 2012).

"Kuehnelt-Leddihn and American Conservatism" .

Crisis Magazine . Retrieved December 23, 2023 .

^ Binder, Dieter A. (2009).

The Christian Corporatist State . Routledge. p. 73.

ISBN 9781351315203 .

^ Bischof 2003 .

^ von Kuehnelt-Leddihn 1943 , p. 210.

^ Zoch, Irene (February 22, 2004).

"Habsburgs demand return of estates seized by Nazis in 1938" .

The Daily Telegraph .

Archived from the original on January 12, 2022 . Retrieved August 18, 2024 .

^ Dan van der Vat (July 4, 2011).

"Otto von Habsburg obituary" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on September 30, 2013 . Retrieved August 18, 2024 .

^ Jelavich, Barbara (1989).

Modern Austria: Empire & Republic 1815–1986 . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-31625-1 .

^ "Sebastian Kurz, der "junge Metternich" " .

kurier.at (in German). January 16, 2014.

Archived from the original on May 18, 2021 . Retrieved December 15, 2023 .

^ Annesley 2005 , p. 124.

^ Zig Layton-Henry, ed.

Conservative Politics in Western Europe (St. Martin's Press, 1982) ^ Paul Lucardie and Hans-Martien Ten Napel, " Between confessionalism and liberal conservatism: the Christian Democratic parties of Belgium and the Netherlands Archived June 23, 2020, at the Wayback Machine ." in David Hanley, ed.

Christian Democracy in Europe: A Comparative Perspective (London: Pinter 1994) pp. 51–70 ^ Philippe Siuberski (October 7, 2014).

"Belgium gets new government with Michel as PM" .

Yahoo News . AFP . Retrieved November 7, 2014 .

^ a b Skov, Christian Egander.

"Konservatisme" .

danmarkshistorien.dk (in Danish) . Retrieved July 17, 2023 .

^ euconedit (September 17, 2023).

"Nordic Conservative Homecoming" .

europeanconservative.com . Retrieved December 3, 2023 .

^ Annesley 2005 , p. 68.

^ Kosiara-Pedersen, Karina (July 10, 2023).

"Det Konservative Folkeparti" .

Den Store Danske (in Danish) . Retrieved July 17, 2023 .

^ Abildlund, Andreas (October 9, 2015).

"Den konservative højrefløj er gået i udbrud" .

Information (in Danish).

^ Folketinget : "Partiernes historie" Archived March 13, 2020, at the Wayback Machine ^ Det Konservative Folkeparti : "Vi elsker Kongehuset" Archived March 19, 2022, at the Wayback Machine ^ Siaroff 2000 , p. 243.

^ Helsingin Sanomat , October 11, 2004, International poll: Anti-Russian sentiment runs very strong in Finland. Only Kosovo has more negative attitude ^ Jussi M. Hanhimäki (1997).

Containing Coexistence: America, Russia, and the "Finnish Solution" . Kent State UP. p. 4.

ISBN 9780873385589 .

^ The Finnish Civil War 1918: History, Memory, Legacy . BRILL. 2014. p. 166.

ISBN 978-90-04-28071-7 .

^ Levitsky, Steven; Ziblatt, Daniel (2018).

How Democracies Die . Crown.

ISBN 9781524762933 .

^ Woodwards, E. L. (1963).

Three Studies In European Conservatism: Metternich, Guizot, The Catholic Church In The Nineteenth Century . Archon Books.

ISBN 9780714615295 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Fawcett 2020 , pp. 20–21.

^ Heywood 2017 , p. 75.

^ Roger Price (2005).

A Concise History of France . Cambridge UP. p. 225.

ISBN 978-0-521-84480-2 .

^ Judaken, Jonathan (2005). "Action Française". In Richard S. Levy (ed.).

Antisemitism: A Historical Encyclopedia of Prejudice and Persecution . ABC-CLIO. p. 1.

ISBN 978-1-85109-439-4 .

^ Larkin, Maurice (2002).

Religion, Politics and Preferment in France since 1890: La Belle Epoque and its Legacy . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0521522706 .

^ Viereck, Peter (2005).

Conservatism Revisited: The Revolt Against Ideology . Transaction Publishers. p. 205.

ISBN 978-0-7658-0576-8 .

^ Richard Vinen, "The Parti républicain de la Liberté and the Reconstruction of French Conservatism, 1944–1951", French History (1993) 7#2 pp. 183–204 ^ Ware 1996 , p. 32.

^ Hauss, Charles (2008).

Comparative Politics: Domestic Responses to Global Challenges . Cengage Learning. p. 116.

ISBN 978-0-495-50109-1 .

^ "Eric Zemmour: Meet the right-wing TV pundit set to shake up France's presidential race" .

euronews.com . October 13, 2021 . Retrieved October 30, 2021 .

^ Liedke, Herbert R. (1958).

"The German Romanticists and Karl Ludwig von Haller's Doctrines of European Restoration" .

The Journal of English and Germanic Philology .

57 (3): 371– 393.

ISSN 0363-6941 .

JSTOR 27707117 .

^ Tingsten, Herbert (1966). "De kontrarevolutionära idéerna i Tyskland".

De konservativa idéerna . Aldus/Bonniers. pp.

42– 73.

OCLC 1166587654 .

^ Eyck, Erich (1964).

Bismarck and the German Empire . pp.

58– 68.

^ Steinberg, Jonathan (2011).

Bismarck: A Life . Oxford University Press. pp.

416– 417.

ISBN 978-0-19-978252-9 .

^ Kersbergen, Kees van; Vis, Barbara (2013).

Comparative Welfare State Politics: Development, Opportunities, and Reform . Cambridge UP. p. 38.

ISBN 978-1-107-65247-7 .

^ Moore, Robert Laurence; Vaudagna, Maurizio (2003).

The American Century in Europe . Cornell University Press. p. 226.

ISBN 978-0-8014-4075-5 .

^ Frankel, Richard (2003). "From the Beer Halls to the Halls of Power: The Cult of Bismarck and the Legitimization of a New German Right, 1898–1945".

German Studies Review .

26 (3): 543– 560.

doi : 10.2307/1432746 .

JSTOR 1432746 .

^ Stern, Fritz (1961).

The Politics of Cultural Despair: A Study in the Rise of the Germanic Ideology . University of California Press.

ISBN 978-0520026261 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Woods, Roger (1996).

The Conservative Revolution in the Weimar Republic . St. Martin's Press. p. 29.

ISBN 0-333-65014-X .

^ Ringer, Fritz K. (1990).

The Decline of the German Mandarins: The German Academic Community, 1890–1933 . University Press of New England. p. 201.

^ Shirer, William L. (1960).

The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich . New York City: Simon and Schuster. p. 372.

ISBN 0671624202 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Sally, Razeen (2002).

Classical Liberalism and International Economic Order . Routledge. p. 106.

ISBN 0-415-16493-1 .

^ Gregg, Samuel (2010).

Wilhelm Röpke's Political Economy . Edward Elgar Publishing Limited. p. 29.

ISBN 978-1-84844-222-1 .

^ "The Maturing of a Humane Economist Modern Age" . March 23, 2007. Archived from the original on March 23, 2007 . Retrieved July 11, 2021 .

^ Michael John Williams (February 12, 2020).

"The German Center Does Not Hold" .

New Atlanticist . Archived from the original on June 20, 2020 . Retrieved March 7, 2020 .

^ "Germany bewildered about how to halt the rise of the AfD" .

POLITICO . October 3, 2023 . Retrieved March 14, 2024 .

^ Penniman, Howard Rae.

Greece at the polls: the national elections of 1974 and 1977 . Washington: American Enterprise Institute, 1981.

ISBN 978-0-8447-3434-7 pp. 49–59 ^ Deák, István (1963). "Hungary". In Roger, Hans (ed.).

The European Right: A Historical Profile . p. 364.

^ "Hungary: One-party rule" .

The Guardian (editorial). London. January 5, 2011.

^ Castle, Stephen (April 22, 2002).

"Populist premier set for defeat in Hungarian election" .

The Independent . London.

Archived from the original on August 17, 2022.

^ "A populist's lament: Viktor Orbán has made Hungary a ripe target for doubters" , Politics.hu , Hungary, November 22, 2011, archived from the original on November 16, 2017 , retrieved September 3, 2018 ^ Grofman, Bernard and Lijpart, Arend, editors.

The evolution of electoral and party systems in the Nordic countries . New York: Agathon Press, 2002. "The Icelandic electoral system 1844–1999" by Olafur Th. Hardarson ISBN 978-0-87586-138-8 , pp. 107–108 ^ Oireachtas, Houses of the (June 17, 1931).

"Orders of the Day. – Local Government Bill, 1931—Second Stage. – Dáil Éireann (6th Dáil) – Wednesday, 17 Jun 1931 – Houses of the Oireachtas" .

www.oireachtas.ie .

^ Kissane, Bill (April 1, 2007).

"Éamon de Valéra and the Survival of Democracy in Inter-War Ireland" .

Journal of Contemporary History .

42 (2): 213– 226.

doi : 10.1177/0022009407075554 .

^ Ryan, Louise (December 1, 1998).

"Constructing 'Irishwoman': Modern girls and comely maidens" .

Irish Studies Review .

6 (3): 263– 272.

doi : 10.1080/09670889808455611 .

^ "Micheál Martin: Fianna Fáil has more to offer than simplistic and divisive right-left politics" .

The Irish Times .

^ "NYC Department of Records – Notable New Yorkers – Eamon De Valera" . February 8, 2004. Archived from the original on February 8, 2004.

^ Viola, Donatella M. (August 14, 2015).

Routledge Handbook of European Elections . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-50363-7 .

^ Prat, Cesáreo R. Aguilera de (2009).

Political Parties and European Integration . Peter Lang.

ISBN 978-90-5201-535-4 .

^ Malekmian, Shamim (January 1, 1970).

"How the Government Created an Opening for Anti-Immigration Activists to Exploit in East Wall" .

Dublin Inquirer .

^ Parlato, Giuseppe (2008).

La sinistra fascista: storia di un progetto mancato [ Fascist left: history of a failed project.

] (in Italian). Il Mulino Ricerca.

ISBN 978-8815127051 .

^ De Grand, Alexander (2000).

Italian Fascism: its Origins and Development (3rd ed.). University of Nebraska Press. p. 145.

^ Sternhill, Zeev (1998). "Fascism". In Griffin, Roger (ed.).

International Fascism: Theories, Causes, and the New Consensus . London, England; New York: Arnold Publishers. p. 32.

^ Andrain, Charles; Apter, David (1994).

Political Protest and Social Change: Analyzing Politics . Springer. p. 53.

ISBN 9780230377004 .

^ Fella, Stefano; Ruzza, Carlo (2009).

Re-inventing the Italian Right: Territorial Politics, Populism and 'Post-Fascism' . Routledge.

^ Bocca, Giorgio (1981).

Storia della Repubblica italiana (in Italian). Rizzoli. pp.

14– 16.

^ Pepijn Corduwener, The Problem of Democracy in Postwar Europe: Political Actors and the Formation of the Postwar Model of Democracy in France, West Germany and Italy (Taylor & Francis, 2016), pp. 15, 17, 27, 40, 42.

^ Mack Smith, Denis (1997).

Modern Italy: A Political History . pp. 491––496.

^ Daniele Albertazzi, et al., eds.

Resisting the tide: cultures of opposition under Berlusconi (2001–06) (Bloomsbury Publishing USA, 2009).

^ Antonino Castaldo, and Luca Verzichelli. "Technocratic populism in Italy after Berlusconi: The trendsetter and his disciples." Politics and Governance 8.4 (2020): 485–495.

^ Urwin, Derek W.

A Dictionary of European History and Politics, 1945–1995 . London: Pearson, 1996.

ISBN 978-0-582-25874-7 p. 76 ^ "Netherlands: Geert Wilders, the Dutch "Cricket" " . March 21, 2013.

Archived from the original on January 26, 2022 . Retrieved December 23, 2023 .

^ Heidar, Knut (2001).

Norway: Elites on Trial . Boulder Westview Press. pp.

66– 67.

ISBN 978-0-8133-3200-0 .

^ Francis Sejersted Høyrebølgen Archived December 19, 2013, at the Wayback Machine Store norske leksikon. Retrieved December 18, 2013 (in Norwegian) ^ a b c d e Dudek, Antoni (2023).

Historia polityczna Polski 1989–2023 [ Polish political history 1989–2023 ] (in Polish). Warsaw: Wydawnictwo Naukowe Scholar.

ISBN 978-83-67450-66-9 .

^ a b Kaczyński, Jarosław (September 30, 2011).

Polska naszych marzeń . Drukarnia Akapit.

ISBN 9788378250005 .

^ a b c Cat-Mackiewicz, Stanisław (2012).

Historia Polski od 11 listopada 1918 do 17 września 1939 . Universitas.

ISBN 97883-242-3740-1 .

^ Dmowski, Roman (1903).

Myśli Nowoczesnego Polaka [ The Notions of a Modern Pole ] (in Polish). Capital.

ISBN 978-83-64037-04-7 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ " 'Retraditionalization' and Sacralization of 'Worldview Matters': The Politics of Values in Eastern Europe" .

ecpr.eu . Retrieved May 27, 2024 .

^ Sergei Prozorov, "Russian conservatism in the Putin presidency: The dispersion of a hegemonic discourse." Journal of Political Ideologies 10.2 (2005): 121–143 online Archived June 6, 2021, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Tiounine, Margot; Hannen, Tom, eds. (June 27, 2019).

"Liberalism 'has outlived its purpose' — President Putin speaks exclusively to the Financial Times" .

Financial Times . Retrieved October 14, 2023 .

^ Marlene Laruelle, "The Izborsky Club, or the new conservative avant‐garde in Russia." The Russian Review 75.4 (2016): 626–644.

^ Sirke Mäkinen, "Surkovian narrative on the future of Russia: making Russia a world leader." Journal of Communist Studies and Transition Politics 27#2 (2011): 143–165.

^ Michel, Casey (February 9, 2017).

"How Russia Became the Leader of the Global Christian Right" .

Politico .

^ Paterson, Tom (November 9, 2021).

"Why Putin Goes to Church" .

The Cambridge Language Collective .

^ Mark Woods, "How the Russian Orthodox Church is backing Vladimir Putin's new world order" Christian Today March 3, 2016 Archived March 4, 2016, at the Wayback Machine ^ Andrew Higgins, "In Expanding Russian Influence, Faith Combines With Firepower", New York Times Sept 13, 2016 Archived November 10, 2019, at the Wayback Machine ^ Thomas Jansen; Steven Van Hecke (2011).

At Europe's Service: The Origins and Evolution of the European People's Party . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 51.

ISBN 978-3-642-19414-6 .

^ a b O'Leary, Elisabeth (January 16, 2014).

"Spanish ruling party rebels launch new conservative party" .

Reuters . Retrieved April 18, 2018 .

^ Casals, Xavier (April 1, 2019).

"Catalunya i 'la España viva' de Vox" .

Política & Prosa (5).

^ "Vox elige a Vidal-Quadras como su primer presidente" .

Crónica Global . March 8, 2014.

^ Rodhe, Edvard (1942).

Geijer och samhället : en studie i svensk tradition . p. 131.

OCLC 873899895 .

^ Smart, Ninian (1964).

"Reviewed work: Philosophy of Religion, Christopher Jacob Boström, Victor E. Beck, Robert N. Beck" .

The Philosophical Quarterly .

14 (57): 381.

doi : 10.2307/2217786 .

JSTOR 2217786 .

^ Söderbaum, Jakob E:son (2020).

Modern konservatism . Borås: Recito. p. 289.

ISBN 978-91-7765-497-1 .

^ Abrahamsson, Christian (December 18, 2023). "Den organiska statsteorin".

Radikalkonservatismens rötter – Rudolf Kjellén och 1914 års idéer . Timbro. pp.

43– 56.

ISBN 978-91-7703-243-4 .

OCLC 1241263181 .

^ Isaksson, Anders (1985).

Per Albin . Stockholm: Wahlström & Widstrand. p. 184.

ISBN 978-91-46-15026-8 .

^ Söderbaum, Jakob E:son (October 4, 2022).

"KD är det mest konservativa partiet" .

strengnastidning.se . Retrieved December 17, 2023 .

^ Uvell, Markus (2018).

Bakslaget: radikalt etablissemang, konservativa medborgare . Stockholm: Timbro förlag.

ISBN 978-91-7703-129-1 .

^ Cornucopia (June 21, 2018).

"Yougov: SD största parti med 28.5% av väljarstödet" . Retrieved December 23, 2023 .

^ Majlard, Jan (November 15, 2019).

"SD största parti i ny mätning" .

Svenska Dagbladet (in Swedish).

ISSN 1101-2412 . Retrieved December 23, 2023 .

^ SVT Nyheter (March 21, 2019).

"KD-ledaren öppnar för SD-samarbete" .

SVT Nyheter (in Swedish) . Retrieved December 17, 2023 .

^ SVT Nyheter (October 14, 2022).

"L, KD och M ska ingå i regeringen – SD får stort inflytande" .

SVT Nyheter (in Swedish) . Retrieved December 17, 2023 .

^ Oscarsson, Tea (October 14, 2022).

" 'Tidöavtalet' – här är viktigaste punkterna" .

Svenska Dagbladet (in Swedish).

ISSN 1101-2412 . Retrieved December 17, 2023 .

^ Ziebertz, Hans-Georg (2011).

How Teachers in Europe Teach Religion: An International Empirical Study: An International Empirical Study in 16 Countries . Lit Verlag. p. 237.

ISBN 978-3-643-10043-6 .

^ Juravich, Tom (2000).

Ravenswood: The Steelworkers' Victory and the Revival of American Labor . Cornell University Press. p. 133.

ISBN 978-0-8014-8666-1 .

^ a b Schwok, René (2009).

Switzerland – European Union: An Impossible Membership?

. Peter Lang. p. 143.

ISBN 978-90-5201-576-7 .

^ Siaroff 2000 , p. 446.

^ The Stephen Roth Institute.

Anti-semitism worldwide Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2002 ISBN 0-8032-5943-3 p. 120 ^ Hainsworth, Paul (2008).

The Extreme Right in Western Europe . Routledge. pp. 44 and 74.

ISBN 978-0-415-39682-0 .

^ "Conservatism" .

encyclopediaofukraine.com . Retrieved February 15, 2022 .

^ a b c Sack, J. J. (1987). "The Memory of Burke and the Memory of Pitt: English Conservatism Confronts Its Past, 1806–1829".

The Historical Journal .

30 (3): 623– 640.

doi : 10.1017/S0018246X00020914 .

^ Gregory Claeys, "Political Thought", in Chris Williams, ed., A Companion to 19th-Century Britain (2006). p. 195 ^ Charles Richmond; Paul Smith (1998).

The Self-Fashioning of Disraeli, 1818–1851 . Cambridge UP. p. 162.

ISBN 978-0-521-49729-9 .

^ Auerbach 1959 , pp. 39–40.

^ Eccleshall 1990 , p. 83 ^ Eccleshall 1990 , p. 90 ^ Eccleshall 1990 , p. 121 ^ Eccleshall 1990 , pp. 6–7 ^ Stuart Ball, "Baldwin, Stanley, first Earl Baldwin of Bewdley (1867–1947)", Oxford Dictionary of National Biography 2004.

^ Ross McKibbin, Parties and people: England, 1914–1951 (Oxford, 2010).

^ Garside, W.R.; Greaves, J.I. (1997). " Rationalisation and Britain's industrial Malaise: The interwar years revisited ".

Journal of European Economic History .

26 (1): 37–68.

^ McLean & McMillan 2009 , p. 364.

^ Remmer 1989 .

^ Middlebrook, Kevin J.

Conservative parties, the right, and democracy in Latin America . Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 2000 ISBN 978-0-8018-6386-8 pp. 1–52.

^ Fierlbeck, Katherine.

Political thought in Canada: an intellectual history . Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 2006.

ISBN 978-1-55111-711-9 pp. 87–88 ^ Freyre, Gilberto (1943). "Em Torno Do Problema De Uma Cultura Brasileira".

Philosophy and Phenomenological Research .

4 (2): 167– 171.

doi : 10.2307/2103064 .

JSTOR 2103064 .

^ Schipani, Andres (January 6, 2020).

"Royalists pine for days of empire in Bolsonaro's Brazil" .

Los Angeles Times .

^ Gonzalez, Eduardo (December 6, 2011).

"Brazil Shatters Its Wall of Silence on the Past" . International Center for Transitional Justice . Retrieved March 18, 2012 .

^ Boulos, Guilherme.

"Onda Conservadora" .

Folha de S. Paulo . Retrieved January 4, 2024 .

^ "Lula lidera, e Bolsonaro se consolida em 2º, aponta Datafolha" . Poder. December 2, 2017 . Retrieved December 7, 2017 .

^ Oppenheim, Lois Hecht (2007).

Politics in Chile: Socialism, Authoritarianism, and Market Democracy . Boulder, CO: Westview Press.

ISBN 978-0-8133-4227-6 ^ Guy-Meakin, Amelia (September 17, 2012).

"Augusto Pinochet and the Support of Chilean Right-Wing Women" .

E-International Relations .

^ Valdes, Juan Gabriel (August 17, 1995).

Pinochet's Economists: The Chicago School of Economics in Chile . Cambridge University Press. p. 81.

ISBN 978-0-521-45146-8 .

^ Osterling, Jorge P. (1989).

Democracy in Colombia: Clientelist Politics and Guerrilla Warfare . Transaction Publishers. p. 180.

ISBN 978-0-88738-229-1 .

^ Ian Adams (2001).

Political ideology today . Manchester University Press. p. 32.

ISBN 978-0-7190-6020-5 .

^ "Ernest Manning and George Grant:  Who is the Real Conservative" (2004), Ron Dart.

^ Louis Hartz (1964).

The Founding of New Societies: Studies in the History of the United States, Latin America, South Africa, Canada, and Australia .

^ Lori G. Beaman (2006).

Religion and Canadian Society: Traditions, Transitions, and Innovations . Canadian Scholars' Press. p. 230.

ISBN 978-1-55130-306-2 .

^ Grant, George (2005) [1965].

Lament for a Nation: The Defeat of Canadian Nationalism . McGill-Queen's Press.

ISBN 9780773530102 .

^ Kornberg, Allan and Mishler, William.

Influence in Parliament, Canada . Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1976. p. 38 ^ Schultze, Rainer-Olaf; Sturm, Roland and Eberle, Dagmar.

Conservative parties and right-wing politics in North America: reaping the benefits of an ideological victory?

. Germany: VS Verlag, 2003.

ISBN 978-3-8100-3812-8 p. 15 ^ Panizza, Francisco.

Populism and the mirror of democracy . London: Verso, 2005.

ISBN 978-1-85984-489-2 p. 180 ^ Conway, John Frederick.

Debts to pay: the future of federalism in Quebec . Toronto: James Lorimer & Company, 2004.

ISBN 978-1-55028-814-8 pp. 57, 77 ^ Hazony, Yoram (June 15, 2018).

"Jordan Peterson and Conservatism's Rebirth" .

Wall Street Journal .

ISSN 0099-9660 . Retrieved December 23, 2023 .

^ Kirk, Russell (2001).

The Conservative Mind . Regnery Publishing. pp. 6, 63.

ISBN 978-0-89526-171-7 .

^ Neill 2021 , p. 47.

^ "Reconstruction: Radicalism versus Conservatism" .

www.andrewjohnson.com .

^ Michael Kazin, What It Took to Win: A History of the Democratic Party (2022) p xii.

^ Lyman, Brian.

"Fact check: Yes, historians do teach that first Black members of Congress were Republicans" .

USA TODAY . Retrieved May 1, 2022 .

^ Haught, By James A. (September 15, 2016).

"How Democrats and Republicans switched beliefs [Opinion]" .

Houston Chronicle .

^ See David T. Beito and Linda Royster Beito.

"Gold Democrats and the Decline of Classical Liberalism, 1896–1900" Archived March 26, 2014, at the Wayback Machine .

^ John M. Pafford, The Forgotten Conservative: Rediscovering Grover Cleveland (Simon and Schuster, 2013).

^ ( Schneider 2009 , pp. 4–9, 136): "The label (conservatism) is in frequent use and has come to stand for a skepticism, at times an outright hostility, toward government social policies; a muscular foreign policy combined with a patriotic nationalism; a defense of traditional Christian religious values; and support for the free market economic system." ^ Sherwood Thompson, Encyclopedia of Diversity and Social Justice p. 7: "Historically...social justice became associated with liberalism in which equality is the ideal.", Rowman & Littlefield, 2014, ISBN 978-1-4422-1604-4 .

^ Schneider 2009 , p. xii.

^ Cal Jillson (February 22, 2011).

Texas Politics: Governing the Lone Star State . Taylor & Francis.

ISBN 978-0-203-82941-7 . Retrieved January 19, 2012 .

Social conservatives focus on moral or values issues, such as abortion, marriage, school prayer, and judicial appointments.

^ Frohnen 2006 , pp. ix–xiv.

^ Michael Foley (2007).

American credo: the place of ideas in US politics . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-152833-0 . Retrieved January 18, 2012 .

Against accusations of being pre-modern or even anti-modern in outlook, paleoconservatives press for restrictions on immigration, a rollback of multicultural programmes, the decentralization of the federal polity, the restoration of controls upon free trade, a greater emphasis upon economic nationalism and isolationism in the conduct of American foreign policy, and a generally revanchist outlook upon a social order in need of recovering old lines of distinction and in particular the assignment of roles in accordance with traditional categories of gender, ethnicity, and race.

^ Gottfried, Paul E. (2007).

Conservatism in America: Making Sense of the American Right . Palgrave Macmillan. p. 9.

ISBN 9781403974327 .

Post-war conservatives set about creating their own synthesis of free-market capitalism, Christian morality, and the global struggle against Communism ^ Gottfried, Paul Edward (January 1, 1995).

Theologies and Moral Concern . Transaction Publishers. p. 12.

^ Jacques, Peter J.; Dunlap, Riley E.; Freeman, Mark (May 20, 2008). "The organisation of denial: Conservative think tanks and environmental scepticism".

Environmental Politics .

17 (3): 349– 385.

Bibcode : 2008EnvPo..17..349J .

doi : 10.1080/09644010802055576 .

^ Gries, Peter Hayes (2014).

The Politics of American Foreign Policy: How Ideology Divides Liberals and Conservatives over Foreign Affairs . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 9780804790925 .

^ Williamson, Vanessa; Skocpol, Theda (2012).

The Tea Party and the Remaking of Republican Conservatism . Oxford University Press. pp.

45– 82.

ISBN 9780199832637 .

^ "Katie Couric Interviews Tea Party Leaders" .

CBS News . January 25, 2010.

Archived from the original on October 4, 2013 . Retrieved March 11, 2012 .

^ a b Ashbee, Edward; Waddan, Alex (December 13, 2023). "US Republicans and the New Fusionism".

The Political Quarterly .

95 : 148– 156.

doi : 10.1111/1467-923X.13341 .

ISSN 1467-923X .

S2CID 266282896 .

^ "The growing peril of national conservatism" .

The Economist . February 15, 2024.

Archived from the original on February 15, 2024 . Retrieved February 15, 2024 .

^ "The Republican Party no longer believes America is the essential nation" .

The Economist . October 26, 2023.

Archived from the original on February 13, 2024 . Retrieved February 14, 2024 .

^ Dennis Raphael (2012).

Tackling Health Inequalities: Lessons from International Experiences . Canadian Scholars' Press. p. 66.

ISBN 978-1-55130-412-0 .

^ David Mosler; Robert Catley (1998).

America and Americans in Australia . Greenwood Publishing Group. p.

83 .

ISBN 978-0-275-96252-4 .

^ Massola, James (March 21, 2021).

"Who's who in the Liberals' left, right and centre factions?" .

The Sydney Morning Herald .

^ James Jupp (2004).

The English in Australia . Cambridge University Press. p. 172.

ISBN 978-0-521-54295-1 .

^ James, Colin (June 20, 2012).

"National Party – Formation and rise" .

Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Retrieved December 9, 2023 .

^ James, Colin (June 20, 2012).

"National Party – Party principles" .

Te Ara: The Encyclopedia of New Zealand . Retrieved December 9, 2023 .

^ Boston, Jonathan; Eichbaum, Chris (July 2014). "New Zealand's Neoliberal Reforms: Half a Revolution".

Governance .

27 (3): 373– 376.

doi : 10.1111/gove.12092 .

^ David Hall (2021).

"Rhetoric and reality in New Zealand's climate leadership" . In Rüdiger K.W. Wurzel; Mikael Skou Andersen; Paul Tobin (eds.).

Climate Governance across the Globe: Pioneers, Leaders and Followers . Routledge. p. 81.

doi : 10.4324/9781003014249-7 .

ISBN 978-1-000-320381 .

^ Gerber AS, et al. (2010). "Personality and Political Attitudes: Relationships across Issue Domains and Political Contexts".

The American Political Science Review .

104 : 111– 133.

doi : 10.1017/S0003055410000031 .

^ Sweetser KD (2014). "Partisan Personality: The Psychological Differences Between Democrats and Republicans, and Independents Somewhere in Between".

American Behavioral Scientist .

58 (9): 1183– 94.

doi : 10.1177/0002764213506215 .

^ Fatke M (2017). "Personality Traits and Political Ideology: A First Global Assessment".

Political Psychology .

38 (5): 881– 99.

doi : 10.1111/pops.12347 .

^ Brown, T. J., Mowen, J. C., Donavan, D. T., & Licata, J. W. (2002). The customer orientation of service workers: Personality trait effects on self-and supervisor performance ratings. Journal ofMarketing Research, 39, 110–119.

^ Neal, A., Yeo, G., Koy, A., & Xiao, T. (2012). Predicting the form and direction of work role performance from the Big 5 model of personality traits. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 33, 175–192.

^ Davidson, A., & Theriault, D. A. (2021). How Consumer Experience Is Shaped by the Political Orientation of Service Providers. Journal of Consumer Psychology.

^ Inbar, Yoel, et al. (2012). "Disgust sensitivity, political conservatism, and voting".

Social Psychological and Personality Science .

3 (5): 537– 544.

doi : 10.1177/1948550611429024 .

^ Ahn, Woo-Young, et al. (November 2014).

"Nonpolitical Images Evoke Neural Predictors of Political Ideology" .

Current Biology .

24 (22): 2693– 2699.

Bibcode : 2014CBio...24.2693A .

doi : 10.1016/j.cub.2014.09.050 .

PMC 4245707 .

PMID 25447997 .

^ Dan Jones.

"Left or right-wing? Brain's disgust response tells all" .

New Scientist . Retrieved July 18, 2023 .

^ Y. Inbar; et al. (2008).

"Conservatives are more easily disgusted than liberals" (PDF) .

Cognition and Emotion .

23 (4): 714– 725.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.372.3053 .

doi : 10.1080/02699930802110007 . Archived from the original (PDF) on February 3, 2013.

^ Brown, Gordon D. A.; Fincher, Corey L.; Walasek, Lukasz (2016).

"Personality, Parasites, Political Attitudes, and Cooperation: A Model of How Infection Prevalence Influences Openness and Social Group Formation" .

Topics in Cognitive Science .

8 (1): 98– 117.

doi : 10.1111/tops.12175 .

PMC 4991276 .

PMID 26612490 .

^ Navarrete, Carlos David; Fessler, Daniel M.T. (2006). "Disease avoidance and ethnocentrism: The effects of disease vulnerability and disgust sensitivity on intergroup attitudes".

Evolution and Human Behavior .

27 (4): 270– 282.

Bibcode : 2006EHumB..27..270N .

doi : 10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2005.12.001 .

^ David, B.; Olatunji, B.O. (2011). "The effect of disgust conditioning and disgust sensitivity on appraisals of moral transgressions".

Personality and Individual Differences .

50 (7): 1142– 1146.

doi : 10.1016/j.paid.2011.02.004 .

^ "Right-wing authoritarianism (RWA)" .

dictionary.apa.org .

Washington, D.C.

: American Psychological Association. 2021 . Retrieved October 18, 2021 .

^ Altemeyer, Bob (1981).

Right-Wing Authoritarianism . University of Manitoba Press.

ISBN 978-0-88755-124-6 .

^ Rubinstein, G. (1996). "Two Peoples in One Land: A Validation Study of Altemeyer's Right-Wing Authoritarianism Scale in the Palestinian and Jewish Societies in Israel".

Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology .

27 (2): 216– 230.

doi : 10.1177/0022022196272005 .

^ Crowson, H. Michael; Thoma, Stephen J.; Hestevold, Nita (August 7, 2010). "Is Political Conservatism Synonymous With Authoritarianism?".

The Journal of Social Psychology .

145 (5): 571– 592.

doi : 10.3200/SOCP.145.5.571-592 .

PMID 16201679 .

^ Stenner, Karen (2009).

"Three Kinds of 'Conservatism' " (PDF) .

Psychological Inquiry .

20 ( 2– 3): 142– 159.

doi : 10.1080/10478400903028615 . Archived from the original (PDF) on May 12, 2013 . Retrieved June 2, 2012 .

^ Wilson, Glenn D. (2013).

The Psychology of Conservatism . Routledge.

ISBN 9781135094454 .

^ Jost, John T.; Glaser, Jack; Kruglanski, Arie W.; Sulloway, Frank J. (2003).

"Political conservatism as motivated social cognition" .

Psychological Bulletin .

129 (3): 339– 375.

doi : 10.1037/0033-2909.129.3.339 .

PMID 12784934 .

^ Chan, EY; Ilicic, J (2019). "Political ideology and brand attachment".

International Journal of Research in Marketing .

36 (4): TBD.

doi : 10.1016/j.ijresmar.2019.04.001 .

^ "Researchers help define what makes a political conservative" . 2003.

^ Pratto, Felicia; Sidanius, Jim; Stallworth, Lisa M.; Malle, Bertram F. (1994).

"Social dominance orientation: A personality variable predicting social and political attitudes" .

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

67 (4): 741– 763.

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.67.4.741 .

^ Schneider, David J. (April 7, 2005).

The Psychology of Stereotyping . Guilfold Press. p. 275.

^ Kuper, Adam (May 13, 2013).

The Social Science Encyclopedia (2nd ed.). Routledge. pp.

155– 156.

^ Sidanius, J; Pratto, F; Bobo, L (1996).

"Racism, conservatism, affirmative action, and intellectual sophistication: A matter of principled conservatism or group dominance?" (PDF) .

Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

70 (3): 476– 490.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.474.1114 .

doi : 10.1037/0022-3514.70.3.476 .

Archived (PDF) from the original on April 17, 2015.

^ Brooks, Arthur C. (2008).

Gross National Happiness: Why Happiness Matters for America—and How We Can Get More of It .

New York : Basic Books.

ISBN 978-1-5113-9186-3 .

^ Napier, J.L.; Jost, J.T. (2008). "Why Are Conservatives Happier Than Liberals?".

Psychological Science .

19 (6): 565– 572.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02124.x .

PMID 18578846 .

^ Schlenker, Barry; Chambers, John; Le, Bonnie (April 2012).

"Conservatives are happier than liberals, but why? Political ideology, personality and life satisfaction" .

Journal of Research in Personality .

46 (2): 127– 146.

doi : 10.1016/j.jrp.2011.12.009 . Retrieved July 31, 2021 .

^ Rossiter, Clinton (1955).

Conservatism in America . New York: Knopf. p. 114.

OCLC 440025153 .

^ "Klemens von Metternich" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved May 1, 2025 .

Klemens von Metternich was an Austrian statesman, minister of foreign affairs, and a champion of conservatism.

^ Dorey, Peter (1995).

The Conservative Party and the Trade Unions . Psychology Press. pp.

16– 17.

ISBN 978-0415064873 .

^ W. Phillips Shively; David Schultz (2022).

Power and Choice: An Introduction to Political Science . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. p. 34.

^ "Carl Gustaf Mannerheim" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved May 1, 2025 .

Carl Gustaf Mannerheim was a Finnish military leader and conservative statesman.

^ "Miklós Horthy" . Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved May 1, 2025 .

Miklós Horthy was a Hungarian naval officer and conservative leader who defeated revolutionary forces in Hungary after World War I and remained the country's head of state until 1944.

^ Andrew Roberts (2018).

Churchill: Walking with Destiny . Penguin. p. 127.

ISBN 9781101981016 .

^ "Merkel, Kissinger pay tribute to Adenauer" . Deutsche Welle . Retrieved May 1, 2025 .

^ Tsui, Brian (2018).

China's Conservative Revolution: The Quest for a New Order, 1927-1949 . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-1107196230 .

^ Frank J. Coppa (2006).

Encyclopedia of Modern Dictators: From Napoleon to the Present . Peter Lang. p. 275.

A pragmatic rather than dogmatic executive who understood the limitations in which Portugal found herself during the 1930s, Salazar combined Catholic cultural values and socioeconomic conservatism with the kind of nationalistic evocations that had to take the place of vanished glory.

^ "How Charles de Gaulle Rescued France: His life shows that right-wing politics needn't bend toward absolutism" .

The New Yorker . August 13, 2018 . Retrieved April 13, 2025 .

^ "Francisco Franco | The Dictator's Playbook" .

PBS . Retrieved April 13, 2025 .

With his country torn between left and right, Francisco Franco devoted his life to a deeply conservative vision of Spain.

^ "Ronald Reagan." Encyclopædia Britannica .  January 22, 2025 ^ Post-War Korean Conservatism, Japanese Statism, and the Legacy of President Park Chung-hee in South Korea .

The Korean Journal of International . Studies 16-1 (April 2018), 57-76.

^ "Lee Kuan Yew: A meritocratic, paternalistic model of Plato's philosopher king" .

Firstpost . March 24, 2015.

^ Martin E. Marty; R. Scott Appleby; American Academy of Arts and Sciences (1994).

Fundamentalisms Observed . American Academy of Arts and Sciences. p. 175.

^ Amir Yahya Ayatollahi (2022).

Political Conservatism and Religious Reformation in Iran (1905-1979): Reconsidering the Monarchic Legacy . Springer Fachmedien, Imprint: Springer VS.

^ Behrman, Greg (2008).

The Invisible People: How the U.S. Has Slept Through the Global AIDS Pan . Psychology Press. p. 193.

^ Davies, Stephen, Margaret Thatcher and the Rebirth of Conservatism , Ashbrook Center for Public Affairs, July 1993 ^ Yoshida, Reji (December 26, 2012).

"Formed in childhood, roots of Abe's conservatism go deep" .

The Japan Times .

Archived from the original on June 8, 2019 . Retrieved July 11, 2022 .

Those "conservative" and "hawkish" stances include a desire to amend the Constitution, to end the government's ban on collective defense, to strengthen the Japan-U.S. military alliance and to even "reform" the education system by weeding out "problematic" left-leaning teachers.

^ Andrew Heywood, Political Ideologies: An Introduction . Third Edition. (Palgrave Macmillan, 2003), p. 74.

^ Harriet Guest, 2005, "Hannah More and Conservative Feminism", British Women's Writing in the Long Eighteenth Century . London: Palgrave Macmillan.

^ Beum, Robert (1997). "Ultra-Royalism Revisited," Modern Age , Vol. 39, No. 3, p. 305.

^ Peter Gay, "The Complete Romantic," Horizon (1966) 8#2 pp 12-19.

^ D Daiches ed., Companion to Literature 1 (1963) p. 110 ^ Jordan, Alexander (September 20, 2019).

"The Contribution of Thomas Carlyle to British Idealism, c. 1880–1930" .

Scottish Historical Review .

98 : 439– 468.

doi : 10.3366/shr.2019.0428 .

S2CID 204477593 .

^ "Theological Studies – A journal of academic theology" (PDF) .

Ts.mu.edu . November 30, 2016.

Archived (PDF) from the original on March 3, 2011 . Retrieved December 22, 2016 .

^ Jennings, Jeremy (2011).

Revolution and the Republic: A History of Political Thought in France Since the Eighteenth Century . Oxford University Press. p.

188 .

ISBN 978-0-19-820313-1 .

^ Bellamy, Richard (1990). "From Ethical to Economic Liberalism – The Sociology of Pareto's Politics".

Economy and Society .

19 (4): 431– 55.

doi : 10.1080/03085149000000016 .

^ Saatkamp, Herman; Coleman, Martin (2023), "George Santayana" , in Zalta, Edward N.; Nodelman, Uri (eds.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2023 ed.), Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University , retrieved December 26, 2023 ^ Suisheng Zhao (1995).

Power by Design: Constitution-Making in Nationalist China . University of Hawaii Press. pp.

116– 119.

ISBN 9780824863982 .

^ "Vladimir Jabotinsky" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . January 1, 2025 . Retrieved January 1, 2025 .

^ "Ernst Jünger" .

Encyclopædia Britannica .

^ Faith and Political Philosophy: The Correspondence Between Leo Strauss and Eric Voegelin, 1934–1964 , p. 193 ^ Mark Garnett (ed.), Conservative Moments: Reading Conservative Texts , Bloomsbury Academic, 2018, ch. 9 .

^ "Did the Pope Heal or Deepen a Catholic Schism?" .

Newsweek . January 25, 2009.

^ Bradley J. Birzer (September 17, 2015).

Russell Kirk: American Conservative . University Press of Kentucky.

ISBN 978-0-8131-6619-3 .

^ Joseph Pearce (2011), Solzhenitsyn: A Soul in Exile , Ignatius Press . pp.  330–331.

^ Harnden, Tom.

"The most influential US conservatives: 100-81." The Telegraph .  11 January 2010.  17 May 2017.

^ The Stone (January 29, 2020).

"Roger Scruton Was a Conservative. But What Kind" .

New York Times .

^ Rosenthal, John.

"London of John Constable" .

Encyclopedia Britannica .

An economic depression after the Napoleonic Wars had led to agrarian riots, and yet Constable, a loyal Tory, chose to portray an abstracted, well-ordered English society that was untouched by the industrial and social changes surrounding him.

^ Dostoevsky, Fyodor (July 20, 1997).

A Writer's Diary . Northwestern University Press.

ISBN 9780810115163 . Retrieved July 3, 2019 .

^ "CEZANNE; Parting Ways With Zola" .

New York Times . August 25, 1991.

In John Russell's essay "The Poet Who Kick-Started a Stalled Cezanne", the reference to Cezanne's having been abandoned by Emile Zola, his lifelong friend and supporter, is true as far as it goes. It might have gone a bit further, though, and revealed why the coldness developed between the author of "J'accuse" and the anti-Dreyfusard painter.

^ Wegener, Fredrick (December 2000). " "Rabid Imperialist"': Edith Wharton and the Obligations of Empire in Modern American Fiction".

American Literature .

72 (4): 783– 812.

doi : 10.1215/00029831-72-4-783 .

S2CID 162758720 .

^ Allison, Jonathan (ed.). 1996.

Yeats's Political Identities: Selected Essays . University of Michigan Press ^ Bratby, Richard (April 2023).

"Modernists can be monarchists" .

The Critic (modern magazine) .

^ "T. S. Eliot" .

^ Bordwell, David (1983).

The Films of Carl Theodor Dreyer . University of California Press. p. 191.

^ Joshi, Sunand T. (2001).

A dreamer and a visionary: H. P. Lovecraft in his time . Liverpool science fiction texts and studies (1. publ ed.). Liverpool: Liverpool Univ. Press. pp.

8– 16.

ISBN 978-0-85323-946-8 .

^ McBride, Joseph (2003).

Searching for John Ford: A Life . St. Martin's Griffin. pp.

372– 373.

ISBN 978-0-312-31011-0 . Retrieved August 10, 2010 .

^ LIFE Magazine (November 19, 2021).

LIFE It's a Wonderful Life . TI Incorporated Books. p. 96.

ISBN 9781547859740 .

^ Eschner, Kat (December 20, 2017).

"The Weird Story of the FBI and 'It's a Wonderful Life' " .

Smithsonian Magazine . Retrieved September 3, 2024 .

^ Yudin, Florence (1997).

Nightglow: Borges' Poetics of Blindness . City: Universidad Pontificia de Salamanca. p. 31.

ISBN 84-7299-385-X .

^ Ceplair, Larry; Englund, Steven (1983).

The Inquisition in Hollywood: Politics in the Film Community, 1930-1960 . University of California Press. pp.

210 –214.

ISBN 978-0-520-04886-7 . Retrieved August 10, 2010 .

^ Gibson, Ian (1997) pp. 525–27 ^ Lybarger, Jeremy (April 21, 2021).

"The Turbulent Life of Francis Bacon" .

The New Republic .

Bacon was a conservative at heart—when drunk, he'd sometimes lambaste poor people for their supposed weakness—but his art, as channeled through his queerness, cast a critical, if oblique, eye on the prevailing culture.

^ Brown, Neal (May 5, 1998).

"Francis Bacon" .

Frieze .

Bacon's often very beautiful, grandee swirlings and sexualised skidmarks of paint are depictive of certain principal categories of subject. These are either other right-wing libertines like himself, or suicides and alcoholics – alcoholics, of course, just being suicides in slow motion.

^ "Roy Andersson kritiserar Bergman i ny intervju" .

Sveriges Radio . 2014.

^ Lundström, Jacob (April 5, 2018).

"Ingmar Bergman var 68-vänsterns måltavla" .

Arbetet .

^ "Swedish director Bergman's lost 'masterpiece' to start filming" .

Sky News . November 22, 2016.

He (Bergman) and Susanne were often enemies and stood on opposite sides in the political and cultural rebellion at the end of the 60s ^ Lurie, Robert Dean (September 7, 2012).

"The Conservative Kerouac" .

The American Conservative .

My father and my mother and my sister and I have always voted Republican, always." This had nothing to do with party planks and everything to do with family identity, with holding onto something, no matter how arbitrary, in an otherwise disorienting world. We're Kerouacs and this is what we do ^ Kauffman, Bill (July 7, 2022).

"Who was the most right-wing member of the Beat Generation?" .

The Spectator .

The gentle Catholic-Buddhist Jack Kerouac, spontaneous-bop prosody prince of the Old Right, has the strongest claim. In 1952, shortly after finishing the novel that would be published five years later as On the Road, he argued for Robert Taft, "Mr. Republican," for president, while his pal Allen Ginsberg was puffing up Cold Warrior and son of a robber baron Averell Harriman.

^ "Yukio Mishima – 'The Lost Samurai' " .

Japan Today . January 12, 2014.

^ Flanagan, Damian (November 21, 2015).

"Yukio Mishima's enduring, unexpected influence" .

The Japan Times .

^ Robert Sholl; Sander Van Maas (2016).

Contemporary Music and Spirituality . Taylor & Francis. p. 364.

ISBN 9781317160656 .

^ Dombrowski, Ralf (December 7, 2007).

"Der konservative Revolutionär" .

Der Spiegel .

Bibliography [ edit ] Annesley, Claire (2005).

A Political and Economic Dictionary of Western Europe . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-85743-214-5 .

Auerbach, M. Morton (1959).

The Conservative Illusion . Columbia University Press.

ISBN 978-0-598-37476-9 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Bischof, Günter J., ed. (2003).

The Dollfuss/Schuschnigg Era in Austria: A Reassessment . Transaction Publishers.

ISBN 9781412821896 .

Blinkhorn, Martin (1990).

Fascists and Conservatives: The Radical Right and the Establishment in Twentieth-Century Europe . Psychology Press.

ISBN 978-0-04-940087-0 .

Eccleshall, Robert (1990).

English Conservatism since the Restoration: An Introduction and Anthology . Unwin Hyman.

ISBN 978-0-04-445346-8 .

"Conservatism" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved May 1, 2022 .

Fawcett, Edmund (2020).

Conservatism: The Fight for a Tradition . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-0-691-17410-5 .

Freeden, Michael; Sargent, Lyman Tower; Stears, Marc; et al. (2013).

Oxford Handbook of Political Ideologies . OUP Oxford.

ISBN 978-0199585977 .

Frohnen, Bruce; et al. (2006).

American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia . ISI Books.

ISBN 978-1-932236-43-9 .

Giubilei, Francesco (2019).

The History of European Conservative Thought . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 9781621579090 .

Heywood, Andrew (2004).

Political Theory: An Introduction (3 ed.). Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 9780333961803 .

Heywood, Andrew (2017).

Political Ideologies: An Introduction . Palgrave Macmillan.

ISBN 978-1-137-60604-4 .

Kojève, Alexandre (2020) [1942].

The Notion of Authority: A Brief Presentation . Verso Books.

ISBN 9781788739610 .

von Kuehnelt-Leddihn, Erik (1943).

The Menace of the Herd; or, Procrustes at Large . Ludwig von Mises Institute.

OCLC 733805752 .

McLean, Iain; McMillan, Alistair (2009).

Concise Oxford Dictionary of Politics . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199207800 .

Muller, Jerry Z. (1997).

Conservatism: An Anthology of Social and Political Thought from David Hume to the Present . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691037110 .

Neill, Edmund (2021).

Conservatism . Polity.

ISBN 978-1-5095-2705-2 .

Nisbet, Robert (2002).

Conservatism: Dream and Reality . Transaction Publishers.

ISBN 9780765808622 .

Remmer, Karen L. (1989).

Military Rule in Latin America . Westview. p. 10.

ISBN 978-0-8133-8450-4 .

Schneider, Gregory (2009).

The Conservative Century: From Reaction to Revolution . Rowman & Littlefield.

ISBN 9780742542846 .

Siaroff, Alan (2000).

Comparative European Party Systems . Garland.

ISBN 0-8153-2930-X .

Ware, Alan (1996).

Political Parties and Party Systems . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0-19-878076-2 .

Further reading [ edit ] General Green, E.H.H. (2002).

Ideologies of Conservatism: Conservative Political Ideas in the Twentieth Century . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780191069031 .

Hazony, Yoram (2022).

Conservatism: A Rediscovery . Forum.

ISBN 9781800752344 .

Kirk, Russell (2001).

The Conservative Mind: From Burke to Eliot (7 ed.). Regnery Publishing.

ISBN 9780895261717 .

Kirk, Russell (2019).

Russell Kirk's Concise Guide to Conservatism . Simon and Schuster.

ISBN 9781621578789 .

Scruton, Roger (2002).

The Meaning of Conservatism (3 ed.). St. Augustine's Press.

ISBN 9781890318406 .

Viereck, Peter (1949).

Conservatism Revisited: The Revolt Against Ideology . Transaction Publishers.

ISBN 9781412820233 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Witonski, Peter, ed. (1971).

The Wisdom of Conservatism (4 ed.). Arlington House.

ISBN 9780870001185 .

[2396 pages; worldwide sources] Conservatism and fascism Crowson, N. J. (1997).

Facing Fascism: The Conservative Party and the European Dictators, 1935–1940 . Psychology Press.

ISBN 9780415153157 .

Evola, Julius (2013).

Fascism Viewed from the Right . Arktos.

ISBN 9781907166921 .

Conservatism and liberalism Carey, George (2008).

"Conservatism" . In Hamowy, Ronald (ed.).

The Encyclopedia of Libertarianism . Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publishing; Cato Institute . pp.

93– 95.

ISBN 978-1-4129-6580-4 .

Dyson, K. (2021).

Conservative Liberalism, Ordo-Liberalism, and the State: Disciplining Democracy and the Market . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780198854289 .

Schlueter, N.; Wenzel, N. (2016).

Selfish Libertarians and Socialist Conservatives?: The Foundations of the Libertarian-Conservative Debate . Stanford University Press.

ISBN 9780804792912 .

Conservatism and women Bacchetta, Paola; Power, Margaret (2002).

Right-Wing Women: From Conservatives to Extremists Around the World . Psychology Press.

ISBN 9780415927772 .

Blee, Kathleen M.; McGee Deutsch, Sandra, eds. (2012).

Women of the Right: Comparisons and Interplay Across Borders . Penn State University Press.

ISBN 9780271052151 .

Critchlow, Donald T. (2008).

Phyllis Schlafly and Grassroots Conservatism: A Woman's Crusade . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691136240 .

Nickerson, Michelle M. (2014).

Mothers of Conservatism: Women and the Postwar Right . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691163918 .

Conservatism in Germany Epstein, K. (2015).

The Genesis of German Conservatism . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9781400868230 .

von Klemperer, K. (2015).

Germany's New Conservatism: Its History and Dilemma in the Twentieth Century . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9781400876372 .

Lebovics, H. (1969).

Social Conservatism and the Middle Class in Germany, 1914–1933 . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9781400879038 .

Mohler, Armin (2018) [1949].

The Conservative Revolution in Germany, 1918–1932 . Washington Summit Publishers.

ISBN 9781593680596 .

Conservatism in Latin America Luna, J.P.; Kaltwasser, C.R. (2014).

The Resilience of the Latin American Right . Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 9781421413914 .

Middlebrook, Kevin J. (2000).

Conservative Parties, the Right, and Democracy in Latin America . Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 9780801863851 .

Conservatism in Russia Laqueur, Walter (2015).

Putinism: Russia and Its Future with the West . Macmillan.

ISBN 9781466871069 .

Pipes, Richard (2007).

Russian Conservatism and Its Critics: A Study in Political Culture . Yale University Press.

ISBN 9780300122695 .

Robinson, Paul (2019).

Russian Conservatism . Cornell University Press.

ISBN 9781501747342 .

Conservatism in the United Kingdom Jones, Emily (2017).

Edmund Burke and the Invention of Modern Conservatism, 1830–1914 . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780198799429 .

Gilmartin, Kevin (2010).

Writing against Revolution: Literary Conservatism in Britain, 1790–1832 . Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 9780521142199 .

Nugent, Neill (1977).

The British Right: Conservative and Right Wing Politics in Britain . Saxon House.

ISBN 9780566001567 .

Soffer, R. (2008).

History, Historians, and Conservatism in Britain and America: From the Great War to Thatcher and Reagan . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780191548956 .

Conservatism in the United States Allitt, Patrick N. (2009).

The Conservatives: Ideas and Personalities Throughout American History . Yale University Press.

ISBN 9780300155297 .

Continetti, Matthew (2022).

The Right: The Hundred-Year War for American Conservatism . Basic Books.

ISBN 9781541600508 .

Goldwater, Barry (2007) [1960].

The Conscience of a Conservative . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 9780691131177 .

Nash, George H. (2006) [1976].

The Conservative Intellectual Movement in America Since 1945 . Regnery Publishing.

ISBN 9781933859125 .

Nelson, Jeffrey O.; et al. (2014).

American Conservatism: An Encyclopedia . Open Road Media.

ISBN 9781497651579 .

Schneider, Gregory L., ed. (2003).

Conservatism in America Since 1930: A Reader . NYU Press.

ISBN 9780814797990 .

Schulman, B.J. (2008).

Rightward Bound: Making America Conservative in the 1970s . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 9780674267138 .

Will, George (2019).

The Conservative Sensibility . Hachette Books.

ISBN 9780316480932 .

Psychology Haidt, Jonathan (2012).

The Righteous Mind: Why Good People are Divided By Politics and Religion . New York: Pantheon Books.

ISBN 9780307377906 .

Hibbing, John R.; Smith, Kevin B.; Alford, John R. (2013).

Predisposed: Liberals, Conservatives, and the Biology of Political Differences . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1136281211 .

Lakoff, George (2008).

The Political Mind : A Cognitive Scientist's Guide to your Brain and its Politics . Penguin.

ISBN 978-1440637834 .

Lakoff, George (2016).

Moral Politics: How Liberals and Conservatives Think . University of Chicago Press.

ISBN 9780226411323 .

Wailoo, Keith (2014).

Pain: A Political History . Johns Hopkins University Press.

ISBN 9781421413662 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Conservatism .

Wikiquote has quotations related to Conservatism .

English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Conservatism Conservatism an article by Encyclopædia Britannica .

Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

"Conservatism" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Conservatism Schools by region International Authoritarian Corporatist Cultural Fiscal Green Liberal Moderate National Paternalistic Populist Pragmatic Progressive Reactionary Religious Social Traditionalist Ultra Asia China Chiangism Confucianism Neo New Dai Jitao Thought Neoauthoritarianism Iran Khomeinism Monarchist Principlist Israel Fundamentalist Jewish Kahanism Zionism Neo Religious Revisionist Japan Minzoku Neo Nippon Kaigi Shōwa Statism State Shinto South Korea Ilminism New Right Turkey Democratic Erdoğanism Neo-Ottomanism Other Bangladesh Hong Kong India Malaysia Pakistan Ziaism Singapore Taiwan Chiangism Europe France Action Française Bonapartism Gaullism Integral nationalism Legitimism Maurrassisme Nouvelle Droite Orléanism Révolution nationale Sarkozysm Ultra-royalism Germany Agrarian Hegelian Historical School Neue Rechte Ordoliberalism Prussianism Cameralistic Socialist Revolutionary Young Ritter School Romanticism State Socialism Völkisch Italy Berlusconism Historical Right Italian school of elitism Neo-Bourbonism Sanfedismo Poland Golden Liberty Kaczyzm Monarchist National Democracy Sarmatism Russia Duginism Eurasianism Monarchist Black-hundredism Tsarism Putinism Slavophilia Pochvennichestvo Spain Alfonsism Carlism Carloctavismo Carlo-francoism Francoism National Catholicism Integrism Mellismo Maurism Neocatholicism Noucentisme United Kingdom Cameronism Civic Compassionate Muscular liberalism Jacobitism Neo-Jacobite Revival Neo One-nationism Powellism Thatcherism Toryism High Red Social Other Austria Belgium Rexism Denmark Finland Georgia Monarchist Greece Metaxism Populist Hungary Iceland Luxembourg Netherlands Norway Portugal Miguelist Integralismo Lusitano Romania Monarchist Serbia Monarchist Sweden Switzerland Ukraine Latin America Argentina Federal Peronism Maurrasismo Menemism Nacionalismo Orthodox Peronism Brazil Bolsonarism Coronelism Integralism Janismo Monarchist Patrianovism Populism Chile Gremialismo Pinochetism Other Belize Colombia Rojismo Uribism Cuba Guatemala Mexico Cristero Panama Peru Fujimorism Odriismo Uruguay Herrerism Riverism Ruralismo Venezuela Perezjimenismo North America Canada Populism Trumpism Clerico-nationalism Social Toryism Blue Red Pink United States Compassionate Libertarian Fusionism Paleo Tea Party Movement Neo Old Right Paleo Reaganism Social Traditionalist Trumpism Oceania Australia Centre Right National Right New Zealand Philosophy Principles Ancestral worship Authority Traditional Class collaboration Consociationalism Clericalism Collective identity Confessionalism Cultural assimilation Cultural heritage Cultural values Culture of life Pro-Life Discipline Duty Elitism Aristocracy Meritocracy Noblesse oblige Ethical order Familialism Family values Fundamentalism Gender role Complementarianism Honour Imperialism Loyalty Monarchism Royalist Natural law Natural Order Norms Conventions Customs Mores Ordered liberty Organicism Organized religion Orthodoxy Patriotism Nationalism Personalism Philosophical realism Moral realism Private property Protectionism Public morality Rule of law Social hierarchy Social institutions Social order Solidarity Sovereignty State religion Stewardship Subsidiarity Tradition Intellectuals Bainville Barruel Belloc Bonald Buckley Jr.

Burke Burnham Carlyle Chateaubriand Chesterton Coleridge Comte Cortés Dávila Dostoevsky Eliot Evola Fardid Gentz Haller Hitchens Hume Iorga Johnson Jünger Karamzin Kirk Kuehnelt-Leddihn La Mennais Le Bon Le Play Leontiev Lewis Maistre Mansfield Maurras Menéndez More Müller Newman Nisbet Novalis Oakeshott Corrêa de Oliveira Peterson Ranke Renan Rivarol Röpke Santayana Savigny Schlegel Schmitt Scruton Solzhenitsyn Sowell Spann Spengler Stahl Strauss Taine Tocqueville Uvarov Voegelin Politics Organisations European Conservatives and Reformists Party European People's Party Identity and Democracy International Democrat Union International Monarchist League Muslim Brotherhood Tradition, Family, Property Politicians Abe Adams Adenauer Andreotti Berlusconi Bismarck Bolsonaro GW Bush Canning Chiang Churchill Diefenbaker Disraeli Dmowski Dollfuss Erdoğan Franco Fujimori de Gaulle Harper Horthy John Paul II Kaczyński Khamenei Khomeini Kohl Le Pen Lee Macdonald Mannerheim Marcos Maurras Menzies Metaxas Metternich Mobutu Modi Netanyahu Orbán Park Pérez Jiménez Pinochet Pitt Powell Prat de la Riba Putin Reagan Salazar Salisbury Smith Stolypin Suharto Thatcher Trujillo Trump Vajpayee de Valera Zia Zemmour Religion Christian democracy Christian politics Theonomy Christian right Theoconservatism Confucianism Hindutva Jewish conservatism Religious Zionism Islamism Islamic economics Theravada Buddhist economics Traditionalist Catholicism Catholic social teaching Distributism Integralism Ultramontanism Traditionalist School Historical background Ancien régime Bourbon Restauration Congress of Vienna Concert of Europe Conservative Order Counter-Enlightenment German Romanticism Holy Alliance Ultra-royalism Related Ideologies Agrarianism Clerical fascism Communitarianism Conservative liberalism Corporatism Localism Anti-communism Anti-gender movement Anti-Masonry Aristocracy Black conservatism United States Desecularization Postsecularism Conservative feminism Conservative wave Counter-revolutionary Elite theory Ethnopluralism Hispanic and Latino conservatism in the United States LGBTQ conservatism Neo-feudalism Neo-medievalism Opposition to LGBTQ rights Para-fascism Political Evangelicalism in Latin America Political theology Radical right Europe United States Reactionary Neo- Right realism Right-wing politics Authoritarianism New European Small-c conservatives Conservatism portal Politics portal Links to related articles v t e Political ideologies The Establishment Anti Hardline Moderate Political spectrum Far-left Left-wing Centre-left Centrism Centre-right Right-wing Far-right Radical Reactionary Revolutionary Accelerationism Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Communalism Communism Bolshevism Marxism-Leninism National Bolshevism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Corporatism Distributism Social credit Environmentalism Familialism Fascism Nazism Third Position Feminism Fundamentalism Green Hindutva Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Marxism Monarchism Royalism Nationalism Republicanism Classical Modern Social democracy Socialism Third Way Zionism See also Authoritarianism Anti Collectivism Colonialism Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Extremism Federalism Confederalism Confederatism Globalism Ideological repression Imperialism Individualism Internationalism Localism Masculism Militarism Nihilism Pacifism Pluralism Populism Progressivism Reformism Regionalism Separatism Statism Syncretism Totalitarianism v t e Social philosophy Concepts Agency Anomie Convention Cosmopolitanism Customs Cultural heritage Culturalism Inter Mono Multi Culture Counter Familialism History Honour Human nature Identity Formation Ideology Institutions Invisible hand Loyalty Modernity Morality Public Mores National character Natural law Personhood Reification Ressentiment Rights Sittlichkeit Social alienation Social norms Spontaneous order Stewardship Traditions Values Family Volksgeist Worldview Schools Budapest School Catholic social teaching Distributism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Social Frankfurt School Personalism Philosophers Ancient Confucius Laozi Mencius Mozi Xunzi Medieval Alpharabius Aquinas Avempace Bruni Ibn Khaldun Maimonides Ibn Tufayl Early modern Calvin Erasmus Guicciardini Locke Luther Milton Montaigne Müntzer 18th and 19th centuries Arnold Bentham Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Emerson Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Hegel Helvétius Herder Hume Jefferson Kant Kierkegaard Le Bon Le Play Marx Mill Nietzsche Owen Renan Rousseau Royce Ruskin Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Vico Vivekananda Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Adorno Agamben Arendt Aron Badiou Baudrillard Bauman Benoist Berlin Butler Camus de Beauvoir Debord Deleuze Dewey Du Bois Durkheim Eco Evola Foucault Fromm Gandhi Gehlen Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Han Heidegger Hoppe Irigaray Kirk Kołakowski Kropotkin Land Lasch MacIntyre Marcuse Maritain Negri Niebuhr Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Polanyi Radhakrishnan Röpke Santayana Scruton Shariati Simmel Skinner Sombart Sowell Spengler Strauss Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Weil Zinn Žižek Works De Officiis (44 BC) Oration on the Dignity of Man (1486) A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Civilization and Its Discontents (1930) The Work of Art in the Age of Mechanical Reproduction (1935) The Second Sex (1949) One-Dimensional Man (1964) The Society of the Spectacle (1967) The History of Sexuality (1976) The Culture of Narcissism (1979) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) Gender Trouble (1990) The Malaise of Modernity (1991) Intellectuals and Society (2010) See also Agnotology Axiology Critical theory Cultural criticism Cultural pessimism Ethics Historism Historicism Humanities Philosophy of culture Philosophy of education Philosophy of history Political philosophy Social criticism Social science Social theory Sociology Category v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Edmund Burke Works A Vindication of Natural Society (1756) A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas of the Sublime and Beautiful (1757) Thoughts on the Cause of the Present Discontents (1770) " On American Taxation " (1774) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) An Appeal from the New to the Old Whigs (1791) Thoughts and Details on Scarcity (1795) Letters on a Regicide Peace (1796) Organisations Edmund Burke Foundation The Club Royal Bounty Fund Related Conservatism Edmund Burke (Thomas statue) Impeachment of Warren Hastings Religious thought of Edmund Burke Richard Burke Jr.

(son) v t e Joseph de Maistre Works Considerations on France (1796) The Pope (1819) St Petersburg Dialogues (1821) An Examination of the Philosophy of Bacon (1836) Schools Clerical philosophy Conservatism Counter-Enlightenment French royalism Neo-medievalism Neo-ultramontanism Family Baronne Almaury de Maistre (niece) Rodolphe de Maistre (son) Xavier de Maistre (brother) Analysis Scholars Carolina Armenteros Richard Lebrun Larry Siedentop Works The Hedgehog and the Fox (1953) Enemies of the Enlightenment (2001) Joseph de Maistre's Life, Thought, and Influence (2001) The Headless Republic (2005) Les antimodernes (2005) The Reactionary Mind (2011) v t e Western world and culture Foundations Cradle of civilization Old World Greco-Roman world Greece Hellenistic Kingdoms Rome Roman Empire Western Eastern Roman legacy Romanization Romano-Germanic culture Gallo-Roman Christendom History European Bronze Age Classical antiquity Late antiquity Middle Ages early high late Renaissance Modern period Early modern period Age of Discovery Reformation Age of Enlightenment Scientific Revolution Age of Revolution Romanticism Abolitionism Emancipation Capitalism Industrial Revolution Great Divergence Modernism World War I Interwar period Universal suffrage World War II Cold War Post–Cold War era Information age War on terror Culture Alphabet Greek Latin Cyrillic Architecture Art Periods Calendar Cuisine Diet Classical tradition Studies Clothing History Dance Education Esotericism Astrology Folklore Immigration Law Languages Eurolinguistics Standard Average European Literature Canon Media Internet Music Chant Classical Folk Instruments Mythology Painting contemporary Philosophy Science Values Physical culture Sport Religion East–West Schism Western Christianity Decline Secularism Philosophy Ancient Greek philosophy Hellenistic philosophy Ancient Roman philosophy Christian ethics Judeo-Christian ethics Christian philosophy Scholasticism Rationalism Empiricism Existentialism Christian existentialism Humanism Christian humanism Secular humanism Liberalism Conservatism Socialism Continental philosophy Analytic philosophy Post-structuralism Tolerance Paradox Relativism Peritrope Atlanticism Sovereigntism Individualism Values European Religion Abrahamic Christianity Culture Western / Eastern Catholicism Latin Church Eastern Orthodoxy Greek Orthodox Church Protestantism Paganism Baltic Celtic Finnish Germanic Anglo-Saxon Frankish Gothic Old Norse Hellenistic Roman Slavic Neo Agnosticism Atheism Law Natural law Rule of law Equality before the law Constitutionalism Human rights Life Thought Speech Press Religion Property Democracy International law Contemporary integration ABCANZ Armies AER Anglo-Portuguese Alliance ANZUK ANZUS Arctic Council AUKUS AUSCANNZUKUS Baltic Assembly Benelux British–Irish Council BSEC Bucharest Nine CANZUK CBSS CEFTA Council of Europe Craiova Group Eastern European Group Eastern Partnership EEA EFTA EPC ESA EU EU Customs Union Eurozone EU–UK TCA Five Eyes G7 Lancaster House Treaties Lublin Triangle NATO Nordic Council OAS OECD Open Balkan OSCE Pacific Islands Forum PROSUR/PROSUL Rio Treaty Schengen Special Relationship Three Seas Initiative UKUSA Agreement USMCA Visegrád Group West Nordic Council Western Bloc Western European and Others Group Westernization Portals : Conservatism Current events Politics Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Historical Dictionary of Switzerland Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐jrfd9
Cached time: 20250815221601
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, vary‐revision, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 5.473 seconds
Real time usage: 6.292 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 43990/1000000
Revision size: 260564/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 1907576/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 48959/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 91/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 1878919/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 2.994/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24763539/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 4369.519      1 -total
 44.95% 1964.231      1 Template:Reflist
 26.72% 1167.599    226 Template:Cite_book
 10.12%  442.295     25 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
  7.14%  312.029     67 Template:Sfn
  6.14%  268.148     47 Template:Cite_journal
  5.56%  242.970     55 Template:Cite_web
  5.20%  227.430     48 Template:Cite_news
  4.56%  199.342     96 Template:Lang
  4.06%  177.241      1 Template:Conservatism_sidebar Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:6675:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815221601 and revision id 1305907420. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Conservatism&oldid=1305907420 " Categories : Conservatism Centre-right ideologies Political theories Right-wing ideologies Social theories Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 German-language sources (de) CS1 Danish-language sources (da) CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Articles with Norwegian-language sources (no) CS1 Polish-language sources (pl) CS1 Swedish-language sources (sv) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from November 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from February 2025 Articles containing French-language text All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from August 2025 Pages using multiple image with auto scaled images Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing Hebrew-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2014 Articles containing German-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles containing Italian-language text Articles containing Norwegian-language text Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 Articles containing Swedish-language text Articles containing Portuguese-language text Articles with unsourced statements from December 2024 Articles needing cleanup from March 2025 All pages needing cleanup Articles covered by WikiProject Wikify from March 2025 All articles covered by WikiProject Wikify Commons link from Wikidata Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 20:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Conservatism 133 languages Add topic

