Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History Toggle History subsection 1.1 First university-based dental school 1.2 Origins of DMD degree 1.3 Renaming the school 1.4 Expansion of postdoctoral educational programs 1.5 Harvard Odontological Society 1.6 Harvard Dental Alumni Association 2 Education Toggle Education subsection 2.1 School-based programs 2.2 Hospital-based programs 2.3 Major changes in predoctoral curriculum 1994 3 Early graduates 4 Affiliated organizations 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Harvard School of Dental Medicine 2 languages 日本語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°20′10″N 71°06′08″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.336095°N 71.102126°W ﻿ / 42.336095; -71.102126 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dental school in Boston, Massachusetts, US Harvard School of Dental Medicine Coat of arms Former name Harvard Dental School Type Private Established July 17, 1867 ; 158 years ago ( 1867-07-17 ) Parent institution Harvard University Dean William Giannobile Doctoral students 280 Location Boston , Massachusetts , United States 42°20′10″N 71°06′08″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.336095°N 71.102126°W ﻿ / 42.336095; -71.102126 Website hsdm .harvard .edu The Harvard School of Dental Medicine ( HSDM ) is the dental school of Harvard University . It is located in the Longwood Medical Area in Boston , Massachusetts . In addition to the DMD degree, HSDM offers specialty training programs, advanced training programs, and a PhD program through the Harvard Graduate School of Arts and Sciences . The program considers dentistry a specialty of medicine. Therefore, all students at HSDM experience dual citizenship between Harvard School of Dental Medicine and Harvard Medical School .

[ 1 ] Today, HSDM is the smallest school at Harvard University with a total student body of 280.

History [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Harvard School of Dental Medicine" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) First university-based dental school [ edit ] Harvard School of Dental Medicine In the early 19th century a dentist was culturally understood as a tradesman, as opposed to a professional in the medical sense. Most dentists had either learned their trade through apprenticeships or simply offered their services to the public as self-proclaimed experts.

Even physicians and surgeons had once been tradesmen; for example, in the Middle Ages, many barbers were also surgeons by trade .

[ 2 ] The advent of science was a principal factor in the professionalization of medicine and surgery, because as scientific knowledge of biology, chemistry, and physiology advanced, it became necessary to be educated academically in order to master the full body of knowledge in medicine; as medicine changed from an art to a mixture of applied science and art, it became something qualitatively different from the folk medicine or traditional medicine that it had earlier been.

[ citation needed ] A similar evolution happened in dentistry, as dentists today are required to understand a large amount of oral medicine to earn license to practice. The move toward more formal dental education and the professionalization of dentistry in the United States began when the state of Maryland chartered the Baltimore College of Dental Surgery in 1840. The establishment of this independent college, which may have occurred after the University of Maryland refused to add dental education to its curriculum, exemplified the nineteenth-century debate over whether dentistry should be part of scholarly education or should be taught in separate trade schools.

[ 3 ] As a result of this resistance, the various American dental schools that existed by 1866 were all freestanding (not university-affiliated). They included the aforementioned Baltimore College of Dental Surgery (1840), the Ohio College of Dental Surgery (1845), the Philadelphia College of Dental Surgery (1852), the New York College of Dentistry (1852), the Philadelphia Dental College (1863), and the Missouri Dental College (1866).

The move towards university-based dental education institutions (as they exist today) began with the formation of Harvard Dental School in 1867.

Reidar Fauske Sognnaes , noted oral pathologist and founding dean of the UCLA School of Dentistry , commented on the significance of the school's formation in a 1977 New England Journal of Medicine article: There was a time when the mouth, relatively speaking, was considered a scientific "no-man's land." That was when dental education fell between academic chairs--literally between the eyes, ears, nose and throat. In the United States dentistry was denied the academic status of other segments of higher education until 1867, when Harvard established the first dental school affiliated with a university-based faculty of medicine.

[ 4 ] Origins of DMD degree [ edit ] Harvard was the first dental school to award the DMD degree.

[ 5 ] The establishment of the degree is detailed at Dental degree § DDS vs DMD degree . There is no difference between the DMD and DDS degree; all dentists must meet the same national and regional certification standards.

[ 6 ] Renaming the school [ edit ] The school was established as Harvard Dental School in 1867, but renamed the Harvard School of Dental Medicine in 1940.

[ 7 ] This symbolic change was made to emphasize the biological basis of oral medicine and the increasingly multidisciplinary focus of dental research.

Expansion of postdoctoral educational programs [ edit ] In 1957, Harvard School of Dental Medicine was awarded a training grant from the National Institute of Dental Research (now the National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research) to expand its postdoctoral training programs. These new programs included an oral and maxillofacial surgery / MD / general surgery residency program; a Doctor of Medical Sciences (DMSc) degree; and 3- and 4-year joint-degree programs with an emphasis on combining clinical training with research into health policy , public health , and/or biomedical sciences.

The school's current post-doctoral programs include both school-based and hospital based residencies. School-based programs award the Master of Medical Science (MMSc) degree, with an optional Doctor of Medical Sciences (DMSc) degree available for those spending extra time on research activities.

Harvard Odontological Society [ edit ] The Harvard Odontological Society was established in 1878 to promote education and good fellowship amongst graduates and faculty of the Harvard School of Dental Medicine. In continuous operation for over 130 years, the society meets four times a year in a Boston, Massachusetts venue to hold a regular business meeting and an educational presentation of interest to its members.

Harvard Dental Alumni Association [ edit ] The Harvard School of Dental Medicine has an active group of over 2500 alumni who continue to participate in the day-to-day events of the school and are major contributors to the school's vision and goals for the new millennium.  In addition to publishing a quarterly bulletin, marking the current events of the school as well as the achievements of alumni, the Association also sponsors the annual Gold Medal and Silver Medal awards at graduation, honoring the valedictorian and salutatorian of the graduating class, respectively.

Education [ edit ] School-based programs [ edit ] Doctor of Dental Medicine (DMD) Orthodontics Endodontics Prosthodontics Periodontics Dental Public Health Hospital-based programs [ edit ] Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery at Massachusetts General Hospital and Boston Children's Hospital , with MD degree awarded from Harvard Medical School Pediatric Dentistry at Boston Children's Hospital General Practice Residency at Massachusetts General Hospital , Cambridge Health Alliance , or the Veterans Administration Hospital Major changes in predoctoral curriculum 1994 [ edit ] In 1994, a major change in the predoctoral curriculum included an increase of the predoctoral class size to 35, introduction of problem-based curriculum, and a switch from a 5-year program to a 4-year case-based curriculum.

Early graduates [ edit ] Varaztad Kazanjian , pioneer in plastic surgery , Harvard's first Professor of Plastic Surgery, DMD 1905 Robert Tanner Freeman , first African-American graduate, DMD 1869 Nathan Cooley Keep , founder and first Dean of Harvard Dental School, DMD 1870 (Honorary) George Franklin Grant , first African-American faculty member at Harvard University, DMD 1870 Kurt Hermann Thoma , founder of American Board of Pathology, DMD 1911 Affiliated organizations [ edit ] American Student Dental Association Harvard Odontological Society See also [ edit ] Harvard Dental Museum References [ edit ] ^ "DMD Program" .

hsdm.harvard.edu . Retrieved 2024-06-15 .

^ "Barber-surgeons" .

www.sciencemuseum.org.uk . Retrieved 8 January 2016 .

^ Field, Marilyn J. (1995).

Dental Education at the Crossroads: Challenges and Change . National Academies. p. 39.

ISBN 9780309051958 . Retrieved 8 January 2016 .

^ Sognnaes, Reidar F. (13 October 1977). "Why Mouthless Medical Schools?".

New England Journal of Medicine .

297 (15): 837– 838.

doi : 10.1056/NEJM197710132971515 .

PMID 895825 .

^ "DMD Program" .

School of Dentistry . Oregon Health & Science University . Retrieved 8 January 2016 .

^ Lalumandier, JA; Pyle, MA; Sawyer, DR (1999). "Public perception of DDS versus DMD degrees".

The Journal of the American College of Dentists .

66 (3): 29– 37.

PMID 10612944 .

^ "Dental School" .

Harvard University Library . Harvard University. p. 225 . Retrieved 8 January 2016 .

External links [ edit ] Harvard School of Dental Medicine v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons v t e Dental schools American dental schools UAB Arizona Augusta (DCG) Boston U (Goldman) California ( UCLA , UCSF ) Case Western Reserve Colorado Columbia Connecticut Creighton Detroit Mercy East Carolina Florida Harvard Howard Illinois–Chicago Indiana Iowa Kentucky LECOM Loma Linda Louisville LSU Health–New Orleans Marquette Maryland–Baltimore Meharry Michigan Midwestern Minnesota Mississippi Missouri–Kansas City Nebraska–Medical Center Nevada–Las Vegas New England NYU SUNY ( Buffalo , Stony Brook ) North Carolina Nova Ohio State Oklahoma Oregon Pacific (Dugoni) Penn Pitt Puerto Rico Rochester Pacific Northwest Rutgers South Carolina Southern California (Ostrow) Southern Illinois–Edwardsville Touro Temple (Kornberg) Tennessee Texas ( UT Health–Houston , UT Health–San Antonio ) Texas A&M Texas Tech–El Paso (Hunt) Tufts VCU Washington WesternU West Virginia Defunct American dental schools Emory Fairleigh Dickinson Georgetown Harris Loyola Northwestern Ohio College Oral Roberts Pennsylvania College Wash U Canadian dental schools Alberta British Columbia Dalhousie Laval Manitoba McGill Montréal Saskatchewan Toronto Western British dental schools Aberdeen Barts and The London School of Medicine and Dentistry Glasgow Guy's, King's & St Thomas's Liverpool Newcastle Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry UCL Eastman Dental Institute Australian and New Zealand dental schools Sydney Melbourne Adelaide Charles Sturt University Griffith University James Cook La Trobe Queensland Western Australia University of Otago South Korean dental schools Chonbuk Chonnam Chosun Dankook Gangneung-Wonju Kyung Hee Kyungpook Pusan Seoul Wonkwang Yonsei Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Harvard_School_of_Dental_Medicine&oldid=1288948978 " Categories : Harvard Medical School Universities and colleges established in 1867 1867 establishments in Massachusetts Dental schools in Massachusetts Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Articles needing additional references from July 2017 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 5 May 2025, at 15:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Harvard School of Dental Medicine 2 languages Add topic

