Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Russian Revolution Toggle Russian Revolution subsection 1.1 February Revolution 1.2 October Revolution 1.3 The Civil War 2 Soviet socialism 3 Collapse of the Soviet Union 4 Cuba and the Cold War 5 Modern Russia 6 Organizations 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Communism in Russia Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Part of a series on Communism Concepts Anti-capitalism Class conflict Class consciousness Classless society Collective leadership Communist revolution Commune Communist society Critique of political economy Free association "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs" Market abolitionism Proletarian internationalism Labour movement Social revolution Stateless society Wage slavery Workers' self-management World revolution Dictatorship of the proletariat Economics Planned economy Gift economy Common ownership Socialization (Marxism) Economic democracy Use value Variants Anarchist Crypto Marxism Leninist Libertarian Pre-Marxist Utopian Primitive Religious Christian Catholic World History Communist League First International Second International Third International Fourth International Fifth International Organisations Communist party list WPC WFTU WFDY IUS WIDF WFSW IOR People Mazdak More Meslier Babeuf Marx Engels Morris Kropotkin Malatesta Pannekoek Du Bois Lenin Luxemburg Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Lukács Thälmann Makhno Bukharin Ho Gramsci Tito Togliatti Benjamin Khrushchev Mao Pot Zhou James Padmore Sartre Hoxha Beauvoir Nkrumah Kim Hobsbawm Althusser Freire Pasolini Mandel Aidit Raja Fanon Castro Berger Guevara Guattari Debord Amin Berlinguer Negri Guzmán Badiou Sison Newton Ali Davis Holloway Hampton Žižek Sankara Öcalan Gordillo Gilmore Marcos Hardt Dean Graeber Lordon Kelley Fisher Prashad Hatherley Moufawad-Paul Saito By region Brazil Britain Cambodia Colombia France India Kerala Korea Nepal Peru Philippines Poland Russia Sumatra Vietnam Symbols Hammer and sickle Red flag (politics) Red star " The Internationale " " Workers of the world, unite!

" Criticism Anti-communism Communist propaganda Criticism of communist party rule Totalitarianism Criticism of Marxism Related  topics 21st-century communist theorists Anti anti-communism Anti-communist mass killings Anti-fascism Communist state Communitarianism Crimes against humanity Genocide Cambodian genocide Holodomor Genocides committed by the Soviet Union Mass killings under communist regimes Internationalism Intentional community Left-wing politics Old Left New Left LGBTQ rights Marx's theory of alienation National communism Romania Red Scare Revolutionary socialism Socialist economics Socialist mode of production Trade union War communism Worker cooperative Communism portal Socialism portal v t e The first significant attempt to implement communism on a large scale occurred in Russia following the February Revolution of 1917 , which led to the abdication of Tsar Nicholas II after significant pressure from the Duma and the military.

[ citation needed ] After the abdication, Russia was governed by a provisional government composed of remnants of the dissolved Duma and the soviets —workers’ and soldiers’ councils—in a power sharing system known as dvoevlastie (dual power). Later that year, the Bolsheviks , led by Vladimir Lenin , seized power in the October Revolution and established the Russian Soviet Republic . After the Russian Civil War ended in 1922, the Bolsheviks formally established the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) , with Lenin as its first leader.

Throughout the 20th century communism spread to various parts of the world, largely as a result of Soviet influence, often through revolutionary movements and post- World War II geopolitical shifts. The Cold War period saw a global ideological struggle between the communist bloc, led by the Soviet Union, and the capitalist West, led by the United States. The eventual dissolution of the Soviet Union in 1991 marked a significant decline in the global influence of communism, though the ideology persists in some countries and continues to inspire political movements worldwide.

[ 1 ] Efforts to build communism in Russia began after the success of the February Revolution in 1917 , and ended with the dissolution of the USSR in 1991. The Provisional Government was established under the liberal and social-democratic government; however, the Bolsheviks refused to accept the government and revolted in October 1917 , taking control of Russia.

Vladimir Lenin , their leader, rose to power and governed between 1917 and 1924.

The Communist Party of the Russian Federation remains the second-largest political party after United Russia .

Russian Revolution [ edit ] Main article: Russian Revolution February Revolution [ edit ] Main article: February Revolution The First World War placed an unbearable strain on Russia's government and economy, resulting in mass shortages and hunger. In the meantime, the mismanagement and failures of the war turned the people and importantly, the soldiers against the Tsar, whose decision to take personal command of the army seemed to make him personally responsible for the defeats. In February 1917, the Tsar first lost control of the streets, then of the soldiers, and finally of the Duma, resulting in his forced abdication on 2 March 1917.

[ 2 ] On 26 February 1917 citywide strikes spread throughout Petrograd . Dozens of demonstrators were killed by troops. The crowds grew hostile, so the soldiers had to decide which side they were on. As the situation became critical, soldiers refused to work for the Tsar.

[ 2 ] On 26 February 1917 the Army abandoned the Tsar; the soldiers mutinied and refused to put down the riots. By 27 February 1917 the workers were in control of the entire city.

[ 2 ] October Revolution [ edit ] Part of a series on Leninism Schools of thought Bolshevism Bordigism Marxism–Leninism Nkrumaism Right communism Trotskyism Workerism Concepts Anti-imperialism Collective leadership Democratic centralism Dialectical materialism Dual power Labor aristocracy Liquidationism National liberation Proletarian internationalism Revolutionary defeatism Revolutionary situation Self-determination Socialist state Soviet democracy Vanguardism World revolution People Lenin Trotsky Bukharin Kamenev Stalin Zinoviev Rykov Bubnov Sokolnikov Lukács Bordiga Hồ Gramsci Nkrumah Negri Theoretical works The Development of Capitalism in Russia (1899) What Is to Be Done?

(1902) Materialism and Empirio-criticism (1909) Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (1917) The State and Revolution (1917) The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky (1918) "Left-Wing" Communism: An Infantile Disorder (1920) Foundations of Leninism (1924) Leninism: Introduction to the Study of Leninism (1925) History Russian Social Democratic Labour Party 2nd Congress Prague Conference Bolsheviks RSDLP (Bolsheviks) Russian Revolution February Revolution October Revolution History of Soviet Russia RSFSR Collective leadership Civil War Red Army War communism Red Terror National delimitation Anti-religious campaign New Economic Policy Soviet Union Death and funeral of Lenin Comintern Joseph Stalin's rise to power Related topics 26 Baku Commissars Anti-Leninist left De-Leninization Jacobinism Marxism Libertarian Luxemburgism Left communism Mensheviks Orthodox Marxism Proletkult Communism portal Socialism portal Politics portal v t e Main article: October Revolution On 24–25 October 1917 the Bolsheviks and Left Socialist Revolutionaries organized a revolution , occupying government buildings, telegraph stations, and other strategic points.

[ 3 ] On 24 October 1917, the Red Guards took over bridges and telephone exchanges.

[ 3 ] On 25 and 26 October 1917 the Red Guards took over banks, government buildings, and railways stations. The cruiser Aurora fired blank shots at the Winter Palace signalling the start of the revolution. That night (9:40 pm), the Red Guards took over the Winter Palace and arrested the Provisional Government.

[ 3 ] On 27 October 1917 Lenin proclaimed that all power now belonged to the Soviets of Workers', Soldiers' and Peasants' Deputies.

[ 3 ] The Civil War [ edit ] Main article: War communism After Vladimir Lenin and Joseph Stalin took over the Soviet Union, many people still opposed the communist party. This led to the Civil War between the White Army and Red Army. The White Army included the opposition party, while the Red Army included the armed forces of the government and people that supported Vladimir Lenin. The Civil War resulted in the deaths of 10–30 million people.

[ 4 ] Soviet socialism [ edit ] Main article: Socialism in one country This section is an excerpt from Dictatorship of the proletariat § Proletarian government .

[ edit ] Lenin argued that in an underdeveloped country such as Russia the capitalist class would remain a threat even after a successful socialist revolution.

[ 5 ] As a result, he advocated the repression of those elements of the capitalist class that took up arms against the new soviet government, writing that as long as classes existed a state would need to exist to exercise the democratic rule of one class (in his view, the working class) over the other (the capitalist class).

[ 5 ] Lenin wrote that "[d]ictatorship does not necessarily mean the abolition of democracy for the class that exercises the dictatorship over other classes; but it does mean the abolition of democracy (or very material restriction, which is also a form of abolition) for the class over which, or against which, the dictatorship is exercised." [ 6 ] [ 7 ] After World War I , Karl Kautsky became a critic of the Bolshevik Revolution , and was famously denounced by Lenin as a "renegade".

[ 8 ] The use of violence, terror and rule of a single communist party was criticised by other Marxists , including Karl Kautsky , [ 9 ] and Rosa Luxemburg , [ 10 ] as well as Anarcho-Communists like Peter Kropotkin .

[ 11 ] Soviet democracy granted voting rights to the majority of the populace who elected the local soviets, who elected the regional soviets and so on until electing the Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union . Capitalists were disenfranchised in the Russian soviet model. However, according to Lenin in a developed country it would be possible to dispense with the disenfranchisement of capitalists within the democratic proletarian dictatorship as the proletariat would be guaranteed of an overwhelming majority.

[ 12 ] The Bolsheviks in 1917–1924 did not claim to have achieved a communist society. In contrast the preamble to the 1977 Constitution (Fundamental Law) of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (the "Brezhnev Constitution"), stated that the 1917 Revolution established the dictatorship of the proletariat as "a society of true democracy" and that "the supreme goal of the Soviet state is the building of a classless, communist society in which there will be public, communist self-government." [ 13 ] Collapse of the Soviet Union [ edit ] Main article: Communist Party of the Soviet Union § Gorbachev and the party's demise (1985–91) Authors Roger Keeran and Thomas Kenney stipulate that the primary cause of the Soviet Union's collapse was a betrayal of established socialist principles, particularly during the Gorbachev era.

[ 14 ] Gorbachev's policies of perestroika and glasnost undermined the planned economy, weakening the Communist Party and allowing non-communist power to take hold. This is catalyzed in Gorbachev's removal of the Communist Party's constitutional role in 1990. A year later, the USSR was dissolved despite a majority of the Soviet citizens voting against dissolution. Boris Yeltsin then became the first president of Russia.

[ 4 ] Russian President Boris Yeltsin would ban the CPSU in the aftermath of the failed coup attempt . The Communist Party of the Russian Federation (CPRF) would be founded at the Second Extraordinary Congress of Russian Communists on 14 February 1993 as the successor organization of the Communist Party of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic (CPRSFSR). The CPRF was the ruling party in the State Duma , the lower house of the Russian Federal Assembly from 1998 to 1999. It is the second-largest political party in Russia after United Russia .

Cuba and the Cold War [ edit ] The Cold War was a period of geopolitical tension between the United States and the Soviet Union . It began shortly after World War II and lasted until the early 1990s; this era was marked by ideological, political, and military rivalry between the two superpowers and their respective allies. One of the most significant flashpoints of the Cold War was Cuba . After the Cuban Revolution in 1959, Cuba became a close ally of the Soviet Union, aligning itself with communist ideology . This alliance was pivotal during the Cuban Missile Crisis in 1962, when the discovery of Soviet nuclear missiles on Cuban soil brought the world to the brink of nuclear war. The crisis was ultimately resolved through a tense negotiation, resulting in the removal of the missiles in exchange for a U.S. pledge not to invade Cuba and the secret removal of U.S. missiles from Turkey .

Modern Russia [ edit ] Soviet nostalgia remains prevalent among the Russian populace. Per the Levada Center in 2018, 66 percent of Russians said they regretted the Soviet break-up [ 15 ] highlighting the enduring impact of this historical period on the collective memory of the nation.

[ 16 ] Organizations [ edit ] All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) (1995) All-Union Communist Party of Bolsheviks (1991) All-Union Young Guard Bolsheviks Alliance of the Revolutionary Socialists Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of the Soviet Union (1992) Communist Party of the Soviet Union (2001) Communist Party of Social Justice Communists of Russia Essence of Time Labour Russia League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class Left Front Leninist Komsomol of the Russian Federation Party of Narodnik Communists Party of Revolutionary Communism Party of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat Revolutionary Workers' Party Russian Communist Workers Party Russian Communist Workers' Party of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Russian Maoist Party Russian Socialist Movement Russian United Labour Front Socialist Alternative Socialist League Vpered Stalin Bloc – For the USSR Union of Communist Parties – Communist Party of the Soviet Union United Communist Party Vanguard of Red Youth See also [ edit ] Anarchism in Russia Bolshevism Ideology of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union Leninism New Soviet man Nostalgia for the Soviet Union Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic Sovietization References [ edit ] ^ Daniels, R (2001) [1993]. "A documentary history of communism in Russia: From Lenin to Gorbachev".

University of Vermont .

^ a b c Smithsonian Channel (10 September 2012), Russian Revolution in Color – Mutiny in Petrograd , retrieved 16 May 2016 ^ a b c d "Russian Revolution of 1917" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Retrieved 16 May 2016 .

^ a b "Soviet Union | History, Leaders, Map, & Facts" .

Encyclopedia Britannica . Retrieved 25 February 2020 .

^ a b Lenin, Vladimir (1918).

"PRRK: Can There Be Equality Between the Exploited and the Exploiter?" .

The Proletarian Revolution And The Renegade Kautsky .

Archived from the original on 18 April 2024 – via Marxists Internet Archive.

^ V. I. Lenin, The Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky. Collected Works, Vol. 28, p. 235.

^ Marx Engels Lenin on Scientific Socialism . Moscow: Novosti Press Ajency Publishing House. 1974.

^ Lewis, Ben (17 October 2020).

"Karl Kautsky Was Once a Revolutionary" .

Jacobin Magazine .

Archived from the original on 25 November 2020 . Retrieved 26 December 2020 .

^ "Karl Kautsky: Social Democracy vs. Communism (Part 4)" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 13 December 2022 .

^ "Rosa Luxemburg: The Russian Revolution (Chap.6)" .

www.marxists.org . Retrieved 13 December 2022 .

^ "Revolutionary Government" .

The Anarchist Library . Retrieved 13 December 2022 .

^ Notes on Plenkhanov's Second Draft Programme . Lenin Collected Works. Vol. 6, p. 51.

^ 1977 Constitution of the USSR, Part 1 .

^ Keeran, Roger; Kenny, Thomas (2004).

Socialism Betrayed: Behind the Collapse of the Soviet Union (Revised ed.). Bloomington, IN: International Publishers.

ISBN 978-1-4502-4171-7 .

^ Balmforth, Tom (19 December 2018).

"Russian nostalgia for Soviet Union reaches 13-year high" .

Reuters.com . Retrieved 4 November 2022 .

^ "COMMENT: Duma Elections 2021: Russia's Communist Party looks interesting again" .

www.intellinews.com . 5 August 2021 . Retrieved 30 August 2021 .

v t e Marxism–Leninism Concepts Administrative-command system Aggravation of class struggle under socialism Anti-imperialism Anti-fascism Anti-revisionism Central planning Soviet-type economic planning Commanding heights of the economy Developed socialism Dialectical logic Dialectical materialism Foco Labour aristocracy Marxist–Leninist atheism Partiinost' People's democracy People's democratic revolution Popular front Proletarian internationalism Self-criticism Social fascism Socialism in one country Socialist patriotism Soviet Theory of the productive forces Third Period Wars of national liberation State forms People's democratic state National democratic state Socialist state State of socialist orientation Socialist state of the whole people Class system Dictatorship of the proletariat People's democratic dictatorship Political system Party Central committee General Secretary of the Communist Party Politburo Secretariat Vanguardism State Permanent organ of the supreme state organ of power Special committees of the supreme state organ of power Supreme executive and administrative organ Supreme state organ of power Leading role of the party Transmission belt Unified power Unified state apparatus Hybrid Civilian control of the military Collective leadership Cult of personality Democratic centralism Variants Cuban ( Fidelismo Guevarism ) Ho Chi Minh Thought Hoxhaism Husakism Juche ( Songun Kimilsungism–Kimjongilism Kimjongunism ) Kadarism Khrushchevism Maoism ( Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Gonzalo Thought Naxalism Prachanda Path Mao-spontex Islamic Maoism Pantherism ( Intercommunalism ) New Synthesis Mulelism ) Kaysone Phomvihane Thought National Pol Potism African ( Sankarism Machelism Nkrumaism ) Socialism with Chinese characteristics ( Dengism Three Represents Scientific Outlook on Development Xi Jinping Thought ) Stalinism ( Neo-Stalinism ) People's Multiparty Democracy American ( Bill of Rights socialism Browderism Marcyism New Communism ) Dubčekism Zachariadism Brezhnevism Taistoism Titoism ( Đilasism Rankovićism ) People Joseph Stalin Mao Zedong John Maclean James Connolly Ernst Thälmann Khorloogiin Choibalsan Ehmetjan Qasim José Díaz Maurice Thorez Palmiro Togliatti Dolores Ibárruri Harry Pollitt Rajani Palme Dutt Ho Chi Minh Võ Nguyên Giáp Earl Browder Nikita Khrushchev Walter Ulbricht Josip Broz Tito Mátyás Rákosi Lazar Kaganovich Georgi Dimitrov Bolesław Bierut Willie Gallacher Valko Chervenkov Klement Gottwald Gheorghe Gheorghiu-Dej Enver Hoxha Kaysone Phomvihane Khalid Bakdash Leonid Brezhnev Deng Xiaoping Pol Pot Nikos Zachariadis Che Guevara Fidel Castro Agostinho Neto Mengistu Haile Mariam Kim Il Sung Chin Peng Sanzō Nosaka Nicolae Ceaușescu Gustáv Husák János Kádár Maurice Bishop Erich Honecker Władysław Gomułka Samora Machel Thomas Sankara Mathieu Kérékou Siad Barre Nur Muhammad Taraki Alfonso Cano Pushpa Kamal Dahal Rohana Wijeweera Abimael Guzmán Gus Hall Gennady Zyuganov Xi Jinping Theoretical works Foundations of Leninism Dialectical and Historical Materialism The History of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks) Britain's Road to Socialism Economic Problems of Socialism in the USSR A Critique of Soviet Economics Fundamentals of Marxism–Leninism Guerrilla Warfare History Soviet Union ( 1927–1953 1953–1964 1964–1982 1982–1991 ) Great Break Collectivization in the Soviet Union Industrialization in the Soviet Union Great Purge Spanish Civil War Great Patriotic War Greek Civil War Cold War Eastern Bloc Chinese Communist Revolution China ( 1949–1976 1976–1989 1989–2002 2002–present ) Tito–Stalin split Korean War De-Stalinization Warsaw Pact Consolidation of the Cuban Revolution Non-Aligned Movement Vietnam War Albanian–Soviet split Sino-Soviet split Hungarian Revolution of 1956 Great Leap Forward Portuguese Colonial War Black Power movement Nicaraguan Revolution Cultural Revolution Prague Spring Naxalite insurgency New People's Army rebellion Maoist insurgency in Turkey Sino-Albanian split Internal conflict in Peru Nepalese Civil War Revolutions of 1989 By country Afghanistan Albania Angola Benin Bulgaria Cambodia ( Democratic Kampuchea People's Republic of Kampuchea ) China Congo Cuba Czechoslovakia ( Czechia Slovakia ) East Germany Ethiopia Grenada Hungary Laos Mongolia Mozambique North Korea Poland Romania Somalia Soviet Union ( Armenia Azerbaijan Byelarus Estonia Georgia Kazakhstan Kyrgyzstan Latvia Lithuania Moldova Russia Tajikistan Turkmenistan Ukraine Uzbekistan ) Vietnam Yemen Yugoslavia ( Bosnia and Herzegovina Croatia Macedonia Montenegro Serbia Slovenia ) Organizations Albanian Party of Labour Comecon Comintern Chinese Communist Party Communist Party of Brazil Communist Party of Cuba Communist Party of India Communist Party of India (Marxist) Communist Party of Kampuchea Communist Party of the Philippines Communist Party of the Russian Federation Communist Party of the Soviet Union Communist Party of Vietnam Communist Party of Malaya Indochinese Communist Party Kampuchean People's Revolutionary Party Lao People's Revolutionary Party Nepal Communist Party Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine Sandinista National Liberation Front Shining Path ( Militarized Communist Party of Peru ) Workers' Party of Korea Portuguese Communist Party Related topics Bolshevism Leninism Trotskyism See also All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks) Anti-communism ( Mass killings ) Cold War Crimes against humanity under Marxist–Leninist regimes ( Mass killings ) Criticism of Marxist–Leninist party rule MAGA Communism Marxist schools of thought National Bolshevism Nazi-Maoism New class Post-Marxism–Leninism Red fascism Red Scare ( Second ) Second World State capitalism State socialism State ideology of China State ideology of the Soviet Union Third-Worldism Totalitarianism Socialism portal Communism portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐645954cd9f‐26bvz
Cached time: 20250815203049
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.494 seconds
Real time usage: 0.641 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 2527/1000000
Revision size: 11562/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 138357/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 3049/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 14/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 78530/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.292/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8066720/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  489.673      1 -total
 26.70%  130.759      1 Template:Reflist
 24.81%  121.471      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 17.35%   84.948      1 Template:Communism_sidebar
 17.13%   83.861      1 Template:Communism
 12.57%   61.553      1 Template:Cite_journal
 12.34%   60.439      1 Template:Excerpt
 10.74%   52.609      1 Template:Short_description
  8.53%   41.762      1 Template:Leninism_sidebar
  6.86%   33.570      8 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:34267664:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250815203049 and revision id 1301490200. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Communism_in_Russia&oldid=1301490200 " Categories : Communism in Russia Communism in the Soviet Union History of socialism Political history of Russia Political movements in Russia Political movements in the Soviet Union Politics of Russia Politics of the Soviet Union Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Use dmy dates from June 2020 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2025 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 20 July 2025, at 03:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Communism in Russia Add languages Add topic

