Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Tectonics 2 Features 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Siberia (continent) 37 languages Afrikaans العربية Беларуская Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano ಕನ್ನಡ Кыргызча Lietuvių മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Română Русский Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient craton forming the Central Siberian Plateau Current location of the remains of the ancient landmass of Siberia in north Asia Siberia , also known as Siberian Craton , Angaraland (or simply Angara ) and Angarida , [ 1 ] is an ancient craton in the heart of Siberia . Today forming the Central Siberian Plateau , it formed an independent landmass prior to its fusion into Pangaea during the late Carboniferous - Permian . The Verkhoyansk Sea , a passive continental margin, was fringing the Siberian Craton to the east in what is now the East Siberian Lowland .

[ 2 ] Angaraland was named in the 1880s by Austrian geologist Eduard Suess who erroneously believed that in the Paleozoic Era there were two large continents in the Northern Hemisphere: "Atlantis", which was North America connected to Europe via a peninsula (Greenland and Iceland), and "Angara-land", which would have been eastern Asia, named after the Angara River in Siberia.

[ 3 ] Tectonics [ edit ] About 2.5 billion years ago (in the Siderian Period), Siberia was part of a continent called Arctica , along with the Canadian Shield . Around 1.1 billion years ago (in the Stenian Period), Siberia became part of the supercontinent of Rodinia , which lasted until the Tonian about 750 million years ago when it broke up, and Siberia became part of the landmass of Protolaurasia . During the Ediacaran Period around 600 million years ago, Protolaurasia became part of the southern supercontinent of Pannotia . Around 550 million years ago, both Pannotia and Protolaurasia split up to become the continents of Laurentia , Baltica and Siberia.

[ citation needed ] Map of Earth's continents and oceans in the middle of the Ordovician Period, about 470 million years ago (SI=Siberia, LA= Laurentia , BA= Baltica ) Siberia was an independent continent through the early Paleozoic until, during the Carboniferous Period, it collided with the minor continent of Kazakhstania . A subsequent collision with Euramerica/Laurussia during the Late Carboniferous - Permian formed Pangaea .

[ 4 ] Pangaea split up during the Jurassic though Siberia stayed with Laurasia . Laurasia gradually split up during the Cretaceous with Siberia remaining part of present-day northeastern Eurasia . Today, Siberia forms part of the landmass of Afro-Eurasia . To the east it is joined to the North American plate at the Chersky Range . In around 250 million years from now Siberia may be in the subtropical region and part of the new supercontinent of Pangaea Proxima .

[ citation needed ] Features [ edit ] Akitkan Orogen [ 5 ] Aldan Shield Anabar Shield Birekte terrane [ 6 ] Daldyn terrane Magan terrane Olenyok Uplift Stanovoy tectonic zone [ 7 ] Tunguska Basin Tungus terrane See also [ edit ] Geology portal Siberia portal References [ edit ] ^ Klets, A. G.; Budnikov, I. V.; Kutygin, R. V.; Biakov, A. S.; Grinenko, V. S. (2006).

"The Permian of the Verkhoyansk–Okhotsk region, NE Russia" .

Journal of Asian Earth Sciences .

26 (3): 258– 268.

Bibcode : 2006JAESc..26..258K .

doi : 10.1016/j.jseaes.2005.10.001 .

^ Permian bivalve mollusks of Northeast Asia, Fig. 1 ^ Sprague de Camp, L.

(1970).

Lost Continents: The Atlantis Theme in History, Science, and Literature . Courier Corporation.

ISBN 9780486226682 . Retrieved 25 October 2015 .

^ Xu, Yan; Han, Bao-Fu; Liao, Wen; Li, Ang (March 2022).

"The Serpukhovian–Bashkirian Amalgamation of Laurussia and the Siberian Continent and Implications for Assembly of Pangea" .

Tectonics .

41 (3).

doi : 10.1029/2022TC007218 .

ISSN 0278-7407 .

S2CID 247459291 .

^ Schematic map of the Siberian craton showing boundaries of the craton and its terranes ^ Schematic map of ancient terrains and kimberlitic fields in the Siberian craton ^ YAKUTIAN KIMBERLITE PROVINCE: POSITION IN THE STRUCTURE OF THE SIBERIAN CRATON AND COMPOSITION OF THE UPPER AND LOWER CRUST External links [ edit ] Blakey, R.

"Global Earth History: Sedimentation, Tectonics, and Paleogeography of Asia" . Northern Arizona University. Archived from the original on 16 June 2018 . Retrieved 25 October 2015 .

(History of Siberia as well as other parts of Asia) v t e Continents of Earth Africa Antarctica Asia Australia Europe North America South America Afro-Eurasia Americas Eurasia Oceania Prehistoric supercontinents Columbia Gondwana Kenorland Laurasia Nena Pangaea Pannotia Rodinia Ur Vaalbara Other prehistoric continents Amazonia Arctica Asiamerica Atlantica Avalonia Baltica Chilenia Cimmeria Congo Craton Cuyania East Antarctica Euramerica Kalaharia Kazakhstania Laramidia Laurentia North China Pampia Sahul Siberia South China Submerged continent / lands and microcontinents Beringia Cathaysia Iceland Davis Strait Doggerland Great Australian Bight Jan Mayen Kerguelen Plateau Madagascar Mauritia Rockall Basin Sahul Seychelles Sunda Zealandia Possible future supercontinents Amasia Aurica Novopangaea Pangaea Proxima Mythical , lost , and hypothesised continents Atlantis Hyperborea Kumari Kandam Lemuria Meropis Mu Terra Australis Subcontinents Alaska Arabia Central America Eastern Africa Eastern Siberia Greenland (Territory) Indian Subcontinent See also: World portal Regions of the world Continental fragment Category Chronology of continents Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic This palaeogeography article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Siberia_(continent)&oldid=1301049561 " Categories : Historical continents Tectonic plates Historical tectonic plates History of Siberia Paleozoic Asia Paleozoic geology Geology of Russia Natural history of Asia Geology of Krasnoyarsk Krai Geology of the Sakha Republic Palaeogeography stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2020 All stub articles This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 20:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Siberia (continent) 37 languages Add topic

