Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Existence 2 Properties 3 Criticism 4 References Toggle the table of contents Strong Nash equilibrium 4 languages עברית Русский Українська 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in game theory Strong Nash equilibrium Solution concept in game theory Relationship Subset of Evolutionarily stable strategy (if the strong Nash equilibrium is not also weak) Significance Used for All non-cooperative games of more than 2 players In game theory , a strong Nash equilibrium (SNE) is a combination of actions of the different players, in which no coalition of players can cooperatively deviate in a way that strictly benefits all of its members, given that the actions of the other players remain fixed. This is in contrast to simple Nash equilibrium, which considers only deviations by individual players. The concept was introduced by Israel Aumann in 1959.

[ 1 ] SNE is particularly useful in areas such as the study of voting systems , in which there are typically many more players than possible outcomes, and so plain Nash equilibria are far too abundant.

[ 2 ] Existence [ edit ] Nessah and Tian [ 3 ] prove that an SNE exists if the following conditions are satisfied: The strategy space of each player is compact and convex ; The payoff function of each player is concave and continuous; The coalition consistency property: there exists a weight-vector-tuple w , assigning a weight-vector w S to each possible coalition S , such that for each strategy-profile x , there exists a strategy-profile z in which z S maximizes the weighted (by w S ) social welfare to members of S , given x − S .

Note that if x is itself an SNE, then z can be taken to be equal to x . If x is not an SNE, the condition requires that one can move to a different strategy-profile which is a social-welfare-best-response for all coalitions simultaneously.

For example, consider a game with two players, with strategy spaces [1/3, 2] and [3/4, 2], which are clearly compact and convex. The utility functions are: u1(x) = - x1 2 + x2 + 1 u2(x) = x1 - x2 2 + 1 which are continuous and convex. It remains to check coalition consistency. For every strategy-tuple x, we check the weighted-best-response of each coalition: For the coalition {1}, we need to find, for every x2, max y1 (-y1 2 + x2 + 1); it is clear that the maximum is attained at the smallest point of the strategy space, which is y1=1/3.

For the coalition {2}, we similarly see that for every x1, the maximum payoff is attained at the smallest point, y2=3/4.

For the coalition {1,2}, with weights w1,w2, we need to find max y1,y2 (w1*(-y1 2 + y2 + 1)+w2*(y1 - y2 2 + 1)). Using the derivative test , we can find out that the maximum point is y1=w2/(2*w1) and y2=w1/(2*w2). By taking w1=0.6,w2=0.4 we get y1=1/3 and y2=3/4.

So, with w1=0.6,w2=0.4 the point (1/3,3/4) is a consistent social-welfare-best-response for all coalitions simultaneously. Therefore, an SNE exists, at the same point (1/3,3/4).

Here is an example in which the coalition consistency fails, and indeed there is no SNE.

[ 3 ] : Example.3.1 There are two players, with strategy space [0,1]. Their utility functions are: u1(x) = -x1 + 2*x2; u2(x) = 2*x1 - x2.

There is a unique Nash equilibrium at (0,0), with payoff vector (0,0). However, it is not SNE as the coalition {1,2} can deviate to (1,1), with payoff vector (1,1). Indeed, coalition consistency is violated at x =(0,0): for the coalition {1,2}, for any weight-vector w S , the social-welfare-best-response is either on the line (1,0)--(1,1) or on the line (0,1)--(1,1); but any such point is not a best-response for the player playing 1.

Nessah and Tian [ 3 ] also present a necessary and sufficient condition for SNE existence, along with an algorithm that finds an SNE if and only if it exists.

Properties [ edit ] Every SNE is a Nash equilibrium. This can be seen by considering a deviation of the n singleton coalitions.

Every SNE is weakly Pareto-efficient . This can be seen by considering a deviation of the grand coalition - the coalition of all players.

Every SNE is in the weak alpha-core and in the weak-beta core .

[ 3 ] Criticism [ edit ] The strong Nash concept is criticized as too "strong" in that the environment allows for unlimited private communication. As a result of these requirements, Strong Nash rarely exists in games interesting enough to deserve study. Nevertheless, it is possible for there to be multiple strong Nash equilibria. For instance, in Approval voting , there is always a strong Nash equilibrium for any Condorcet winner that exists, but this is only unique (apart from inconsequential changes) when there is a majority Condorcet winner.

A relatively weaker yet refined Nash stability concept is called coalition-proof Nash equilibrium (CPNE) [ 2 ] in which the equilibria are immune to multilateral deviations that are self-enforcing. Every correlated strategy supported by iterated strict dominance and on the Pareto frontier is a CPNE.

[ 4 ] Further, it is possible for a game to have a Nash equilibrium that is resilient against coalitions less than a specified size k . CPNE is related to the theory of the core .

Confusingly, the concept of a strong Nash equilibrium is unrelated to that of a weak Nash equilibrium . That is, a Nash equilibrium can be both strong and weak, either, or neither.

References [ edit ] ^ R. Aumann (1959), Acceptable points in general cooperative n -person games in "Contributions to the Theory of Games IV" , Princeton Univ. Press, Princeton, N.J..

^ a b B. D. Bernheim; B. Peleg; M. D. Whinston (1987), "Coalition-Proof Equilibria I. Concepts", Journal of Economic Theory , 42 : 1– 12, doi : 10.1016/0022-0531(87)90099-8 .

^ a b c d Nessah, Rabia; Tian, Guoqiang (2014-06-15).

"On the existence of strong Nash equilibria" .

Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications .

414 (2): 871– 885.

doi : 10.1016/j.jmaa.2014.01.030 .

ISSN 0022-247X .

^ D. Moreno; J. Wooders (1996), "Coalition-Proof Equilibrium", Games and Economic Behavior , 17 : 80– 112, doi : 10.1006/game.1996.0095 , hdl : 10016/4408 .

v t e Game theory Glossary Game theorists Games Traditional game theory Definitions Asynchrony Bayesian regret Best response Bounded rationality Cheap talk Coalition Complete contract Complete information Complete mixing Confrontation analysis Conjectural variation Contingent cooperator Coopetition Cooperative game theory Dynamic inconsistency Escalation of commitment Farsightedness Game semantics Hierarchy of beliefs Imperfect information Incomplete information Information set Move by nature Mutual knowledge Non-cooperative game theory Non-credible threat Outcome Perfect information Perfect recall Ply Preference Rationality Sequential game Simultaneous action selection Spite Strategic complements Strategic dominance Strategic form Strategic interaction Strategic move Strategy Subgame Succinct game Topological game Tragedy of the commons Uncorrelated asymmetry Equilibrium concepts Backward induction Bayes correlated equilibrium Bayesian efficiency Bayesian game Bayesian Nash equilibrium Berge equilibrium Bertrand–Edgeworth model Coalition-proof Nash equilibrium Core Correlated equilibrium Cursed equilibrium Edgeworth price cycle Epsilon-equilibrium Gibbs equilibrium Incomplete contracts Inequity aversion Individual rationality Iterated elimination of dominated strategies Markov perfect equilibrium Mertens-stable equilibrium Nash equilibrium Open-loop model Pareto efficiency Payoff dominance Perfect Bayesian equilibrium Price of anarchy Program equilibrium Proper equilibrium Quantal response equilibrium Quasi-perfect equilibrium Rational agent Rationalizability Rationalizable strategy Satisfaction equilibrium Self-confirming equilibrium Sequential equilibrium Shapley value Strong Nash equilibrium Subgame perfect equilibrium Trembling hand equilibrium Strategies Appeasement Bid shading Cheap talk Collusion Commitment device De-escalation Deterrence Escalation Fictitious play Focal point Grim trigger Hobbesian trap Markov strategy Max-dominated strategy Mixed strategy Pure strategy Tit for tat Win–stay, lose–switch Games All-pay auction Battle of the sexes Nash bargaining game Bertrand competition Blotto game Centipede game Coordination game Cournot competition Deadlock Dictator game Trust game Diner's dilemma Dollar auction El Farol Bar problem Electronic mail game Gift-exchange game Guess 2/3 of the average Keynesian beauty contest Kuhn poker Lewis signaling game Matching pennies Obligationes Optional prisoner's dilemma Pirate game Prisoner's dilemma Public goods game Rendezvous problem Rock paper scissors Stackelberg competition Stag hunt Traveler's dilemma Ultimatum game Volunteer's dilemma War of attrition Theorems Arrow's impossibility theorem Aumann's agreement theorem Brouwer fixed-point theorem Competitive altruism Folk theorem Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem Gibbs lemma Glicksberg's theorem Kakutani fixed-point theorem Kuhn's theorem One-shot deviation principle Prim–Read theory Rational ignorance Rational irrationality Sperner's lemma Zermelo's theorem Subfields Algorithmic game theory Behavioral game theory Behavioral strategy Compositional game theory Contract theory Drama theory Graphical game theory Heresthetic Mean-field game theory Negotiation theory Quantum game theory Social software Key people Albert W. Tucker Alvin E. Roth Amos Tversky Antoine Augustin Cournot Ariel Rubinstein David Gale David K. Levine David M. Kreps Donald B. Gillies Drew Fudenberg Eric Maskin Harold W. Kuhn Herbert Simon Herbert Scarf Hervé Moulin Jean Tirole Jean-François Mertens Jennifer Tour Chayes Ken Binmore Kenneth Arrow Leonid Hurwicz Lloyd Shapley Martin Shubik Melvin Dresher Merrill M. Flood Olga Bondareva Oskar Morgenstern Paul Milgrom Peyton Young Reinhard Selten Robert Aumann Robert Axelrod Robert B. Wilson Roger Myerson Samuel Bowles Suzanne Scotchmer Thomas Schelling William Vickrey Combinatorial game theory Core concepts Combinatorial explosion Determinacy Disjunctive sum First-player and second-player win Game complexity Game tree Impartial game Misère Partisan game Solved game Sprague–Grundy theorem Strategy-stealing argument Zugzwang Games Chess Chomp Clobber Cram Domineering Hackenbush Nim Notakto Subtract a square Sylver coinage Toads and Frogs Mathematical tools Mex Nimber On Numbers and Games Star Surreal number Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays Search algorithms Alpha–beta pruning Expectiminimax Minimax Monte Carlo tree search Negamax Paranoid algorithm Principal variation search Key people Claude Shannon John Conway John von Neumann Evolutionary game theory Core concepts Bishop–Cannings theorem Evolution and the Theory of Games Evolutionarily stable set Evolutionarily stable state Evolutionarily stable strategy Replicator equation Risk dominance Stochastically stable equilibrium Weak evolutionarily stable strategy Games Chicken Stag hunt Applications Cultural group selection Fisher's principle Mobbing Terminal investment hypothesis Key people John Maynard Smith Robert Axelrod Mechanism design Core concepts Algorithmic mechanism design Bayesian-optimal mechanism Incentive compatibility Market design Monotonicity Participation constraint Revelation principle Strategyproofness Vickrey–Clarke–Groves mechanism Theorems Myerson–Satterthwaite theorem Revenue equivalence Applications Digital goods auction Knapsack auction Truthful cake-cutting Other topics Bertrand paradox Chainstore paradox Computational complexity of games Helly metric Multi-agent system PPAD-complete Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Strong_Nash_equilibrium&oldid=1275030469 " Category : Game theory equilibrium concepts Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 10 February 2025, at 18:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Strong Nash equilibrium 4 languages Add topic

