Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Concept 2 Development 3 Critique Toggle Critique subsection 3.1 In the critique of political economy 3.2 Domination of things 3.3 Objectified value 3.4 Naturalization of market behaviour 3.5 Masking 3.6 Opacity of economic relations 3.7 Capitalism as religion 4 Applications Toggle Applications subsection 4.1 Cultural theory 4.1.1 Social prestige 4.1.2 Reification 4.1.3 Industrialized culture 4.1.4 Commodity narcissism 4.1.5 Ethical consumption 4.1.6 Social alienation 4.1.7 Semiotic sign 4.2 Intellectual property 4.2.1 Philosophic base 4.2.2 Knowledge: authentic and counterfeit 4.2.3 Financial risk management 4.2.4 Commodified art 4.2.5 Legal traducement 5 Criticism 6 See also 7 References 8 Further reading 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Commodity fetishism 27 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն עברית Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in Marxist analysis Commodity fetishism: In the economics of the marketplace , producers and consumers perceive each other by means of the money and goods that they exchange.

Part of a series on Marxism Outline Theoretical works Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 The Condition of the Working Class in England The German Ideology Wage Labour and Capital The Communist Manifesto The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte Grundrisse Capital Critique of the Gotha Programme Dialectics of Nature The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State What Is to Be Done?

The Accumulation of Capital Philosophical Notebooks Terrorism and Communism The State and Revolution Essays on Marx's Theory of Value History and Class Consciousness Prison Notebooks The Black Jacobins On Practice Dialectic of Enlightenment A Critique of Soviet Economics The Long Revolution Guerrilla Warfare The Wretched of the Earth Reading Capital The Society of the Spectacle Pedagogy of the Oppressed Ideology and Ideological State Apparatuses Ways of Seeing How Europe Underdeveloped Africa Social Justice and the City Women, Race and Class Marxism and the Oppression of Women Imagined Communities Hegemony and Socialist Strategy The Sublime Object of Ideology Time, Labor and Social Domination The Age of Extremes The Origin of Capitalism Empire Late Victorian Holocausts Change the World Without Taking Power Caliban and the Witch An Introduction to the Three Volumes of Karl Marx's Capital Capitalist Realism Capital in the Anthropocene Philosophy Alienation Dialectical materialism Ideology Philosophy of nature Philosophy in the Soviet Union Reification Marxist ethics Critique of political economy Capital ( accumulation ) Crisis theory Commodity Concrete and abstract labor Factors of production Falling profit-rate tendency Means of production Mode of production Capitalist Socialist Productive forces Scientific socialism State monopoly capitalism Surplus product Socially necessary labour time Value-form Wage labour Sociology Base and superstructure Bourgeoisie Class Class consciousness Classless society Commodity fetishism Communist society Critical theory Cultural hegemony Democracy Dictatorship of the proletariat Soviet Radical Democratic centralism Exploitation False consciousness Human nature Immiseration Imperialism Lumpenproletariat Metabolic rift Proletariat Private property Relations of production State theory Working class History Class struggle Historical determinism Primitive accumulation Proletarian revolution World revolution Theory of historical trajectory Aspects Aesthetics Archaeology Criminology Cultural Marxism Cultural Studies Ethics Film theory Geography Historiography Literary criticism Marxism and religion Sociology Philosophy Common variants Structural Autonomist Marxism–Leninism Guevarism Maoism Neo-Gramscianism Regulation school Third-worldist Titoism Trotskyism Hegelian Budapest School Frankfurt School Humanist Neue Marx-Lektüre Open Praxis School Both Black Classical Communization Feminist Leninism Neo Post Western Other variants Analytical Austromarxism Hispanic marxism Centrist Eurocommunism Instrumental Marxism–Leninism–Maoism Nkrumaism Political Revisionist Situationist Socialism with Chinese characteristics Wertkritik People Marx Engels Morris Lafargue Rubin Kautsky Plekhanov Du Bois Connolly Lenin Luxemburg Liebknecht Kollontai Stalin Trotsky Grossman Zinoviev Bloch Lukács Korsch Bukharin Ho Serge Gramsci Pashukanis Bordiga Benjamin Mao Basu Mariátegui Horkheimer Dutt Brecht Marcuse Kalecki Fromm Cox Lefebvre James Adorno Padmore Sartre Deutscher Beauvoir Sombart Nkrumah Sweezy Emmanuel Hill Bettelheim Draper Jones Hobsbawm Althusser Hinton Williams Freire Cunhal Lara Mandel Sivanandan Miliband Cabral Thompson Bauman Fanon Berger Castro Guevara Liebman Heller Guattari Mészáros O'Connor Wallerstein Mies Tronti Debord Amin Hall Nairn Parenti Negri Jameson Dussel Harvey Laclau Bahro Poulantzas Vattimo Badiou Harnecker Altvater Ismail Anderson Löwy Vogel Sison Easthope Rancière Berman Przeworski Cohen Therborn Losurdo Postone Rodney Bannerji Spivak Newton Wood Federici Wolff Balibar Eagleton Kurz Rowbotham Mouffe Geras Brenner Davis Massey Cleaver Bishop Haraway Panitch Clarke Jessop Davis Wright Fraser Burawoy Holloway Rose Screpanti Tamás Hampton Cano Žižek Berardi Sankara Hennessy McDonnell Douzinas Roediger Foster West Ghandy Marcos Heinrich Prashad Kelley Dean Lordon Linera Fisher Li Prestes Coulthard Malm Seymour Toscano Bhattacharya Moufawad-Paul Srnicek Horvat Hamza Saito Journals Antipode Capital & Class Capitalism Nature Socialism Constellations Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory Historical Materialism Mediations Monthly Review New Left Review Race & Class Rethinking Marxism Science & Society Socialist Register Related topics 21st-century communist theorists Anarchism Creative destruction Conflict theory Criticism of Marxism Communism Communalism Economic determinism History of communism Left-wing politics Marxian economics New Left Old Left Municipalism Political ecology Socialism Authoritarian Democratic Market Reformist Revolutionary Social Utopian Left-wing populism Universal class Vulgar Marxism Economism Worker cooperative Workers' council Communism portal Economics portal Philosophy portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e In Marxist philosophy , commodity fetishism is the perception of the economic relationships of production and exchange as relationships among things (money and merchandise) rather than among people. As a form of reification , commodity fetishism presents economic value as inherent to the commodities, and not as arising from the workforce , from the human relations that produced the commodity, the goods and the services.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Concept [ edit ] In the first chapter of Capital: A Critique of Political Economy (1867), commodity fetishism is used to explain how the social organization of labour manifests in the buying and selling of commodities (goods and services). In the marketplace, social relations among people—who makes what, who works for whom, the production-time for a commodity, etc.—are represented as social relations among objects.

[ 3 ] In the process of commercial exchange , commodities appear in a depersonalized form, obscuring the social relations inherent to their production.

[ 4 ] Marx explained the sociology of commodity fetishism: As against this, the commodity-form, and the value-relation of the products of labour, within which it appears, have absolutely no connection with the physical nature of the commodity and the material relations arising out of this. It is nothing but the definite social relation, between men, themselves, which assumes here, for them, the fantastic form of a relation between things. In order, therefore, to find an analogy, we must take flight into the misty realm of religion. There the products of the human brain appear as autonomous figures endowed with a life of their own, which enter into relations, both with each other and with the human race. So it is in the world of commodities with the products of men's hands. I call this the fetishism which attaches itself to the products of labour as soon as they are produced as commodities, and is, therefore, inseparable from the production of commodities.

[ 5 ] According to Marx, the operation of commodity fetishism requires the owners of capital to actively ignore or maintain an indifference to the relational whole that produces a commodity.

[ 6 ] : 132 Development [ edit ] A South African fetish figurine whose supernatural powers protect the owner and kin in the natural world ( c.

1900 ) A political poster shows gold coin as the basis of prosperity (c. 1896).

The theory of commodity fetishism ( German : Warenfetischismus ) originated from Karl Marx's references to fetishes and fetishism in his analyses of religious superstition, and in the criticism of the beliefs of political economists .

[ 7 ] Marx borrowed the concept of "fetishism" from The Cult of Fetish Gods (1760) by Charles de Brosses , which proposed a materialist theory of the origin of religion.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Moreover, in the 1840s, the philosophic discussion of fetishism by Auguste Comte , and Ludwig Feuerbach 's psychological interpretation of religion also influenced Marx's development of commodity fetishism.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] Marx's first mention of fetishism appeared in 1842, in his response to a newspaper article by Karl Heinrich Hermes, which defended Germany on religious grounds.

[ 12 ] Hermes agreed with the German philosopher Hegel in regarding fetishism as the crudest form of religion. Marx dismissed that argument and Hermes's definition of religion as that which elevates man "above sensuous appetites". Instead, Marx said that fetishism is "the religion of sensuous appetites", and that the fantasy of the appetites tricks the fetish worshipper into believing that an inanimate object will yield its natural character to gratify the desires of the worshipper. Therefore, the crude appetite of the fetish worshipper smashes the fetish when it ceases to be of service.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] [ 15 ] The next mention of fetishism was in the 1842 Rheinische Zeitung newspaper articles about the "Debates on the Law on Thefts of Wood", wherein Marx spoke of the Spanish fetishism of gold and the German fetishism of wood as commodities: [ 16 ] The savages of Cuba regarded gold as a fetish of the Spaniards. They celebrated a feast in its honour, sang in a circle around it, and then threw it into the sea. If the Cuban savages had been present at the sitting of the Rhine Province Assembly, would they not have regarded wood as the Rhinelanders' fetish? But a subsequent sitting would have taught them that the worship of animals is connected with this fetishism, and they would have thrown the hares into the sea in order to save the human beings.

In the Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 , Marx spoke of the European fetish of precious-metal money: The nations which are still dazzled by the sensuous glitter of precious metals, and are, therefore, still fetish-worshippers of metal money, are not yet fully developed money-nations. [Note the] contrast of France and England. The extent to which the solution of theoretical riddles is the task of practice, and is effected through practice, the extent to which true practice is the condition of a real and positive theory, is shown, for example, in fetishism. The sensuous consciousness of the fetish-worshipper is different from that of the Greek, because his sensuous existence is different. The abstract enmity between sense and spirit is necessary so long as the human feeling for nature, the human sense of nature, and, therefore, also the natural sense of man, are not yet produced by man's own labour.

[ 17 ] In the ethnological notebooks, he commented upon the archaeological reportage of The Origin of Civilization and the Primitive Condition of Man: Mental and Social conditions of Savages (1870), by John Lubbock .

[ 18 ] In the Outlines of the Critique of Political Economy (Grundrisse, 1859), he criticized the liberal arguments of the French economist Frédéric Bastiat ; and about fetishes and fetishism Marx said: In real history, wage labour arises out of the dissolution of slavery and serfdom —or of the decay of communal property, as with Oriental and Slavonic peoples—and, in its adequate, epoch-making form, the form which takes possession of the entire social being of labour, out of the decline and fall of the guild economy, of the system of Estates, of labour and income in kind , of industry carried on as rural subsidiary occupation, of small-scale feudal agriculture, etc. In all these real historic transitions, wage labour appears as the dissolution, the annihilation of relations in which labour was fixed on all sides, in its income, its content, its location, its scope, etc. Hence, as negation of the stability of labour and of its remuneration. The direct transition from the African's fetish to Voltaire's "Supreme Being", or from the hunting gear of a North American savage to the capital of the Bank of England, is not so absurdly contrary to history, as is the transition from Bastiat's fisherman to the wage labourer.

[ 19 ] In A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy (1859), Marx referred to A Discourse on the Rise, Progress, Peculiar Objects, and Importance of Political Economy (1825), by John Ramsay McCulloch , who said that "In its natural state, matter ... is always destitute of value", with which Marx concurred, saying that "this shows how high even a McCulloch stands above the fetishism of German 'thinkers' who assert that 'material', and half a dozen similar irrelevancies are elements of value".

Furthermore, in the manuscript of "Results of the Immediate Process of Production" (c. 1864), an appendix to Capital: Critique of Political Economy, Volume 1 (1867), Marx said that: ... we find in the capitalist process of production [an] indissoluble fusion of use-values in which capital subsists [as] means of production and objects defined as capital, when what we are really faced with is a definite social relationship of production. In consequence, the product embedded in this mode of production is equated with the commodity, by those who have to deal with it. It is this that forms the foundation for the fetishism of the political economists.

[ 20 ] Hence did Karl Marx apply the concepts of fetish and fetishism , derived from economic and ethnologic studies, to the development of the theory of commodity fetishism, wherein an economic abstraction (value) is psychologically transformed ( reified ) into an object, which people choose to believe has an intrinsic value, in and of itself.

[ 21 ] Critique [ edit ] In the critique of political economy [ edit ] Main article: Critique of political economy Marx proposed that in a society where independent, private producers trade their products with each other, of their own volition and initiative, and without much coordination of market exchange, the volumes of production and commercial activities are adjusted in accordance with the fluctuating values of the products (goods and services) as they are bought and sold, and in accordance with the fluctuations of supply and demand . Because their social coexistence, and its meaning, is expressed through market exchange (trade and transaction ), people have no other relations with each other. Therefore, social relations are continually mediated and expressed with objects (commodities and money). How the traded commodities relate will depend upon the costs of production, which are reducible to quantities of human labour, although the worker has no control over what happens to the commodities that they produce. (See: Entfremdung , Marx's theory of alienation ) Domination of things [ edit ] The concept of the intrinsic value of commodities (goods and services) determines and dominates the economic (business) relationships among people, to the extent that buyers and sellers continually adjust their beliefs (financial expectations) about the value of things—either consciously or unconsciously—to the proportionate price changes ( market value ) of the commodities over which buyers and sellers believe they have no true control. That psychologic perception transforms the trading-value of a commodity into an independent entity (an object), to the degree that the social value of the goods and services appears to be a natural property of the commodity itself. Thence objectified , the market appears as if self-regulated (by fluctuating supply and demand) because, in pursuit of profit, the consumers of the products ceased to perceive the human co-operation among capitalists that is the true engine of the market where commodities are bought and sold; such is the domination of things in the market.

Objectified value [ edit ] The value of a commodity originates from the human being's intellectual and perceptual capacity to consciously (subjectively) ascribe a relative value (importance) to a commodity, the goods and services manufactured by the labour of a worker. Therefore, in the course of the economic transactions ( buying and selling ) that constitute market exchange, people ascribe subjective values to the commodities, which the buyers and the sellers then perceive as objective values, the market-exchange prices that people will pay for the commodities.

Naturalization of market behaviour [ edit ] In a capitalist society, the human perception that "the market" is an independent, sentient entity, is how buyers, sellers, and producers naturalize market exchange (the human choices and decisions that constitute commerce)  as a series of "natural phenomena ... that ... happen of their own accord". Such were the political-economy arguments of the economists whom Karl Marx criticized when they spoke of the "natural equilibria" of markets, as if the price (value) of a commodity were independent of the volition and initiative of the capitalist producers, buyers, and sellers of commodities.

In the 18th century, the Scottish social philosopher and political economist Adam Smith , in The Wealth of Nations (1776) proposed that the "truck, barter, and exchange" activities of the market were corresponding economic representations of human nature, that is, the buying and selling of commodities were activities intrinsic to the market, and thus are the "natural behaviour" of the market. Hence, Smith proposed that a market economy was a self-regulating entity that "naturally" tended towards economic equilibrium , wherein the relative prices (the value) of a commodity ensured that the buyers and sellers obtained what they wanted for and from their goods and services.

[ 22 ] In the 19th century, Karl Marx contradicted the artifice of Adam Smith's "naturalisation of the market's behaviour" as a politico-ideologic apology—by and for the capitalists—which allowed human economic choices and decisions to be misrepresented as fixed "facts of life", rather than as the human actions that resulted from the will of the producers, the buyers, and the sellers of the commodities traded at market. Such "immutable economic laws" are what Capital: Critique of Political Economy (1867) revealed about the functioning of the capitalist mode of production , how goods and services (commodities) are circulated among a society; and thus explain the psychological phenomenon of commodity fetishism, which ascribes an independent, objective value and reality to a thing that has no inherent value—other than the value given to it by the producer, the seller, and the buyer of the commodity.

Masking [ edit ] In a capitalist economy, a character mask ( Charaktermaske ) is the functional role with which a person relates and is related to in a society composed of stratified social classes , especially in relationships and market-exchange transactions; thus, in the course of buying and selling, the commodities (goods and services) usually appear other than they are, because they are masked (obscured) by the role-playing of the buyer and the seller. Moreover, because the capitalist economy of a class society is an intrinsically contradictory system, the masking of the true socio-economic character of the transaction is an integral feature of its function and operation as market exchange. In the course of business competition among themselves, buyers, sellers, and producers cannot do business (compete) without obscurity— confidentiality and secrecy —thus the necessity of the character masks that obscure true economic motive.

Central to the Marxist critique of political economy is the obscurantism of the juridical labour contract, between the worker and the capitalist, that masks the true, exploitive nature of their economic relationship—that the worker does not sell his and her labour, but that the worker sells individual labour power , the human capacity to perform work and manufacture commodities (goods and services) that yield a profit to the producer. The work contract is the mask that obscures the economic exploitation of the difference between the wages paid for the labour of the worker, and the new value created by the labour of the worker.

Marx thus established that in a capitalist society the creation of wealth is based upon "the paid and unpaid portions of labour [that] are inseparably mixed up with each other, and the nature of the whole transaction is completely masked by the intervention of a contract, and the pay received at the end of the week"; and that: [ 23 ] [ 24 ] [ 25 ] Vulgar economics actually does nothing more than to interpret, to systematize and turn into apologetics —in a doctrinaire way—the ideas of the agents who are trapped within bourgeois relations of production . So it should not surprise us that, precisely within the estranged form of appearance of economic relations in which these prima facie absurd and complete contradictions occur—and all science would be superfluous if the form of appearance of things directly coincided with their essence—that precisely here vulgar economics feels completely at home, and that these relationships appear all the more self-evident to it, the more their inner interconnection remains hidden to it, even though these relationships are comprehensible to the popular mind.

— Capital, Volume III .

[ 26 ] Opacity of economic relations [ edit ] The primary valuation of the trading-value of goods and services (commodities) is expressed as money-prices. The buyers and the sellers determine and establish the economic and financial relationships; and afterwards compare the prices in and the price trends of the market. Moreover, because of the masking of true economic motive, neither the buyer, nor the seller, nor the producer perceive and understand every human labour-activity required to deliver the commodities (goods and services), nor do they perceive the workers whose labour facilitated the purchase of commodities. The economic results of such collective human labour are expressed as the values and the prices of the commodities; the value-relations between the amount of human labour and the value of the supplied commodity.

Capitalism as religion [ edit ] Main article: Capitalism as Religion In the essay " Capitalism as Religion " (1921), Walter Benjamin said that whether or not people treat capitalism as a religion was a moot subject, because "One can behold in capitalism a religion, that is to say, capitalism essentially serves to satisfy the same worries, anguish, and disquiet formerly answered by so-called religion." That the religion of capitalism is manifest in four tenets: "Capitalism is a purely cultic religion, perhaps the most extreme that ever existed" "The permanence of the cult" "Capitalism is probably the first instance of a cult that creates guilt, not atonement" "God must be hidden from it, and may be addressed only when guilt is at its zenith".

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Applications [ edit ] Cultural theory [ edit ] The Hungarian philosopher György Lukács developed Karl Marx 's theory of commodity fetishism to develop reification theory .

Thorstein Veblen proposed the conspicuous consumption of commodities as the pursuit of social prestige .

Since the 19th century, when Karl Marx presented the theory of commodity fetishism, in Section 4, "The Fetishism of Commodities and the Secret thereof", of the first chapter of Capital: Critique of Political Economy (1867), the constituent concepts of the theory, and their sociologic and economic explanations, have proved intellectually fertile propositions that permit the application of the theory (interpretation, development, adaptation) to the study, examination, and analysis of other cultural aspects of the political economy of capitalism, such as: Social prestige [ edit ] In the 19th century, Thorstein Veblen ( The Theory of the Leisure Class: An Economic Study of Institutions , 1899) developed the social status (prestige) relationship between the producer of consumer goods and the aspirations to prestige of the consumer. To avoid the status anxiety of not being of or belonging to "the right social class", the consumer establishes a personal identity (social, economic, cultural) that is defined and expressed by the commodities (goods and services) that they buy, own, and use; the domination of things that communicate the "correct signals" of social prestige, of belonging. (See: Conspicuous consumption .) Reification [ edit ] In History and Class Consciousness (1923), György Lukács started from the theory of commodity fetishism for his development of reification (the psychological transformation of an abstraction into a concrete object) as the principal obstacle to class consciousness . About which Lukács said: "Just as the capitalist system continuously produces and reproduces itself economically on higher levels, the structure of reification progressively sinks more deeply, more fatefully, and more definitively into the consciousness of Man"—hence, commodification pervaded every conscious human activity, as the growth of capitalism commodified every sphere of human activity into a product that can be bought and sold in the market.

[ 29 ] (See: Verdinglichung , Marx's theory of reification .) Industrialized culture [ edit ] Commodity fetishism is theoretically central to the Frankfurt School philosophy, especially in the work of the sociologist Theodor W. Adorno , which describes how the forms of commerce invade the human psyche; how commerce casts a person into a role not of his or her making; and how commercial forces affect the development of the psyche . In the book Dialectic of Enlightenment (1944), Adorno and Max Horkheimer presented the Theory of the Culture Industry to describe how the human imagination (artistic, spiritual, intellectual activity) becomes commodified when subordinated to the "natural commercial laws" of the market.

To the consumer, the cultural goods and services sold in the market appear to offer the promise of a richly developed and creative individuality, yet the inherent commodification severely restricts and stunts the human psyche, so that the man and the woman consumer has little "time for myself", because of the continual personification of cultural roles over which he and she exercise little control. In personifying such cultural identities, the person is a passive consumer, not the active creator, of his or her life; the promised life of individualistic creativity is incompatible with the collectivist, commercial norms of bourgeois culture .

Commodity narcissism [ edit ] In the study From Commodity Fetishism to Commodity Narcissism (2012) the investigators applied the Marxist theory of commodity fetishism to psychologically analyse the economic behaviour (buying and selling) of the contemporary consumer. With the concept of commodity narcissism, the psychologists Stephen Dunne and Robert Cluley proposed that consumers who claim to be ethically concerned about the manufacturing origin of commodities, nonetheless behaved as if ignorant of the exploitative labour conditions under which the workers produced the goods and services, bought by the "concerned consumer"; that, within the culture of consumerism , narcissistic men and women have established shopping (economic consumption) as a socially acceptable way to express aggression.

[ 30 ] Researchers find no evidence that a greater manufacturing base can spur economic growth, while improving government effectiveness and regulation quality are more promising for facilitating economic growth.

[ 31 ] Ethical consumption [ edit ] Environmentally "conscious" consumers want their purchased products to be environmentally ethical. According to James G. Carrier, [ 32 ] on a personal level their purchases can make them feel more positively moral and second they can help put pressure on firms in a competitive market to change the way they do things. Marx's 1867 notion of commodity fetishism which concerns the idea that ethical consumption is going beyond the two reasons first noted by Carrier.

[ according to whom?

] Certain commodities are perceived in a particular way that the consumer ignores or denies the labor time entailed in the process of production or for that matter any detailed background people and process that is viable in creating an ethical product. Capitalists have the intention of selling to an audience with commercial gain - the use of nature as a strategy is vital in urging people to buy their product. Ethical consumption is mostly concerned with the social, political and environmental context of objects - and consumers want a product that meets their moral criteria, something non-exploitative. These baseline concepts need to be visible and eye-catching with recognizable verifications. This is very common in ecotourism who produce eco-friendliness as a reason to buy and visit. Advertising protection and conservation attracts visitors and media attention. These capitalists make no point to vary in their images and photographs or captions - the repetition of nature is always colorful and vibrant, gentle and reserved. They are "fetishizing" nature as a marketing technique. Portraying themselves as a business that protects nature satisfies their clientele so that the consumer cannot see the objects and mechanisms used to actually produce it. Carrier describes how the environment itself is fetishized as a consumable product through parks and other areas of land being used as bodies or images attached to promises of natural experiences or protection efforts in return for money. Carrier also offers the example of fair-trade coffee as a way that commodity fetishism is seen in ethical consumption. If fair-trade coffee promises that it is direct, cooperative supply chain between growers and consumers through images of coffee growers and messaging on the bag of coffee, this becomes more relevant to consumer decision making than the reality that many other "middle-men" were needed in the roasting, packaging, marketing, and transportation of that commodity.

[ 33 ] Ethical consumption is believed by advocates of the theory to allow people to lead more moral lives as well as affect the world by placing economic pressure on firms to change their production processes and products to become more ethical to remain competitive within the greater market. The fetishization of nature and natural resources often leads through its commodification as a product to be advertised. Conceptual categories need to be "legible, be visible and recognizable" [ 34 ] in order to be effective as ethical standards. The advertising on items listed and named as fair trade often misrepresents the actual production process, especially in products requiring extensive and hard labor to produce, such as coffee. It also often becomes exploitative as it uses the images of ethnic small holders rather than the ethnic migrants and wage laborers who do the majority of the work. The use of images not only fetishizes the product, but defines ethicality as a whole.

[ 35 ] A common narrative now is whether or not ethical consumption is at all possible in a globalized world of highly interconnected capitalism and trade. It relies on ideas of greenwashing in which producers use environmentalism and fair trade ideals to advertise their products without living up to the ideals. The false image of environmentalism disguises the unsustainable practices being utilized. Another critique is the overall effectiveness of individual consumer choices without large-scale systemic change through government regulation. Accessibility is another issue, as ethical products are often more expensive and less accessible to low-income activists.

Social alienation [ edit ] Part of a series on the Marxian critique of political economy Concepts Capitalist mode of production Capital Commodity Concrete and abstract labour Critique of political economy Means of production Mode of production Productive forces Relations of production Socially necessary labour time Socialization Wage labour Wage slavery Wertkritik Wertabspaltungskritik Value-form Topics Crisis theory Imperialism Historical materialism Technological unemployment Falling profit-rate tendency Works Outlines of a Critique of Political Economy Economic and Philosophical Manuscripts of 1844 Wage Labour and Capital A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy Grundrisse Das Kapital Theories of Surplus Value Value, Price and Profit People Karl Marx Friedrich Engels Roman Rosdolsky Isaak Illich Rubin Étienne Balibar Robert Kurz Mark Fisher Claus Peter Ortlieb Moishe Postone NML Hans-Georg Backhaus Helmut Reichelt Michael Heinrich Journals Monthly Review New School Economic Review Crisis and Critique Historical Materialism Socialist register Capital & Class Related topics Critique of political economy Economics Marxist sociology Socialism portal v t e In The Society of the Spectacle (1967), Guy Debord presented the theory of " le spectacle "—the systematic conflation of advanced capitalism , the mass communications media , and a government amenable to exploiting those factors. The spectacle transforms human relations into objectified relations among images, and vice versa; the exemplar spectacle is television, the communications medium wherein people passively allow (cultural) representations of themselves to become the active agents of their beliefs. The spectacle is the form that society assumes when the Arts, the instruments of cultural production, have been commodified as commercial activities that render an aesthetic value into a commercial value (a commodity). Whereby artistic expression then is shaped by the person's ability to sell it as a commodity, that is, as artistic goods and services.

Capitalism reorganizes personal consumption to conform to the commercial principles of market exchange; commodity fetishism transforms a cultural commodity into a product with an economic "life of its own" that is independent of the volition and initiative of the artist, the producer of the commodity. What Karl Marx critically anticipated in the 19th century, with "The Fetishism of Commodities and the Secret thereof", Guy Debord interpreted and developed for the 20th century—that in modern society, the psychologic intimacies of intersubjectivity and personal self-relation are commodified into discrete "experiences" that can be bought and sold. The Society of the Spectacle is the ultimate form of social alienation that occurs when a person views his or her being (self) as a commodity that can be bought and sold, because they regard every human relation as a (potential) business transaction. (See: Entfremdung , Marx's theory of alienation ) Semiotic sign [ edit ] Jean Baudrillard applied commodity fetishism to explain the subjective feelings of men and women towards consumer goods in the "realm of circulation"; that is, the cultural mystique (mystification) that advertising ascribed to the commodities (goods and services) in order to encourage the buyer to purchase the goods and services as aids to the construction of his and her cultural identity . In the book For a Critique of the Political Economy of the Sign (1972), Baudrillard developed the semiotic theory of " the Sign " (sign value) as a development of Marx's theory of commodity fetishism and of the exchange value vs.

use value dichotomy of capitalism.

Intellectual property [ edit ] In the 21st century, the political economy of capitalism reified the abstract objects that are information and knowledge into the tangible commodities of intellectual property , which are produced by and derived from the labours of the intellectual and the white collar workers.

Philosophic base [ edit ] The economist Michael Perelman critically examined the belief systems from which arose intellectual property rights , the field of law that commodified knowledge and information.

Samuel Bowles and Herbert Gintis critically reviewed the belief systems of the theory of human capital .

[ 36 ] Knowledge, as the philosophic means to a better life, is contrasted with capitalist knowledge (as commodity and capital), produced to generate income and profit. Such commodification detaches knowledge and information from the (user) person, because, as intellectual property, they are independent, economic entities.

Knowledge: authentic and counterfeit [ edit ] In Postmodernism, or, the Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (1991), the Marxist theorist Fredric Jameson linked the reification of information and knowledge to the post-modern distinction between authentic knowledge (experience) and counterfeit knowledge (vicarious experience),  which usually is acquired through the mass communications media . In Critique of Commodity Aesthetics: Appearance, Sexuality and Advertising in Capitalist Society (1986), the philosopher Wolfgang Fritz Haug presents a "critique of commodity aesthetics" that examines how human needs and desires are manipulated and reshaped for commercial gain.

[ 37 ] Financial risk management [ edit ] The sociologists Frank Furedi and Ulrich Beck studied the development of commodified types of knowledge in the business culture of "risk prevention" in the management of money. The Post–World War II economic expansion (c. 1945–1973) created very much money (capital and savings), while the dominant bourgeois ideology of money favoured the risk-management philosophy of the managers of investment funds and financial assets. From such administration of investment money, manipulated to create new capital, arose the preoccupation with risk calculations, which subsequently was followed by the "economic science" of risk prevention management.

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] In light of which, the commodification of money as "financial investment funds" allows an ordinary person to pose as a rich person, as an economic risk-taker able to risk losing money invested to the market. Hence, the fetishization of financial risk as "a sum of money" is a reification that distorts the social perception of the true nature of financial risk, as experienced by ordinary people.

[ 40 ] Moreover, the valuation of financial risk is susceptible to ideological bias; that contemporary fortunes are achieved from the insight of experts in financial management, who study the relationship between "known" and "unknown" economic factors, by which human fears about money can be manipulated and exploited.

Commodified art [ edit ] The cultural critics Georg Simmel and Walter Benjamin examined and described the fetishes and fetishism of art , by means of which "artistic" commodities are produced for sale in the market, and how commodification determines and establishes the value of the artistic commodities (goods and services) derived from legitimate Art; for example, the selling of an artist's personal effects as "artistic fetishes".

Legal traducement [ edit ] In the field of law, the scholar Evgeny Pashukanis ( The General Theory of Law and Marxism , 1924), the Austrian politician Karl Renner , the German political scientist Franz Leopold Neumann , the British socialist writer China Miéville , the labour-law attorney Marc Linder, and the American legal philosopher Duncan Kennedy ( The Role of Law in Economic Theory: Essays on the Fetishism of Commodities , 1985) have respectively explored the applications of commodity fetishism in their contemporary legal systems, and reported that the reification of legal forms misrepresents social relations.

[ 41 ] [ 42 ] Criticism [ edit ] The Tribuna of the Uffizi (1772–1778) by Johann Zoffany depicts the commodity-fetishism metamorphosis of oil paintings into culture-industry products.

In Portrait of a Marxist as a Young Nun (1988), Professor Helena Sheehan said that the analogy between religious faith and commodity fetishism is a mistaken interpretation, because people do not worship commodities (money and merchandise) by attributing supernatural powers to inanimate objects, to a fetish . That the belief that value-relationships inherent to a commodity described is not religious belief, because value-relations do not possess the psychological characteristics of spiritual beliefs. That interpretation is proved by the possibility of a person's possessing religious faith, in Santa Claus whilst being aware of the psychology of commodity fetishism, and thus being critical of the fetishization of money and merchandise, thus, a person's disbelief in the golden calf is integral to the person's iconoclasm against the idolatry of money.

[ 43 ] See also [ edit ] Pre-Marxist theories Simple living Marxist theories pertinent to the theory of commodity fetishism Character mask Commodity (Marxism) Critique of political economy Exchange value False consciousness Fetishism Labor theory of value Law of value Real prices and ideal prices Reification (Marxism) Relations of production Use value Value-form Post-Marxist theories derived from the theory of commodity fetishism Essays of Marx's Theory of Value by Isaak Illich Rubin History and Class Consciousness , "Reification and the Consciousness of the Proletariat" (theories of class consciousness and of reification ) by Geörg Lukács The Society of the Spectacle by Guy Debord ( full text ) The System of Objects by Jean Baudrillard Neomaterialism by Joshua Simon Time, Labor and Social Domination by Moishe Postone Value criticism (in German Wertkritik ) References [ edit ] ^ Marx, Karl (1887).

Capital Volume One . Moscow: Progress Publishers.

Archived from the original on 7 June 2019 . Retrieved 11 January 2020 .

A commodity is therefore a mysterious thing, simply because in it the social character of men's labour appears to them as an objective character stamped upon the product of that labour; because the relation of the producers to the sum total of their own labour is presented to them as a social relation, existing not between themselves, but between the products of their labour.

^ Isaak Illich Rubin said that "The theory of fetishism is, per se, the basis of Marx's entire economic system, and, in particular, of his theory of value." — Essays on Marx's Theory of Value . Montreal: Black Rose Books, 1990, p. 5.

^ Roubine, Isaak I. (2009).

Essais sur la théorie de la valeur de Marx . Paris: Syllepse. p. 55.

ISBN 978-2-84950-218-1 .

^ Rubin, Isaak Illich (1972).

Essays on Marx's Theory of Value . Detroit: Black and Red.

Archived from the original on 31 May 2020 . Retrieved 10 January 2020 .

^ Marx, Karl (1990).

Capital . London: Penguin Classics. p. 165.

^ Driscoll, Mark W. (2020).

The Whites are Enemies of Heaven: Climate Caucasianism and Asian Ecological Protection . Durham: Duke University Press .

ISBN 978-1-4780-1121-7 .

^ The various references in the 'Wood Theft' articles to idols, animal masks, worship of animals, and fetishes, reflect Marx's systematic study (1841–42) of primitive religion. The notebooks indicate that Marx was especially interested in the concept of fetishism — its nature, its origins, and the difference between ancient and modern forms of fetishism. (MEGA, Vol . 1, Part 2 p. 115ff) — Sherover, Erica (1979).

"The Virtue of Poverty: Marx's Transformation of Hegel's Concept of the Poor" (PDF) .

Canadian Journal of Political and Social Theory .

3 (1): 53– 66.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 13 October 2011 . Retrieved 1 October 2011 .

^ Du culte des dieux fétiches ou Parallèle de l'ancienne religion de l'Égypte avec la religion actuelle de Nigritie ([Reprod.]) (in French). 15 October 2007.

Archived from the original on 6 December 2016 . Retrieved 3 January 2017 – via Gallica.bnf.fr.

^ The German translation was Uber den Dienst der fetischengotter oder Vergleichung der alten religion Egyptians mit den heutigen Religion Nigritiens. Ubersetzt von Christian Brandanus Hermann Pistorius.

Berlin, Stralsund: Gottlieb August Lange, 1785. For a study of the conceptual origin of fetishism, see: William Pietz, "The problem of the fetish, I", Res 9 (Spring 1985), pp. 5–17; "The problem of the fetish, II: The origin of the fetish", Res 13 (Spring 1987), pp. 23–45; "The problem of the fetish, III: Bosman's Guinea and the enlightenment theory of fetishism", Res 16 (Autumn 1988), pp. 105–123.

^ "Philosophy3.p65" (PDF) .

Socserv.mcmaster.ca .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 July 2012 . Retrieved 3 January 2017 .

^ Feuerbach, Ludwig (2008).

The Essence of Christianity (PDF) . Translated by Eliot, George . MSAC Philosophy Group.

ISBN 978-1-56543-102-7 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 14 June 2012.

^ "Leading Article in No. 179 of the Kölnische Zeitung" . Archived from the original on 9 March 2001.

^ Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, On religion . Atlanta: Scholars, 1982, p. 22.

^ "Commodity fetishism - Fredy Perlman" . 2006.

Archived from the original on 25 December 2007.

^ "The fetishism of commodities" . 2016.

Archived from the original on 28 June 2019.

^ "1842: Debates on the Law on Thefts of Wood" . Archived from the original on 9 March 2001.

^ Karl Marx (1975).

" "Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844", in Marx-Engels Collected Works " . Moscow: Progress. p. 312.

Archived from the original on 22 September 2023 . Retrieved 8 June 2010 .

^ Lawrence Krader (ed.), The Ethnological Notebooks of Karl Marx: Studies of Morgan, Phear, Maine, Lubbock . Assen: Van Gorcum, 1972, p. 342f.

^ "Grundrisse 17" .

Marxists.org .

Archived from the original on 21 February 2012 . Retrieved 3 January 2017 .

^ Karl Marx, Results of the Immediate Process of Production , appendix in Capital Volume 1 . Penguin edition, 1976, p. 983.

^ For more details, see Boer, Roland (2010). "That Hideous Pagan Idol: Marx, Fetishism and Graven Images".

Critique: Journal of Socialist Theory .

38 (1): 93– 116.

doi : 10.1080/03017600903454413 .

S2CID 143420404 .

^ Smith, Adam .

"An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations" .

Geolib.com .

Archived from the original on 27 January 2017 . Retrieved 3 January 2017 .

^ Karl Marx.

" Value, Price and Profit , part 9" .

Marxists.org .

Archived from the original on 21 December 2016 . Retrieved 3 January 2017 .

... the paid and unpaid portions of labour are inseparably mixed up with each other, and the nature of the whole transaction is completely masked by the intervention of a contract and the pay received at the end of the week ^ Karl Marx (1875).

" Critique of the Gotha Programme " .

Marxists.org . p. part 2 (emphases added).

Archived from the original on 16 July 2018 . Retrieved 3 January 2017 .

"Since Lassalle 's death, there has asserted itself in our party the scientific understanding that wages are not what they appear to be—namely, the value, or price, of labor—but only a masked form for the value, or price, of labor power".

^ cf. the Resultate manuscript in Capital, Volume I , Penguin edition, p. 1064, where Marx uses the word " vertuscht " (covered up).

^ Marx, Capital, Volume III , Penguin edition, p. 956 (translation corrected to the German edition).

^ Benjamin, Walter (2004). "Capitalism as Religion". In Jennings, Michael W. (ed.).

Walter Benjamin: Selected Writings . Vol. 1: 1913–1926. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press. p. 259.

^ Noys, Benjamin (17 December 2008).

"Notes on 'Capitalism as Religion' " .

No Useless Leniency (blog post).

Archived from the original on 4 January 2017 . Retrieved 3 January 2017 .

^ "Just as the capitalist system continuously produces and reproduces itself economically on higher levels, the structure of reification progressively sinks more deeply, more fatefully, and more definitively into the consciousness of Man." György Lukács, History and Class-Consciousness London: Merlin Press, 1971, p. 93.

^ Cluley, R. and Dunne, S. (2012) From Commodity Fetishism to Commodity Narcissism , Marketing Theory, 12(3) ^ Alecia, Waite Cassidy; Edward, Tower; Xiaolu, Wang, Lucy (1 September 2016). "Manufacturing Fetishism: The Neo-Mercantilist Preoccupation with Protecting Manufacturing".

SSRN 2833529 .

{{ cite news }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ "James G. Carrier" .

The Social Solidarity Economy resource website .

Archived from the original on 18 April 2016 . Retrieved 2 November 2021 .

^ Carrier, James (2012).

Ethical Consumption. Social Value and Economic Practice . Berghahn Books. pp.

672– 689.

^ Carrier, James G. (21 May 2010).

"Protecting the Environment the Natural Way: Ethical Consumption and Commodity Fetishism" .

Antipode .

42 (3): 672– 689.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00768.x .

ISSN 0066-4812 .

Archived from the original on 6 July 2023 . Retrieved 9 November 2023 .

^ Carrier, James G. (21 May 2010).

"Protecting the Environment the Natural Way: Ethical Consumption and Commodity Fetishism" .

Antipode .

42 (3): 672– 689.

doi : 10.1111/j.1467-8330.2010.00768.x .

ISSN 0066-4812 .

Archived from the original on 6 July 2023 . Retrieved 9 November 2023 .

^ "Samuel Bowles" .

Tuvalu.santafe.edu . Archived from the original on 17 December 2016 . Retrieved 3 January 2017 .

^ Wolfgang Fritz Haug , Critique of Commodity Aesthetics: Appearance, Sexuality and Advertising in Capitalist Society . Introduced by Stuart Hall. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1986.

^ "Paying for Pensions: Affording Old Age" Archived 24 June 2021 at the Wayback Machine , BBC News, 13 September 2010 ^ Charles Roxburgh; Susan Lund; Charles Atkins; Stanislas Belot; Wayne W. Hu; Moira S. Pierce (September 2009), Global capital markets: entering a new era , McKinsey Global Institute, p. 9, archived from the original on 7 March 2016 , retrieved 3 March 2016 ^ Toporowski, Jan (4 September 2010).

"The Wisdom of Property and the Politics of the Middle Classes by Jan Toporowski" . Monthly Review.

Archived from the original on 9 January 2011 . Retrieved 3 January 2017 .

^ Marc Linder, Reification and the consciousness of the critics of political economy . Copenhagen: Rhodos, 1975 and subsequent works.

^ Duncan Kennedy (1985).

"The Role of Law in Economic Theory: Essays on the Fetishism of Commodities" (PDF) .

The American University Law Review .

34 : 939– 1001.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 24 December 2010 . Retrieved 29 June 2010 .

^ Dr Helena Sheehan.

"Portrait of a Marxist as a Young Nun" .

Webpages.dcu.ie .

Archived from the original on 22 December 2016 . Retrieved 3 January 2017 .

Further reading [ edit ] Sandel, Michael (2012).

What money can't buy : the moral limits of markets . New York: Farrar, Straus and Giroux.

ISBN 9780374203030 .

Bottomore, Tom (1991).

A Dictionary of Marxist thought . Oxford, UK Cambridge, Mass: Blackwell Reference.

ISBN 9780631180821 .

Debord, Guy (2009).

The Society of the Spectacle . Eastbourne: Soul Bay Press.

ISBN 9780955955334 .

Fine, Ben (2010).

Marx's Capital . London & New York: Pluto Press.

ISBN 978-0745330167 .

Harvey, David (2010).

A companion to Marx's Capital . London New York: Verso.

ISBN 978-1844673599 .

Lukács, György (1971).

History and Class Consciousness : studies in Marxist dialectics . Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press.

ISBN 9780262620208 .

Marx, Karl (1981).

Capital :Volume 1: A critique of political economy . London New York, N.Y: Penguin Books in association with New Left Review.

ISBN 9780140445688 .

Douglas, Mary (1996).

The world of goods : towards an anthropology of consumption : with a new introduction . London New York: Routledge.

ISBN 9780415130479 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Commodity fetishism .

Capital, Chapter 1, Section 4 – The Fetishism of Commodities and the Secret Thereof All of Chapter One – Marx's logical presentation Isaac Rubin's commentary on Marx "The Reality behind Commodity Fetishism" David Harvey , Reading Marx's Capital , Reading Marx's Capital – Class 2, Chapters 1–2, The Commodity (video lecture) Biene Baumeister, Die Marxsche Kritik des Fetischismus (outline in German) Understanding Capitalism Part IV: Capitalism, Culture and Society NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐ggg5l
Cached time: 20250814220409
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.813 seconds
Real time usage: 1.039 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4224/1000000
Revision size: 56399/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 173323/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 11812/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 15/100
Expensive parser function count: 11/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 188751/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.486/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19247541/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  820.786      1 -total
 38.13%  312.963      1 Template:Reflist
 21.09%  173.107     17 Template:Cite_book
 16.65%  136.689      2 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 14.46%  118.674      1 Template:Marxism
 11.55%   94.830      1 Template:Langx
  9.53%   78.242     15 Template:Cite_web
  9.01%   73.989      1 Template:Short_description
  6.79%   55.725      1 Template:Sidebar
  5.02%   41.166      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:302256:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220409 and revision id 1305785810. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Commodity_fetishism&oldid=1305785810 " Categories : Marxist terminology Marxian economics Marxian critique of political economy Hidden categories: CS1 French-language sources (fr) CS1: long volume value CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from September 2022 Use dmy dates from September 2022 Articles containing German-language text All articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases Articles with specifically marked weasel-worded phrases from December 2022 This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 02:48 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Commodity fetishism 27 languages Add topic

