Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 National parks 2 Flora 3 Fauna 4 Mammals Toggle Mammals subsection 4.1 Primates 4.2 Cats 4.3 Civets 4.4 Deer 4.5 Elephants 4.6 Bovine 4.7 Rhinoceros 4.8 Cetacea 4.9 Sirenia 5 Reptiles Toggle Reptiles subsection 5.1 Turtles/tortoises 5.2 Lizards 5.2.1 Agamids 5.2.2 Geckos 5.2.3 Monitors 5.2.4 Skinks 5.3 Snakes 5.3.1 Venomous 5.3.2 Non-venomous 5.4 Crocodilians 6 Birds 7 Molluscs Toggle Molluscs subsection 7.1 Marine molluscs 7.2 Non-marine molluscs 8 Threats and conservation 9 See also 10 References 11 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Wildlife of Vietnam 2 languages فارسی Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Fauna of Vietnam ) Saola ( Pseudoryx nghetinhensis ) discovered in Vietnam in 1992 The wildlife of Vietnam is rich in flora and fauna as reflected by its unique biodiversity.

Saola , rare and antelope-like animal categorized under the bovine subfamily , was found in 1992 in Vũ Quang National Park . In the 1990s, three other muntjac species, the deer-like Truong Son muntjac (found in Bạch Mã National Park ), giant muntjac (found in Vũ Quang National Park ) and Pu Hoat muntjac (found in Pù Hoạt, Nghệ An ), were also discovered.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Conservation protection and scientific studies of the ecology of Vietnam, particularly in the protected forest areas, have been given priority attention by the Government of Vietnam. Laws were enacted to set up Xuân Thủy Wetland National Park , four UNESCO Biosphere Reserves , and Hạ Long Bay and Phong Nha-Kẻ Bàng National Parks ; the last two are also designated as UNESCO World Heritage Sites .

[ 1 ] The rich diversity of Vietnam's wildlife includes 11,400 species of vascular plants , 1030 species of moss , 310 species of mammals, 296 reptile species, 162 amphibian species, 700 freshwater species of fish and 2000 species of marine fish.

[ 3 ] There are about 889 species of birds [ 4 ] and over 850 species of land mollusks .

[ 5 ] However, a study by the WWF has reported that nearly 10% of the wildlife in the country is threatened with extinction. Vietnam is placed 16th highest among 152 countries studied in terms of the proportion of its wildlife species found to be in danger.

[ 6 ] National parks [ edit ] Main articles: List of national parks of Vietnam and Protected areas of Vietnam Landscape of Xuan Thuy National Park While the national reserves cover small areas of scientific significance with restricted access, the national parks also cover wetlands of Ramsar designated areas and BirdLife International inscribed bird areas. The largest of the national parks initially covered were the Cuc Phuong National Park, the Cat Tien National Park, the Con Dao National Park and Con Dao National Park, which to start with, were forest areas along with being reserves or prohibited areas. The objective for creating national parks was to allow access to the reserved areas as a part of ecotourism and cultural needs with full attention to the basic approach of conservation of natural environmental resources.

[ 1 ] The national parks and reserves, as per present status, (as reported by the national parks of Vietnam) conforming to the topography of the country which cover terrestrial, deltas of rivers, and coastal zones are: [ 7 ] [ 8 ] Five national parks and four reserves in the Mekong Delta ; [ 9 ] two national parks in the northeastern area; [ 10 ] five reserves in the north western area; [ 11 ] three parks in the Red River Delta ; [ 12 ] two parks and one reserve in the North Central Coastal area; [ 13 ] two reserves in South Central Coastal area; [ 14 ] three parks and one reserve in Central Highlands; [ 15 ] one park and one reserve in south eastern area.

[ 16 ] Flora [ edit ] The flora of Vietnam has existed in its current form since at least the Oligocene , as evidenced by the assemblage known as the Ha Long megafossil flora from the Oligocene-aged Dong Ho Formation, which outcrops in the Ha Long region.

[ 17 ] The country was once totally covered with forests but over the years due to the war and deforestation and anthropological pressures some areas have lost their biodiversity value.

[ 18 ] The floral richness of the rain forest habitats comprise a broad range of evergreens.

[ 19 ] According to the  Conservation International List Vietnam is identified as the fifth biodiversity hot spot in the world, on account of its exotic flora and fauna. Between 1997 and 2007, almost 1000 new species have been discovered. However, many areas still remain to be explored, and more species are likely to appear in the future. Natural forests are at higher elevations in the northwest and mangrove swamps are in the coastal areas. Rainforest in the hilly region has wild rhododendrons in the northwest along with dwarf bamboos and numerous types of orchids . The central dry region has pines and the river deltas have mangrove forests. The largest and the most conspicuous find in recent years is of the plant species in the Halong Bay area known as Halong fan palm .

[ 18 ] The largest species was the gum tree.

Considered one of the world biological diversification centers, the flora estimated is of the order of 12,000 species (veined flora) of which 9,628 have been recorded under 291 families. It includes 1000 endemic species. Trees, which provide timber, are of 1,000 species. Timber plants are 100 species. Commercially usable species are 352 species including 42 listed as precious tree species. Further categorization of the flora relates to 76 aromatic spices, 160 species providing vegetable oils, and also herbal species. Some of the well known herbal species are: ginseng , Coscinium fenestratum , Coptis teeta , Panax vietnamensis , and Stephania .

[ 20 ] Fauna [ edit ] Main article: List of mammals of Vietnam Grey-shanked douc langur at Cuc Phuong Primate Rehabilitation Center Faunal species noted are accounted as 11,217 species of animals, in Vietnam's hot and humid climate. These are broadly: Indian elephants , bears ( black bear and honey bear ), Indochinese tigers and Indochinese leopards as well as smaller animals like pygmy lorises, [ 21 ] monkeys (such as snub-nosed monkey), bats, flying squirrels , turtles and otters . Reptiles such as crocodiles , snakes and lizards are also reported.

[ 22 ] [ 20 ] [ 19 ] [ 18 ] Specifically the faunal species which are endemic to Vietnam are the following.

[ 23 ] While many variety of animals have become extinct like the Northern Sumatran rhinoceros , the protection of large animals have been addressed. The Vietnamese Javan rhinoceros used to live throughout the region of Vietnam but was declared extinct in 2010 when the last remaining individual was found dead with the horn removed.

There are also 2,470 species of fish, more than 23,000 species of corals and many species of invertebrates recorded in the wildlife of Vietnam.

[ 20 ] Mammals [ edit ] Primates [ edit ] Red-shanked duoc Hatinh langur Francois' langur Black-crested gibbon White-cheeked gibbon Southern white-cheeked gibbon Red-shanked douc Black-shanked douc Gray-shanked douc Tonkin snub-nosed monkey Stump-tailed macaque Pygmy loris Stump-tailed macaque eating Crab-eating macaque Pig-tailed macaque Cats [ edit ] Indochinese tiger Leopard cat Marbled cat Jungle cat Clouded leopard Asian golden cat Indochinese leopard Civets [ edit ] Large Indian civet Large-spotted civet Small Indian civet Owston's palm civet Asian palm civet Binturong Masked palm civet Small-toothed palm civet Deer [ edit ] Giant muntjac Indian muntjac Truong Son muntjac Vietnamese sika deer Sambar deer Elephants [ edit ] Indian elephant Bovine [ edit ] Banteng Kouprey Saola Gaur Water buffalo Rhinoceros [ edit ] Northern Sumatran rhinoceros which is officially extinct in Vietnam and on the IUCN Red List .

Vietnamese Javan rhinoceros which is officially extinct in Vietnam and on the IUCN Red List.

Cetacea [ edit ] Chinese white dolphin Finless porpoise ( narrow-ridged finless porpoise ) Irrawaddy dolphin Spinner dolphin Sirenia [ edit ] Dugong Reptiles [ edit ] A new species of gecko ( Cyrtodactylus phongnhakebangensis ) found in Phong Nha-Kẻ Bàng National Park Perhaps a third of Vietnam's 484 identified reptile species are endemic, and new species are regularly discovered. These species are often found in particular hotspots, for example 32 endemic species are found within the Annamite Range . The IUCN Red List has listings for 74 threatened species, which does not include species which are too data deficient for assessments to be made. Many species are known only from a single location, and only around a fifth of species (and 23% the Red List species) have captive populations. Such populations can be crucial for a species to survive, for example the Vietnamese pond turtle is present in captivity despite being rare or extinct in the wild.

[ 24 ] Turtles/tortoises [ edit ] Elongated tortoise ( Indotestudo elongata ) Vietnamese pond turtle ( Mauremys annamensis ) Asian forest tortoise ( Manouria emys ) Green sea turtle ( Chelonia mydas ) Hawksbill turtle ( Eretmochelys imbricata ) Leatherback sea turtle ( Dermochelys coriacea ) Asian giant softshell turtle ( Pelochelys cantorii ) Yangtze giant softshell turtle ( Rafetus swinhoei ) Lizards [ edit ] Agamids [ edit ] Chinese water dragon ( Physignathus cocincinus ) Short-footed lizard ( Acanthosaura brachypoda ) Mountain horned-dragon ( Acanthosaura capra ) Crowned spiny lizard ( Acanthosaura coronata ) Brown pricklenape ( Acanthosaura lepidogaster ) Murphy's agama ( Acanthosaura murphyi ) Natalie's agama ( Acanthosaura nataliae ) Phong Dien agama ( Acanthosaura phongdienensis ) Short-spined agama ( Acanthosaura prasina ) Banded japalure ( Diploderma fasciatum ) Geckos [ edit ] Adler's gecko ( Gekko adleri ) Ba Na dwarf gecko ( Hemiphyllodactylus banaensis ) Monitors [ edit ] Clouded monitor ( Varanus nebulosus ) Water monitor ( Varanus salvator ) Skinks [ edit ] Chinese short-limbed skink ( Ateuchosaurus chinensis ) Snakes [ edit ] Ruby-eyed viper Venomous [ edit ] Mountain pit viper ( Ovophis monticola ) Sharp-nosed viper ( Deinagkistrodon acutus ) Jerdon's pit viper ( Protobothrops jerdonii ) Brown-spotted pit-viper ( Protobothrops mucrosquamatus ) Three-horned pit-viper ( Protobothrops sieversorum ) Stejneger's bamboo viper ( Trimeresurus stejnegeri ) Ruby-eyed pit-viper ( Trimeresurus rubeus ) White-lipped pit-viper ( Trimeresurus albolabris ) King cobra ( Ophiophagus hannah ) Monocled cobra ( Naja kaouthia ) Indochinese spitting cobra ( Naja siamensis ) Chinese cobra ( Naja atra ) Non-venomous [ edit ] Reticulated python Burmese python Red-tailed green ratsnake Vietnam blue beauty ratsnake Siamese crocodile basking in sun Crocodilians [ edit ] Saltwater crocodile , which has been extinct in Vietnam since at least the 1980s.

Siamese crocodile which is critically endangered on the IUCN Red List and, in Vietnam, is currently only found within Cat Tien National Park, but was much more widespread historically.

Birds [ edit ] Main article: List of birds of Vietnam Left: Anastomus oscitans in Tram Chim National Park, Dong Thap Province, Vietnam. Right: Wetland at Tram Chim National Park Rare and little known birds have been identified such as the Edward's pheasant which was believed to be extinct, the white-winged wood duck and the white-shouldered ibis. The country lies on the east Asian flyway of Siberian birds and is an important stopover for migratory waders.

[ 18 ] According to the BirdLife International records of 2011, the avifauna recorded are of 889 species, which includes 18 endemic species, 44 globally threatened species and 6 introduced species. The globally threatened species are listed under the following three categories, excluding vulnerable category.

[ 4 ] Near-threatened The near threatened species listed by IBA are: [ 4 ] Falcated duck ( Anas falcata ) Ferruginous duck ( Aythya nyroca ) Chestnut-necklaced partridge ( Arborophila charltonii ) Siamese fireback ( Lophura diardi ) Germain's peacock-pheasant ( Polyplectron germaini ) Platalea minor ( Ichthyophaga humilis ) Gray-headed fish-eagle ( Ichthyophaga ichthyaetus ) Cinereous vulture ( Aegypius monachus ) White-rumped falcon ( Polihierax insignis ) Laggar falcon ( Falco jugger ) Corn crake ( Crex crex ) Band-bellied crake ( Porzana paykullii ) Malaysian plover ( Charadrius peronii ) Eurasian curlew ( Numenius arquata ) Black-tailed godwit ( Limosa limosa ) Asian dowitcher ( Limnodromus semipalmatus ) Black-bellied tern ( Sterna acuticauda ) Nicobar pigeon ( Caloenas nicobarica ) Blue-rumped parrot ( Psittinus cyanurus ) Long-tailed parakeet ( Psittacula longicauda ) Black-bellied malkoha ( Phaenicophaeus diardi ) Ward's trogon ( Harpactes wardi ) Blyth's kingfisher ( Alcedo hercules ) Black hornbill ( Anthracoceros malayanus ) Great hornbill ( Buceros bicornis ) Brown hornbill ( Anorrhinus austeni ) White-crowned hornbill ( Aceros comatus ) Red-collared woodpecker ( Picus rabieri ) Japanese paradise-flycatcher ( Terpsiphone atrocaudata ) Collared crow ( Corvus torquatus ) Yellow-billed nuthatch ( Sitta solangiae ) Streaked bulbul ( Ixos malaccensis ) Black-headed parrotbill ( Paradoxornis margaritae ) Rufous-rumped grassbird ( Graminicola bengalensis ) Short-tailed scimitar-babbler ( Jabouilleia danjoui ) Black-hooded laughingthrush ( Garrulax milleti ); Vietnamese cutia ( Cutia legalleni ) Scarlet-breasted flowerpecker ( Prionochilus thoracicus ) Mekong wagtail ( Motacilla samveasnae ) Vietnamese greenfinch ( Chloris monguilloti ) Asian golden weaver ( Ploceus hypoxanthus ) Endangered The endangered list covers the following species.

[ 4 ] Male Edward's pheasant White-winged duck ( Cairina scutulata ) Baer's pochard ( Aythya baeri ) Scaly-sided merganser ( Mergus squamatus ) Orange-necked partridge ( Arborophila davidi ) Edwards's pheasant ( Lophura edwardsi ) Vietnamese pheasant Black-faced spoonbill Lesser fish-eagle ( Platalea minor ) Nordmann's greenshank ( Tringa guttifer ) Collared laughingthrush ( Garrulax yersini ) Gray-crowned crocias ( Crocias langbianis ) Sooty babbler ( Stachyris herberti ) Critically endangered The list of critically endangered species identified by IBA is given below.

[ 4 ] Spoon-billed sandpiper ( Eurynorhynchus pygmeus ) Christmas Island frigatebird ( Fregata andrewsi ) White-shouldered ibis ( Pseudibis davisoni ) Giant ibis ( Pseudibis gigantea ) White-rumped vulture ( Gyps bengalensis ) Indian vulture ( Gyps indicus ) Red-headed vulture ( Sarcogyps calvus ) Bengal florican ( Houbaropsis bengalensis ) Spoon-billed sandpiper ( Eurynorhynchus pygmeus ) Molluscs [ edit ] Three views of a shell of the land snail species Leptacme cuongi Marine molluscs [ edit ] The marine molluscan fauna of Vietnam includes numerous species of chitons , gastropods , tusk shells , cephalopods and bivalves .

[ 25 ] Non-marine molluscs [ edit ] Main article: List of non-marine molluscs of Vietnam Vietnam's fauna of non-marine molluscs comprises various species of freshwater gastropods, freshwater bivalves and terrestrial gastropods.

[ 25 ] The terrestrial gastropod fauna is highly diverse and includes more than 850 described land snail and slug species; many species inhabit limestone karst hills.

[ 5 ] Threats and conservation [ edit ] The protected areas in Vietnam have suffered a decline over the past several decades. The reasons adduced to this situation are; the Vietnam war, deforestation, hunting, export of animals under CITES agreement which is generally violated by illegal activity due to inadequate patrolling.

[ 6 ] Illegal trade in wildlife is flourishing in Vietnam as there is great demand for these animals in China and also within the country. They have commercial value both at home and abroad.

[ 18 ] Trade in wildlife resources in Vietnam is of considerable value. In respect of faunal species, trade varies between 3,700 and 4,500 tons; the use of faunal species are also for medical purposes, pets, and as food and ornamentation but excludes trade in aquatic species. Insects are also a valuable source of trade with beetle and Lepidoptera species contributing towards a major share. Medicinal plants are also harvested and its trade is of the order of 20,000 tons.

[ 3 ] Continuous conservation efforts by the Government of Vietnam have brought more and more areas under protected status. Logging operations have been banned. The conservation efforts are showing positive results with wildlife becoming re-established in many reforested areas.

Mangrove forest areas are on the rise due to renewed planting. Fish fauna and crustaceans are proliferating and birds are seen more frequently. As a result of conservation efforts, Siamese crocodile numbers have recovered on account of their reintroduction to ponds within the parks.

[ 18 ] See also [ edit ] Protected areas of Vietnam List of fauna of Hà Giang List of amphibians of Hoàng Liên National Park References [ edit ] ^ a b c "Protected Areas Programme" (PDF) .

Protected Area Categories . IUCN Organization. 2004 . Retrieved 1 April 2013 .

^ Ray & Balasingamchow 2010 , p. 232.

^ a b "Report on the Review of Vietnam's Wildlife Trade Policy" (PDF) . CITES: Convention on International Trade in EndangeredSpecies of Wild Fauna and Flora . Retrieved 3 April 2013 .

^ a b c d e "Avibase - Bird Checklists of the World Vietnam" . Avibase The World Data Base Organization . Retrieved 2 April 2013 .

^ a b Raheem, Dinarzarde C.; Backeljau, Thierry; Pearce-Kelly, Paul; Taylor, Harry; Fenn, Jonathan; Sutcharit, Chirasak; Panha, Somsak; von Oheimb, Katharina C. M.; von Oheimb, Parm Viktor; Ikebe, Chiho; Páll-Gergely, Barna; Gargominy, Olivier; Lương, Hào Văn; Phạm, Sáng Văn; Đỗ, Tứ Văn; Đinh, Phòng Thị; Naggs, Manel; Ablett, Jon; Mackenzie Dodds, Jackie; Wade, Christopher M.; Naggs, Fred (2017).

An Illustrated Guide to the Land Snails and Slugs of Vietnam . The Natural History Museum, the Royal Belgian Institute of Natural Sciences & the Zoological Society of London.

ISBN 978-0-565-09458-4 .

^ a b "Vietnam Wildlife Found threatened" . Triciaswaterdragon.com . Retrieved 2 April 2013 .

^ "Vietnam: Wildlife Sanctuaries & National Parks" . World-wildlife-adventures.com . Retrieved 3 April 2013 .

^ "National Parks" . Vietnam National Parks . Retrieved 3 April 2013 .

^ "National Parks & Nature Reserves in Mekong Delta" . Official website of Vietnam National Parks organization . Retrieved 6 April 2013 .

^ "National Parks & Nature Reserves in North Eastern Area" . Official website of Vietnam National Parks organization . Retrieved 6 April 2013 .

^ "National Parks & Nature Reserves in North Western Area" . Official website of Vietnam National Parks organization . Retrieved 6 April 2013 .

^ "National Parks & Nature Reserves in Red River Delta" . Official website of Vietnam National Parks organization . Retrieved 6 April 2013 .

^ "National Parks & Nature Reserves in North Centre Coast" . Official website of Vietnam National Parks organization . Retrieved 6 April 2013 .

^ "National Parks & Nature Reserves in South Centre Coast" . Official website of Vietnam National Parks organization . Retrieved 6 April 2013 .

^ "National Parks & Nature Reserves in Centre Highlands" . Official website of Vietnam National Parks organization . Retrieved 6 April 2013 .

^ "National Parks & Nature Reserves in South Eastern Area" . Official website of Vietnam National Parks organization . Retrieved 6 April 2013 .

^ Huang, Jian; Spicer, Robert A.; Li, Shu-Feng; Liu, Jia; Do, Truong Van; Nguyen, Hung Ba; Zhou, Zhe-Kun; Su, Tao (1 May 2022).

"Long-term floristic and climatic stability of northern Indochina: Evidence from the Oligocene Ha Long flora, Vietnam" .

Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology .

593 : 110930.

doi : 10.1016/j.palaeo.2022.110930 .

S2CID 247368063 . Retrieved 31 August 2022 .

^ a b c d e f Ray & Balasingamchow 2010 , pp. 75–77.

^ a b "Vietnam's Wildlife" . Asiacopmasninfo.organization . Retrieved 1 April 2013 .

^ a b c "Conservation and Management of Wildlife In Vietnam" (PDF) . Official web site of Vietnam Forestry Organization. April 2003 . Retrieved 6 April 2013 .

^ Nekaris, K. Anne-Isola; Nijman, Vincent (2022-03-23).

"A new genus name for pygmy lorises, Xanthonycticebus gen. nov. (Mammalia, primates)" .

Zoosystematics and Evolution .

98 (1): 87– 92.

doi : 10.3897/zse.98.81942 .

ISSN 1860-0743 .

^ Joseph (2020-11-17).

"Top 7 Most Dangerous Animals in Vietnam: Deadliest Creatures" .

Journeying The Globe . Retrieved 2021-04-05 .

^ "Taxon Information" . Animal Diversity Web . Retrieved 1 April 2013 .

^ Carolyn Cowan (21 September 2023).

"For Vietnam's rare reptiles, lack of captive populations may spell doom" .

Mongabay . Retrieved 3 October 2023 .

^ a b Nguyên, Thach Ngoc (2005).

Shells of Vietnam . ConchBooks.

ISBN 3-925919-71-6 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Ray, Nick; Balasingamchow, Yu-Mei (15 September 2010).

Vietnam . Lonely Planet. p. 394.

ISBN 978-1-74220-389-8 . Retrieved 6 April 2013 .

v t e Wildlife of Asia Sovereign states Afghanistan Armenia Azerbaijan Bahrain Bangladesh Bhutan Brunei Cambodia China Cyprus Egypt Georgia India Indonesia Iran Iraq Israel Japan Jordan Kazakhstan North Korea South Korea Kuwait Kyrgyzstan Laos Lebanon Malaysia Maldives Mongolia Myanmar Nepal Oman Pakistan Philippines Qatar Russia Saudi Arabia Singapore Sri Lanka Syria Tajikistan Thailand Timor-Leste (East Timor) Turkey Turkmenistan United Arab Emirates Uzbekistan Vietnam Yemen States with limited recognition Abkhazia Northern Cyprus Palestine South Ossetia Taiwan Dependencies and other territories British Indian Ocean Territory Christmas Island Cocos (Keeling) Islands Hong Kong Macau Category Asia portal v t e Vietnam articles History Capitals Dynasties Economic Military Monarchs Names Naval Timeline Prehistoric Ancient Chinese dominated Monarchical French colonial Modern North Vietnam State of Vietnam South Vietnam PRG Geography Borders Climate Climate change Ecoregions Environmental issues Protected areas National parks Wildlife Mammals Birds Molluscs Endangered species World Heritage Sites Divisions Provinces Municipalities Cities District-level Commune-level Electoral units Regions Northern Red River Delta Northeast Northwest Central North Central South Central Central Highlands Southern Southeast Mekong Delta Politics Censorship Constitution Fatherland Front Foreign relations Human rights LGBT Law Law enforcement Communist Party Central Committee General Secretary Permanent Member of the Secretariat History of central officeholders National Congress Politburo Central Secretariat Central Inspection Commission Central Military Commission Executive President Vice President Government Prime Minister Deputy Prime Ministers Ministers Legislative National Assembly Standing Committee Chairman Elections Judiciary Supreme People's Court Chief Justice Supreme People's Procuracy Procurator-General Military Courts Military Central Military Commission National Defense and Security Council Defense industry Armed forces Army Navy Air Force Border Guard Coast Guard Security and militia Public Security Militia and Self-Defence Force Economy Agriculture Banking Đổi Mới ("Renovation") Đồng (currency) Energy Renewable energy Nuclear power Power stations Foreign aid Foreign trade Five-Year Plans Manufacturing Standards Automotive Poverty Science and Technology Traditional medicine Measurement Inventions Telecommunications Internet Censorship Tourism Visa policy Water supply Transport Air transport Airports Rail transport Expressways Society Education Universities Health HIV/AIDS COVID-19 Crime Gambling Prostitution Sex trafficking Human trafficking Corruption Public holidays Time Women Demographics People Eunuchs Overseas community Language Alphabet Phonology Language and computers Ethnic groups Name Racism Religion Folk religions Buddhism Taoism Christianity Islam Culture Anthem Architecture Art Awards Cinema Animation Clothing Cuisine Dishes Ingredients Dance Emblem Festivals Flag Literature Poetry Mass media Television News Agency Voice Newspapers Music V-pop Traditional musical instruments Philosophy Anarchism Communism Nationalism Socialism Trotskyism Ho Chi Minh Thought Person Dignity Theory Sports Traditional games Martial arts Symbols Theater Vietnamese studies Outline Index Category Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐5667c77bf8‐sg7hw
Cached time: 20250818131943
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.631 seconds
Real time usage: 0.781 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 16283/1000000
Revision size: 26417/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 171902/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 37975/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 14/100
Expensive parser function count: 27/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 108974/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.321/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7640127/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  615.938      1 -total
 30.44%  187.466      1 Template:Reflist
 29.14%  179.463      6 Template:Navbox
 28.73%  176.949      1 Template:Asia_in_topic
 20.10%  123.801     18 Template:Cite_web
 15.42%   94.960     56 Template:Iso2country
 13.50%   83.127      1 Template:Vietnam_topics
 13.18%   81.158      1 Template:Country_topics
  9.98%   61.460      1 Template:Short_description
  6.84%   42.101      7 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:10936588:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250818131943 and revision id 1291855878. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Wildlife_of_Vietnam&oldid=1291855878 " Categories : Fauna of Vietnam Environment of Vietnam Natural history of Vietnam Wildlife by country Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 May 2025, at 20:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Wildlife of Vietnam 2 languages Add topic

