Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Heliocentric theory 2 Tides 3 Seleucus in Strabo 4 See also 5 References 6 Sources Toggle the table of contents Seleucus of Seleucia 23 languages Afrikaans العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Lëtzebuergesch Nederlands Norsk bokmål پنجابی Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hellenistic astronomer and philosopher Seleucus of Seleucia Σέλευκος ὁ Σελεύκειος Born c.

190 BC Seleucia , Seleucid Empire Died c.

150 BC unknown Scientific career Fields Astronomy Philosophy Seleucus of Seleucia ( Greek : Σέλευκος Seleukos ; born c. 190 BC; fl.

c. 150 BC) was a Hellenistic astronomer and philosopher.

[ 1 ] Coming from Seleucia on the Tigris , Mesopotamia , the capital of the Seleucid Empire , or, alternatively, Seleukia on the Erythraean Sea , [ 2 ] [ 3 ] he is best known as a proponent of heliocentrism [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] and for his theory of the causes of tides .

Heliocentric theory [ edit ] Seleucus is known to have supported the heliocentric theory of Aristarchus of Samos , which stated that the Earth rotated around its own axis which in turn revolved around the Sun .

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] According to Plutarch , Seleucus was the first to demonstrate the heliocentric system through reasoning , but it is not known what arguments he used.

[ 9 ] According to Bartel Leendert van der Waerden , Seleucus may have constructed his heliocentric theory by determining the constants of a geometric model and by developing methods to compute planetary positions using this model, as Nicolaus Copernicus later did in the 16th century. He may have used trigonometric methods that were available in his time, as he was a contemporary of Hipparchus .

[ 10 ] Since the time of Heraclides Ponticus (387 BC–312 BC), the inferior planets Mercury and Venus have been at times named solar planets , as their positions diverge from the Sun by only a small angle.

According to the Greek geographer Strabo , Seleucus was also the first to assume the universe to be infinite.

[ 11 ] None of his original writings have survived, [ citation needed ] though a fragment of his work has survived only in Arabic translation, which was later referred to by the Persian philosopher Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi (865–925).

[ 12 ] Tides [ edit ] According to Lucio Russo , Seleucus' arguments for a heliocentric theory were probably related to the phenomenon of tides .

[ 13 ] The annual cycle of tides (which was studied by Seleucus) can indeed hardly be explained in a geocentric system. Seleucus correctly theorized that tides were caused by the Moon , explaining that the interaction was mediated by the pneuma . He noted that the tides varied in time and strength in different parts of the world. According to Russo, Seleucus ascribed tides both to the Moon and to a whirling motion of the Earth , which could be interpreted as the motion of the Earth around the Earth-Moon center of mass .

According to Strabo (3.5.9), Seleucus was the first to state that the tides are due to the attraction of the Moon, and that the height of the tides depends on the Moon's position relative to the Sun.

[ 11 ] Seleucus in Strabo [ edit ] Seleucus is known from the writings of Plutarch , Aetius , and Strabo , all of whom were Greeks, and the Persian Muhammad ibn Zakariya al-Razi . Strabo lists Seleucus as one of the four most influential " Chaldean " astronomers: In Chapter XVI of his Geographia , Strabo mentions several "Chaldaen" astronomers. At the end he adds: "Seleukios of Seleukia was a Chaldaean too." ... Babylonian astrologers and astronomers were often called "Chaldaeans." Strabo calls them "the so-called Chaldaeans". Their writings were translated into Greek and used by later authors like Geminos. The "Chaldaean" astronomers mentioned by Strabo are Kidenas , Naburianos , Sudines, and Seleukos. The first two are also known from astronomical cuneiform texts under their Akkadian names Nabu-Rimannu and Kidinnu.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Babylonian astronomy Greek astronomy Discourse on the Tides References [ edit ] ^ Greek astronomer: The SAO/NASA Astrophysics Data System (ADS) : Greek philosopher, born in Seleucia, ...

ScienceWorld : Greek philosopher who was the one astronomer of note who championed Aristarchus's heliocentric theory.

^ Neugebauer 1945 , pp. 39–42: Among several cities named Seleukia, the best known is Seleukia on the Tigris, the capital of the Seleucid kingdom. It is possible that the astronomer Seleukos lived or was born in this city, but it is also possible that his native town was Seleukia on the Erythrean Sea.

^ Describing his studies in the tides, Strabo claims that Seleucus was "from the region of the Erythraean Sea" (3.5.9).

^ Index of Ancient Greek Philosophers-Scientists Archived 2009-03-21 at the Wayback Machine ^ Seleucus of Seleucia (c. 190 BC–?) , The SAO/NASA Astrophysics Data System (ADS) ^ Seleucus of Seleucia (ca. 190–unknown BC) , ScienceWorld ^ Russell, Bertrand — History of Western Philosophy (2004) – p. 215 ^ We do not know other names of ancient astronomers or scientists who supported the heliocentric system: Hipparchus and later Ptolemy contributed to the success of the geocentric system; however, in the writings of Plutarch and Sextus Empiricus we read of "the followers of Aristarchus", thus it is probable that other people we do not know of adhered to the heliocentric view.

^ Van der Waerden 1987 , p. 528 ^ Van der Waerden 1987 , pp. 527−529 ^ a b c Van der Waerden 1987 , p. 527 ^ Shlomo Pines (1986), Studies in Arabic versions of Greek texts and in mediaeval science , vol. 2, Brill Publishers , pp. viii & 201–17, ISBN 965-223-626-8 ^ Russo 2003 .

Sources [ edit ] Neugebauer, O.

(1945), "The History of Ancient Astronomy. Problems and Methods", Journal of Near Eastern Studies , 4 (1): 1– 38, doi : 10.1086/370729 Russo, Lucio (2003), Flussi e riflussi , Milano: Feltrinelli, ISBN 88-07-10349-4 Sarton, George (1955), "Chaldaean Astronomy of the Last Three Centuries B. C.", Journal of the American Oriental Society , 75 (3): 166– 173, doi : 10.2307/595168 , JSTOR 595168 Van der Waerden, B. L.

(1987), "The Heliocentric System in Greek, Persian and Hindu Astronomy", Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences , 500 (1): 525– 545, Bibcode : 1987NYASA.500..525V , doi : 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1987.tb37224.x v t e Ancient Greek astronomy Astronomers Aglaonice Agrippa Anaximander Andronicus Apollonius Aratus Aristarchus Aristyllus Attalus Autolycus Bion Callippus Cleomedes Cleostratus Conon Eratosthenes Euctemon Eudoxus Geminus Heraclides Hicetas Hipparchus Hippocrates of Chios Hypsicles Menelaus Meton Oenopides Philip of Opus Philolaus Posidonius Ptolemy Pytheas Seleucus Sosigenes of Alexandria Sosigenes the Peripatetic Strabo Thales Theodosius Theon of Alexandria Theon of Smyrna Timocharis Works Almagest (Ptolemy) Catasterismi (Eratosthenes) Little Astronomy On Sizes and Distances (Hipparchus) On the Sizes and Distances (Aristarchus) On the Heavens (Aristotle) Instruments Antikythera mechanism Armillary sphere Astrolabe Dioptra Equatorial ring Gnomon Mural instrument Triquetrum Concepts Callippic cycle Celestial spheres Circle of latitude Counter-Earth Deferent and epicycle Equant Geocentrism Heliocentrism Hipparchic cycle Inferior and superior planets Metonic cycle Octaeteris Solstice Spherical Earth Sublunary sphere Zodiac Influences Babylonian astronomy Egyptian astronomy Influenced Medieval European science Indian astronomy Medieval Islamic astronomy Authority control databases International VIAF Academics zbMATH Other IdRef Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Seleucus_of_Seleucia&oldid=1258773773 " Categories : 190s BC births 150s BC deaths Babylonian astronomers People from the Seleucid Empire Chaldea 2nd-century BC astronomers Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Greek-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2016 This page was last edited on 21 November 2024, at 15:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Seleucus of Seleucia 23 languages Add topic

