Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Paleontological use 3 References Toggle References subsection 3.1 Sources Toggle the table of contents Suture (geology) 12 languages Čeština Deutsch فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands Polski Русский Slovenčina Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Joining together of separate terranes along a major fault zone In structural geology , a suture is a joining along a major fault zone, of separate terranes , tectonic units that have different plate tectonic , metamorphic and paleogeographic histories. The suture is often represented on the surface by an orogen or mountain range.

[ 1 ] Overview [ edit ] In plate tectonics, sutures are the remains of subduction zones , and the terranes that are joined are interpreted as fragments of different palaeocontinents or tectonic plates .

Outcrops of sutures can vary in width from a few hundred meters to a couple of kilometers . They can be networks of mylonitic shear zones or brittle fault zones, but are usually both. Sutures are usually associated with igneous intrusions and tectonic lenses with varying kinds of lithologies from plutonic rocks to ophiolitic fragments.

[ 2 ] An example from Great Britain is the Iapetus Suture which, though now concealed beneath younger rocks, has been determined by geophysical means to run along a line roughly parallel with the Anglo-Scottish border and represents the joint between the former continent of Laurentia to the north and the former micro-continent of Avalonia to the south.

[ 3 ] Avalonia is in fact a plain which dips steeply northwestwards through the crust, underthrusting Laurentia.

Paleontological use [ edit ] When used in paleontology , suture can also refer to fossil exoskeletons , as in the suture line, a division on a trilobite between the free cheek and the fixed cheek; this suture line allowed the trilobite to perform ecdysis (the shedding of its skin).

References [ edit ] ^ There is a "difference between the geophysical and geological definition of suture zones and terrane boundaries. The geophysical definitions are generally based upon the integration of a physical response over the thickness of the crust, whereas the geological definition is almost always as a line or zone at the Earth's surface." Harris, Anthony L. and Fettes, D. J. (1988) The Caledonian-Appalachian orogen published for the Geological Society by Blackwell Scientific Publications, Oxford, England, page 4, ISBN 978-0-632-01796-6 ^ Grotzinger, John P.; Thomas H. Jordan (2014).

Understanding Earth (7th ed.). New York.

ISBN 978-1-4641-3874-4 .

OCLC 884299180 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Oliver, G. J. H.; Stone, P. and Bluck, B. J. (2002) "The Ballantrae Complex and Southern Uplands terrane" pp. 167–200 In Trewin, N. H. (editor) (2002) The Geology of Scotland The Geological Society, London, page 191 , ISBN 978-1-86239-126-0 Sources [ edit ] Heron, P., Pysklywec, R. & Stephenson, R. Lasting mantle scars lead to perennial plate tectonics. Nat Commun 7, 11834 (2016).

https://doi.org/10.1038/ncomms11834 v t e Structural geology Underlying theory Deformation mechanism Lamé's stress ellipsoid Mohr–Coulomb theory Mohr's circle Overburden pressure Rock mechanics Strain Strain partitioning Stress Stress field Tension Measurement conventions Brunton compass Inclinometer Orthographic projection Rake Stereographic projection Strike and dip Large-scale tectonics Accretionary wedge Allochthon Autochthon Back-arc basin Continental collision Convergent boundary Décollement Divergent boundary Extensional tectonics Fault block Fenster Fold and thrust belt Fold mountains Foreland basin Graben Half-graben Horse Horst Horst and graben Intra-arc basin Inversion Klippe List of tectonic plate interactions Mélange Mountain formation Nappe Obduction Orogeny Passive margin Plate tectonics Pull-apart basin Rift valley Rift Saddle Strike-slip tectonics Structural basin Suture Syneclise Terrane Thick-skinned deformation Thin-skinned deformation Thrust tectonics Fracturing Columnar jointing Dike Exfoliation joint Fissure Joint Vein Faulting Asperity Cataclasite Cataclastic rock Detachment fault Disturbance Fault friction Fault mechanics Fault scarp Fault trace Thrust fault Transfer zone Transform fault Foliation and lineation Cleavage Compaction Crenulation Fissility Oblique foliation Pressure solution Rock microstructure Slickenside Stylolite Tectonic phase Tectonite Folding Anticline Chevron Detachment fold Dome Homocline Monocline Syncline Vergence Boudinage Competence Kinematic analysis 3D fold evolution Paleostress inversion Paleostress Section restoration Shear zone Mylonite Pure shear Shear Category Authority control databases National United States Israel Other Yale LUX This tectonics article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Suture_(geology)&oldid=1219972190 " Categories : Structural geology Paleontology Suture zones Tectonics stubs Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All stub articles This page was last edited on 21 April 2024, at 01:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Suture (geology) 12 languages Add topic

