Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Work Toggle Work subsection 2.1 Relationship with Slavoj Žižek 3 Bibliography 4 See also 5 References 6 Further reading 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Ernesto Laclau 33 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Magyar Македонски മലയാളം مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Occitan Polski Português Русский Simple English Slovenščina Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Argentine philosopher and political theorist Ernesto Laclau Ernesto Laclau in 2012 Born 6 October 1935 Buenos Aires , Argentina Died 13 April 2014 (2014-04-13) (aged 78) Seville , Spain Philosophical work Era 20th- / 21st-century philosophy Region Western philosophy School Post-Marxism Main interests Hegemony · Identity politics Notable ideas Criticism of Marxist economic determinism Ernesto Laclau ( Spanish: [laˈklaw] ; 6 October 1935 – 13 April 2014) was an Argentine political theorist and philosopher . He is often described as an 'inventor' of post-Marxist political theory. He is well known for his collaborations with his long-term partner, Chantal Mouffe .

He studied history at the University of Buenos Aires Faculty of Philosophy and Letters , graduating with a licenciatura in 1964, and received a PhD from the University of Essex in 1977.

From 1986 he served as Professor of Political Theory at the University of Essex, where he founded and directed for many years the graduate programme in Ideology and Discourse Analysis , as well as the Centre for Theoretical Studies in the Humanities and the Social Sciences. Under his directorship, the Ideology and Discourse Analysis programme has provided a research framework for the development of a distinct type of discourse analysis that draws on post-structuralist theory (especially the work of Saussure , and Derrida ), post-analytic thought ( Wittgenstein , and Richard Rorty ) and psychoanalysis (primarily the work of Lacan ) to provide innovative analysis of concrete political phenomena, such as identities, discourses and hegemonies. This theoretical and analytical orientation is known today as the ' Essex School of discourse analysis '.

[ 1 ] Over his career Laclau lectured extensively in many universities in North America, South America, Western Europe, Australia, and South Africa. He also held positions at SUNY Buffalo and Northwestern University , both in the US.

Biography [ edit ] Laclau studied history at the University of Buenos Aires [ 2 ] and was a member of the PSIN (Socialist Party of the National Left) until 1969, when the British historian Eric Hobsbawm supported his entrance to Oxford.

[ 3 ] He had close links with Jorge Abelardo Ramos , the founder of the PSIN, although he stated in 2005 that the latter had evolved in a direction he did not appreciate.

[ 3 ] In the same interview, he claimed that he came from a Yrigoyenista family, and that the Peronist politician Arturo Jauretche , a strong opponent of Justo 's dictatorship during the Infamous Decade of the 1930s, was a close friend of his father.

[ 3 ] In his later years, he had close ties with the Argentine Socialist Confederation (Spanish: Confederación Socialista Argentina ), [ 4 ] and in Argentina he is associated with Peronism .

[ 5 ] Laclau died of a heart attack in Seville in 2014.

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Work [ edit ] Laclau's early work was influenced by Althusserian Marxism and focused on issues debated within Neo-Marxist circles in the 1970s, such as the role of the state, the dynamics of capitalism, the importance of building popular movements, and the possibility of revolution. Laclau's most significant book is Hegemony and Socialist Strategy , which he co-authored with Chantal Mouffe in 1985. The position outlined in this book is usually described as post-Marxist because it rejects (a) Marxist economic determinism and (b) the view that class struggle is the most important antagonism in society. In their 2001 introduction to the second edition Laclau and Mouffe commented on this label, stating that whilst ' post -Marxist' they were also 'post- Marxist ': [ 8 ] their work, though a departure from traditional Western Marxism, retained similar concerns and ideas. A key innovation in Hegemony and Socialist Strategy was Laclau and Mouffe's argument that left-wing movements need to build alliances with a wide variety of different groups if they are to be successful and establish a left-wing 'hegemony'. In the final chapter of the book, the project of "radical and plural democracy" was advocated: a democracy in which subjects accept the importance of the values of liberty and equality, but fight over what the terms mean.

In Hegemony and Socialist Strategy Laclau and Mouffe also offered a constructivist account of 'discourse'. By drawing on the work of the later Wittgenstein, they argued that social entities only become meaningful through both linguistic and non-linguistic discursive articulation.

[ 9 ] As such, the meaning of something is never pre-given but is, instead, constructed through social practices. In a later summary of his view, Laclau claims there is support for this broad sense of discourse in Saussure. "By discourse... I do not mean something that is essentially restricted to the areas of speech and writing, but any complex of elements in which relations play the constitutive role. This means that elements do not pre-exist the relational complex but are constituted through it. Thus 'relation' and 'objectivity' are synonymous. Saussure asserted that there are no positive terms in language, only differences — something is what it is only through its differential relations to something else." [ 10 ] Laclau subsequently used this account of discourse to re-consider the nature of identity, arguing that all political identities are discursive - even if they are experienced by individuals as 'natural' (even to the point where one's identity is not recognised as an identity). For example, though an individual may think that they are just 'born male' this is, for Laclau [ citation needed ] not the case: 'maleness' is a socially constructed category that has no innate meaning.

In his more recent works, Laclau returned to a topic that was prevalent in his earliest writings: populism. In On Populist Reason , Laclau considered the nature of populism in political discourse, the creation of a popular hegemonic bloc such as "the people", and the importance of affect in politics. Building on his earlier work, Laclau argued that the basis of populism lies in the creation of " empty signifiers ": words and ideas that express a universal idea of justice, and symbolically structure the political environment. Against those who see populism as a threat to democracy, Laclau argued that it is an essential component of it.

[ 11 ] Relationship with Slavoj Žižek [ edit ] Laclau is known for his long standing dialogue with Lacanian "arch-Marxist" Slavoj Žižek . This dates back to at least 1989, when Laclau wrote the introduction to Žižek's first book in English ( The Sublime Object of Ideology ). Žižek is widely recognized as responsible for Laclau's increased acceptance of Lacanian ideas and his essay "Beyond Discourse Analysis", [ 12 ] which was published in Laclau's New Reflections on the Revolutions of Our Time (1990), provided a psychoanalytic critique of Laclau's work. In 2000, Laclau, Žižek and Judith Butler published the trialogue Contingency, Hegemony, Universality , in which each responded to the others' works in a three-essay cycle. Although Žižek and Laclau noted their similarities and mutual respect, significant political and theoretical differences emerged between all three interlocutors. Following several acrimonious publications in the early 2000s, Laclau wrote in On Populist Reason (2005) that Žižek had an impractical and confused approach to politics, describing him as "waiting for the Martians".

[ 13 ] Their disagreement escalated in the pages of Critical Inquiry in 2006, when in a spate of essays the two argued in an increasingly hostile manner about political action, Marxism and class struggle, Hegel, populism, and the Lacanian Real.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] More recently in a 2014 interview with David Howarth, Laclau stated that his relationship with Žižek had deteriorated due to the latter adopting a "frantic ultra-Leftist stance, wrapped in a Leninism of kindergarten".

[ 16 ] Bibliography [ edit ] Politics and Ideology in Marxist Theory (NLB, 1977) Laclau, Ernesto; Mouffe, Chantal (2001) [1985].

Hegemony and Socialist Strategy . London: Verso Books .

ISBN 9781859843307 .

New Reflections on the Revolution of our Time (Verso, 1990) The Making of Political Identities (editor) (Verso, 1994) Emancipation(s) (Verso, 1996) Contingency, Hegemony, Universality (with Judith Butler and Slavoj Žižek ) (Verso, 2000) On Populist Reason . Phronesis. London: Verso Books . 2005.

ISBN 9781859846513 .

The Rhetorical Foundations of Society (Verso, 2014) See also [ edit ] Antonio Gramsci Chantal Mouffe Essex School of discourse analysis Hegemony discursive theory Laclau-Mouffe List of deconstructionists Louis Althusser Peronism Richard JF Day Slavoj Žižek Saul Newman References [ edit ] ^ Townshend, Jules (February 2003). "Discourse theory and political analysis: a new paradigm from the Essex School?".

British Journal of Politics and International Relations .

5 (1): 129– 142.

doi : 10.1111/1467-856X.00100 .

S2CID 146283536 .

^ "Cuáles eran las principales ideas de la obra de Ernesto Laclau" [What were the main ideas of the work of Ernesto Laclau].

La Nacion (in Spanish). 13 April 2014. Archived from the original on 18 September 2018 . Retrieved 18 April 2015 .

^ a b c "Las manos en la masa - Ernesto Laclau contra Negri, Hardt y Zizek" [Hands in the dough - Ernesto Laclau against Negri, Hardt and Zizek].

Pagina/12 (in Spanish). 5 June 2005.

^ "Una apuesta por la transformación" [A commitment to transformation].

La Vanguardia (in Spanish).

^ "Ernesto Laclau, el ideólogo de la Argentina dividida" [Ernesto Laclau, the ideologue of divided Argentina].

Perfil (in Spanish). 14 April 2014.

Archived from the original on 19 April 2015.

^ "ÚLTIMO MOMENTO: Falleció en Sevilla, el téorico y politólogo argentino, Ernesto Laclau | Radio Rivadavia" [LAST MOMENT: The Argentine theoretician and political scientist, Ernesto Laclau | Radio Rivadavia] (in Spanish). Rivadavia.com.ar. Archived from the original on 14 April 2014 . Retrieved 13 April 2014 .

^ Blackburn, Robin.

"Ernesto Laclau, 1935-2014" .

Verso Books . Retrieved 14 April 2014 .

^ Laclau & Mouffe 2001 .

^ Laclau & Mouffe 2001 , p. 108.

^ Laclau 2005 , p. 68.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFLaclau2005 ( help ) ^ Laclau 2005 .

sfn error: no target: CITEREFLaclau2005 ( help ) ^ Žižek, Slavoj (1990).

Beyond Discourse Analysis . London: Verso Books . pp.

249– 260.

^ Laclau 2005 , p. 232.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFLaclau2005 ( help ) ^ Laclau, Ernesto (2006). "Why Constructing A People is the Main Task of Radical Politics".

Critical Inquiry .

32 (4): 646– 680.

doi : 10.1086/508086 .

JSTOR 10.1086/508086 .

S2CID 146643004 .

^ Žižek, Slavoj (2006). "Schlagend, aber nicht Treffend!".

Critical Inquiry .

33 (1): 185– 211.

doi : 10.1086/509751 .

JSTOR 10.1086/509751 .

S2CID 154718020 .

^ Laclau, Ernesto (2014).

Ernesto Laclau: Post-Marxism, Populism and Critique . Abingdon: Routledge . p. 271.

Further reading [ edit ] Anna Marie Smith, Laclau and Mouffe: The Radical Democratic Imaginary , London: Routledge, 1998.

David Howarth, Discourse , Milton Keynes: Open University Press, 2000.

Louise Philips and Marianne Jorgensen, Discourse Analysis as Theory and Method , London: Sage, 2002.

David Howarth, Aletta Norval and Yannis Stavrakakis (eds), Discourse Theory and Political Analysis , Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2002.

Simon Critchley and Oliver Marchart (eds), Laclau: A Critical Reader , London: Routledge, 2004.

Warren Breckman, Adventures of the Symbolic: Postmarxism and Radical Democracy , New York: Columbia University Press, 2013 David Howarth and Jacob Torfing (eds) Discourse Theory in European Politics , Houndmills: Palgrave, 2005.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Ernesto Laclau .

Library resources about Ernesto Laclau Resources in your library Resources in other libraries By Ernesto Laclau Resources in your library Resources in other libraries Centre for Theoretical Studies, University of Essex Includes Laclau papers on populism and the philosophical roots of discourse theory Ideology and Discourse Analysis network Hearts, Minds and Radical Democracy Archived 14 May 2016 at the Wayback Machine Interview with Ernesto Laclau and Chantal Mouffe Entrevista a Ernesto Laclau sobre el juego de la política Curriculum Vitae God Only Knows 1991 article in Marxism Today Socialist strategy: where next?

1981 article in Marxism Today by Ernesto Laclau and Chantal Mouffe v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Argentina Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii People Trove DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ernesto_Laclau&oldid=1283055431 " Categories : Argentine people of French descent 1935 births 2014 deaths People from Buenos Aires Discourse analysts Marxist theorists Argentine political philosophers Populism scholars Academics of the University of Essex 20th-century Argentine philosophers 21st-century Argentine philosophers Peronists University at Buffalo faculty University of Buenos Aires alumni Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Harv and Sfn no-target errors Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles with hCards Pages with Spanish IPA All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2021 Commons category link from Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 30 March 2025, at 04:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ernesto Laclau 33 languages Add topic

