Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origins Toggle Origins subsection 1.1 1651–1763: Evolution of colonial policy 1.2 1764–1766: Taxes imposed and withdrawn 1.3 1767–1773: Townshend Acts and the Tea Act 1.4 1774–1775: Intolerable Acts 2 Military hostilities begin 3 Creating new state constitutions 4 Second Continental Congress Toggle Second Continental Congress subsection 4.1 Declaration of Independence 5 Defending the revolution Toggle Defending the revolution subsection 5.1 British return: 1776–1777 5.2 Prisoners 5.3 American alliances after 1778 5.4 1778–1783: the British move south 5.4.1 Surrender at Yorktown (1781) 5.5 End of the war 6 Paris peace treaty 7 Finance 8 Concluding the revolution Toggle Concluding the revolution subsection 8.1 National debt 9 Ideology and factions Toggle Ideology and factions subsection 9.1 Ideology behind the revolution 9.1.1 Liberalism 9.1.2 Republicanism 9.1.3 Protestant dissenters and the Great Awakening 9.2 Class and psychology of the factions 9.2.1 King George III 9.2.2 Patriots 9.2.3 Loyalists 9.2.4 Neutrals 9.2.5 Role of women 9.3 Other participants 9.3.1 France and Spain 9.3.2 Germans 9.3.3 Native Americans 9.3.4 Black Americans 10 Effects of the revolution Toggle Effects of the revolution subsection 10.1 Interpretations 10.2 Inspiring other independence movements and revolutions 10.3 Status of African Americans 10.4 Status of American women 10.5 Loyalist expatriation 10.6 Commemorations 11 See also 12 Notes 13 References 14 Sources 15 Further reading Toggle Further reading subsection 15.1 Reference works 15.2 Surveys of the era 15.3 Specialized studies 15.4 Historiography 15.5 Primary sources 16 External links Toggle the table of contents American Revolution 80 languages Afrikaans العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Føroyskt Français Galego Gĩkũyũ 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Ido Bahasa Indonesia Interlingua Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული Ikinyarwanda Kreyòl ayisyen Kurdî Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Ligure Македонски मराठी مصرى Bahasa Melayu Монгол မြန်မာဘာသာ Nederlands नेपाली नेपाल भाषा 日本語 Norsk bokmål Occitan ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی پښتو Patois Português Qaraqalpaqsha Română Rumantsch Русский Scots Shqip සිංහල سنڌي Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikibooks Wikiquote Wikiversity Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1765–1783 colonial rebellion in North America This article is about political and social developments, and the origin and aftermath of the war. For military actions, see American Revolutionary War . For other uses, see American Revolution (disambiguation) .

American Revolution Part of the Atlantic Revolutions The Continental Union Flag (1775–1777) The Committee of Five presenting its draft of the Declaration of Independence to the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia on June 28, 1776, depicted in John Trumbull 's 1818 portrait, Declaration of Independence Date 1765 to 1783 Location Thirteen Colonies (1765–1775) United Colonies (1775–1781) United States (1781–1783) Outcome Independence of the United States of America from Great Britain Dissolution of British America , formation of British North America and Spanish Florida End of the First British Empire Began the Age of Revolution World's first federal republic founded on the consent of the governed First permanently successful overthrow of monarchical colonial rule Part of a series on the American Revolution Declaration of Independence (painting) The Committee of Five presents their draft of the Declaration of Independence to the Second Continental Congress in Philadelphia Timeline Military leaders Battles Origins Context Thirteen Colonies Salutary neglect French and Indian War George III Ideas American Enlightenment Republicanism Liberalism " No taxation without representation " Conflict over taxation Sugar Act Currency Act Quartering Acts Stamp Act 1765 Sons of Liberty Stamp Act Congress Declaratory Act Townshend Acts Virginia Association Tea Act Boston Massacre Boston Tea Party Edenton Tea Party Philadelphia Tea Party Intolerable Acts Committees of Correspondence First Continental Congress Continental Association Revolutionary War Continental Army Continental Navy Minutemen British Army British Royal Navy France Spain Battles Diplomacy Intelligence Treaty of Paris Financial costs Political developments Loyalists Patriots Role of women Role of African Americans Second Continental Congress 27 colonial grievances Olive Branch Petition Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence ( Drafting Signing ) Forming a republic Confederation period Articles of Confederation Perpetual Union Congress of the Confederation Northwest Ordinance Dissent and rebellions Newburgh Conspiracy Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1783 Shays' Rebellion Paper Money Riot Constitution Annapolis Convention Philadelphia Convention The Federalist Papers Anti-Federalist Papers Raftification Bill of Rights Legacy United States Atlantic Revolutions American nationalism American civil religion Bicentennial Prospect Hill Flag Debate United States portal v t e This article is part of a series on the History of the United States Timeline and periods Prehistoric and Pre-Columbian Era until 1607 Colonial Era 1607–1765 1776–1789 American Revolution 1765–1783 Confederation period 1783–1788 1789–1815 Federalist Era 1788–1801 Jeffersonian Era 1801–1817 1815–1849 Era of Good Feelings 1817–1825 Jacksonian Era 1825–1849 1849–1865 Civil War Era 1849–1865 Greater Reconstruction 1846–1898 1865–1917 Reconstruction Era 1865–1877 Gilded Age 1877–1896 Progressive Era 1896–1917 1917–1945 World War I 1917–1918 Roaring Twenties 1918–1929 Great Depression 1929–1941 World War II 1941–1945 1945–1964 Post-World War II Era 1945–1964 Civil Rights Era 1954–1968 1964–1980 Civil Rights Era 1954–1968 Vietnam War 1964–1975 1980–1991 Reagan Era 1981–1991 1991–2016 Post-Cold War Era 1991–present 2016–present 2016–present Topics American Century Antisemitism Civil unrest Racial violence Cultural Cinema Music Newspapers Sports Demography Immigration Economy Banking Education Higher education Flag Government Abortion Capital punishment Civil rights Corruption The Constitution Debt ceiling Direct democracy Foreign policy Law enforcement Postal service Taxation Voting rights Journalism Maritime Military Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard Party Systems First Second Third Fourth Fifth Sixth Religion Social class Slavery Sexual slavery Technology and industry Agriculture Labor Lumber Medicine Railway Groups African Americans Asian Americans Chinese Americans Filipino Americans Indian Americans Japanese Americans Korean Americans Thai Americans Vietnamese Americans European Americans Albanian Americans English Americans Estonian Americans Finnish Americans German Americans Irish Americans Italian Americans Lithuanian Americans Polish Americans Serbian Americans Hispanic and Latino Americans Mexican Americans Jewish Americans Middle Eastern Americans Egyptian Americans Iranian Americans Iraqi Americans Lebanese Americans Palestinian Americans Saudi Americans Native Americans Cherokee Comanche Pacific Islander Americans Chamorros Hawaiians Women LGBTQ Gay men Lesbians Transgender people Places Territorial evolution Admission to the Union Historic regions American frontier Manifest destiny Indian removal Regions New England The South The West Coast States AL AK AZ AR CA CO CT DE FL GA HI ID IL IN IA KS KY LA ME MD MA MI MN MS MO MT NE NV NH NJ NM NY NC ND OH OK OR PA RI SC SD TN TX UT VT VA WA WV WI WY Territories DC AS GU MP PR VI Cities Urban history Cities Outline List of years Historiography Category Portal v t e Part of a series on Revolution Characteristics Bourgeois Colour Communist Counter-revolutionary Democratic Nonviolent Passive Permanent Proletarian From above Wave Social Methods Boycott Civil disorder Civil war Class struggle Contentious politics Coup d'état Demonstration Human chain Direct action Guerrilla warfare Insurgency Mass mobilization Mutiny Protest Rebellion Resistance Nonviolent Civil Disobedience Riot Samizdat Strike action Tax resistance Terror Examples English Atlantic American Brabant Liège French Haitian Spanish American Serbian Greek 1820s 1830 July Belgian Texas 1848 Italian states February German Hungarian Eureka Bulgarian unification Philippine Iranian First Second Young Turk Mexican Chinese Xinhai Communist Cultural 1917–1923 Russian German Siamese Spanish August Guatemalan Hungarian (1956) Cuban Rwandan Nicaraguan Argentine Carnation Saur People Power 1989 Yogurt Velvet Romanian Singing Bolivarian Bulldozer Rose Orange Tulip Kyrgyz Arab Spring Tunisian Egyptian Yemeni Euromaidan Second Arab Spring Sudanese Politics portal v t e The American Revolution (1765–1783) was a colonial rebellion and war of independence in which the Thirteen Colonies broke from British rule to form the United States of America . The revolutionary era reached its zenith with the American Revolutionary War , which commenced on April 19, 1775, with the Battles of Lexington and Concord . The leaders of the American Revolution were colonial separatists who, as British subjects , initially sought greater autonomy . However, they came to embrace the cause of full independence and the necessity of prevailing in the Revolutionary War to obtain it. The Second Continental Congress , which represented the colonies and convened in the present-day Independence Hall in Philadelphia , established the Continental Army and appointed George Washington as its commander-in-chief in June 1775. The following year, the Congress unanimously adopted the Declaration of Independence , which served to inspire, formalize, and escalate the war. Throughout the majority of the eight-year war, the outcome appeared to be uncertain. However, in 1781, a decisive victory by Washington and the Continental Army in the Siege of Yorktown led King George III and the British to negotiate the cessation of colonial rule and the acknowledgment of American independence. This was formalized in the Treaty of Paris in 1783, resulting in the establishment of the United States of America as a sovereign nation.

Discontent with colonial rule began shortly after the defeat of France in the French and Indian War in 1763. Even though the colonies had fought in and supported the war, British Parliament imposed new taxes to compensate for wartime costs and transferred control of the colonies' western lands to British officials in Montreal . Representatives from several colonies convened the Stamp Act Congress in 1765; its " Declaration of Rights and Grievances " argued that taxation without representation violated their rights as Englishmen . In 1767, tensions flared again following British Parliament's passage of the Townshend Acts . In an effort to quell the mounting rebellion, King George III deployed British troops to Boston , where British troops killed protesters in the Boston Massacre on March 5, 1770. In 1772, anti-tax demonstrators destroyed the Royal Navy customs schooner Gaspee off present-day Warwick, Rhode Island . On December 16, 1773, in a seminal event in the American Revolution's escalation, Sons of Liberty activists wearing costumes of Native Americans instigated the Boston Tea Party , during which they boarded and dumped chests of tea owned by the British East India Company into Boston Harbor . London responded by closing Boston Harbor and enacting a series of punitive laws , which effectively ended self-government in Massachusetts but also served to expand and intensify the revolutionary cause.

In late 1774, 12 of the Thirteen Colonies sent delegates to the First Continental Congress , which met inside Carpenters' Hall in Philadelphia; the Province of Georgia joined in 1775. The First Continental Congress began coordinating Patriot resistance through underground networks of committees . Following the Battles of Lexington and Concord, Continental Army surrounded Boston , forcing the British to withdraw by sea in March 1776, and leaving Patriots in control in every colony. In August 1775, King George III proclaimed Massachusetts to be in a state of open defiance and rebellion .

In 1776, the Second Continental Congress began debating and deliberating on the Articles of Confederation , an effort to establish a self-governing rule of law in the Thirteen Colonies. On July 2, they passed the Lee Resolution , affirming their support for national independence, and on July 4, 1776, they unanimously adopted the Declaration of Independence , authored primarily by Thomas Jefferson , which embodied the political philosophies of liberalism and republicanism , rejected monarchy and aristocracy , and famously proclaimed that " all men are created equal ".

The Revolutionary War continued for another five years during which France ultimately entered the war, supporting the colonial cause of independence. On September 28, 1781, Washington, with support from Marquis de Lafayette , the French Army , and French Navy , led the Continental Army's most decisive victory, capturing roughly 7,500 British troops led by British general Charles Cornwallis during the Siege of Yorktown , leading to the collapse of King George's control of Parliament and consensus in Parliament that the war should be ended on American terms. On September 3, 1783, the British signed the Treaty of Paris , ceding to the new nation nearly all the territory east of the Mississippi River and south of the Great Lakes . About 60,000 Loyalists migrated to other British territories in Canada and elsewhere, but the great majority remained in the United States. With its victory in the American Revolution, the United States became the first large-scale modern nation to establish a federal constitutional republic based on a written constitution, extending the principles of consent of the governed and the rule of law over a continental territory, albeit with the significant democratic limitations typical of the era.

Origins For a chronological guide, see Timeline of the American Revolution .

A 1775 map of Eastern North America, including the Province of Quebec , the Thirteen Colonies on the Atlantic Coast, and the Indian Reserve as defined by the Royal Proclamation of 1763. The border between the red and pink areas represents the 1763 Proclamation line , and the orange area represents Spanish colonial claims .

Under the British policy of salutary neglect , Britain traded with the colonies but otherwise mostly left them alone over the first 150 years of the colonies' existence.

[ tone ] The colonists became accustomed to running their own affairs, and they liked it.

[ tone ] This British policy changed significantly after the French and Indian War , during which the British state had spent heavily to protect the colonies, prompting the Thirteen Colonies to seek greater autonomy from Britain. After the Revolution, one colonist, Capt. Levi Preston, of Danvers, Massachusetts , was asked why the Americans rebelled against England, responded, "…we always had governed ourselves, and we always meant to. They didn't mean we should." [ 1 ] 1651–1763: Evolution of colonial policy Further information: Colonial history of the United States The Thirteen Colonies were established in the 17th century as part of the English Empire and became parts of the British Empire after the union of England and Scotland in 1707.

[ 2 ] The development of a unique American identity can be traced to the English Civil War (1642–1651) and its aftermath.

[ citation needed ] The Puritan colonies of New England supported the Commonwealth government responsible for the execution of King Charles I . After the Stuart Restoration of 1660, Massachusetts did not recognize Charles II as the legitimate king for more than a year after his coronation .

[ 3 ] In King Philip's War (1675–1678), the New England colonies fought a handful of Native American tribes without military assistance from England, thereby contributing to the development of a uniquely American identity separate from that of the British people .

[ 4 ] In the 1680s, Charles and his brother, James II , attempted to bring New England under direct English control.

[ 5 ] The colonists fiercely opposed this, and the Crown nullified their colonial charters in response.

[ 6 ] In 1686, James finalized these efforts by consolidating the separate New England colonies along with New York and New Jersey into the Dominion of New England .

Edmund Andros was appointed royal governor and tasked with governing the new Dominion under his direct rule . Colonial assemblies and town meetings were restricted, new taxes were levied, and rights were abridged. Dominion rule triggered bitter resentment throughout New England.

[ 7 ] When James tried to rule without Parliament , the English aristocracy removed him from power in the Glorious Revolution of 1688.

[ 8 ] This was followed by the 1689 Boston revolt , which overthrew Dominion rule.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Colonial governments reasserted their control after the revolt. The new monarchs, William and Mary , granted new charters to the individual New England colonies, and local democratic self-government was restored.

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] After the Glorious Revolution in 1688, the British Empire became a constitutional monarchy with sovereignty in the King-in-Parliament . Aristocrats inherited seats in the House of Lords , while the gentry and merchants controlled the elected House of Commons . The king ruled through cabinet ministers who depended on majority support in the Commons to govern effectively.

[ 13 ] British subjects on both sides of the Atlantic proudly claimed that uthe unwritten British constitution , with its guarantees of the rights of Englishmen , protected personal liberty better than any other government.

[ 14 ] It served as the model for colonial governments . The Crown appointed a royal governor to exercise executive power.

[ 15 ] Property owners elected a colonial assembly with powers to legislate and levy taxes, but the British government reserved the right to veto colonial legislation.

[ 13 ] Radical Whig ideology profoundly influenced American political philosophy with its love of liberty and opposition to tyrannical government.

[ 16 ] With little industry except shipbuilding, the colonies exported agricultural products to Britain in return for manufactured goods. They also imported molasses, rum, and sugar from the British West Indies .

[ 17 ] The British government pursued a policy of mercantilism in order to grow its economic and political power. According to mercantilism, the colonies existed for the mother country's economic benefit, and the colonists' economic needs took second place.

[ 18 ] In 1651, Parliament passed the first in a series of Navigation Acts , which restricted colonial trade with foreign countries. The Thirteen Colonies could trade with the rest of the empire but only ship certain commodities like tobacco to Britain. Any European imports bound for British America had to first pass through an English port and pay customs duties.

[ 19 ] Other laws regulated colonial industries, such as the Wool Act 1698 , the Hat Act 1731 , and the Iron Act 1750 .

[ 20 ] [ 21 ] Colonial reactions to these policies were mixed. The Molasses Act 1733 placed a duty of six pence per gallon upon foreign molasses imported into the colonies. This act was particularly egregious to the New England colonists, who protested it as taxation without representation. The act increased the smuggling of foreign molasses, and the British government ceased enforcement efforts after the 1740s.

[ 22 ] On the other hand, certain merchants and local industries benefitted from the restrictions on foreign competition. The limits on foreign-built ships greatly benefitted the colonial shipbuilding industry, particularly in New England.

[ 23 ] Some argue that the economic impact was minimal on the colonists, [ 24 ] [ 25 ] but the political friction that the acts triggered was more serious, as the merchants most directly affected were also the most politically active.

[ 26 ] The British government lacked the resources and information needed to control the colonies. Instead, British officials negotiated and compromised with colonial leaders to gain compliance with imperial policies. The colonies defended themselves with colonial militias , and the British government rarely sent military forces to America before 1755.

[ 27 ] According to historian Robert Middlekauff , "Americans had become almost completely self-governing" before the American Revolution, a practice that was consistent with the British monarchy's practice of salutary neglect .

[ 28 ] During the French and Indian War (1754–1763), the British government fielded 45,000 soldiers, half British Regulars and half colonial volunteers. The colonies also contributed money to the war effort; however, two-fifths of this spending was reimbursed by the British government. Great Britain defeated France and acquired that nation's territory east of the Mississippi River.

[ 29 ] In early 1763, the Bute ministry decided to permanently garrison 10,000 soldiers in North America.

[ 30 ] [ 31 ] The impetus behind this was to allow approximately 1,500 politically well-connected British Army officers to remain on active duty with full pay in the colonies, since stationing a standing army in Great Britain during peacetime was politically unacceptable.

[ 32 ] As the government found, American colonists also found a standing army in peacetime unacceptable, when the first of the Quartering Acts were imposed in 1765. The British government's stated reason for the decision for the standing army "was the threat posed by French troops being stationed in the West Indies" [ 33 ] and a standing army would supposedly provide defense against Native Americans in the west and foreign populations in newly acquired territories (the French in Canada and the Spanish in Florida ). In addition, British soldiers could help collect customs duties and prevent white colonists from instigating conflict with Native Americans.

[ 34 ] Instead, it caused a major insurrection (i.e., Pontiac's War , 1763-66) due to outrage at "the arrogance, cruelty, and stinginess of General Amherst", the British commander.

[ 35 ] The situation in the west was complicated when white settlers migrated beyond the Appalachian Mountains , increased after the French threat was removed, and the Native Americans' uprising was a response. The Grenville ministry issued the Royal Proclamation of 1763 , designating the territory between the Appalachian Mountains and the Mississippi River as an Indian Reserve closed to white settlement. The Proclamation angered settlers, fur traders, and land speculators and it failed to stop their westward migration.

[ 36 ] 1764–1766: Taxes imposed and withdrawn Main articles: Sugar Act , Currency Act , Quartering Acts , Stamp Act 1765 , and Declaratory Act Further information: No taxation without representation and Virtual representation Notice of the Stamp Act 1765 in a colonial newspaper George Grenville became prime minister in 1763, and "the need for money played a part in every important decision made by Grenville regarding the colonies—and for that matter by the ministries that followed up to 1776." [ 37 ] The national debt had grown to £133 million with annual debt payments of £5 million (out of an £8 million annual budget). Stationing troops in North America on a permanent basis would cost another £360,000 a year. On a per capita basis, Americans only paid 1 shilling in taxes to the empire compared to 26 shillings paid by the English.

[ 31 ] Grenville believed that the colonies should help pay the troop costs.

[ 38 ] In 1764 Parliament passed the Sugar Act , decreasing the existing customs duties on sugar and molasses but providing stricter measures of enforcement and collection. That same year, Grenville proposed direct taxes on the colonies to raise revenue, but he delayed action to see whether the colonies would propose some way to raise the revenue themselves.

[ 39 ] Parliament passed the Stamp Act in March 1765, which imposed direct taxes on the colonies for the first time. All official documents, newspapers, almanacs, and pamphlets were required to have the stamps—even decks of playing cards. The colonists did not object that the taxes were high; they were actually low.

[ a ] [ 40 ] They objected to their lack of representation in the Parliament, which gave them no voice concerning legislation that affected them, such as the tax, violating the unwritten English constitution . This grievance was summarized in the slogan "No taxation without representation". Shortly following adoption of the Stamp Act, the Sons of Liberty formed, and began using public demonstrations, boycotts, and threats of violence to ensure that the British tax laws became unenforceable. In Boston , the Sons of Liberty burned the records of the vice admiralty court and looted the home of chief justice Thomas Hutchinson . Several legislatures called for united action, and nine colonies sent delegates to the Stamp Act Congress in New York City in October. Moderates led by John Dickinson drew up a Declaration of Rights and Grievances stating that the colonists were equal to all other British citizens and that taxes passed without representation violated their rights as Englishmen , and Congress emphasized their determination by organizing a boycott on imports of all British merchandise .

[ 41 ] American spokesmen such as Samuel Adams, James Otis, John Hancock, John Dickinson, Thomas Paine, and many others, rejected aristocracy and propounded " republicanism " as the political philosophy that was best suited to American conditions.

[ 42 ] [ 43 ] The Parliament at Westminster saw itself as the supreme lawmaking authority throughout the Empire and thus entitled to levy any tax without colonial approval or even consultation.

[ 44 ] They argued that the colonies were legally British corporations subordinate to the British Parliament.

[ 45 ] Parliament insisted that the colonists effectively enjoyed a " virtual representation ", as most British people did, since only a small minority of the British population were eligible to elect representatives to Parliament.

[ 46 ] However, Americans such as James Otis maintained that there was no one in Parliament responsible specifically to any colonial constituency, so they were not "virtually represented" by anyone in Parliament.

[ 47 ] The Rockingham government came to power in July 1765, and Parliament debated whether to repeal the stamp tax or to send an army to enforce it. Benjamin Franklin appeared before them to make the case for repeal, explaining that the colonies had spent heavily in manpower, money, and blood defending the empire, and that further taxes to pay for those wars were unjust and might bring about a rebellion. Parliament agreed and repealed the tax on February 21, 1766, but they insisted in the Declaratory Act of March 1766 that they retained full power to make laws for the colonies "in all cases whatsoever".

[ 48 ] [ 49 ] The repeal nonetheless caused widespread celebrations in the colonies.

1767–1773: Townshend Acts and the Tea Act Main articles: Townshend Acts and Tea Act Further information: Crisis of 1772 , Massachusetts Circular Letter , Boston Massacre , and Boston Tea Party Letter III of John Dickinson 's Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania , published in the Pennsylvania Chronicle , December 1767 On June 9, 1772, the Sons of Liberty burned HMS Gaspee , a British customs schooner in Narragansett Bay .

The December 16, 1773 Boston Tea Party , led by Samuel Adams and Sons of Liberty , has become a mainstay of American patriotic lore.

In 1767, the British Parliament passed the Townshend Acts , which placed duties on several staple goods, including paper, glass, and tea, and established a Board of Customs in Boston to more rigorously execute trade regulations. Parliament's goal was not so much to collect revenue but to assert its authority over the colonies. The new taxes were enacted on the belief that Americans only objected to internal taxes and not to external taxes such as custom duties. However, in his widely read pamphlet, Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania , John Dickinson argued against the constitutionality of the acts because their purpose was to raise revenue and not to regulate trade.

[ 50 ] Colonists responded to the taxes by organizing new boycotts of British goods. These boycotts were less effective, however, as the goods taxed by the Townshend Acts were widely used.

In February 1768, the Assembly of Massachusetts Bay Colony issued a circular letter to the other colonies urging them to coordinate resistance. The governor dissolved the assembly when it refused to rescind the letter. Meanwhile, a riot broke out in Boston in June 1768 over the seizure of the sloop Liberty , owned by John Hancock , for alleged smuggling. Customs officials were forced to flee, prompting the British to deploy troops to Boston. A Boston town meeting declared that no obedience was due to parliamentary laws and called for the convening of a convention. A convention assembled but only issued a mild protest before dissolving itself. In January 1769, Parliament responded to the unrest by reactivating the Treason Act 1543 which called for subjects outside the realm to face trials for treason in England. The governor of Massachusetts was instructed to collect evidence of said treason, and the threat caused widespread outrage, though it was not carried out.

On March 5, 1770, a large crowd gathered around a group of British soldiers on a Boston street. The crowd grew threatening, throwing snowballs, rocks, and debris at them. One soldier was clubbed and fell.

[ 51 ] There was no order to fire, but the soldiers panicked and fired into the crowd. They hit 11 people; three civilians died of wounds at the scene of the shooting, and two died shortly after. The event quickly came to be called the Boston Massacre . The soldiers were tried and acquitted (defended by John Adams ), but the widespread descriptions soon began to turn colonial sentiment against the British. This accelerated the downward spiral in the relationship between Britain and the province of Massachusetts.

[ 51 ] A new ministry under Lord North came to power in 1770 [ 52 ] , and Parliament repealed most of the Townshend duties, except the tax on tea.

[ 53 ] This temporarily resolved the crisis, and the boycott of British goods largely ceased, with only the more radical patriots such as Samuel Adams continuing to agitate.

[ 54 ] [ 55 ] In June 1772, American patriots, including John Brown , burned a British warship that had been vigorously enforcing unpopular trade regulations, in what became known as the Gaspee Affair . The affair was investigated for possible treason, but no action was taken.

In 1773, private letters were published in which Massachusetts Governor Thomas Hutchinson claimed that the colonists could not enjoy all English liberties, and in which Lieutenant Governor Andrew Oliver called for the direct payment of colonial officials, which had been paid by local authorities. This would have reduced the influence of colonial representatives over their government. The letters' contents were used as evidence of a systematic plot against American rights, and discredited Hutchinson in the eyes of the people; the colonial Assembly petitioned for his recall. Benjamin Franklin, postmaster general for the colonies, acknowledged that he leaked the letters, which led to him being removed from his position.

In Boston, Samuel Adams set about creating new Committees of Correspondence , which linked Patriots in all 13 colonies and eventually provided the framework for a rebel government. Virginia, the largest colony, set up its Committee of Correspondence in early 1773, on which Patrick Henry and Thomas Jefferson served.

[ 56 ] A total of about 7,000 to 8,000 Patriots served on these Committees; Loyalists were excluded. The committees became the leaders of the American resistance to British actions, and later largely determined the war effort at the state and local level. When the First Continental Congress decided to boycott British products, the colonial and local Committees took charge, examining merchant records and publishing the names of merchants who attempted to defy the boycott by importing British goods.

[ 57 ] Meanwhile, Parliament passed the Tea Act lowering the price of taxed tea exported to the colonies, to help the British East India Company undersell smuggled untaxed Dutch tea. Special consignees were appointed to sell the tea to bypass colonial merchants. The act was opposed by those who resisted the taxes and also by smugglers who stood to lose business.

[ 58 ] [ 59 ] In every colony demonstrators warned merchants not to bring in tea that included the hated new tax. In most instances, the consignees were forced by the Americans to resign and the tea was turned back, but Massachusetts governor Hutchinson refused to allow Boston merchants to give in to pressure.

A town meeting in Boston determined that the tea would not be landed, and ignored a demand from the governor to disperse. On December 16, 1773, a group of men, led by Samuel Adams and dressed to evoke the appearance of Indigenous people, boarded the ships of the East India Company and dumped £10,000 worth of tea from their holds (approximately £636,000 in 2008) into Boston Harbor . Decades later, this event became known as the Boston Tea Party and remains a significant part of American patriotic lore.

[ 60 ] 1774–1775: Intolerable Acts Main article: Intolerable Acts Further information: Quebec Act and Continental Association A 1774 illustration from The London Magazine depicts Prime Minister Lord North , author of the Boston Port Act , forcing the Intolerable Acts down the throat of America , whose arms are restrained by Lord Chief Justice Mansfield with a tattered "Boston Petition" trampled on the ground beside her.

Lord Sandwich pins down her feet and peers up her robes; behind them, Mother Britannia weeps while France and Spain look on.

The British government responded by passing four laws that came to be known as the Intolerable Acts , further darkening colonial opinion towards England.

[ 61 ] The first was the Massachusetts Government Act which altered the Massachusetts charter and restricted town meetings. The second was the Administration of Justice Act which ordered that all British soldiers to be tried were to be arraigned in Britain, not in the colonies. The third was the Boston Port Act , which closed the port of Boston until the British had been compensated for the tea lost in the Boston Tea Party. The fourth was the Quartering Act of 1774 , which allowed royal governors to house British troops in the homes of citizens without permission of the owner.

[ 62 ] In response, Massachusetts patriots issued the Suffolk Resolves and formed an alternative shadow government known as the Provincial Congress, which began training militia outside British-occupied Boston.

[ 63 ] In September 1774, the First Continental Congress convened, consisting of representatives from each colony, to serve as a vehicle for deliberation and collective action. During secret debates, conservative Joseph Galloway proposed the creation of a colonial Parliament that would be able to approve or disapprove acts of the British Parliament, but his idea was tabled in a vote of 6 to 5 and was subsequently removed from the record.

[ citation needed ] Congress called for a boycott beginning on December 1, 1774, of all British goods; it was enforced by new local committees authorized by the Congress.

[ 64 ] It also began coordinating Patriot resistance by militias which existed in every colony and which had gained military experience in the French and Indian War. For the first time, the Patriots were armed and unified against Parliament.

Military hostilities begin Main article: American Revolutionary War Further information: Shot heard round the world , Boston campaign , and Invasion of Quebec (1775) Join, or Die , a political cartoon created in 1754 by Benjamin Franklin , urged the Thirteen Colonies to unite.

King George declared Massachusetts to be in a state of rebellion in February 1775 [ 65 ] and the British garrison received orders to seize the rebels' weapons and arrest their leaders, leading to the Battles of Lexington and Concord on April 19, 1775. The Patriots assembled a militia 15,000 strong and laid siege to Boston, occupied by 6500 British soldiers. The Second Continental Congress convened in Philadelphia on June 14, 1775. The congress was divided on the best course of action. They authorized formation of the Continental Army and appointed George Washington as its commander-in-chief, and produced the Olive Branch Petition in which they attempted to come to an accord with King George. The king, however, issued a Proclamation of Rebellion which declared that the states were "in rebellion" and the members of Congress were traitors. The Battle of Bunker Hill followed on June 17, 1775. It was a British victory—but at a great cost: about 1,000 British casualties from a garrison of about 6,000, as compared to 500 American casualties from a much larger force.

[ 66 ] [ 67 ] As Benjamin Franklin wrote to Joseph Priestley in October 1775: Britain, at the expense of three millions, has killed 150 Yankees this campaign, which is £20,000 a head ... During the same time, 60,000 children have been born in America. From these data his mathematical head will easily calculate the time and expense necessary to kill us all.

[ 68 ] In the winter of 1775, the Americans invaded northeastern Quebec under generals Benedict Arnold and Richard Montgomery , expecting to rally sympathetic colonists there. The attack was a failure; many Americans were killed, captured, or died of smallpox.

In March 1776, aided by the fortification of Dorchester Heights with cannons recently captured at Fort Ticonderoga , the Continental Army led by George Washington forced the British to evacuate Boston . The revolutionaries now fully controlled all thirteen colonies and were ready to declare independence. There still were many Loyalists, but they were no longer in control anywhere by July 1776, and all of the Royal officials had fled.

[ 69 ] Creating new state constitutions Main article: State constitution (United States) Following the Battle of Bunker Hill in June 1775, the Patriots had control of Massachusetts outside Boston 's city limits, and the Loyalists suddenly found themselves on the defensive with no protection from the British army. In each of the Thirteen Colonies, American patriots overthrew their existing governments, closed courts, and drove out British colonial officials. They held elected conventions and established their own legislatures , which existed outside any legal parameters established by the British. New constitutions were drawn up in each state to supersede royal charters. They proclaimed that they were now states , no longer colonies .

[ 70 ] On January 5, 1776, New Hampshire ratified the first state constitution. In May 1776, Congress voted to suppress all forms of crown authority, to be replaced by locally created authority.

New Jersey , South Carolina , and Virginia created their constitutions before July 4.

Rhode Island and Connecticut simply took their existing royal charters and deleted all references to the crown.

[ 71 ] The new states were all committed to republicanism, with no inherited offices. On May 26, 1776, John Adams wrote James Sullivan from Philadelphia warning against extending the franchise too far: Depend upon it, sir, it is dangerous to open so fruitful a source of controversy and altercation, as would be opened by attempting to alter the qualifications of voters. There will be no end of it. New claims will arise. Women will demand a vote. Lads from twelve to twenty one will think their rights not enough attended to, and every man, who has not a farthing, will demand an equal voice with any other in all acts of state. It tends to confound and destroy all distinctions, and prostrate all ranks, to one common level[.] [ 72 ] [ 73 ] The resulting constitutions in states, including those of Delaware , Maryland , Massachusetts , New York , and Virginia [ b ] featured: Property qualifications for voting and even more substantial requirements for elected positions (though New York and Maryland lowered property qualifications) [ 70 ] Bicameral legislatures , with the upper house as a check on the lower Strong governors with veto power over the legislature and substantial appointment authority Few or no restraints on individuals holding multiple positions in government The continuation of state-established religion In Pennsylvania , New Jersey , and New Hampshire , the resulting constitutions embodied: universal manhood suffrage, or minimal property requirements for voting or holding office (New Jersey enfranchised some property-owning widows, a step that it retracted 25 years later) strong, unicameral legislatures relatively weak governors without veto powers, and with little appointing authority prohibition against individuals holding multiple government posts The radical provisions of Pennsylvania 's constitution lasted 14 years. In 1790, conservatives gained power in the state legislature, called a new constitutional convention, and rewrote the constitution. The new constitution substantially reduced universal male suffrage, gave the governor veto power and patronage appointment authority, and added an upper house with substantial wealth qualifications to the unicameral legislature.

Thomas Paine called it a constitution unworthy of America.

[ 74 ] Second Continental Congress Main article: Second Continental Congress Pulling Down the Statue of King George III, N.Y.C.

, depicting American patriots tearing down a statue of King George III in New York City on July 9, 1776, five days after the adoption of the Declaration of Independence .

In April 1776, the North Carolina Provincial Congress issued the Halifax Resolves explicitly authorizing its delegates to vote for independence.

[ 75 ] By June, nine Provincial Congresses supported independence from Britain, and Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, and New York followed.

Richard Henry Lee was instructed by the Virginia legislature to propose independence, and he did so on June 7, 1776.

Declaration of Independence Main articles: Committee of Five , Lee Resolution , and United States Declaration of Independence Gathered at Pennsylvania State House, later renamed Independence Hall , in Philadelphia , 56 of the nation's Founding Fathers , representing America's Thirteen Colonies , unanimously adopted and issued to King George III the Declaration of Independence , which was drafted largely by Thomas Jefferson and presented by the Committee of Five , which was charged with authoring it. The Congress struck several provisions of Jefferson's draft, and then adopted it unanimously on July 4.

[ 76 ] The Declaration embodied the political philosophies of liberalism and republicanism , rejected monarchy and aristocracy , and famously proclaimed that " all men are created equal ". With the issuance of the Declaration of Independence, each colony began operating as independent and sovereign states. The next step was to form a union to facilitate international relations and alliances.

[ 77 ] [ 78 ] On November 5, 1777, the Congress approved the Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union and sent it to each state for ratification. The Congress immediately began operating under the Articles' terms, providing a structure of shared sovereignty during prosecution of the Revolutionary War and facilitating international relations and alliances. The Articles were fully ratified on March 1, 1781. At that point, the Continental Congress was dissolved and a new government of the United States in Congress Assembled took its place the following day, on March 2, 1782, with Samuel Huntington leading the Congress as presiding officer.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] Defending the revolution Main article: American Revolutionary War British return: 1776–1777 Further information: New York and New Jersey campaign , Staten Island Peace Conference , Saratoga campaign , and Philadelphia campaign The British fleet amassed off Staten Island in New York Harbor in the summer of 1776, as depicted in Harper's Magazine in 1876 According to British historian Jeremy Black , the British had significant advantages, including a highly trained army, the world's largest navy, and an efficient system of public finance that could easily fund the war. However, they seriously misunderstood the depth of support for the American Patriot position, misinterpreting the situation as merely a large-scale riot. The British government believed that they could overawe the Americans by sending a large military and naval force: Convinced that the Revolution was the work of a full few miscreants who had rallied an armed rabble to their cause, they expected that the revolutionaries would be intimidated .... Then the vast majority of Americans, who were loyal but cowed by the terroristic tactics ... would rise up, kick out the rebels, and restore loyal government in each colony.

[ 81 ] In the Siege of Boston , Washington forced the British out of the city in the spring of 1776, and neither the British nor the Loyalists controlled any significant areas. The British, however, were amassing forces at their naval base at Halifax, Nova Scotia . They returned in force in July 1776, landing in New York and defeating Washington's Continental Army in August at the Battle of Brooklyn . This gave the British control of New York City and its strategic harbor . Following that victory, they requested a meeting with representatives from Congress to negotiate an end to hostilities.

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] A delegation including John Adams and Benjamin Franklin met British admiral Richard Howe on Staten Island in New York Harbor on September 11 in what became known as the Staten Island Peace Conference . Howe demanded that the Americans retract the Declaration of Independence , which they refused to do, and negotiations ended. The British then seized New York City and nearly captured Washington's army. They made the city their main political and military base of operations, holding it until November 1783 . The city became the destination for Loyalist refugees and a focal point of Washington's intelligence network .

[ 82 ] [ 83 ] Washington crossing the Delaware on December 25–26, 1776, depicted in Emanuel Leutze 's 1851 painting The British also took New Jersey, pushing the Continental Army into Pennsylvania. Washington crossed the Delaware River back into New Jersey in a surprise attack in late December 1776 and defeated the Hessian and British armies at Trenton and Princeton , thereby regaining control of most of New Jersey. The victories gave an important boost to Patriots at a time when morale was flagging, and they have become iconic events of the war.

In September 1777, in anticipation of a coordinated attack by the British Army on the revolutionary capital of Philadelphia, the Continental Congress was forced to depart Philadelphia temporarily for Baltimore , where they continued deliberations.

In 1777, the British sent Burgoyne's invasion force from Canada south to New York to seal off New England. Their aim was to isolate New England, which the British perceived as the primary source of agitation. Rather than move north to support Burgoyne, the British army in New York City went to Philadelphia in a major case of mis-coordination, capturing it from Washington. The invasion army under Burgoyne was much too slow and became trapped in northern New York state. It surrendered after the Battles of Saratoga in October 1777. From early October 1777 until November 15, a siege distracted British troops at Fort Mifflin , Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, and allowed Washington time to preserve the Continental Army by safely leading his troops to harsh winter quarters at Valley Forge .

Prisoners Main article: Prisoners of war in the American Revolutionary War Further information: HMS Jersey (1736) and Sugar house prisons in New York City On August 23, 1775, George III declared Americans to be traitors to the Crown if they took up arms against royal authority. There were thousands of British and Hessian soldiers in American hands following their surrender at the Battles of Saratoga. Lord Germain took a hard line, but the British generals on American soil never held treason trials, and instead treated captured American soldiers as prisoners of war.

[ 84 ] The dilemma was that tens of thousands of Loyalists were under American control and American retaliation would have been easy. The British built much of their strategy around using these Loyalists.

[ 85 ] The British maltreated the prisoners whom they held, resulting in more deaths to American prisoners of war than from combat operations.

[ 85 ] At the end of the war, both sides released their surviving prisoners.

[ 86 ] American alliances after 1778 Main article: Diplomacy in the American Revolutionary War Further information: France in the American Revolutionary War , Spain in the American Revolutionary War , and Carlisle Peace Commission See also: First League of Armed Neutrality Hessian troops hired out to the British by their German sovereigns The capture of a British army at Saratoga encouraged the French to formally enter the war in support of Congress, and Benjamin Franklin negotiated a permanent military alliance in early 1778; France thus became the first foreign nation to officially recognize the Declaration of Independence. On February 6, 1778, the United States and France signed the Treaty of Amity and Commerce and the Treaty of Alliance .

[ 87 ] William Pitt spoke out in Parliament urging Britain to make peace in America and to unite with America against France, while British politicians who had sympathized with colonial grievances now turned against the Americans for allying with Britain's rival and enemy.

[ 88 ] The Spanish and the Dutch became allies of the French in 1779 and 1780 respectively, forcing the British to fight a global war without major allies, and requiring it to slip through a combined blockade of the Atlantic. Britain began to view the American war for independence as merely one front in a wider war, [ 89 ] and the British chose to withdraw troops from America to reinforce the British colonies in the Caribbean, which were under threat of Spanish or French invasion. British commander Sir Henry Clinton evacuated Philadelphia and returned to New York City.  Washington intercepted him in the Battle of Monmouth Court House , the last major battle fought in the north. After an inconclusive engagement, the British retreated to New York City. The northern war subsequently became a stalemate, as the focus of attention shifted to the smaller southern theater.

[ 90 ] 1778–1783: the British move south Further information: Southern theater of the American Revolutionary War and Naval operations in the American Revolutionary War The British Royal Navy blockaded ports and held New York City for the duration of the war, and other cities for brief periods, but failed in their effort to destroy Washington's forces. The British strategy now concentrated on a campaign in the southern states . With fewer regular troops at their disposal, the British commanders saw the "southern strategy" as a more viable plan, as they perceived the south as strongly Loyalist with a large population of recent immigrants and large numbers of slaves who might be tempted to run away from their masters to join the British and gain their freedom.

[ 91 ] Beginning in late December 1778, the British captured Savannah and controlled the Georgia coastline. In 1780, they launched a fresh invasion and took Charleston . A significant victory at the Battle of Camden meant that royal forces soon controlled most of Georgia and South Carolina. The British set up a network of forts inland, hoping that the Loyalists would rally to the flag.

[ 92 ] Not enough Loyalists turned out, however, and the British had to fight their way north into North Carolina and Virginia with a severely weakened army. Behind them, much of the territory that they had already captured dissolved into a chaotic guerrilla war , fought predominantly between bands of Loyalists and American militia, which negated many of the gains that the British had previously made.

[ 92 ] Surrender at Yorktown (1781) Main article: Siege of Yorktown The 1781 siege of Yorktown ended with the surrender of a second British army, marking effective British defeat.

The British army under Cornwallis marched to Yorktown, Virginia , where they expected to be rescued by a British fleet.

[ 93 ] The fleet did arrive, but so did a larger French fleet. The French were victorious in the Battle of the Chesapeake , and the British fleet returned to New York for reinforcements, leaving Cornwallis trapped. In October 1781, the British surrendered their second invading army of the war under a siege by the combined French and Continental armies commanded by Washington.

[ 94 ] End of the war Washington did not know if or when the British might reopen hostilities after Yorktown. They still had 26,000 troops occupying New York City, Charleston, and Savannah, together with a powerful fleet. The French army and navy departed, so the Americans were on their own in 1782–83.

[ 95 ] The American treasury was empty, and the unpaid soldiers were growing restive, almost to the point of mutiny or possible coup d'etat . Washington dispelled the unrest among officers of the Newburgh Conspiracy in 1783, and Congress subsequently created the promise of a five years bonus for all officers.

[ 96 ] Historians continue to debate whether the odds were long or short for American victory.

John E. Ferling says that the odds were so long that the American victory was "almost a miracle".

[ 97 ] On the other hand, Joseph Ellis says that the odds favored the Americans, and asks whether there ever was any realistic chance for the British to win. He argues that this opportunity came only once, in the summer of 1776, and Admiral Howe and his brother General Howe "missed several opportunities to destroy the Continental Army .... Chance, luck, and even the vagaries of the weather played crucial roles." Ellis's point is that the strategic and tactical decisions of the Howes were fatally flawed because they underestimated the challenges posed by the Patriots. Ellis concludes that, once the Howe brothers failed, the opportunity "would never come again" for a British victory.

[ 98 ] Support for the conflict had never been strong in Britain, where many sympathized with the Americans, but now it reached a new low.

[ 99 ] King George wanted to fight on, but his supporters lost control of Parliament and they launched no further offensives in America on the eastern seaboard.

[ 90 ] [ c ] Paris peace treaty Main article: Treaty of Paris (1783) Further information: Diplomacy in the American Revolutionary War and Peace of Paris (1783) Treaty of Paris by Benjamin West portrays the American delegation about to sign the 1783 Treaty of Paris ( John Jay , John Adams , Benjamin Franklin , Henry Laurens , W.T. Franklin ). The British delegation refused to pose and the painting was never completed.

During negotiations in Paris, the American delegation discovered that France supported American independence but no territorial gains, hoping to confine the new nation to the area east of the Appalachian Mountains. The Americans opened direct secret negotiations with London, cutting out the French. British Prime Minister Lord Shelburne was in charge of the British negotiations, and he saw a chance to make the United States a valuable economic partner, facilitating trade and investment opportunities.

[ 101 ] The US obtained all the land east of the Mississippi River, including southern Canada , but Spain took control of Florida from the British. It gained fishing rights off Canadian coasts, and agreed to allow British merchants and Loyalists to recover their property. Prime Minister Shelburne foresaw highly profitable two-way trade between Britain and the rapidly growing United States, which did come to pass. The blockade was lifted and American merchants were free to trade with any nation anywhere in the world.

[ 102 ] The British largely abandoned their Indigenous allies, who were not a party to this treaty and did not recognize it until they were defeated militarily by the United States. However, the British did sell them munitions and maintain forts in American territory until the Jay Treaty of 1795.

[ 103 ] Losing the war and the Thirteen Colonies was a shock to Britain. The war revealed the limitations of Britain's fiscal-military state when they discovered that they suddenly faced powerful enemies with no allies, and they were dependent on extended and vulnerable transatlantic lines of communication. The defeat heightened dissension and escalated political antagonism to the King's ministers.  The King went so far as to draft letters of abdication, although they were never delivered.

[ 104 ] Inside Parliament, the primary concern changed from fears of an over-mighty monarch to the issues of representation, parliamentary reform, and government retrenchment. Reformers sought to destroy what they saw as widespread institutional corruption , and the result was a crisis from 1776 to 1783. The crisis ended after 1784 confidence in the British constitution was restored during the administration of Prime Minister William Pitt .

[ 105 ] [ 106 ] [ d ] Finance Main article: Financial costs of the American Revolutionary War Robert Morris statue honoring Founding Father and financier Robert Morris at Independence National Historical Park in Philadelphia A five dollar banknote issued by the Second Continental Congress in 1775 Britain's war against the Americans, the French, and the Spanish cost about £100 million. The Treasury borrowed 40 percent of the money that it needed.

[ 108 ] Britain had a sophisticated financial system based on the wealth of thousands of landowners who supported the government, together with banks and financiers in London. In London the British had relatively little difficulty financing their war, keeping their suppliers and soldiers paid, and hiring tens of thousands of German soldiers.

[ 109 ] In sharp contrast, Congress and the American states had no end of difficulty financing the war.

[ 110 ] In 1775, there was at most 12 million dollars in gold in the colonies, not nearly enough to cover current transactions, let alone finance a major war. The British made the situation much worse by imposing a tight blockade on every American port, which cut off almost all trade. One partial solution was to rely on volunteer support from militiamen and donations from patriotic citizens.

[ 111 ] [ 112 ] Another was to delay actual payments, pay soldiers and suppliers in depreciated currency, and promise that it would be made good after the war. Indeed, the soldiers and officers were given land grants in 1783 to cover the wages that they had earned but had not been paid during the war. The national government did not have a strong leader in financial matters until 1781, when Robert Morris was named Superintendent of Finance of the United States .

[ 111 ] Morris used a French loan in 1782 to set up the private Bank of North America to finance the war. He reduced the civil list , saved money by using competitive bidding for contracts, tightened accounting procedures, and demanded the national government's full share of money and supplies from the individual states.

[ 111 ] Congress used four main methods to cover the cost of the war, which cost about 66 million dollars in specie (gold and silver).

[ 113 ] Congress made issues of paper money, known colloquially as " Continental Dollars ", in 1775–1780 and in 1780–1781. The first issue amounted to 242 million dollars. This paper money would supposedly be redeemed for state taxes, but the holders were eventually paid off in 1791 at the rate of one cent on the dollar. By 1780, the paper money was so devalued that the phrase "not worth a Continental" became synonymous with worthlessness.

[ 114 ] The skyrocketing inflation was a hardship on the few people who had fixed incomes, but 90 percent of the people were farmers and were not directly affected by it. Debtors benefited by paying off their debts with depreciated paper. The greatest burden was borne by the soldiers of the Continental Army whose wages were usually paid late and declined in value every month, weakening their morale and adding to the hardships of their families.

[ 115 ] Beginning in 1777, Congress repeatedly asked the states to provide money, but the states had no system of taxation and were of little help. By 1780, Congress was making requisitions for specific supplies of corn, beef, pork, and other necessities, an inefficient system which barely kept the army alive.

[ 116 ] [ 117 ] Starting in 1776, the Congress sought to raise money by loans from wealthy individuals, promising to redeem the bonds after the war. The bonds were redeemed in 1791 at face value, but the scheme raised little money because Americans had little specie, and many of the rich merchants were supporters of the Crown. The French secretly supplied the Americans with money, gunpowder, and munitions to weaken Great Britain; the subsidies continued when France entered the war in 1778, and the French government and Paris bankers lent large sums [ quantify ] to the American war effort. The Americans struggled to pay off the loans; they ceased making interest payments to France in 1785 and defaulted on installments due in 1787. In 1790, however, they resumed regular payments on their debts to the French, [ 118 ] and settled their accounts with the French government in 1795 when James Swan, an American banker, assumed responsibility for the balance of the debt in exchange for the right to refinance it at a profit.

[ 119 ] Concluding the revolution Main articles: United States Constitution and United States Bill of Rights See also: Annapolis Convention (1786) , Philadelphia Convention , and The Federalist Papers The September 17, 1787 signing of the United States Constitution at Independence Hall in Philadelphia depicted in Howard Chandler Christy 's 1940 painting, Scene at the Signing of the Constitution of the United States The war ended in 1783 and was followed by a period of prosperity. The national government was still operating under the Articles of Confederation and settled the issue of the western territories , which the states ceded to Congress. American settlers moved rapidly into those areas, with Vermont, Kentucky, and Tennessee becoming states in the 1790s.

[ 120 ] However, the national government had no money either to pay the war debts owed to European nations and the private banks, or to pay Americans who had been given millions of dollars of promissory notes for supplies during the war. Nationalists led by Washington, Alexander Hamilton, and other veterans feared that the new nation was too fragile to withstand an international war, or even the repetition of internal revolts such as the Shays's Rebellion of 1786 in Massachusetts. They convinced Congress to call the Philadelphia Convention in 1787.

[ 121 ] The Convention adopted a new Constitution which provided for a republic with a much stronger national government in a federal framework, including an effective executive in a check-and-balance system with the judiciary and legislature.

[ 122 ] The Constitution was ratified in 1788, after a fierce debate in the states over the proposed new government. The new administration under President George Washington took office in New York in March 1789.

[ 123 ] James Madison spearheaded Congressional legislation proposing amendments to the Constitution as assurances to those cautious about federal power, guaranteeing many of the inalienable rights that formed a foundation for the revolution. Rhode Island was the final state to ratify the Constitution in 1790, the first ten amendments were ratified in 1791 and became known as the United States Bill of Rights .

National debt Further information: Financial costs of the American Revolutionary War , National debt of the United States , and Alexander Hamilton Alexander Hamilton , the first Secretary of the Treasury during the Presidency of George Washington The national debt fell into three categories after the American Revolution. The first was the $12 million owed to foreigners, mostly money borrowed from France. There was general agreement to pay the foreign debts at full value. The national government owed $40 million and state governments owed $25 million to Americans who had sold food, horses, and supplies to the Patriot forces. There were also other debts which consisted of promissory notes issued during the war to soldiers, merchants, and farmers who accepted these payments on the premise that the new Constitution would create a government that would pay these debts eventually.

The war expenses of the individual states added up to $114 million, compared to $37 million by the central government.

[ 124 ] In 1790, Congress combined the remaining state debts with the foreign and domestic debts into one national debt totaling $80 million at the recommendation of first Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton . Everyone received face value for wartime certificates, so that the national honor would be sustained and the national credit established.

[ 125 ] Ideology and factions The population of the Thirteen States was not homogeneous in political views and attitudes. Loyalties and allegiances varied widely within regions and communities and even within families, and sometimes shifted during the Revolution.

Ideology behind the revolution Main articles: Age of Enlightenment and American Enlightenment The American Enlightenment was a critical precursor of the American Revolution. Chief among the ideas of the American Enlightenment were the concepts of natural law, natural rights, consent of the governed, individualism, property rights, self-ownership, self-determination, liberalism, republicanism, and defense against corruption. A growing number of American colonists embraced these views and fostered an intellectual environment which led to a new sense of political and social identity.

[ 126 ] Liberalism Main article: Liberalism in the United States See also: Social contract and Natural rights and legal rights Part of a series on Liberalism Schools Classical Conservative Cultural Economic Green Muscular National Neo Neoclassical New Ordo Radical Religious Christian Catholic Islamic Jewish Secular Social Techno Principles Consent of the governed Due process Democracy Economic globalization Equality Gender Legal Federalism Freedom Economic Market Trade Press Religion Speech Harm principle Internationalism Invisible hand Labor theory of property Laissez-faire Liberty Negative Positive Limited government Market economy Natural monopoly Open society Permissive society Popular sovereignty Property Private Public Rights Civil and political Minority Natural and legal To own property To bear arms Rule of law Secularism Secular humanism Separation of church and state Separation of powers Social contract Social justice Social services Welfare state Whig history History Glorious Revolution Age of Enlightenment Atlantic Revolutions American Revolution French Revolution Revolutions of 1848 Vormärz Prague Spring Revolutions of 1989 Arab Spring Intellectuals Milton Locke Spinoza Montesquieu Voltaire Rousseau Smith Kant Turgot Burke Priestley Paine Beccaria Condorcet Bentham Korais De Gouges Robespierre Wollstonecraft Staël Say Humboldt Constant Ricardo Guizot Lamennais List Bastiat Martineau Emerson Tocqueville Mill Spencer Arnold Acton Weber Hobhouse Croce Cassirer Mises Ortega Keynes Collingwood Čapek Hu Hayek Popper Aron Berlin Friedman Rawls Sen Nozick Kymlicka Badawi Politicians Jefferson Kołłątaj Madison Artigas Bolívar Broglie Lamartine Macaulay Kossuth Deák Cobden Mazzini Juárez Lincoln Gladstone Cavour Sarmiento Mommsen Naoroji Itagaki Levski Kemal Deakin Milyukov Lloyd George Venizelos Ståhlberg Gokhale Rathenau Madero Einaudi King Roosevelt Pearson Ohlin Kennedy Jenkins Balcerowicz Verhofstadt Obama Macron Organizations Africa Liberal Network Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe Party Arab Liberal Federation Council of Asian Liberals and Democrats European Democratic Party European Liberal Youth International Alliance of Libertarian Parties International Federation of Liberal Youth Liberal International Liberal Network for Latin America Liberal parties Liberal South East European Network Renew Europe Regional variants Europe Latin America Albania Armenia Australia Austria Bangladesh Belgium Bolivia Brazil Bulgaria Canada Chile China Hong Kong Colombia Costa Rica Croatia Cuba Cyprus Czech Republic Denmark Ecuador Egypt Estonia Finland France Georgia Germany Greece Venizelism Honduras Hungary India Iran Israel Italy Liberism Japan Latvia Lithuania Luxembourg Mexico Moldova Montenegro Netherlands New Zealand Nicaragua Nigeria North Macedonia Norway Panama Paraguay Peru Philippines Poland Cracovian Portugal Romania Russia Senegal Serbia Slovakia Slovenia South Africa South Korea Spain Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Thailand Tunisia Turkey Ukraine United Kingdom Cobdenism Gladstonian Manchester Whiggism United States Arizona School Classical Jeffersonian Modern Uruguay Venezuela Zimbabwe Related topics Abortion debate Pro-Choice Anti-authoritarianism Anti-clericalism Anti-communism Bias in American academia Bias in the media Capitalism Democratic Centrism Radical Economic freedom Egalitarianism Empiricism Humanism Individualism Anarchist Land value tax Liberal autocracy Liberal conservatism Feminist Equity Internationalist Libertarianism Left Right Pirate Party Progressivism Sexually liberal feminism Utilitarianism Liberalism portal Politics portal v t e Samuel Adams points at the Massachusetts Charter , which he viewed as a constitution that protected the people's rights, in this c.

1772 portrait by John Singleton Copley .

[ 127 ] John Locke is often referred to as "the philosopher of the American Revolution" due to his work in the Social Contract and Natural Rights theories that underpinned the Revolution's political ideology.

[ 128 ] Locke's Two Treatises of Government published in 1689 was especially influential. He argued that all humans were created equally free, and governments therefore needed the " consent of the governed ".

[ 129 ] In late eighteenth-century America, belief was still widespread in "equality by creation" and "rights by creation".

[ 130 ] Locke's ideas on liberty influenced the political thinking of English writers such as John Trenchard , Thomas Gordon , and Benjamin Hoadly , whose political ideas in turn also had a strong influence on the American Patriots.

[ 131 ] His work also inspired symbols used in the American Revolution such as the "Appeal to Heaven" found on the Pine Tree Flag , which alludes to Locke's concept of the right of revolution .

[ 132 ] The theory of the social contract influenced the belief among many of the Founders that the right of the people to overthrow their leaders , should those leaders betray the historic rights of Englishmen , was one of the "natural rights" of man.

[ 133 ] [ 134 ] The Americans heavily relied on Montesquieu 's analysis of the wisdom of the "balanced" British Constitution ( mixed government ) in writing the state and national constitutions.

Republicanism Main article: Republicanism in the United States Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e The American interpretation of republicanism was inspired by the Whig party in Great Britain which openly criticized the corruption within the British government.

[ 135 ] Americans were increasingly embracing republican values, seeing Britain as corrupt and hostile to American interests.

[ 136 ] The colonists associated political corruption with ostentatious luxury and inherited aristocracy.

[ 137 ] The Founding Fathers were strong advocates of republican values, particularly Samuel Adams , Patrick Henry , John Adams , Benjamin Franklin , Thomas Jefferson , Thomas Paine , George Washington , James Madison , and Alexander Hamilton , [ 138 ] which required men to put civic duty ahead of their personal desires. Men were honor bound by civic obligation to be prepared and willing to fight for the rights and liberties of their countrymen. John Adams wrote to Mercy Otis Warren in 1776, agreeing with some classical Greek and Roman thinkers: "Public Virtue cannot exist without private, and public Virtue is the only Foundation of Republics." He continued: There must be a positive Passion for the public good, the public Interest, Honour, Power, and Glory, established in the Minds of the People, or there can be no Republican Government, nor any real Liberty. And this public Passion must be Superior to all private Passions. Men must be ready, they must pride themselves, and be happy to sacrifice their private Pleasures, Passions, and Interests, nay their private Friendships and dearest connections, when they Stand in Competition with the Rights of society.

[ 139 ] Protestant dissenters and the Great Awakening Main articles: English Dissenters and First Great Awakening See also: List of clergy in the American Revolution and Quakers in the American Revolution Protestant churches that had separated from the Church of England , called "dissenters", were the "school of democracy", in the words of historian Patricia Bonomi.

[ 140 ] Before the Revolution, the Southern Colonies and three of the New England Colonies had official established churches : Congregational in Massachusetts Bay , Connecticut , and New Hampshire , and the Church of England in Maryland , Virginia , North-Carolina , South Carolina , and Georgia . The New York , New Jersey , Pennsylvania , Delaware , and the Colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations had no officially established churches.

[ 141 ] Church membership statistics from the period are unreliable and scarce, [ 142 ] but what little data exists indicates that the Church of England was not in the majority, not even in the colonies where it was the established church, and they probably did not comprise even 30 percent of the population in most localities (with the possible exception of Virginia).

[ 141 ] John Witherspoon , who was considered a "new light" Presbyterian , wrote widely circulated sermons linking the American Revolution to the teachings of the Bible . Throughout the colonies, dissenting Protestant ministers from the Congregational, Baptist , and Presbyterian churches preached Revolutionary themes in their sermons while most Church of England clergymen preached loyalty to the king, the titular head of the English state church .

[ 143 ] Religious motivation for fighting tyranny transcended socioeconomic lines.

[ 140 ] The Declaration of Independence also referred to the "Laws of Nature and of Nature's God" as justification for the Americans' separation from the British monarchy: the signers of the Declaration professed their "firm reliance on the Protection of divine Providence", and they appealed to "the Supreme Judge for the rectitude of our intentions".

[ 144 ] Historian Bernard Bailyn argues that the evangelicalism of the era challenged traditional notions of natural hierarchy by preaching that the Bible teaches that all men are equal, so that the true value of a man lies in his moral behavior, not in his class.

[ 145 ] Kidd argues that religious disestablishment , belief in God as the source of human rights, and shared convictions about sin, virtue, and divine providence worked together to unite rationalists and evangelicals and thus encouraged a large proportion of Americans to fight for independence from the Empire. Bailyn, on the other hand, denies that religion played such a critical role.

[ 146 ] Alan Heimert argues that New Light anti-authoritarianism was essential to furthering democracy in colonial American society, and set the stage for a confrontation with British monarchical and aristocratic rule.

[ 147 ] Class and psychology of the factions Main article: Political culture of the United States Further information: Social class in the United States and Culture of the United States Patriots tarring and feathering Loyalist John Malcolm depicted in a 1774 painting John Adams concluded in 1818: The Revolution was effected before the war commenced. The Revolution was in the minds and hearts of the people .... This radical change in the principles, opinions, sentiments, and affections of the people was the real American Revolution.

[ 148 ] In the mid-20th century, historian Leonard Woods Labaree identified eight characteristics of the Loyalists that made them essentially conservative, opposite to the characteristics of the Patriots.

[ 149 ] Loyalists tended to feel that resistance to the Crown was morally wrong, while the Patriots thought that morality was on their side.

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] Loyalists were alienated when the Patriots resorted to violence, such as burning houses and tarring and feathering . Loyalists wanted to take a centrist position and resisted the Patriots' demand to declare their opposition to the Crown. Many Loyalists had maintained strong and long-standing relations with Britain, especially merchants in port cities such as New York and Boston.

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] Many Loyalists felt that independence was bound to come eventually, but they were fearful that revolution might lead to anarchy, tyranny, or mob rule. In contrast, the prevailing attitude among Patriots was a desire to seize the initiative.

[ 150 ] [ 151 ] Labaree also wrote that Loyalists were pessimists who lacked the confidence in the future displayed by the Patriots.

[ 149 ] Historians in the early 20th century such as J. Franklin Jameson examined the class composition of the Patriot cause, looking for evidence of a class war inside the revolution.

[ 152 ] More recent historians have largely abandoned that interpretation, emphasizing instead the high level of ideological unity.

[ 153 ] Both Loyalists and Patriots were a "mixed lot", [ 154 ] [ 155 ] but ideological demands always came first. The Patriots viewed independence as a means to gain freedom from British oppression and to reassert their basic rights. Most yeomen farmers, craftsmen, and small merchants joined the Patriot cause to demand more political equality. They were especially successful in Pennsylvania but less so in New England, where John Adams attacked Thomas Paine's Common Sense for the "absurd democratical notions" that it proposed.

[ 154 ] [ 155 ] King George III Main article: George III See also: Monarchy of the United Kingdom and Royal prerogative in the United Kingdom King George III depicted in a 1781 portrait The revolution became a personal issue for the king , fueled by his growing belief that British leniency would be taken as weakness by the Americans. He also sincerely believed that he was defending Britain's constitution against usurpers, rather than opposing patriots fighting for their natural rights.

[ 156 ] King George III is often accused of obstinately trying to keep Great Britain at war with the revolutionaries in America, despite the opinions of his own ministers.

[ 157 ] In the words of the British historian George Otto Trevelyan , the King was determined "never to acknowledge the independence of the Americans, and to punish their contumacy by the indefinite prolongation of a war which promised to be eternal." [ 158 ] The king wanted to "keep the rebels harassed, anxious, and poor, until the day when, by a natural and inevitable process, discontent and disappointment were converted into penitence and remorse".

[ 159 ] Later historians defend George by saying in the context of the times no king would willingly surrender such a large territory, [ 160 ] [ 161 ] and his conduct was far less ruthless than contemporary monarchs in Europe.

[ 162 ] After the surrender of a British army at Saratoga, both Parliament and the British people were largely in favor of the war; recruitment ran at high levels and although political opponents were vocal, they remained a small minority.

[ 160 ] [ 163 ] With the setbacks in America, Lord North asked to transfer power to Lord Chatham , whom he thought more capable, but George refused to do so; he suggested instead that Chatham serve as a subordinate minister in North's administration, but Chatham refused. He died later in the same year.

[ 164 ] Lord North was allied to the "King's Friends" in Parliament and believed George III had the right to exercise powers.

[ 165 ] In early 1778, Britain's chief rival France signed a treaty of alliance with the United States, and the confrontation soon escalated from a "rebellion" to something that has been characterized as "world war".

[ 166 ] The French fleet was able to outrun the British naval blockade of the Mediterranean and sailed to North America.

[ 166 ] The conflict now affected North America, Europe and India .

[ 166 ] The United States and France were joined by Spain in 1779 and the Dutch Republic , while Britain had no major allies of its own, except for the Loyalist minority in America and German auxiliaries (i.e.

Hessians ).

Lord Gower and Lord Weymouth both resigned from the government. Lord North again requested that he also be allowed to resign, but he stayed in office at George III's insistence.

[ 167 ] Opposition to the costly war was increasing, and in June 1780 contributed to disturbances in London known as the Gordon riots .

[ 167 ] As late as the Siege of Charleston in 1780, Loyalists could still believe in their eventual victory, as British troops inflicted defeats on the Continental forces at the Battle of Camden and the Battle of Guilford Court House .

[ 168 ] In late 1781, the news of Cornwallis's surrender at the siege of Yorktown reached London; Lord North's parliamentary support ebbed away and he resigned the following year. The king drafted an abdication notice, which was never delivered, [ 161 ] [ 169 ] finally accepted the defeat in North America, and authorized peace negotiations. The Treaties of Paris , by which Britain recognized the independence of the United States and returned Florida to Spain, were signed in 1782 and 1783 respectively.

[ 170 ] In early 1783, George III privately conceded "America is lost!" He reflected that the Northern colonies had developed into Britain's "successful rivals" in commercial trade and fishing.

[ 171 ] When John Adams was appointed American Minister to London in 1785, George had become resigned to the new relationship between his country and the former colonies. He told Adams, "I was the last to consent to the separation; but the separation having been made and having become inevitable, I have always said, as I say now, that I would be the first to meet the friendship of the United States as an independent power." [ 172 ] Patriots Main article: Patriot (American Revolution) Further information: Sons of Liberty Those who fought for independence were called "Revolutionaries", "Continentals", "Rebels", "Patriots", "Whigs", "Congress-men", or "Americans" during and after the war. They included a full range of social and economic classes but were unanimous regarding the need to defend the rights of Americans and uphold the principles of republicanism in rejecting monarchy and aristocracy, while emphasizing civic virtue by citizens. The signers of the Declaration of Independence were mostly—with definite exceptions—well-educated, of British stock, and of the Protestant faith.

[ 173 ] [ 174 ] Newspapers were strongholds of patriotism (although there were a few Loyalist papers) and printed many pamphlets, announcements, patriotic letters, and pronouncements.

[ 175 ] According to historian Robert Calhoon, 40 to 45 percent of the white population in the Thirteen Colonies supported the Patriots' cause, 15 to 20 percent supported the Loyalists, and the remainder were neutral or kept a low profile.

[ 176 ] Mark Lender concludes that ordinary people became insurgents against the British because they held a sense of rights which the British were violating, rights that stressed local autonomy, fair dealing, and government by consent. They were highly sensitive to the issue of tyranny, which they saw manifested in the British response to the Boston Tea Party. The arrival in Boston of the British Army heightened their sense of violated rights, leading to rage and demands for revenge. They had faith that God was on their side.

[ 177 ] Thomas Paine published his pamphlet Common Sense in January 1776, after the Revolution had started. It was widely distributed and often read aloud in taverns, contributing significantly to concurrently spreading the ideas of republicanism and liberalism, bolstering enthusiasm for separation from Great Britain and encouraging recruitment for the Continental Army.

[ 178 ] Paine presented the Revolution as the solution for Americans alarmed by the threat of tyranny.

[ 178 ] Loyalists Main article: Loyalist (American Revolution) See also: Loyalists fighting in the American Revolution and United Empire Loyalist The consensus of scholars is that about 15 to 20 percent of the white population remained loyal to the British Crown.

[ 179 ] Those who actively supported the king were known at the time as "Loyalists", "Tories", or "King's men". The Loyalists never controlled territory unless the British Army occupied it. They were typically older, less willing to break with old loyalties, and often connected to the Church of England; they included many established merchants with strong business connections throughout the Empire, as well as royal officials such as Thomas Hutchinson of Boston.

[ 180 ] There were 500 to 1,000 Black Loyalists , enslaved African Americans who escaped to British lines and supported Britain's cause via several means. Many of them died from disease, but the survivors were evacuated by the British to their remaining colonies in North America .

[ 181 ] The revolution could divide families, such as William Franklin , son of Benjamin Franklin and royal governor of the Province of New Jersey who remained loyal to the Crown throughout the war. He and his father never spoke again.

[ 182 ] Recent immigrants who had not been fully Americanized were also inclined to support the King.

[ 183 ] After the war, the great majority of the half-million Loyalists remained in America and resumed normal lives. Some became prominent American leaders, such as Samuel Seabury . Approximately 46,000 Loyalists relocated to Canada; others moved to Britain (7,000), Florida, or the West Indies (9,000). The exiles represented approximately two percent of the total population of the colonies.

[ 184 ] Nearly all Black Loyalists left for Nova Scotia, Florida, or England, where they could remain free.

[ 185 ] Loyalists who left the South in 1783 took thousands of their slaves with them as they fled to the British West Indies .

[ 184 ] Neutrals See also: Quakers in the American Revolution A minority of uncertain size tried to stay neutral in the war. Most kept a low profile, but the Quakers were the most important group to speak out for neutrality, especially in Pennsylvania. The Quakers continued to do business with the British even after the war began, and they were accused of supporting British rule, "contrivers and authors of seditious publications" critical of the revolutionary cause.

[ 186 ] [ full citation needed ] Most Quakers remained neutral, although a sizeable number participated to some degree.

Role of women Main article: Women in the American Revolution See also: Republican motherhood Mercy Otis Warren published poems and plays that attacked royal authority and urged colonists to resist British rule.

Women contributed to the American Revolution in many ways and were involved on both sides. Formal politics did not include women, but ordinary domestic behaviors became charged with political significance as Patriot women confronted a war which permeated all aspects of political, civil, and domestic life. They participated by boycotting British goods, spying on the British, following armies as they marched, washing, cooking, and mending for soldiers, delivering secret messages, and even fighting disguised as men in a few cases, such as Deborah Samson .

Mercy Otis Warren held meetings in her house and cleverly attacked Loyalists with her creative plays and histories.

[ 187 ] Many women also acted as nurses and helpers, tending to the soldiers' wounds and buying and selling goods for them. Some of these camp followers even participated in combat, such as Madam John Turchin who led her husband's regiment into battle.

[ 188 ] Above all, women continued the agricultural work at home to feed their families and the armies. They maintained their families during their husbands' absences and sometimes after their deaths.

[ 189 ] American women were integral to the success of the boycott of British goods, [ 190 ] as the boycotted items were largely household articles such as tea and cloth. Women had to return to knitting goods and to spinning and weaving their own cloth—skills that had fallen into disuse. In 1769, the women of Boston produced 40,000 skeins of yarn, and 180 women in Middletown, Massachusetts wove 20,522 yards (18,765 m) of cloth.

[ 189 ] Many women gathered food, money, clothes, and other supplies during the war to help the soldiers.

[ 191 ] A woman's loyalty to her husband could become an open political act, especially for women in America committed to men who remained loyal to the King. Legal divorce, usually rare, was granted to Patriot women whose husbands supported the King.

[ 192 ] [ 193 ] Other participants Further information: Diplomacy in the American Revolutionary War France and Spain Main articles: France in the American Revolutionary War and Spain and the American Revolutionary War Louis XVI , King of France and Navarre In early 1776, France set up a major program of aid to the Americans, and the Spanish secretly added funds. Each country spent one million "livres tournaises" to buy munitions. A dummy corporation run by Pierre Beaumarchais concealed their activities. American Patriots obtained some munitions from the Dutch Republic as well, through the French and Spanish ports in the West Indies .

[ 194 ] Heavy expenditures and a weak taxation system pushed France toward bankruptcy.

[ 195 ] In 1777, Charles François Adrien le Paulmier , Chevalier d'Annemours, acting as a secret agent for France, made sure General George Washington was privy to his mission. He followed Congress around for the next two years, reporting what he observed back to France.

[ 196 ] The Treaty of Alliance between the French and the Americans followed in 1778, which led to more French money, matériel and troops being sent to the United States.

Spain did not officially recognize the United States, but it was a French ally and it separately declared war on Britain on June 21, 1779.

Bernardo de Gálvez , general of the Spanish forces in New Spain , also served as governor of Louisiana. He led an expedition of colonial troops to capture Florida from the British and to keep open a vital conduit for supplies going to the Americans.

[ 197 ] Germans Main articles: Germans in the American Revolution and Hessian (soldier) Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben was a former Prussian Army officer who served as inspector general of the Continental Army during the American Revolutionary War. He is credited with teaching the Continental Army the essentials of military drill and discipline beginning at Valley Forge in 1778, considered a turning point for the Americans.

Ethnic Germans served on both sides of the American Revolutionary War. As George III was also the Elector of Hanover , many supported the Loyalist cause and served as allies of the Kingdom of Great Britain ; most notably rented auxiliary troops [ 198 ] from German states such as the Landgraviate of Hessen-Kassel .

American Patriots tended to represent such troops as mercenaries in propaganda against the British Crown. Even American historians followed suit, in spite of Colonial-era jurists drawing a distinction between auxiliaries and mercenaries, with auxiliaries serving their prince when sent to the aid of another prince, and mercenaries serving a foreign prince as individuals.

[ 198 ] By this distinction the troops which served in the American Revolution were auxiliaries.

Other German individuals came to assist the American revolutionaries, most notably Friedrich Wilhelm von Steuben , who served as a general in the Continental Army and is credited with professionalizing that force, but most Germans who served were already colonists. Von Steuben's native Prussia joined the League of Armed Neutrality , [ 199 ] and King Frederick II of Prussia was well appreciated in the United States for his support early in the war. He expressed interest in opening trade with the United States and bypassing English ports, and allowed an American agent to buy arms in Prussia.

[ 200 ] Frederick predicted American success, [ 201 ] and promised to recognize the United States and American diplomats once France did the same.

[ 202 ] Prussia also interfered in the recruiting efforts of Russia and neighboring German states when they raised armies to send to the Americas, and Frederick II forbade enlistment for the American war within Prussia.

[ 203 ] All Prussian roads were denied to troops from Anhalt-Zerbst, [ 204 ] which delayed reinforcements that Howe had hoped to receive during the winter of 1777–1778.

[ 205 ] However, when the War of the Bavarian Succession (1778–1779) erupted, Frederick II became much more cautious with Prussian/British relations. U.S. ships were denied access to Prussian ports, and Frederick refused to officially recognize the United States until they had signed the Treaty of Paris . Even after the war, Frederick II predicted that the United States was too large to operate as a republic , and that it would soon rejoin the British Empire with representatives in Parliament.

[ 206 ] Native Americans Main article: Native Americans in the United States Further information: Western theater of the American Revolutionary War , Northern theater of the American Revolutionary War after Saratoga , Treaty of Fort Pitt , and Iroquois Thayendanegea , a Mohawk military and political leader, was the most prominent indigenous leader opposing the Patriot forces.

[ 207 ] Most Indigenous people rejected pleas that they remain neutral and instead supported the British Crown. The great majority of the 200,000 Indigenous people east of the Mississippi distrusted the Americans and supported the British cause, hoping to forestall continued expansion of settlement into their territories.

[ 208 ] [ 209 ] Those tribes closely involved in trade tended to side with the Patriots, although political factors were important as well. Some tried to remain neutral, seeing little value in joining what they perceived to be a "white man's war", and fearing reprisals from whichever side they opposed.

The great majority of Indigenous people did not participate directly in the war, with the notable exceptions of warriors and bands associated with four of the Iroquois tribes in New York and Pennsylvania which allied with the British, [ 209 ] and the Oneida and Tuscarora tribes among the Iroquois of central and western New York who supported the American cause.

[ 210 ] The British did have other allies, particularly in the regions of southwest Quebec on the Patriot's frontier. The British provided arms to Indigenous people who were led by Loyalists in war parties to raid frontier settlements from the Carolinas to New York. These war parties managed to kill many settlers on the frontier, especially in Pennsylvania and New York's Mohawk Valley.

[ 211 ] In 1776, Cherokee war parties attacked American Colonists all along the southern Quebec frontier of the uplands throughout the Washington District, North Carolina (now Tennessee) and the Kentucky wilderness area.

[ 212 ] The Chickamauga Cherokee under Dragging Canoe allied themselves closely with the British, and fought on for an additional decade after the Treaty of Paris was signed. They launched raids with roughly 200 warriors, as seen in the Cherokee–American wars ; they could not mobilize enough forces to invade settler areas without the help of allies, most often the Creek .

Joseph Brant ( also Thayendanegea) of the powerful Mohawk tribe in New York was the most prominent Indigenous leader against the Patriot forces.

[ 207 ] In 1778 and 1780, he led 300 Iroquois warriors and 100 white Loyalists in multiple attacks on small frontier settlements in New York and Pennsylvania, killing many settlers and destroying villages, crops, and stores.

[ 213 ] In 1779, the Continental Army forced the hostile Indigenous people out of upstate New York when Washington sent an army under John Sullivan which destroyed 40 evacuated Iroquois villages in central and western New York. The Battle of Newtown proved decisive, as the Patriots had an advantage of three-to-one, and it ended significant resistance; there was little combat otherwise.  Facing starvation and homeless for the winter, the Iroquois fled to Canada.

[ 214 ] At the peace conference following the war, the British ceded lands which they did not really control, without consultation with their Indigenous allies. They transferred control to the United States of all the land south of the Great Lakes east of the Mississippi and north of Florida. Calloway concludes: Burned villages and crops, murdered chiefs, divided councils and civil wars, migrations, towns and forts choked with refugees, economic disruption, breaking of ancient traditions, losses in battle and to disease and hunger, betrayal to their enemies, all made the American Revolution one of the darkest periods in American Indian history.

[ 215 ] Black Americans Main article: African Americans in the Revolutionary War Further information: Black Patriot , Black Loyalist , and Book of Negroes Crispus Attucks , a ( c.

1943 ) portrait by Herschel Levit depicts Attucks , who is considered to be the first American to die for the cause of independence in the Revolution.

An African American soldier (left) of the 1st Rhode Island Regiment , widely regarded as the first Black battalion in U.S. military history Free Blacks in the New England Colonies and Middle Colonies in the North as well as Southern Colonies fought on both sides of the War, but the majority fought for the Patriots. Gary Nash reports that there were about 9,000 Black veteran Patriots, counting the Continental Army and Navy, state militia units, privateers, wagoneers in the Army, servants to officers, and spies.

[ 216 ] Ray Raphael notes that thousands did join the Loyalist cause, but "a far larger number, free as well as slave, tried to further their interests by siding with the patriots." [ 217 ] Crispus Attucks was one of the five people killed in the Boston Massacre in 1770 and is considered the first American casualty for the cause of independence.

The effects of the war were more dramatic in the South. Tens of thousands of slaves escaped to British lines throughout the South, causing dramatic losses to slaveholders and disrupting cultivation and harvesting of crops. For instance, South Carolina was estimated to have lost about 25,000 slaves to flight, migration, or death which amounted to a third of its slave population.

[ 218 ] During the war, the British commanders attempted to weaken the Patriots by issuing proclamations of freedom to their slaves.

[ 219 ] In the November 1775 document known as Dunmore's Proclamation Virginia royal governor, Lord Dunmore recruited Black men into the British forces with the promise of freedom, protection for their families, and land grants. Some men responded and briefly formed the British Ethiopian Regiment . Historian David Brion Davis explains the difficulties with a policy of wholesale arming of the slaves: But England greatly feared the effects of any such move on its own West Indies , where Americans had already aroused alarm over a possible threat to incite slave insurrections. The British elites also understood that an all-out attack on one form of property could easily lead to an assault on all boundaries of privilege and social order, as envisioned by radical religious sects in Britain's seventeenth-century civil wars.

[ 220 ] Davis underscores the British dilemma: "Britain, when confronted by the rebellious American colonists, hoped to exploit their fear of slave revolts while also reassuring the large number of slave-holding Loyalists and wealthy Caribbean planters and merchants that their slave property would be secure".

[ 221 ] The Americans, however, accused the British of encouraging slave revolts, with the issue becoming one of the 27 colonial grievances .

[ 222 ] The existence of slavery in the American colonies had attracted criticism from both sides of the Atlantic as many could not reconcile the existence of the institution with the egalitarian ideals espoused by leaders of the Revolution. British writer Samuel Johnson wrote "how is it we hear the loudest yelps for liberty among the drivers of the Negroes?" in a text opposing the grievances of the colonists.

[ 223 ] Referring to this contradiction, English abolitionist Thomas Day wrote in a 1776 letter that if there be an object truly ridiculous in nature, it is an American patriot, signing resolutions of independency with the one hand, and with the other brandishing a whip over his affrighted slaves.

[ 224 ] Thomas Jefferson unsuccessfully attempted to include a section in the Declaration of Independence which asserted that King George III had "forced" the slave trade onto the colonies.

[ 225 ] Despite the turmoil of the period, African-Americans contributed to the foundation of an American national identity during the Revolution.

Phyllis Wheatley , an African-American poet, popularized the image of Columbia to represent America.

[ 226 ] The 1779 Philipsburg Proclamation expanded the promise of freedom for Black men who enlisted in the British military to all the colonies in rebellion. British forces gave transportation to 10,000 slaves when they evacuated Savannah and Charleston , carrying through on their promise.

[ 227 ] They evacuated and resettled more than 3,000 Black Loyalists from New York to Nova Scotia , Upper Canada , and Lower Canada . Others sailed with the British to England or were resettled as freedmen in the West Indies of the Caribbean. But slaves carried to the Caribbean under control of Loyalist masters generally remained slaves until British abolition of slavery in its colonies in 1833–1838. More than 1,200 of the Black Loyalists of Nova Scotia later resettled in the British colony of Sierra Leone , where they became leaders of the Krio ethnic group of Freetown and the later national government. Many of their descendants still live in Sierra Leone, as well as other African countries.

[ 228 ] [ full citation needed ] Effects of the revolution Main articles: American nationalism and American civil religion After the Revolution, genuinely democratic politics became possible in the former American colonies.

[ 229 ] The rights of the people were incorporated into state constitutions. Concepts of liberty, individual rights, equality among men and hostility toward corruption became incorporated as core values of liberal republicanism. The new United States government was empowered to undertake its own project of territorial expansion and settler colonialism . The greatest challenge to the old order in Europe was the challenge to inherited political power and the democratic idea that government rests on the consent of the governed . The example of the first successful revolution against a European empire, and the first successful establishment of a republican form of democratically elected government, provided a model for many other colonial peoples who realized that they too could break away and become self-governing nations with directly elected representative government.

[ 230 ] [ page needed ] The U.S. motto Novus ordo seclorum , meaning "A New Age Now Begins", is paraphrased from Thomas Paine 's Common Sense , published January 10, 1776. "We have it in our power to begin the world over again," Paine wrote.  The American Revolution ended an age—an age of monarchy.  And, it began a new age—an age of freedom.  As a result of the growing wave started by the Revolution, there are now more people around the world living in freedom than ever before, both in absolute numbers and as a percentage of the world's population.

[ 231 ] [ 232 ] [ 233 ] [ 234 ] Interpretations Interpretations vary concerning the effect of the Revolution. Historians such as Bernard Bailyn , Gordon Wood , and Edmund Morgan view it as a unique and radical event which produced deep changes and had a profound effect on world affairs, such as an increasing belief in the principles of the Enlightenment. These were demonstrated by a leadership and government that espoused protection of natural rights, and a system of laws chosen by the people.

[ 235 ] John Murrin, by contrast, argues that the definition of "the people" at that time was mostly restricted to free men who passed a property qualification.

[ 236 ] [ 237 ] Gordon Wood states: The American Revolution was integral to the changes occurring in American society, politics and culture .... These changes were radical, and they were extensive .... The Revolution not only radically changed the personal and social relationships of people, including the position of women, but also destroyed aristocracy as it'd been understood in the Western world for at least two millennia.

[ 238 ] Edmund Morgan has argued that, in terms of long-term impact on American society and values: The Revolution did revolutionize social relations. It did displace the deference, the patronage, the social divisions that had determined the way people viewed one another for centuries and still view one another in much of the world. It did give to ordinary people a pride and power, not to say an arrogance, that have continued to shock visitors from less favored lands. It may have left standing a host of inequalities that have troubled us ever since. But it generated the egalitarian view of human society that makes them troubling and makes our world so different from the one in which the revolutionists had grown up.

[ 239 ] Inspiring other independence movements and revolutions Main article: Age of Revolution Further information: Atlantic Revolutions The American Revolution was part of the first wave of the Atlantic Revolutions , an 18th and 19th century revolutionary wave in the Atlantic World .

The first shot of the American Revolution at the Battle of Lexington and Concord is referred to as the "shot heard 'round the world" . The Revolutionary War victory not only established the United States as the first modern constitutional republic, but marked the transition from an age of monarchy to a new age of freedom by inspiring similar movements worldwide.

[ 240 ] The American Revolution was the first of the Atlantic Revolutions : followed most notably by the French Revolution , the Haitian Revolution , and the Latin American wars of independence . Aftershocks contributed to rebellions in Ireland , the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth , and the Netherlands.

[ 241 ] [ 242 ] [ 240 ] The U.S. Constitution , drafted shortly after independence, remains the world's oldest written constitution, and has been emulated by other countries, in some cases verbatim.

[ 243 ] Some historians and scholars argue that the subsequent wave of independence and revolutionary movements has contributed to the continued expansion of democratic government; 144 countries, representing two-third of the world's population, are full or partially democracies of same form.

[ 244 ] [ 233 ] [ 245 ] [ 246 ] [ 234 ] [ 231 ] The Dutch Republic, also at war with Britain, was the next country after France to sign a treaty with the United States, on October 8, 1782.

[ 87 ] On April 3, 1783, Ambassador Extraordinary Gustaf Philip Creutz , representing King Gustav III of Sweden , and Benjamin Franklin, signed a Treaty of Amity and Commerce with the U.S.

[ 87 ] The Revolution had a strong, immediate influence in Great Britain, Ireland, the Netherlands, and France. Many British and Irish Whigs in Parliament spoke glowingly in favor of the American cause. In Ireland, the Protestant minority who controlled Ireland demanded self-rule . Under the leadership of Henry Grattan , the Irish Patriot Party forced the reversal of mercantilist prohibitions against trade with other British colonies. The King and his cabinet in London could not risk another rebellion, and so made a series of concessions to the Patriot faction in Dublin. Armed volunteer units of the Protestant Ascendancy were set up ostensibly to protect against an invasion from France. As had been in colonial America, so too in Ireland now the King no longer had a monopoly of lethal force .

[ 247 ] [ 240 ] [ 248 ] For many Europeans, such as the Marquis de Lafayette , who later were active during the era of the French Revolution , the American case along with the Dutch Revolt (end of the 16th century) and the 17th century English Civil War , was among the examples of overthrowing an old regime. The American Declaration of Independence influenced the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and of the Citizen of 1789.

[ 249 ] [ 250 ] The spirit of the Declaration of Independence led to laws ending slavery in all the Northern states and the Northwest Territory, with New Jersey the last in 1804. States such as New Jersey and New York adopted gradual emancipation, which kept some people as slaves for more than two decades longer.

[ 251 ] [ 240 ] [ 252 ] Status of African Americans Main article: African-American history A Lexington, Massachusetts memorial to Prince Estabrook , who was wounded in the Battle of Lexington and Concord and was the first Black casualty of the Revolutionary War A postage stamp, created at the time of the bicentennial, honors Salem Poor , who was an enslaved African American man who purchased his freedom, became a soldier, and rose to fame as a war hero during the Battle of Bunker Hill .

[ 253 ] During the revolution, the contradiction between the Patriots' professed ideals of liberty and the institution of slavery generated increased scrutiny of the latter.

[ 254 ] : 235 [ 255 ] : 105–106 [ 256 ] : 186 As early as 1764, the Boston Patriot leader James Otis, Jr.

declared that all men, "white or black", were "by the law of nature" born free.

[ 254 ] : 237 Anti-slavery calls became more common in the early 1770s. In 1773, Benjamin Rush , the future signer of the Declaration of Independence, called on "advocates for American liberty" to oppose slavery.

[ 254 ] : 239 Slavery became an issue that had to be addressed.  As historian Christopher L. Brown put it, slavery "had never been on the agenda in a serious way before," but the Revolution "forced it to be a public question from there forward." [ 257 ] [ 258 ] In the late 1760s and early 1770s, several colonies, including Massachusetts and Virginia, attempted to restrict the slave trade, but were prevented from doing so by royally appointed governors.

[ 254 ] : 245 In 1774, as part of a broader non-importation movement aimed at Britain, the Continental Congress called on all the colonies to ban the importation of slaves, and the colonies passed acts doing so.

[ 254 ] : 245 In the first two decades after the American Revolution, state legislatures and individuals took actions to free slaves, in part based on revolutionary ideals. Northern states passed new constitutions that contained language about equal rights or specifically abolished slavery; some states, such as New York and New Jersey, where slavery was more widespread, passed laws by the end of the 18th century to abolish slavery by a gradual method. By 1804, all the northern states had passed laws outlawing slavery, either immediately or over time.

[ 259 ] No southern state abolished slavery. However, individual owners could free their slaves by personal decision. Numerous slaveholders who freed their slaves cited revolutionary ideals in their documents; others freed slaves as a reward for service. Records also suggest that some slaveholders were freeing their own mixed-race children, born into slavery to slave mothers. The number of free Blacks as a proportion of the Black population in the upper South increased from less than 1 percent to nearly 10 percent between 1790 and 1810 as a result of these actions.

[ 260 ] [ 261 ] [ 262 ] [ 263 ] [ 264 ] [ 265 ] [ 266 ] [ 267 ] [ 268 ] [ 269 ] [ excessive citations ] Nevertheless, slavery continued in the South, where it became a "peculiar institution", setting the stage for future sectional conflict between North and South over the issue.

[ 256 ] : 186–187 Thousands of free Blacks in the northern states fought in the state militias and Continental Army. In the south, both sides offered freedom to slaves who would perform military service. Roughly 20,000 slaves fought in the American Revolution.

[ 270 ] Status of American women Main article: History of women in the United States The status of women during the Revolutionary War can be illustrated by the interchange of gender, sexuality, citizenship, and class. While women were entering a period in which they found themselves gaining more identity within society, it was clear that they were still very much considered under men as their role in society remained being a good wife and mother. Their clothes, the way they responded to their husband, and listened to their husband, was incredibly important in the social sphere. Having a woman who was dressed well for her role as a good wife and mother as well as fitting the social role, was a symbol of not only status, but a family devoted to the republic. As they continued to nurture social and political partnerships, their role in enabling the success of the revolution emphasized their changing role in society – leading to the post-revolutionary reconstruction of gender ideology.

In addition, the democratic ideals of the Revolution inspired changes in the roles of women.

[ 271 ] Patriot women married to Loyalists who left the state could get a divorce and obtain control of the ex-husband's property.

[ 272 ] Abigail Adams expressed to her husband, the president, the desire of women to have a place in the new republic: I desire you would remember the Ladies, and be more generous and favourable to them than your ancestors. Do not put such unlimited power into the hands of the Husbands.

[ 273 ] As discussions rose regarding the rights of man post Revolutionary war, women began pushing a debate for the rights of women as well. One particular woman, Mary Wallstonecraft, would pioneer the discussion regarding women's rights, and push those like Abigail Adams to begin expressing the desire to want a larger place in society. Wollstonecraft was an English writer, philosopher, and advocate for women's rights, and would publish the Vindication of the Rights of Woman (1792) – challenging the idea that rights should only be granted to men. As one of the first major advocates and foundational figures for women's rights and gender equality in a time where women were considered inferior to men, Wollstonecraft focused on equal education and social opportunities for women – believing that if women were educated the same as men, they would gain autonomy over their own lives and better contribute to society. Her radical ideas would give ground to the conversation in allowing women to be bearers of rights alongside men – that while the rights of man were taking on a new meaning post-revolutionary America, it was time for the rights of women too. Inspired by the radical feminism in her work, women in the early republic would change their views on marriage, education, participation in public life, and autonomy – pushing them to lay the groundwork for the later women's suffrage movement, education opportunities, property rights, and more.

However, this new sense of independence and dignity did not come with ease, as a gender hierarchy would continue to bind what it meant for women to have rights during the post-revolutionary era. Women in the early republic had many limitations – they could not vote, hold political office, earn fair wages, lacked opportunities for higher education and certain professions, and most importantly, own property independently of their husbands. In addition, they held little legal powers in subjects such as divorce, property rights, and child custody. A central legal concept that reinforced these restrictions was coverture , a central legal doctrine that limited women's lives in all aspects – making a woman's legal identity a part of their husband's and essentially making them subordinates. The denial of things like property rights to women through coverture would play an important role in why they were denied many other rights, as property was a symbol of individual liberty and empowerment during the post-revolutionary era.

So while women would eventually begin gaining new rights such as increased access to education and limited property and voting rights – much of their lives still depended on men.  This stark contrast of men's versus women's rights comes from the deeply established gender roles from philosophical theories like the Scottish Theory –  stating that the rights of women were simply benefits in life. The emphasis of women's rights was on duty and obligation, instead of liberty and choice – confining women to the traditional role of wife and mother. On the other hand, men's rights were heavily inspired by Locke, as it emphasized equality, individual autonomy, and the expansion of personal freedoms. This is evident in their rights to property, participation in government, and autonomy. So while women were becoming bearers of rights, the foundation and philosophy of those given rights differed vastly and continued to stay limited.

The early national period of America would continue to struggle with the concept of rights and equality, as women also faced the notion that women should be under the dominance of men – carried by a resurgence of Christian beliefs. Women were blamed for the "Fall of Man", in reference to Eve and Adam in the Bible.  So while women were beginning to bear rights, the type of language that was being used when talking about the rights of women was done with care and hesitance. This Christian worldview has viewed women as inferior to men long before the early republic, however it is important to note the influence it would continue to place onto their rights as they began to oppose traditional gender roles.

It is also important to note that for more than thirty years, however, the 1776 New Jersey State Constitution gave the vote to "all inhabitants" who had a certain level of wealth, including unmarried women and blacks (not married women because they could not own property separately from their husbands), until in 1807, when that state legislature passed a bill interpreting the constitution to mean universal white male suffrage , excluding paupers.

[ 274 ] Loyalist expatriation Main article: United Empire Loyalist See also: Expulsion of the Loyalists British Loyalists fleeing to British Canada as depicted in this early 20th century drawing Tens of thousands of Loyalists left the United States following the war ; Philip Ranlet estimates 20,000, while Maya Jasanoff estimates as many as 70,000.

[ 275 ] Some migrated to Britain, but the great majority received land and subsidies for resettlement in British colonies in North America, especially Quebec (concentrating in the Eastern Townships ), Prince Edward Island , and Nova Scotia .

[ 276 ] Britain created the colonies of Upper Canada ( Ontario ) and New Brunswick expressly for their benefit, and the Crown awarded land to Loyalists as compensation for losses in the United States. Nevertheless, approximately eighty-five percent of the Loyalists stayed in the United States as American citizens, and some of the exiles later returned to the U.S.

[ 277 ] Patrick Henry spoke of the issue of allowing Loyalists to return as such: "Shall we, who have laid the proud British lion at our feet, be frightened of its whelps?" His actions helped secure return of the Loyalists to American soil.

[ 278 ] Commemorations Main articles: Commemoration of the American Revolution and United States Bicentennial Further information: American Revolution Statuary and Independence Day (United States) See also: Minor American Revolution holidays The American Revolution has a central place in the American memory [ 279 ] as the story of the nation's founding. It is covered in the schools, memorialized by two national holidays, Washington's Birthday in February and Independence Day in July, and commemorated in innumerable monuments. George Washington's estate at Mount Vernon was one of the first national pilgrimages for tourists and attracted 10,000 visitors a year by the 1850s.

[ 280 ] The Revolution became a matter of contention in the 1850s in the debates leading to the American Civil War (1861–1865), as spokesmen of both the Northern United States and the Southern United States claimed that their region was the true custodian of the legacy of 1776.

[ 281 ] The United States Bicentennial in 1976 came a year after the American withdrawal from the Vietnam War , and speakers stressed the themes of renewal and rebirth based on a restoration of traditional values.

[ 282 ] Today, more than 100 battlefields and historic sites of the American Revolution are protected and maintained by the government. The National Park Service alone manages and maintains more than 50 battlefield parks and many other sites such as Independence Hall that are related to the Revolution.

[ 283 ] The private American Battlefield Trust uses government grants and other funds to preserve almost 700 acres of battlefield land in six states, and the ambitious private recreation/restoration/preservation/interpretation of over 300 acres of pre-1790 Colonial Williamsburg was created in the first half of the 20th century for public visitation.

[ 284 ] See also Timeline of the American Revolution International relations (1648–1814) List of George Washington articles List of films about the American Revolution List of plays and musicals about the American Revolution List of television series and miniseries about the American Revolution Museum of the American Revolution Influence of the American Revolution on the French Revolution Notes ^ Lord North claimed that Englishmen paid an average 25 shillings annually in taxes, whereas Americans paid only sixpence.

[ 40 ] ^ Massachusetts' constitution is still in force in the 21st century, continuously since its ratification on June 15, 1780 ^ A final naval battle was fought on March 10, 1783, by Captain John Barry and the crew of the USS Alliance , who defeated three British warships led by HMS Sybille .

[ 100 ] ^ Some historians suggest that loss of the American colonies enabled Britain to deal with the French Revolution with more unity and better organization than would otherwise have been the case.

[ 105 ] Britain turned towards Asia, the Pacific, and later Africa with subsequent exploration leading to the rise of the Second British Empire .

[ 107 ] References ^ Fischer, David Hackett.

Paul Revere’s Ride, 163–4, Oxford University Press, New York and Oxford, 1994.

ISBN 0-19-508847-6 .

^ Taylor 2016 , p. 17.

^ Weimer, Adrian Chastain (2023). "Courts: Articulating Sedition and Loyalty".

A Constitutional Culture: New England and the Struggle Against Arbitrary Rule in the Restoration Empire . Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press. pp.

70– 71.

ISBN 9781512823974 .

^ Lepore 1999 , pp. 5–7.

^ Nettels 1938 , p. 297.

^ Lovejoy 1987 , pp. 148–156, 155–157, 169–170.

^ Barnes 1960 , pp. 169–170.

^ Taylor 2016 , p. 12.

^ Webb 1998 , pp. 190–191.

^ Lustig 2002 , p. 201.

^ Palfrey 1864 , p. 596.

^ Evans 1922 , p. 430.

^ a b Taylor 2016 , pp. 12–13.

^ Taylor 2016 , pp. 12–13 & 32.

^ Middlekauff 2005 , p. 46.

^ Middlekauff 2005 , p. 51.

^ Taylor 2016 , pp. 19 & 23.

^ Middlekauff 2005 , p. 28.

^ Taylor 2016 , p. 23.

^ John A. Garraty; Mark C. Carnes (2000).

"Chapter Three: America in the British Empire" .

A Short History of the American Nation (8th ed.). Longman.

ISBN 0321070984 . Archived from the original on May 17, 2008.

^ Max Savelle, Empires to Nations: Expansion in America, 1713–1824 , p. 93 (1974) ^ Miller 1943 , pp. 98–99.

^ Thomas 1964 , p. 632.

^ Whaples 1995 , p. 140.

^ Thomas 1964 .

^ Walton 1971 .

^ Taylor 2016 , pp. 31–32.

^ Middlekauff 2005 , p. 30.

^ Taylor 2016 , pp. 45 & 47.

^ Middlekauff 2005 , p. 55.

^ a b Taylor 2016 , p. 51.

^ Shy, Toward Lexington pp. 73–78 ^ Dull, Jonathan.

The Miracle of the American Revolution . Potomac Books, 2015, 42 ^ Middlekauff 2005 , pp. 55–56.

^ Dull, The Miracle of the American Revolution , 42 ^ Middlekauff 2005 , p. 60.

^ Middlekauff 2005 , pp. 60–61.

^ Middlekauff 2005 , p. 62.

^ "The Stamp Act – March 22, 1765" .

Revolutionary War and Beyond . Archived from the original on May 29, 2019 . Retrieved May 29, 2019 .

[ unreliable source?

] ^ a b Miller, Origins of the American Revolution (1943) p. 89 ^ T.H. Breen, American Insurgents, American Patriots: The Revolution of the People (2010) pp. 81–82 ^ Robert E. Shalhope, "Republicanism and early American historiography." William and Mary Quarterly (1982) 39#2 334–356.

online ^ Homer L. Calkin, "Pamphlets and public opinion during the American Revolution".

Pennsylvania Magazine of History and Biography 64.1 (1940): 22–42.

online ^ Middlekauff p. 62 ^ Lecky, William Edward Hartpole, A History of England in the Eighteenth Century (1882) pp. 297–298 ^ Lecky, William Edward Hartpole, A History of England in the Eighteenth Century (1882) p. 173 ^ Bryan-Paul Frost and Jeffrey Sikkenga (2003).

History of American Political Thought . Lexington Books. pp.

55– 56.

ISBN 978-0739106242 .

^ Miller (1966) [1959].

Origins of the American Revolution . Stanford University Press. pp. 181–.

ISBN 978-0804705936 .

^ Thomas P. Slaughter, "The Tax Man Cometh: Ideological Opposition to Internal Taxes, 1760–1790".

William and Mary Quarterly (1984). 41 (4): 566–591.

doi : 10.2307/1919154 ^ Melvin I. Urofsky and Paul Finkelman, A March of Liberty: A Constitutional History of the United States (Oxford UP, 2002) v. 1 p. 52.

^ a b Hiller B. Zobel, The Boston Massacre (1996) ^ Whiteley, Peter (July 1, 1996).

Lord North: The Prime Minister Who Lost America . Bloomsbury Publishing.

ISBN 978-0-8264-3493-7 .

^ Mark, Harrison W. (November 30, 2023).

"Intolerable Acts" . Archived from the original on July 18, 2025 . Retrieved July 18, 2025 .

^ Alexander, John Kurt (2002).

Samuel Adams: America's Revolutionary Politician . Lanham, Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield. p. 249.

ISBN 0-7425-2115-X .

^ Fowler, William M.; Fowler, Lillian M. (January 1, 1997).

Samuel Adams: Radical Puritan (Handlin, Oscar ed.). New York: Longman. p. 190.

ISBN 0-673-99293-4 .

^ Greene and Pole (1994) chapters 22–24 ^ Mary Beth Norton et al., A People and a Nation (6th ed. 2001) vol 1 pp. 144–145 ^ Ketchum, Richard (October 14, 2002).

Divided Loyalties: How the American Revolution came to New York . Henry Holt and Co.

ISBN 0-8050-6120-7 .

^ Unger, Harlow Giles (September 1, 2000).

Unger, Harlow, John Hancock, Merchant King and American Patriot . Somerset, New Jersey: Wiley & Sons.

ISBN 0-7858-2026-4 .

^ Carp, B.L. (2010).

Defiance of the Patriots: The Boston Tea Party and the Making of America . Yale University Press. pp.

1– 3.

ISBN 978-0300168457 . Retrieved May 29, 2023 .

^ Miller (1943) pp. 353–376 ^ Carp, Defiance of the Patriots: The Boston Tea Party and the Making of America (2010) ch 9 ^ John K. Alexander (2011).

Samuel Adams: The Life of an American Revolutionary . Rowman & Littlefield. pp.

187– 194.

ISBN 978-0742570351 .

^ Mary Beth Norton; et al. (2010).

A People and a Nation: A History of the United States . Cengage Learning. p. 143.

ISBN 978-0495915256 .

^ Cogliano, Francis D. Revolutionary America, 1763–1815: A Political History. Routledge, 1999, p. 47.

^ Harvey.

"A few bloody noses" (2002) pp. 208–210 ^ Urban p. 74 ^ Isaacson, Walter (2003).

Benjamin Franklin: An American Life . Simon & Schuster. p.

303 .

ISBN 978-0684807614 .

^ Miller (1948) p. 87 ^ a b Nevins (1927); Greene and Pole (1991) chapter 29 ^ Nevins (1927) ^ Founding the Republic: A Documentary History , edited by John J. Patrick ^ Reason, Religion, and Democracy , Dennis C. Muelle. p. 206 ^ Wood, The Radicalism of the American Revolution (1992) ^ Jensen, The Founding of a Nation (1968) pp. 678–679 ^ Maier, American Scripture (1997) pp. 41–46 ^ Armitage, David.

The Declaration of Independence: A Global History . Harvard University Press, London. 2007. "The Articles of Confederation safeguarded it for each of the thirteen states in Article II ("Each State retains its sovereignty, freedom and independence"), but confined its international expression to Congress alone." ^ Tesesis, Alexander.

Self-Government and the Declaration of Independence . Cornell Law Review, Volume 97 Issue 4. May 2012.

(applying the Declaration in the context of state sovereignty while dealing with personal liberty laws, noting that "after the declaration of independence in 1776, each state, at least before the confederation, was a sovereign, independent body") .

^ Greene and Pole (1991) chapter 30 ^ Klos, President Who? Forgotten Founders (2004) ^ Jeremy Black, Crisis of Empire: Britain and America in the Eighteenth Century (2008) p. 140 ^ a b Schecter, Barnet.

The Battle for New York: The City at the Heart of the American Revolution . (2002) ^ a b McCullough, 1776 (2005) ^ Alan Valentine, Lord George Germain (1962) pp. 309–310 ^ a b Larry G. Bowman, Captive Americans: Prisoners During the American Revolution (1976) ^ John C. Miller, Triumph of Freedom, 1775–1783 (1948) p. 166.

^ a b c Hamilton, The Papers of Alexander Hamilton (1974) p. 28 ^ Stanley Weintraub, Iron Tears: America's Battle for Freedom, Britain's Quagmire, 1775–1783 (2005) p. 151 ^ Mackesy, The War for America (1993) p. 568 ^ a b Higginbotham, The War of American Independence (1983) p. 83 ^ Crow and Tise, The Southern Experience in the American Revolution (1978) pp. 157–159 ^ a b Henry Lumpkin, From Savannah to Yorktown: The American Revolution in the South (2000) ^ Brendan Morrissey, Yorktown 1781: The World Turned Upside Down (1997) ^ Harvey pp. 493–515 ^ Jonathan R. Dull, The French Navy and American Independence (1975) p. 248 ^ Richard H. Kohn, Eagle and Sword: The Federalists and the Creation of the Military Establishment in America, 1783–1802 (1975) pp. 17–39 ^ John Ferling, Almost A Miracle: The American Victory in the War of Independence (2009) ^ Joseph J. Ellis (2013).

Revolutionary Summer: The Birth of American Independence . Random House. p. 11.

ISBN 978-0307701220 .

^ Harvey p. 528 ^ Martin I. J. Griffin, The Story of Commodore John Barry (2010) pp. 218–223 ^ Charles R. Ritcheson, "The Earl of Shelbourne and Peace with America, 1782–1783: Vision and Reality".

International History Review 5#3 (1983): 322–345.

^ Jonathan R. Dull (1987).

A Diplomatic History of the American Revolution . Yale up. pp.

144– 151.

ISBN 0300038860 .

^ William Deverell, ed. (2008).

A Companion to the American West . John Wiley & Sons. p. 17.

ISBN 978-1405138482 .

^ Ruppert, Bob (August 9, 2022).

"The Abdication(s) of King George III" .

Journal of the American Revolution . Retrieved August 9, 2022 .

^ a b William Hague, William Pitt the Younger (2004) ^ Jeremy Black, George III: America's Last King (2006) ^ Canny, p. 92.

^ Paul Kennedy, The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers (1987) pp. 81, 119 ^ John Brewer, The sinews of power: war, money, and the English state, 1688–1783 (1990) p. 91 ^ Curtis P. Nettels, The Emergence of a National Economy, 1775–1815 (1962) pp. 23–44 ^ a b c Charles Rappleye, Robert Morris: Financier of the American Revolution (2010) pp. 225–252 ^ Edwin J. Perkins, American public finance and financial services, 1700–1815 (1994) pp. 85–106.

Complete text line free ^ Oliver Harry Chitwood, A History of Colonial America (1961) pp. 586–589 ^ Terry M. Mays (2005).

Historical Dictionary of Revolutionary America . Scarecrow Press. pp.

73– 75.

ISBN 978-0810853898 .

^ Harlow, Ralph Volney (1929). "Aspects of Revolutionary Finance, 1775–1783".

The American Historical Review .

35 (1): 46– 68.

doi : 10.2307/1838471 .

JSTOR 1838471 .

^ Erna Risch, Supplying Washington's Army (1982) ^ E. Wayne Carp, To Starve the Army at Pleasure: Continental Army Administration and American Political Culture, 1775–1783 (1990) ^ E. James Ferguson, The power of the purse: A history of American public finance, 1776–1790 (1961) ^ Office of the Historian (2020).

"Milestones: 1784–1800" .

history.state.gov . Department of State.

Archived from the original on February 4, 2009 . Retrieved January 19, 2020 .

^ Greene and Pole, eds.

Companion to the American Revolution , pp. 557–624 ^ Richard B. Morris, The Forging of the Union: 1781–1789 (1987) pp. 245–266 ^ Morris, The Forging of the Union: 1781–1789 pp. 300–313 ^ Morris, The Forging of the Union, 1781–1789 pp. 300–322 ^ Jensen, The New Nation (1950) p. 379 ^ Joseph J. Ellis, His Excellency: George Washington (2004) p. 204 ^ Robert A. Ferguson, The American Enlightenment, 1750–1820 (1997).

^ Alexander, Revolutionary Politician , 103, 136; Maier, Old Revolutionaries , 41–42.

^ Jeffrey D. Schultz; et al. (1999).

Encyclopedia of Religion in American Politics . Greenwood. p. 148.

ISBN 978-1573561303 .

^ Waldron, Jenny (2002).

God, Locke, and Equality .

Cambridge University Press . p. 136.

doi : 10.1017/CBO9780511613920 .

ISBN 978-0-521-81001-2 .

^ Thomas S. Kidd (2010): God of Liberty: A Religious History of the American Revolution , New York, pp. 6–7 ^ Middlekauff (2005), pp. 136–138 ^ "Right of Revolution: John Locke, Second Treatise, §§ 149, 155, 168, 207–10, 220–31, 240–43" .

press-pubs.uchicago.edu . Retrieved June 7, 2024 .

^ Charles W. Toth, Liberte, Egalite, Fraternite: The American Revolution and the European Response . (1989) p. 26.

^ Philosophical Tales, by Martin Cohen, (Blackwell 2008), p. 101 ^ Stanley Weintraub, Iron Tears: America's Battle for Freedom, Britain's Quagmire, 1775–1783 (2005) chapter 1 ^ Bailyn, The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution (1992) pp. 125–137 ^ Wood, The Radicalism of the American Revolution (1992) pp. 35, 174–175 ^ Shalhope, Toward a Republican Synthesis (1972) pp. 49–80 ^ Adams quoted in Paul A. Rahe, Republics Ancient and Modern: Classical Republicanism and the American Revolution. Volume: 2 (1994) p. 23.

^ a b Bonomi, p. 186, Chapter 7 "Religion and the American Revolution" ^ a b Barck, Oscar T.; Lefler, Hugh T. (1958).

Colonial America . New York: Macmillan. p. 404.

^ Faragher, John Mack (1996).

The Encyclopedia of Colonial and Revolutionary America . Da Capo Press. p.

359 .

ISBN 978-0306806872 .

^ William H. Nelson, The American Tory (1961) p. 186 ^ Kidd (2010), p. 141 ^ Bailyn , The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution (1992) p. 303 ^ Thomas S. Kidd, God of Liberty: A Religious History of the American Revolution (2010) ^ Alan Heimert, Religion and the American Mind: From the Great Awakening to the Revolution . Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1967.

^ John Ferling, Setting the World Ablaze: Washington, Adams, Jefferson, and the American Revolution (2002) p. 281 ^ a b Labaree, Conservatism in Early American History (1948) pp. 164–165 ^ a b c Hull et al., Choosing Sides (1978) pp. 344–366 ^ a b c Burrows and Wallace, The American Revolution (1972) pp. 167–305 ^ J. Franklin Jameson, The American Revolution Considered as a Social Movement (1926); other historians pursuing the same line of thought included Charles A. Beard , Carl Becker , and Arthur Schlesinger, Sr.

^ Wood, Rhetoric and Reality in the American Revolution (1966) pp. 3–32 ^ a b Nash (2005) ^ a b Resch (2006) ^ Andrew Jackson O'Shaughnessy, "'If Others Will Not Be Active, I must Drive': George III and the American Revolution".

Early American Studies 2004 2(1): pp. 1–46. P. D. G. Thomas, "George III and the American Revolution".

History 1985 70(228) ^ O'Shaughnessy, ch 1.

^ Trevelyan, vol. 1 p. 4.

^ Trevelyan, vol. 1 p. 5.

^ a b Cannon, John (September 2004).

"George III (1738–1820)" .

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/10540 . Retrieved October 29, 2008 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) ^ a b Cannon and Griffiths, pp. 510–511.

^ Brooke, p. 183.

^ Brooke, pp. 180–182, 192, 223.

^ Hibbert, Christopher (1990).

Redcoats and Rebels .

Grafton Books . pp.

156– 157.

^ Willcox & Arnstein, p. 157.

^ a b c Willcox & Arnstein, pp. 161, 165.

^ a b Ayling, Stanley (1972).

George the Third .

Knopf . pp.

275– 284.

ISBN 978-0-394-48169-2 .

^ The Oxford Illustrated History of the British Army (1994) p. 129.

^ Brooke, p. 221.

^ U.S. Department of State, Treaty of Paris, 1783 . Retrieved July 5, 2013.

^ Bullion, George III on Empire, 1783 , p. 306.

^ Adams, C.F., ed. (1850–1856), The works of John Adams, second president of the United States , vol. VIII, pp.

255– 257 , quoted in Ayling, p. 323 and Hibbert, p. 165.

^ Caroline Robbins ,  "Decision in '76: Reflections on the 56 Signers".

Proceedings of the Massachusetts Historical Society . Vol. 89 pp. 72–87, quote at p. 86.

^ See also Richard D. Brown, "The Founding Fathers of 1776 and 1787: A collective view".

William and Mary Quarterly (1976) 33#3: 465–480.

online ^ Carol Sue Humphrey, The American Revolution and the Press: The Promise of Independence (Northwestern University Press; 2013) ^ Robert M. Calhoon, "Loyalism and neutrality" in Jack P. Greene; J.R. Pole (2008).

A Companion to the American Revolution . John Wiley & Sons. p. 235.

ISBN 978-0470756447 .

^ Mark Edward Lender, review of American Insurgents, American Patriots: The Revolution of the People (2010) by T. H. Breen, in The Journal of Military History (2012) 76#1 pp. 233–234 ^ a b Ferguson, The Commonalities of Common Sense (2000) pp. 465–504 ^ Calhoon, "Loyalism and neutrality" in Greene and Pole, eds.

A Companion to the American Revolution (1980) at p. 235 ^ Calhoon, "Loyalism and neutrality" in Greene and Pole, eds.

A Companion to the American Revolution (1980) pp. 235–247, ^ Mary BethNorton, "The fate of some Black Loyalists of the American Revolution".

Journal of Negro History 58.4 (1973): 402–426 online .

^ Sheila L. Skemp , Benjamin and William Franklin: Father and Son, Patriot and Loyalist (1994) ^ Joan Magee (1984).

Loyalist Mosaic: A Multi-Ethnic Heritage . Dundurn. pp. 137ff.

ISBN 978-1459711426 .

^ a b Greene and Pole (1994) chapters 20–22 ^ "Chaos in New York" .

Black Loyalists: Our People, Our History . Canada's Digital Collections. Archived from the original on November 17, 2007 . Retrieved October 18, 2007 .

^ Gottlieb (2005) ^ Eileen K. Cheng (2008).

The Plain and Noble Garb of Truth: Nationalism & Impartiality in American Historical Writing, 1784–1860 . University of Georgia Press. p. 210.

ISBN 978-0820330730 .

^ Pauw, Linda Grant De (1994). "Roles of Women in the American Revolution and the Civil War".

Social Education .

58 (2): 77.

^ a b Berkin, Revolutionary Mothers (2006) pp. 59–60 ^ Greene and Pole (1994) chapter 41 ^ Cometti, Elizabeth (1947). "Women in the American Revolution".

The New England Quarterly .

20 (3): 329– 346.

doi : 10.2307/361443 .

JSTOR 361443 .

^ Kerber, Women of the Republic (1997) chapters 4 and 6 ^ Mary Beth Norton, Liberty's Daughters: The Revolutionary Experience of American Women (1980) ^ Jonathan Dull, A Diplomatic History of the American Revolution (1985) pp. 57–65 ^ David Patrick Geggus, "The effects of the American Revolution on France and its empire". in A Companion to the American Revolution , ed. Jack P. Greene and J.R. Pole (Blackwell, 2000) pp: 523–530.

ISBN 9780631210580 ^ "Founders Online: To George Washington from d'Annemours, 15 February 1789" .

founders.archives.gov . Retrieved May 26, 2021 .

^ Thompson, Buchanan Parker, Spain: Forgotten Ally of the American Revolution North Quincy, Mass.: Christopher Publishing House, 1976.

^ a b Atwood, Rodney (1980).

The Hessians: Mercenaries from Hessen-Kassel in the American Revolution . Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.

^ Commager (1958) , p. 994.

^ Rosengarten (1906) , p. 5.

^ Rosengarten (1906) , p. 13.

^ Rosengarten (1906) , p. 14.

^ Rosengarten (1886) , p. 22.

^ Lowell (1884) , p. 50.

^ Rosengarten (1906) , p. 17.

^ Rosengarten (1906) , p. 19.

^ a b Cornelison, Pam (2004).

The great American history fact-finder : the who, what, where, when, and why of American history . Ted Yanak (2nd ed.). Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

ISBN 1417594411 .

OCLC 60414840 .

[ page needed ] ^ Greene and Pole (2004) chapters 19, 46 and 51 ^ a b Calloway (1995) .

^ Joseph T. Glatthaar and James Kirby Martin, Forgotten Allies: The Oneida Indians and the American Revolution (2007) ^ Karim M. Tiro, "A 'Civil' War? Rethinking Iroquois Participation in the American Revolution".

Explorations in Early American Culture 4 (2000): 148–165.

^ Tom Hatley, The Dividing Paths: Cherokees and South Carolinians through the Era of Revolution (1993); James H. O'Donnell, III, Southern Indians in the American Revolution (1973) ^ Graymont, Barbara (1983).

"Thayendanegea (Joseph Brant)" . In Halpenny, Francess G (ed.).

Dictionary of Canadian Biography . Vol. V (1801–1820) (online ed.).

University of Toronto Press .

^ Joseph R. Fischer, A Well-Executed Failure: The Sullivan Campaign against the Iroquois, July–September 1779 (1997).

^ Calloway (1995) , p. 290.

^ Gary B. Nash, "The African Americans Revolution", in Oxford Handbook of the American Revolution (2012) edited by Edward G Gray and Jane Kamensky pp. 250–270, at p. 254 ^ Ray Raphael, A People's History of the American Revolution (2001) p. 281 ^ Peter Kolchin, American Slavery: 1619–1877 , New York: Hill and Wang, 1993, p. 73 ^ Revolutionary War: The Home Front , Library of Congress ^ Davis p. 148 ^ Davis p. 149 ^ Schama pp. 28–30, 78–90 ^ Stanley Weintraub, Iron Tears: America's Battle for Freedom, Britain's Quagmire, 1775–1783 (2005) p. 7 ^ (1) Armitage, Global History , 77.

Archived May 10, 2016, at the Wayback Machine (2) Day, Thomas.

Fragment of an original letter on the Slavery of the Negroes, written in the year 1776 . London - Printed for John Stockdale (1784). Boston - Re-printed by Garrison and Knapp, at the office of " The Liberator " (1831). p. 10.

Archived from the original on March 16, 2016 . Retrieved February 26, 2014 .

If there be an object truly ridiculous in nature, it is an American patriot, signing resolutions of independency with the one hand, and with the other brandishing a whip over his affrighted slaves.

At: Internet Archive Archived March 4, 2014, at the Wayback Machine : The Johns Hopkins University Sheridan Libraries Archived April 23, 2014, at the Wayback Machine : James Birney Collection of Antislavery Pamphlets Archived August 6, 2014, at the Wayback Machine .

^ Maier, American Scripture , 146–150.

^ James G. Basker, "A Poem Links Unlikely Allies in 1775: Phillis Wheatley and George Washington" History Now: The Journal Issue 39 Spring 2014.

online ^ Kolchin, American Slavery , p. 73 ^ Hill (2007), see also blackloyalist.com ^ Gordon Wood.

The Radicalism of the American Revolution (1992) pp. 278–279 ^ Palmer, (1959) ^ a b McDonald, Forrest.

Novus Ordo Seclorum: The Intellectual Origins of the Constitution , pp. 6–7, Lawrence: University Press of Kansas, 1985.

ISBN 0700602844 .

^ Smith, Duane E., general editor.

We the People: The Citizen and the Constitution , pp. 204–207, Center for Civic Education, Calabasas, California, 1995.

ISBN 0-89818-177-1 .

^ a b van Loon, Hendrik.

The Story of Mankind , p. 333, Garden City Publishing Company, Inc., Garden City, New York, 1921.

^ a b "Countries and Territories" .

Freedom House . Retrieved October 13, 2020 .

^ Wood, The American Revolution: A History (2003) ^ Murrin, John M.; Johnson, Paul E.; McPherson, James M.; Fahs, Alice; Gerstle, Gary (2012).

Liberty, Equality, Power: A History of the American People (6th ed.). Wadsworth, Cengage Learning. p. 296.

ISBN 978-0495904991 .

^ "U.S. Voting Rights" . Retrieved July 2, 2013 .

^ Gordon Wood, The Radicalism of the American Revolution (1993) pp. 7–8.

ISBN 0679736883 ^ Edmund S. Morgan (2005).

The Genuine Article: A Historian Looks at Early America . W. W. Norton. p. 246.

ISBN 978-0393347845 .

^ a b c d Bailyn, Bernard.

To Begin the World Anew: The Genius and Ambiguities of the American Founders , pp. 35, 134–149, Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 2003.

ISBN 0375413774 .

^ Greene and Pole (1994) ch. 53–55 ^ Wim Klooster, Revolutions in the Atlantic World: A Comparative History (2009) ^ "Taylor, Steven L. "On Using the US Constitution as a Model," Outside the Beltway, February 3, 2012, Retrieved October 13, 2020" . February 4, 2012.

^ Smith, Duane E., general editor.

We the People: The Citizen and the Constitution , pp. 204–207, Center for Civic Education, Calabasas, California, 1995.

ISBN 0898181771 .

^ Wells, H. G.

The Outline of History , pp. 840–842, Garden City Publishing Co., Inc., Garden City, NY, 1920.

^ "Petronzio, Matt. "Only 40% of the World's Population Live in Free Countries", Mashable.com, February 14, 2015, Retrieved October 13, 2020" .

Mashable . February 15, 2015.

^ R. B. McDowell, Ireland in the Age of Imperialism and Revolution, 1760–1801 (1979) ^ Bailyn, Bernard.

To Begin the World Anew: The Genius and Ambiguities of the American Founders , pp. 134–137, Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 2003.

ISBN 0375413774 .

^ Palmer, (1959); Greene and Pole (1994) chapters 49–52 ^ Center for History and New Media, Liberty, equality, fraternity (2010) ^ Greene and Pole pp. 409, 453–454 ^ Bailyn, Bernard.

To Begin the World Anew: The Genius and Ambiguities of the American Founders , pp. 134–137, 141–142, Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 2003.

ISBN 0375413774 .

^ Hubbard, Robert Ernest.

Major General Israel Putnam: Hero of the American Revolution , p. 98, McFarland & Company, Inc., Jefferson, North Carolina, 2017.

ISBN 978-1476664538 .

^ a b c d e Bailyn, Bernard (2017) [1967].

The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution (3rd ed.). Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674975651 .

^ Brown, Christopher Leslie (2006).

Moral Capital: Foundations of British Abolitionism . Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 978-0807830345 .

^ a b Wood, Gordon S. (1992).

The Radicalism of the American Revolution . New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 0679404937 .

^ Brown, Christopher. PBS Video "Liberty! The American Revolution," Episode 6, "Are We to be a Nation?," Twin Cities Television, Inc. 1997.

^ Brown, Christopher Leslie.

Moral Capital: Foundations of British Abolitionism , pp. 105–106. University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, 2006.

ISBN 978-0-8078-3034-5 .

^ Arthur Zilversmit, The First Emancipation: The Abolition of Slavery in the North (1967) pp. 201–230 ^ Ketcham, Ralph.

James Madison: A Biography , pp. 625–626, American Political Biography Press, Newtown, Connecticut, 1971.

ISBN 0945707339 .

^ "Benjamin Franklin Petitions Congress" . National Archives and Records Administration. August 15, 2016.

^ Franklin, Benjamin (February 3, 1790).

"Petition from the Pennsylvania Society for the Abolition of Slavery" . Archived from the original on May 21, 2006 . Retrieved May 21, 2006 .

^ John Paul Kaminski (1995).

A Necessary Evil?: Slavery and the Debate Over the Constitution . Rowman & Littlefield. p. 256.

ISBN 978-0945612339 .

^ Painter, Nell Irvin (2007).

Creating Black Americans: African-American History and Its Meanings, 1619 to the Present . p. 72.

^ Wood, Gordon S.

Friends Divided: John Adams and Thomas Jefferson , pp. 19, 132, 348, 416, Penguin Press, New York, 2017.

ISBN 978-0735224711 .

^ "Mackaman, Tom. "An Interview with Historian Gordon Wood on the New York Times 1619 Project," " .

wsws.org . November 28, 2019 . Retrieved October 10, 2020 .

^ "Mackaman, Tom. "Interview with Gordon Wood on the American Revolution: Part One", World Socialist Web Site, wsws.org, March 3, 2015. Retrieved October 10, 2020" . March 3, 2015.

^ Wood, Gordon S.

The Radicalism of the American Revolution , pp. 3–8, 186–187, Alfred A. Knopf, New York, 1992.

ISBN 0679404937 .

^ Bailyn, Bernard.

Faces of Revolution: Personalities and Themes in the Struggle for American Independence , pp. 221–224, Vintage Books, New York, 1992.

ISBN 0679736239 .

^ Hubbard, Robert Ernest.

Major General Israel Putnam: Hero of the American Revolution , p. 98, McFarland & Company, Inc., Jefferson, NC, 2017.

ISBN 978-1476664538 ; Hoock, Holger.

Scars of Independence: America's Violent Birth , pp. 95, 300–303, 305, 308–310, Crown Publishing Group, New York, 2017.

ISBN 978-0804137287 ; O'Reilly, Bill and Dugard, Martin.

Killing England: The Brutal Struggle for American Independence , pp. 96, 308, Henry Holt and Company, New York, 2017.

ISBN 978-1627790642 ; "Ayres, Edward. "African Americans and the American Revolution," Jamestown Settlement and American Revolution Museum at Yorktown website, Retrieved October 21, 2020" .

History Is Fun .

; " "Slavery, the American Revolution, and the Constitution", University of Houston Digital History website, Retrieved October 21, 2020" .

^ Kerber, Linda K.; Cott, Nancy F.; Gross, Robert; Hunt, Lynn; Smith-Rosenberg, Carroll; Stansell, Christine M.

(1989). "Beyond Roles, Beyond Spheres: Thinking about Gender in the Early Republic".

The William and Mary Quarterly .

46 (3): 565– 585.

doi : 10.2307/1922356 .

JSTOR 1922356 .

^ Mary Beth Norton, Liberty's Daughters: The Revolutionary Experience of American Women, 1750–1800 (3rd ed. 1996) ^ Woody Holton (2010).

Abigail Adams . Simon and Schuster. p. 172.

ISBN 978-1451607369 .

^ Klinghoffer and Elkis ("The Petticoat Electors: W omen's Suffrage in New Jersey, 1776–1807", Journal of the Early Republic 12, no. 2 (1992): 159–193.) ^ Maya Jasanoff, Liberty's Exiles: American Loyalists in the Revolutionary World (2011). Philip Ranlet, however, estimates that only 20,000 adult white Loyalists went to Canada. "How Many American Loyalists Left the United States?." Historian 76.2 (2014): 278–307.

^ W. Stewart Wallace, The United Empire Loyalists: A Chronicle of the Great Migration (Toronto, 1914) online edition Archived March 29, 2012, at the Wayback Machine ^ Van Tine, American Loyalists (1902) p. 307 ^ Kukla , pp. 265–268.

^ Michael Kammen, A Season of Youth: The American Revolution and the Historical Imagination (1978); Kammen, Mystic Chords of Memory: The Transformation of Tradition in American Culture (1991) ^ Lee, Jean B. (2001). "Historical Memory, Sectional Strife, and the American Mecca: Mount Vernon, 1783–1853".

The Virginia Magazine of History and Biography .

109 (3): 255– 300.

JSTOR 4249931 .

^ Jonathan B. Crider, "De Bow's Revolution: The Memory of the American Revolution in the Politics of the Sectional Crisis, 1850–1861," American Nineteenth Century History (2009) 10#3 pp. 317–332 ^ David Ryan, "Re-enacting Independence through Nostalgia – The 1976 US Bicentennial after the Vietnam War", Forum for Inter-American Research (2012) 5#3 pp. 26–48.

^ National Park Service Revolutionary War Sites.

Accessed January 4, 2018.

^ [1] American Battlefield Trust "Saved Land" webpage. Accessed May 30, 2018.

Sources Bailyn, Bernard (1992).

The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution . Cambridge, Massachusetts: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0674443013 .

Barnes, Viola Florence (1960) [1923].

The Dominion of New England: A Study in British Colonial Policy . New York: Frederick Ungar.

ISBN 978-0804410656 .

OCLC 395292 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) Calloway, Colin G. (1995).

The American Revolution in Indian country : pcrisis and diversity in Native American communities . Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0-521-47149-7 . Retrieved October 20, 2023 .

Commager, Henry Steele ; Richard B. Morris (1967) [1958].

The Spirit of Seventy-Six. The story of the American Revolution as told by its participants . Castle Books; HarperCollins Publishers.

ISBN 0785814639 .

LCCN 67011325 .

Evans, James Truslow (1922).

The Founding of New England . Boston: The Atlantic Monthly Press.

OCLC 1068441 .

Ferguson, Robert A. (2000). "The Commonalities of Common Sense ".

The William and Mary Quarterly .

57 (3): 465– 504.

doi : 10.2307/2674263 .

ISSN 0043-5597 .

JSTOR 2674263 .

Greene, Jack P.; Pole, J.R., eds. (1991).

The Blackwell Encyclopedia of the American Revolution . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, Limited.

ISBN 978-1557862440 .

Greene, Jack P.; Pole, J.R., eds. (2003).

A Companion to the American Revolution . Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley and Sons, Limited.

ISBN 978-1405116749 . Retrieved October 2, 2010 .

Greene, Jack P. (2000).

"The American Revolution" .

The American Historical Review .

105 (1): 93– 102.

doi : 10.2307/2652437 .

ISSN 1937-5239 .

JSTOR 2652437 . Archived from the original on May 25, 2012 . Retrieved October 2, 2010 .

Kukla, Jon (2017).

Patrick Henry: Champion of Liberty . New York: Simon & Schuster.

ISBN 978-1439190814 .

Lepore, Jill (1999).

The Name of War: King Philip's War and the Origins of American Identity . Vintage Books.

ISBN 9780375702624 .

Lovejoy, David (1987).

The Glorious Revolution in America . Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press.

ISBN 978-0819561770 .

OCLC 14212813 .

Lowell, Edward J (1884).

The Hessians and the other German Auxiliaries of Great Britain in the Revolutionary War . Harper & Brothers, Franklin Square, New York.

LCCN 02004604 .

Lustig, Mary Lou (2002).

The Imperial Executive in America: Sir Edmund Andros, 1637–1714 . Madison, WI: Fairleigh Dickinson University Press.

ISBN 978-0838639368 .

OCLC 470360764 .

Maier, Pauline (1997).

American Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence . New York: Alfred A. Knopf.

ISBN 978-0679454922 . Retrieved October 2, 2010 .

Maier, Pauline (1991).

From Resistance to Revolution: Colonial Radicals and the Development of American Opposition to Britain, 1765–1776 . New York: W.W. Norton and Company, Inc.

ISBN 978-0393308259 . Retrieved October 2, 2010 .

Middlekauff, Robert (2005).

The Glorious Cause: The American Revolution, 1763–1789 .

Oxford History of the United States . Vol. 3 (revised and expanded ed.). Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978 0-19-516247-9 .

Miller, John C. (1943).

Origins of the American Revolution . Boston: Little, Brown and company.

OL 6453380M .

Nettels, Curtis P. (1938).

The Roots of American Civilization: A History of American Colonial Life .

Palfrey, John (1864).

History of New England During the Stuart Dynasty . Boston: Little, Brown.

OCLC 1658888 .

Pestana, Carla Gardina (2004).

The English Atlantic in an Age of Revolution: 1640–1661 . Harvard University Press.

Rosengarten, Joseph George (2006) [1886].

The German Soldier in the Wars of the United States . J.B. Lippencott Company, Philadelphia.

ISBN 1428654321 .

Rosengarten, Joseph George (1906).

Frederick the Great and the United States . Harvard University.

Taylor, Alan (2016).

American Revolutions: A Continental History, 1750–1804 . W. W. Norton & Company.

ISBN 978-0-393-25387-0 .

Thomas, Robert P. (1964). "A Quantitative Approach to the Study of the Effects of British Imperial Policy of Colonial Welfare: Some Preliminary Findings".

Journal of Economic History .

25 (4): 615– 638.

doi : 10.1017/S0022050700058460 .

JSTOR 2116133 .

S2CID 153513278 .

Trevelyan, George (1912).

George the Third and Charles Fox: The Concluding Part of the American Revolution . New York: Longmans, Green.

Walton, Gary M. (1971). "The New Economic History and the Burdens of the Navigation Acts".

Economic History Review .

24 (4): 533– 542.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0289.1971.tb00192.x .

Webb, Stephen Saunders (1998).

Lord Churchill's Coup: The Anglo-American Empire and the Glorious Revolution Reconsidered . Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press.

ISBN 978-0815605584 .

OCLC 39756272 .

Weimer, Adrian Chastain (2023).

A Constitutional Culture: New England and the Struggle Against Arbitrary Rule in the Restoration Empire . Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.

ISBN 9781512823974 .

Whaples, Robert (March 1995). "Where Is There Consensus Among American Economic Historians? The Results of a Survey on Forty Propositions".

The Journal of Economic History .

55 (1): 139– 154.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.482.4975 .

doi : 10.1017/S0022050700040602 .

ISSN 0022-0507 .

JSTOR 2123771 .

S2CID 145691938 .

Wood, Gordon S.

(1966). "Rhetoric and Reality in the American Revolution".

The William and Mary Quarterly .

23 (1): 3– 32.

doi : 10.2307/2936154 .

ISSN 0043-5597 .

JSTOR 2936154 .

Wood, Gordon S. (1993).

The Radicalism of the American Revolution . New York: Vintage Books.

ISBN 978-0679736882 .

Wood, Gordon S. (2003).

The American Revolution: A History . New York: Modern Library.

ISBN 978-0812970418 . Retrieved October 2, 2010 .

Further reading Further information: Bibliography of the American Revolutionary War Reference works Barnes, Ian, and Charles Royster .

The Historical Atlas of the American Revolution (2000), maps and commentary excerpt and text search Blanco, Richard L.; Sanborn, Paul J. (1993).

The American Revolution, 1775–1783: An Encyclopedia . New York: Garland Publishing Inc.

ISBN 978-0824056230 .

Boatner, Mark Mayo III (1974).

Encyclopedia of the American Revolution (2nd ed.). New York: Charles Scribner's Sons .

ISBN 978-0684315133 .

Canny, Nicholas (1998).

The Origins of Empire, The Oxford History of the British Empire Volume I . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0199246769 . Retrieved July 22, 2009 .

Cappon, Lester (1976).

Atlas of Early American History . Princeton University Press.

ISBN 0-911028-00-5 .

Fremont-Barnes, Gregory; Ryerson, Richard Alan; Arnold, James R.; Wiener, Roberta (2006).

The Encyclopedia of the American Revolutionary War . Abc-clio.

ISBN 978-1851094080 .

Gray, Edward G.; Kamensky, Jane (2013).

The Oxford Handbook of the American Revolution . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 978-0199746705 .

Greene, Jack P.; Pole, J. R. (2003).

A Companion to the American Revolution . Wiley-Blackwell.

ISBN 978-1405116749 .

Herrera, Ricardo A. "American War of Independence" Oxford Bibliographies (2017) annotated guide to major scholarly books and articles online Kennedy, Frances H.

The American Revolution: A Historical Guidebook (2014) A guide to 150 famous historical sites.

Purcell, L. Edward.

Who Was Who in the American Revolution (1993); 1500 short biographies Resch, John Phillips (2005).

Americans at War . MacMillan Reference Library.

ISBN 978-0028658063 .

Selesky, Harold E.; III, Mark M. Boatner; Schecter, Barnet (2006).

Encyclopedia of the American Revolution . Charles Scribner's Sons.

ISBN 0684314703 .

Symonds, Craig L. (1986).

A Battlefield Atlas of the American Revolution . Nautical & Aviation Publishing Company of America.

ISBN 0933852533 .

Surveys of the era Alden, John R.

A history of the American Revolution (1966) 644 pp online , A scholarly general survey Allison, Robert.

The American Revolution: A Concise History (2011) 128 pp excerpt and text search Atkinson, Rick.

The British Are Coming: The War for America, Lexington to Princeton, 1775–1777 (2019) (vol 1 of his 'The Revolution Trilogy'); called, "one of the best books written on the American War for Independence," [ Journal of Military History Jan 2020 p. 268]; the maps are online here Black, Jeremy (2001).

War for America . Sutton Publishing.

ISBN 0750928085 .

, British perspective Brown, Richard D., and Thomas Paterson, eds.

Major Problems in the Era of the American Revolution, 1760–1791: Documents and Essays (2nd ed. 1999) Bunker, Nick.

An Empire on the Edge: How Britain Came to Fight America .  New York 2014.

Christie, Ian Ralph (1976).

Empire Or Independence . Phaidon Press.

ISBN 0714816140 .

, British perspective' Cogliano, Francis D.

Revolutionary America, 1763–1815; A Political History (2nd ed. 2008), British textbook Ellis, Joseph J.

American Creation: Triumphs and Tragedies in the Founding of the Republic (2008) excerpt and text search Higginbotham, Don .

The War of American Independence: Military Attitudes, Policies, and Practice, 1763–1789 (1983) Online in ACLS Humanities E-book Project ; comprehensive coverage of military and domestic aspects of the war.

Jensen, Merrill (2004).

The Founding of a Nation . Hackett Publishing.

ISBN 0872207056 .

Knollenberg, Bernhard (2003).

Growth of the American Revolution, 1766–1775 . Liberty Fund.

ISBN 0865974152 .

Mackesy, Piers.

The War for America: 1775–1783 (1992), British military study Rakove, Jack N.

Revolutionaries: A New History of the Invention of America (2010) interpretation by leading scholar excerpt and text search Taylor, Alan.

American Revolutions: A Continental History, 1750–1804 (2016) 704 pp; recent survey by leading scholar Weintraub, Stanley .

Iron Tears: Rebellion in America 1775–83 (2005) excerpt and text search , popular Wood, Gordon S. (2007).

Revolutionary Characters . Penguin Books.

ISBN 978-0-14-311208-2 .

Specialized studies Baer, Friederike.

Hessians: German Soldiers in the American Revolutionary War (Oxford University Press, 2022).

Publisher's website .

Bailyn, Bernard.

The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution . (Harvard University Press, 1967).

ISBN 0674443012 Becker, C.L. (1922).

The Declaration of Independence: A Study in the History of Political Ideas . Harcourt, Brace . Retrieved May 29, 2023 .

Becker, Frank: The American Revolution as a European Media Event , European History Online , Mainz: Institute of European History , 2011, retrieved: October 25, 2011.

Berkin, Carol (2006).

Revolutionary Mothers: Women in the Struggle for America's Independence . New York: Vintage Books.

ISBN 978-1400075324 .

Breen, T. H. (2005).

The Marketplace of Revolution . Oxford University Press.

ISBN 019518131X .

Breen, T. H. (2010).

American Insurgents, American Patriots . Hill and Wang.

ISBN 978-1429932608 .

Brunsman, Denver Alexander; Silverman, David J. (2014).

The American Revolution Reader . Routledge.

ISBN 978-0-415-53757-5 .

Carté, Katerine.

Religion and the American Revolution: An Imperial History . Chapel Hill: Omohondro Institute of Early American History and Culture and the University of North Carolina Press 2021.

ISBN 9781469662640 Chernow, Ron (2010).

Washington . Penguin.

ISBN 978-1101444184 .

Crow, Jeffrey J.; Tise, Larry E. (1978).

The Southern Experience in the American Revolution . University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 0-8078-1313-3 .

Fischer, David Hackett (1995).

Paul Revere's Ride . Oxford University Press, US.

ISBN 0195098315 .

Fischer, David Hackett.

Washington's Crossing (2004). 1776 campaigns; Pulitzer prize.

ISBN 0195170342 "Washington : Freeman, Douglas Southall, 1886–1953 : Free Download, Borrow, and Streaming : Internet Archive" . New York, Scribner. March 25, 2023 . Retrieved May 29, 2023 – via Internet Archive.

Gilbert, Alan.

Black Patriots and Loyalists: Fighting for Emancipstuob in the War for Independence .  Chicago: University of Chicago Press 2012.

ISBN 978-0-226-29307-3 Horne, Gerald .

The Counter-Revolution of 1776: Slave Resistance and the Origins of the United States of America . ( New York University Press , 2014).

ISBN 1479893404 Hull, N.E.H.; Hoffer, Peter C.; Allen, Steven L. (1978). "Choosing Sides: A Quantitative Study of the Personality Determinants of Loyalist and Revolutionary Political Affiliation in New York".

Journal of American History .

65 (2): 344– 366.

doi : 10.2307/1894084 .

ISSN 0021-8723 .

JSTOR 1894084 .

Kerber, Linda K.

(1997).

Women of the Republic: Intellect and Ideology in Revolutionary America . Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina Press.

ISBN 978-0807846322 .

Kidd, Thomas S.; Kidd, S (2010).

God of Liberty . Basic Books.

ISBN 978-0465022779 .

Langley, Lester D.

The Long American Revolution and Its Legacy (U of Georgia Press, 2019) online review emphasis on long-term global impact.

Lockwood, Matthew (2019).

To Begin the World Over Again . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0300232257 .

McCullough, David .

1776 (2005).

ISBN 0743226712 ; popular narrative of the year 1776 Maier, Pauline .

American Scripture: Making the Declaration of Independence (1998) excerpt and text search Nash, Gary B.

The Unknown American Revolution: The Unruly Birth of Democracy and the Struggle to Create America . (2005).

ISBN 0670034207 Nevins, Allan ; The American States during and after the Revolution, 1775–1789 1927.

online edition Norton, Mary Beth (1980).

Liberty's Daughters . Scott Foresman & Company.

ISBN 0673393488 .

Norton, Mary Beth.

1774: The Long Year of Revolution (2020) online review by Gordon S. Wood O'Shaughnessy, Andrew Jackson (2013).

The Men Who Lost America . Yale University Press.

ISBN 978-0300195248 .

Palmer, Robert R.

The Age of the Democratic Revolution: A Political History of Europe and America, 1760–1800 . vol 1 (1959) Resch, John Phillips; Sargent, Walter L. (2006).

War & Society in the American Revolution . Northern Illinois University Press.

ISBN 0875803660 .

Rothbard, Murray , Conceived in Liberty (2011), Volume III: Advance to Revolution, 1760–1775 and Volume IV: The Revolutionary War, 1775–1784 .

ISBN 978-1933550985 , OCLC 810280385 libertarian perspective Shy, John (2008).

Toward Lexington: The Role of the British Army in the Coming of the American Revolution . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.

ISBN 978-1597404143 . Retrieved October 2, 2010 .

Van Tyne, Claude Halstead.

American Loyalists: The Loyalists in the American Revolution (1902) online edition Volo, James M. and Dorothy Denneen Volo.

Daily Life during the American Revolution (2003) Wahlke, John C. ed.

The Causes of the American Revolution (1967) primary and secondary readings online Warren, Charles (1945). "Fourth of July Myths".

The William and Mary Quarterly .

2 (3): 237– 272.

doi : 10.2307/1921451 .

ISSN 0043-5597 .

JSTOR 1921451 .

Wood, Gordon S.

American Revolution (2005) [excerpt and text search] 208 pp excerpt and text search Wood, Gordon S. (1992).

The Radicalism of the American Revolution . Knopf.

ISBN 0679404937 .

Historiography Allison, David, and Larrie D. Ferreiro, eds.

The American Revolution: A World War (Smithsonian, 2018) excerpt ASIN B07FLJX556 Breen, Timothy H. "Ideology and nationalism on the eve of the American Revolution: Revisions once more in need of revising." Journal of American History (1997): 13–39.

in JSTOR Burnard, Trevor.

Writing Early America: From Empire to Revolution . Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press 2023.

ISBN 978-0-8139-4920-8 Analysis of 400 scholarly journal articles.

Countrymen, Edward. "Historiography" in Harold E. Selesky, ed., Encyclopedia of the American Revolution (Gale, 2006) pp. 501–508.

ISBN 978-0684314983 Gibson, Alan.

Interpreting the Founding: Guide to the Enduring Debates over the Origins and Foundations of the American Republic (2006).

ISBN 978-0700614547 Hattem, Michael D. "The Historiography of the American Revolution" Journal of the American Revolution (2013) online outlines ten different scholarly approaches Morgan, Gwenda.

The Debate on the American Revolution (2007). Manchester University Press.

ISBN 978-0719052415 Schocket, Andrew M.

Fighting over the Founders: How We Remember the American Revolution (2014).

ISBN 9780814708163 , 9781479884100 , 9780814771174 . How politicians, screenwriters, activists, biographers, museum professionals, and re-enactors portray the American Revolution.

excerpt Shalhope, Robert E. "Toward a republican synthesis: the emergence of an understanding of republicanism in American historiography." William and Mary Quarterly (1972): 49–80.

in JSTOR Waldstreicher, David. "The Revolutions of Revolution Historiography: Cold War Contradance, Neo-Imperial Waltz, or Jazz Standard?" Reviews in American History 42.1 (2014): 23–35.

online Wood, Gordon S. "Rhetoric and Reality in the American Revolution." William and Mary Quarterly (1966): 4–32.

in JSTOR Young, Alfred F. and Gregory H. Nobles.

Whose American Revolution Was It? Historians Interpret the Founding (2011). NYU Press.

ISBN 978-0814797105 Primary sources The American Revolution: Writings from the War of Independence (2001), Library of America ASIN B009OEAT8Q Dann, John C., ed.

The Revolution Remembered: Eyewitness Accounts of the War for Independence (1999).

ISBN 978-0226136240 .

excerpt and text search , recollections by ordinary soldiers Humphrey, Carol Sue, ed.

The Revolutionary Era: Primary Documents on Events from 1776 to 1800 (2003), Greenwood Press.

ISBN 9780313320835 , Newspaper accounts excerpt and text search Jensen, Merill, ed.

Tracts of the American Revolution, 1763–1776 (1967). American pamphlets ISBN 978-0872206939 Jensen, Merill, ed.

English Historical Documents: American Colonial Documents to 1776: Volume 9 (1955), 890 pp; major collection of important documents ISBN 978-0195195064 Morison, Samuel E.

ed.

Sources and Documents Illustrating the American Revolution, 1764–1788, and the Formation of the Federal Constitution (1923).

ISBN 978-0195002621 .

Murdoch, David H. ed.

Rebellion in America: A Contemporary British Viewpoint, 1769–1783 (1979), 900+ pp of annotated excerpts from Annual Register online Martin Kallich and Andrew MacLeish, eds.

The American Revolution through British eyes (1962) primary documents Fifth Virginia Convention (1776).

"Preamble and Resolution of the Virginia Convention, May 15, 1776" . New Haven, CT: Lillian Goldman Law Library.

Archived from the original on September 6, 2010 . Retrieved October 2, 2010 .

External links American Revolution , US National Park Service website portal American Independence Teaching with Historic Places uses historic places in National Parks and the National Park Service's National Register of Historic Places to enliven history, social studies, geography, civics, and other subjects Ben Franklin's World , podcast on early America, sponsored by the Colonial Williamsburg Foundation. <www.benfranklinsworld.com> Library of Congress Guide to the American Revolution Worlds Turned Upside Down podcast "Hessians:" German Soldiers in the American Revolutionary War . Academic blog with original German sources, English translations, and commentary.

Museum of the American Revolution Revolution! The Atlantic World Reborn , explores the transformations in the world's politics from 1763 to 1815, with particular attention to three revolutions in America, France, and Haiti. Linking the attack on monarchism and aristocracy to the struggle against slavery, it at how freedom, equality, and sovereignty of the people became universal goals.

New-York Historical Society 132 historic photographs dealing with the personalities, monuments, weapons and locations of the American Revolution; these are pre-1923 and out of copyright.

Pictures of the Revolutionary War: Select Audiovisual Records , National Archives and Records Administration images, including non-military events and portraits The Democratic Revolution of the Enlightenment . Legacy of the struggle for independence and democracy.

PBS Television Series Liberty Archived May 11, 2021, at the Wayback Machine Chickasaws Conflicted by the American Revolution – Chickasaw.TV Smithsonian study unit on Revolutionary Money Black Loyalist Heritage Society Spanish and Latin American contribution to the American Revolution American Archives: Documents of the American Revolution at Northern Illinois University Libraries "Counter-Revolution of 1776": Was U.S. Independence War a Conservative Revolt in Favor of Slavery?

Democracy Now!

June 27, 2014.

Wikiversity:The Great American Paradox v t e Origins of the American Revolution : writings American resolves, declarations, petitions, essays and pamphlets prior to the Declaration of Independence (July 1776) Following the Stamp Act (1765) Virginia Resolves (May 1765) Braintree Instructions (September 1765) Declaration of Rights and Grievances (October 1765) Leedstown Resolutions (February 1766) An Inquiry into the Rights of the British Colonies (1766) Following the Townshend Acts (1767) Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania (1767, 1768) Massachusetts Circular Letter (February 1768) Journal of Occurrences (1768, 1769) Virginia Association (May 1769) Boston Pamphlet (1772) Sheffield Declaration (January 1773) Following the Coercive Acts (1774) Maryland Chestertown Resolves (May 1774) Talbot Resolves (May 1774) Bush River Resolution (March 1775) Massachusetts Suffolk Resolves (September 1774) New York Orangetown Resolutions (July 1774) A Full Vindication of the Measures of Congress (December 1774) The Farmer Refuted (February 1775) North Carolina Rowan Resolves (August 1774) Edenton Tea Party (October 1774) Mecklenburg Resolves or Declaration (May 1775) Liberty Point Resolves (June 1775) Tryon Resolves (August 1775) Halifax Resolves (April 1776) Virginia Loudoun Resolves (June 1774) Fairfax Resolves (July 1774) Fincastle Resolutions (January 1775) Augusta Resolves (February 1775) Augusta Declaration (May 1776) Virginia Declaration of Rights (June 1776) First Continental Congress Declaration and Resolves (October 1774) Continental Association (October 1774) Petition to the King (October 1774) Second Continental Congress Olive Branch Petition (July 1775) Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms (July 1775) May 15 preamble (May 1776) Lee Resolution (July 1776) Essays and pamphlets The Rights of Colonies Examined (1764) " Letters to the Inhabitants of Canada " (1774, 1775, 1776) A Summary View of the Rights of British America (1774) Novanglus (1775) Common Sense (January 1776) Thoughts on Government (Spring, 1776) Related Journals of the Continental Congress Category v t e American Revolutionary War Origins of the American Revolution Philosophy American Enlightenment John Locke Colonial history Liberalism Republicanism Freedom of religion Rights of Englishmen No taxation without representation Common Sense Spirit of '76 " All men are created equal " " Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness " " Consent of the governed " Expansionism Settler colonialism Royalists Pitt–Newcastle ministry Bute ministry Grenville ministry First Rockingham ministry Chatham ministry Grafton ministry North ministry Second Rockingham ministry Shelburne ministry Fox–North coalition Loyalists Black Loyalist Related British acts of Parliament Navigation Iron Molasses Royal Proclamation of 1763 Sugar Currency Quartering Stamp up i.p.o Declaratory Townshend Tea Quebec Intolerable Conciliatory Resolution Restraining Proclamation of Rebellion Prohibitory Colonials Loyal Nine Stamp Act Congress Declaration of Rights and Grievances Virginia Association Daughters of Liberty Sons of Liberty Patriots Black Patriots Committees of correspondence Committees of safety Letters from a Farmer in Pennsylvania Massachusetts Circular Letter Suffolk Resolves Continental Congress First Continental Congress Continental Association Minutemen Provincial Congress Second Continental Congress United Colonies Olive Branch Petition Declaration of the Causes and Necessity of Taking Up Arms Committee of Secret Correspondence Halifax Resolves Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence Model Treaty Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union Confederation Congress Events French and Indian War Treaty of Paris (1763) Boston Massacre British credit crisis of 1772–1773 Gaspee affair Hutchinson letters affair Boston Tea Party Philadelphia Tea Party Powder Alarm Combatants Campaigns Theaters Battles Events Colonies Combatants United Colonies / Thirteen Colonies Continental Congress Board of War Army Navy Marines Kingdom of Great Britain Parliament British Army Royal Navy European allies of King George III Colonial allies France Franco-American Treaty Army Navy Hortalez et Cie German supporters of Congress Campaigns and theaters Boston Quebec Nova Scotia New York and New Jersey Saratoga Philadelphia Northern Northern after Saratoga Southern Western Yorktown Naval battles Major battles Lexington and Concord Boston Capture of Fort Ticonderoga Bunker Hill Quebec Valcour Island Long Island Harlem Heights Fort Washington Trenton Assunpink Creek Princeton Siege of Fort Ticonderoga Bennington Saratoga Oriskany Brandywine Germantown Monmouth St. Lucia Grenada Stony Point Sullivan Expedition Savannah Gibraltar Cape St. Vincent Charleston Connecticut Farms Springfield Camden Kings Mountain Cowpens Pensacola Guilford Court House Lochry's Defeat Chesapeake Yorktown The Saintes Other events Staten Island Peace Conference "First Salute" Washington's crossing of the Delaware River Conway Cabal Valley Forge Entry of France into war Carlisle Peace Commission Gordon Riots Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1781 Sint Eustatius Newburgh Conspiracy Pennsylvania Mutiny of 1783 Related conflicts Cherokee–American wars Fourth Anglo-Dutch War Second Anglo-Mysore War Involvement (by colony or location) Rebel colonies Connecticut Delaware Georgia Maryland Massachusetts New Hampshire New Jersey New York North Carolina Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina Virginia Loyal colonies East Florida Nova Scotia Quebec West Florida Leaders British Military Arbuthnot Brant Burgoyne Campbell Carleton Clinton Cornwallis Fraser Gage Graves Richard Howe William Howe Knyphausen Rodney Civilian King George III Amherst Barrington Germain North Rockingham Sandwich Shelburne Colonial Military Washington Alexander Allen Arnold Barry Claghorn Clark Duportail Gates Greene Hamilton Hopkins Jones de Kalb Knox Lafayette Charles Lee Lincoln Mercer Montgomery Nicholson Putnam Rodney St. Clair Schuyler von Steuben Sullivan Ward Wayne Civilian John Adams Samuel Adams Carroll Dickinson Franklin Hancock Hanson Henry Huntington Jay Jefferson Laurens Richard Henry Lee McKean Morris Revere Rush Witherspoon Colonial allies French Louis XVI Beaumarchais d'Estaing de Grasse de Guichen Luzerne de Rochambeau Suffren Vergennes Aftermath Society of the Cincinnati Treaty of Paris (1783) Evacuation Day (1783) Ratification Day (1784) Constitutional Convention The Federalist Papers Constitution Bill of Rights Shays's Rebellion Jay Treaty Related topics Military Prisoners The Turtle Tomb of the Unknown Revolutionary War Soldier Political Founding Fathers Diplomacy Liberty Tree Yankee Doodle Other topics Timeline of the American Revolution African Americans in the Revolutionary War Dogs in the American Revolutionary War Intelligence in the American Revolutionary War Women in the American Revolution Financial costs of the war Continental currency banknotes Continental Currency dollar coin Libertas Americana Commemoration films television theater Independence Day Patriots' Day Pulaski Memorial Day Washington's Birthday Jefferson's Birthday Von Steuben Day Minor holidays Centennial Sesquicentennial Bicentennial Semiquincentennial Children of the American Revolution Daughters of the American Revolution Sons of the American Revolution Sons of the Revolution Washington D.C. statuary Charters of Freedom Rotunda Museum of the American Revolution v t e British laws relating to the American Revolution Royal Proclamations , Acts of Parliament , and other legal issues relating to the American Revolution Before 1763 Navigation Acts Wool Act (1699) Hat Act (1732) Molasses Act (1733) Iron Act (1750) Grenville ministry (1763–1765) Royal Proclamation of 1763 Sugar Act (1764) Currency Act (1764) Quartering Act (1765) Stamp Act (1765) Rockingham ministry (1765–1766) Repeal Act (March 1766) Declaratory Act (March 1766) Revenue Act (June 1766) Chatham and Grafton ministries (1766–1770) Townshend Acts (1767) North ministry (1770–1782) Repeal Act (1770) Tea Act (1773) Coercive Acts (1774: Boston Port Act Massachusetts Government Act Administration of Justice Act Quartering Act Quebec Act Conciliatory Resolution (February 1775) Restraining Acts (March and April 1775) Proclamation of Rebellion (August 1775) Prohibitory Act (December 1775) Taxation of Colonies Act (1778) Other legal issues Rights of Englishmen Writ of assistance Admiralty courts Parson's Cause (1763) Taxation without representation Category v t e United States Declaration of Independence Physical history of the Declaration of Independence Memorial to the 56 Signers Founding Fathers Syng inkstand Primary author Thomas Jefferson Signatories President of Congress John Hancock (Massachusetts) New Hampshire Josiah Bartlett William Whipple Matthew Thornton Massachusetts Samuel Adams John Adams Robert Treat Paine Elbridge Gerry Rhode Island Stephen Hopkins William Ellery Connecticut Roger Sherman Samuel Huntington William Williams Oliver Wolcott New York William Floyd Philip Livingston Francis Lewis Lewis Morris New Jersey Richard Stockton John Witherspoon Francis Hopkinson John Hart Abraham Clark Pennsylvania Robert Morris Benjamin Rush Benjamin Franklin John Morton George Clymer James Smith George Taylor James Wilson George Ross Delaware George Read Caesar Rodney Thomas McKean Maryland Samuel Chase William Paca Thomas Stone Charles Carroll of Carrollton Virginia George Wythe Richard Henry Lee Thomas Jefferson Benjamin Harrison Thomas Nelson Jr.

Francis Lightfoot Lee Carter Braxton North Carolina William Hooper Joseph Hewes John Penn South Carolina Edward Rutledge Thomas Heyward Jr.

Thomas Lynch Jr.

Arthur Middleton Georgia Button Gwinett Lyman Hall George Walton Delegates voting for Independence (did not sign) New York : Robert R. Livingston , Henry Wisner Maryland : John Rogers , Matthew Tilghman Related Halifax Resolves Virginia Declaration of Rights Second Continental Congress Lee Resolution Committee of Five " All men are created equal " " Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness " " Consent of the governed " 27 grievances Document's history signing Charles Thomson Timothy Matlack Journals of the Continental Congress United Colonies Independence Hall Syng inkstand American Revolution Display and legacy National Archives Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom Independence Day Anniversaries Centennial Sesquicentennial Bicentennial Semiquincentennial Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence (Washington, D.C.) Signers Monument (Georgia) Pine portrait Trumbull portrait Statue of Liberty v t e Constitution of the United States Articles Preamble I II III IV V VI VII Amendments Bill of Rights 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1795–1804 11 12 Reconstruction 13 14 15 20th century 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 Unratified Congressional Apportionment Titles of Nobility Corwin Amendment Child Labor Equal Rights District of Columbia Voting Rights Proposed Balanced budget Blaine amendment Bricker amendment Campaign finance reform Christian amendment Crittenden Compromise Electoral College abolition Equal Opportunity to Govern Federal Marriage Flag Desecration Human Life "Liberty" amendment Ludlow amendment Parental Rights amendment School Prayer Single subject Victims' Rights Convention to propose amendments State ratifying conventions Formation History Articles of Confederation Mount Vernon Conference Annapolis Convention Philadelphia Convention Virginia Plan New Jersey Plan Connecticut Compromise Three-fifths Compromise Committee of Detail List of Framers Signing Printing Independence Hall Syng inkstand The Federalist Papers Anti-Federalist Papers Massachusetts Compromise Virginia Ratifying Convention New York Circular Letter Hillsborough Convention Fayetteville Convention Rhode Island ratification Drafting and ratification timeline Clauses Admission to the Union Appointments Appropriations Assemble and Petition Clause Assistance of Counsel Case or Controversy Citizenship Commerce Compact Compulsory Process Confrontation Congressional enforcement Contingent Elections Contract Copyright and Patent Double Jeopardy Due Process Elections Engagements Equal Protection Establishment Exceptions Excessive Bail Ex Post Facto Extradition Free Exercise Freedom of the Press Freedom of Speech Fugitive Slave Full Faith and Credit General Welfare Guarantee House Apportionment Impeachment Import-Export Ineligibility Militia Natural-born citizen Necessary and Proper No Religious Test Oath or Affirmation Original Jurisdiction Origination Pardon Postal Presentment Presidential Electors Presidential succession Privileges and Immunities Privileges or Immunities Recess appointment Recommendation Self-Incrimination Speech or Debate Speedy Trial State of the Union Supremacy Suspension Take Care Takings Taxing and Spending Territorial Title of Nobility ( Foreign Emoluments ) Treaty Trial by Jury Vesting ( Legislative / Executive / Judicial ) Vicinage War Powers Interpretation Balance of powers Concurrent powers Constitutional law Criminal procedure Criminal sentencing Dormant Commerce Clause Enumerated powers Equal footing Executive privilege Implied powers Incorporation of the Bill of Rights Judicial review Nondelegation doctrine Plenary power Preemption Reserved powers Saxbe fix Separation of church and state Separation of powers Symmetric federalism Taxation power Unitary executive theory Signatories Convention President George Washington New Hampshire John Langdon Nicholas Gilman Massachusetts Nathaniel Gorham Rufus King Connecticut William Samuel Johnson Roger Sherman New York Alexander Hamilton New Jersey William Livingston David Brearley William Paterson Jonathan Dayton Pennsylvania Benjamin Franklin Thomas Mifflin Robert Morris George Clymer Thomas Fitzsimons Jared Ingersoll James Wilson Gouverneur Morris Delaware George Read Gunning Bedford Jr.

John Dickinson Richard Bassett Jacob Broom Maryland James McHenry Daniel of St. Thomas Jenifer Daniel Carroll Virginia John Blair James Madison North Carolina William Blount Richard Dobbs Spaight Hugh Williamson South Carolina John Rutledge Charles Cotesworth Pinckney Charles Pinckney Pierce Butler Georgia William Few Abraham Baldwin Convention Secretary William Jackson Related Notes of Debates in the Federal Convention of 1787 Jacob Shallus William Lambert Bibliography of the United States Constitution Founding Fathers of the United States Display and legacy National Archives Rotunda for the Charters of Freedom Independence Mall Constitution Day and Citizenship Day Constitution Gardens Constitution Week National Constitution Center Scene at the Signing of the Constitution (painting) A More Perfect Union (film) Worldwide influence v t e History of the United States Timeline Outline Events Pre-Colonial Geological Pre-Columbian era Colonial Exploration of North America European colonization Native American epidemics Settlement of Jamestown Thirteen Colonies Atlantic slave trade King William's War Queen Anne's War Dummer's War First Great Awakening War of Jenkins' Ear King George's War Prelude to Revolution American Enlightenment French and Indian War Proclamation of 1763 Sugar Act Stamp Act Congress Sons of Liberty Boston Massacre Boston Tea Party Intolerable Acts First Continental Congress Continental Association 1776–1789 American Revolution War Second Continental Congress Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence Treaty of Paris Confederation period Articles of Confederation and Perpetual Union Pennsylvania Mutiny Shays' Rebellion Northwest Ordinance Drafting and ratification of the Constitution 1789–1815 Bill of Rights Federalist Era Whiskey Rebellion Quasi-War Jeffersonian era Louisiana Purchase War of 1812 1815–1849 Era of Good Feelings Missouri Compromise Monroe Doctrine Jacksonian era Trail of Tears Nat Turner's slave rebellion Nullification crisis Westward expansion Mexican–American War Seneca Falls Convention First Industrial Revolution Second Great Awakening 1849–1865 Antebellum Era California Gold Rush Greater Reconstruction Prelude to War Compromise of 1850 Fugitive Slave Act Kansas–Nebraska Act Bleeding Kansas Dred Scott decision Election of Lincoln Secession Civil War Emancipation Proclamation Assassination of Abraham Lincoln 1865–1917 Reconstruction era Amendments First transcontinental railroad Ku Klux Klan Enforcement Acts Compromise of 1877 Second Industrial Revolution Gilded Age The Gospel of Wealth Assassination of James A. Garfield Chinese Exclusion Act Pendleton Civil Service Reform Act Haymarket affair Sherman Antitrust Act Progressive Era Spanish–American War Imperialism Assassination of William McKinley Square Deal Nadir of American race relations 1917–1945 World War I Paris Peace Conference First Red Scare Roaring Twenties Prohibition Women's suffrage Tulsa race massacre Second Klan Bath School disaster Harlem Renaissance Great Depression Wall Street crash of 1929 Dust Bowl New Deal World War II Pearl Harbor home front Manhattan Project Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki 1945–1964 Strike wave of 1945–1946 Start of Cold War Truman Doctrine Early Cold War North Atlantic Treaty Korean War Ivy Mike McCarthyism Post-war boom Project Mercury Civil Rights Movement Early–mid Cold War Cuban Missile Crisis Assassination of John F. Kennedy 1964–1980 Great Society Space Race Project Gemini Apollo program Mid Cold War Détente Vietnam War Fall of Saigon Assassination of Martin Luther King Jr.

Counterculture Second-wave feminism Gay liberation Stonewall riots Watergate scandal Pardon of Richard Nixon Iran hostage crisis Moral Majority 1980–1991 Reagan era Reaganomics Iran–Contra affair Crack epidemic Late Cold War Invasion of Grenada Reagan Doctrine End of the Cold War Space Shuttle program War on drugs Invasion of Panama 1991–2016 Gulf War NAFTA Los Angeles riots WTC bombing Waco siege Republican Revolution Oklahoma City bombing Columbine Bush v. Gore September 11 attacks War on terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Hurricane Katrina Virginia Tech shooting Great Recession Killing of Osama bin Laden Rise in mass shootings Tucson Aurora Sandy Hook Orlando Black Lives Matter Obergefell v. Hodges 2016–present Unite the Right rally Continued rise in mass shootings Las Vegas Parkland El Paso Uvalde COVID-19 pandemic recession George Floyd protests January 6 insurrection Afghanistan withdrawal Dobbs v. Jackson Women's Health Organization Support of Ukraine Indictments of Donald Trump Topics American Century Antisemitism Cultural Cinema Music Newspapers Sports Demography Immigration Economy Banking Education Higher education Flag Government Abortion Capital punishment Civil Rights Corruption The Constitution Debt ceiling Direct democracy Foreign policy Law enforcement Postal service Taxation Voting rights Journalism Merchant Marine Military Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard Party Systems First Second Third Fourth Fifth Sixth Religion Genocide Slavery Sexual slavery Technology and industry Agriculture Labor Lumber Medicine Railway Groups African American Asian American Chinese American Filipino American Indian American Japanese American Korean American Thai American Vietnamese American European American Albanian American English American Estonian American Finnish American Irish American Italian American Lithuanian American Polish American Serbian American Hispanic and Latino American Mexican American Jewish American Middle Eastern American Egyptian American Iranian American Iraqi American Lebanese American Palestinian American Saudi American Native Americans Cherokee Comanche Women LGBTQ Gay men Lesbians Transgender people Places Territorial evolution Admission to the Union Historical regions American frontier Manifest destiny Indian removal Regions New England The South The West Coast States Alabama Alaska Arizona Arkansas California Colorado Connecticut Delaware Florida Georgia Hawaii Idaho Illinois Indiana Iowa Kansas Kentucky Louisiana Maine Maryland Massachusetts Michigan Minnesota Mississippi Missouri Montana Nebraska Nevada New Hampshire New Jersey New Mexico New York North Carolina North Dakota Ohio Oklahoma Oregon Pennsylvania Rhode Island South Carolina South Dakota Tennessee Texas Utah Vermont Virginia Washington West Virginia Wisconsin Wyoming Federal District Washington, D.C.

Insular areas American Samoa Guam Northern Mariana Islands Puerto Rico U.S. Virgin Islands Outlying islands Baker Island Howland Island Jarvis Island Johnston Atoll Kingman Reef Midway Atoll Navassa Island Palmyra Atoll Wake Island Cities Urban history Cities List of years Historiography Category Portal v t e George Washington 1st President of the United States (1789–1797) Senior Officer of the Army (1798–1799) Commander-in-Chief of the Continental Army (1775–1783) Delegate to the Second Continental Congress (1775) Delegate to the First Continental Congress (1774) Military career Revolutionary War Military career French and Indian War Jumonville Glen Battle of Fort Necessity Battle of the Monongahela Forbes Expedition Washington in the American Revolution Commander-in-chief, Continental Army Aides-de-camp Washington's headquarters office and sleeping tent Boston campaign Siege of Boston New York and New Jersey campaign Delaware River crossing Battle of Trenton Battle of the Assunpink Creek Battle of Princeton Philadelphia campaign Battle of Brandywine Battle of Germantown Battle of White Marsh Valley Forge Battle of Monmouth Battles of Saratoga Sullivan Expedition Yorktown campaign Siege of Yorktown Culper Spy Ring Newburgh Conspiracy Newburgh letter Asgill Affair Evacuation Day Resignation as commander-in-chief Badge of Military Merit Purple Heart Washington Before Boston Medal Horses Nelson Blueskin Other U.S.

founding events Initiated, co-wrote, 1769 Virginia Association Initiated, 1774 Fairfax Resolves Continental Association Court of Appeals in Cases of Capture 1785 Mount Vernon Conference Chairman, 1787 Constitutional Convention George Washington's political evolution Presidency ( timeline ) 1788–89 United States presidential election First inauguration inaugural bible 1792 presidential election Second inauguration Reception at Trenton Title of "Mr. President" Cabinet of the United States Secretary of State Attorney General Secretary of the Treasury Secretary of War Judiciary Act of 1789 Oath Administration Act Nonintercourse Act Park Watchmen Whiskey Rebellion Militia Acts of 1792 Coinage Act of 1792 United States Mint Presidential Succession Act of 1792 United States Capitol cornerstone laying Proclamation of Neutrality Neutrality Act of 1794 Jay Treaty Pinckney's Treaty Slave Trade Act of 1794 Residence Act Thanksgiving Proclamation Farewell Address State of the Union Address January 1790 December 1790 1791 1792 1793 1794 1795 1796 Cabinet Federal judicial appointments John Rutledge Supreme Court nominations Views and public image Presidential library The Washington Papers Religious views Town Destroyer Legacy Life and homes Early life Birthplace Ferry Farm boyhood home Mount Vernon Fishery Gristmill Whiskey distillery Woodlawn Plantation Longfellow House–Washington's Headquarters National Historic Site Ford Mansion, Washington's headquarters Hasbrouck House First Presidential Mansion Second Presidential Mansion President's House, Philadelphia Germantown White House Custis estate Washington's relations with the Iroquois Confederacy Potomac Company James River and Kanawha Canal Mountain Road Lottery Congressional Gold Medal Thanks of Congress President General of the Society of the Cincinnati Washington College Washington and Lee University Electoral history of George Washington Post-presidency of George Washington Memorials and depictions Washington, D.C.

Washington state Washington Monument Mount Rushmore Washington's Birthday Purple Heart The Apotheosis of Washington Washington Monument (Boonsboro, Maryland) Washington Monument (Baltimore) Washington Monument (Philadelphia) George Washington (Houdon) plaster copy George Washington (Ceracchi) George Washington (Canova) George Washington (Greenough) George Washington (Trumbull) George Washington and the Revolutionary War Door Revolutionary War Door Washington Crossing the Delaware The Passage of the Delaware General George Washington at Trenton Washington at Verplanck's Point General George Washington Resigning His Commission Surrender of Lord Cornwallis Unfinished portrait Lansdowne portrait The Washington Family portrait Washington at Princeton paintings George Washington Taking the Salute at Trenton Reception at Trenton painting Statues Trenton Battle Monument Princeton Battle Monument Point of View sculpture George Washington on Horseback Austin statue Baltimore statue Boston statue Mexico City statue Morristown statue Newark statue New York City statue Wall Street statue Paris statue Perth Amboy statue Philadelphia statue Portland statue Trenton statue Washington, D.C. statue West Point monument George Washington University Washington University in St. Louis Washington Masonic National Memorial George Washington Memorial Parkway George Washington Bridge Washington Tree, Mariposa Grove Washington Tree, Sequoia National Park Washington and Jefferson National Forests Washington Square Park Arch U.S. Postage stamps Washington–Franklin Issues 1932 bicentennial Currency Washington quarter 50 State Quarters D.C. and territories quarters America the Beautiful quarters American Women quarters History Instructing Youth dollar Washington dollar Lafayette dollar Silver bullion coins Washington nickel Washington half eagle 250th Anniversary half dollar Mount Rushmore Anniversary coins Mount Washington Cultural depictions George Washington (1984 miniseries 1986 sequel) A More Perfect Union (1989 film) The Crossing (2000 film) We Fight to Be Free (2006 film) Turn: Washington's Spies (2014–2017 series) The War that Made America (2006 miniseries) Washington (2020 miniseries) Hamilton ( film ) Related Bibliography List of articles Founders Online Founding Fathers of the United States Republicanism Federalist Party Federalist Era Virginia dynasty Coat of arms Cherry-tree anecdote River Farm Washington's Crossing Washington–Rochambeau Revolutionary Route 1751 Barbados trip Category Syng inkstand General of the Armies Conway Cabal American Foxhound American Philosophical Society American Revolution patriots Betsy Ross flag Mount Vernon Ladies' Association Mount Vernon replicas George Washington Memorial Building Attempted theft of Washington's skull Family Martha Washington (wife) John Parke Custis (stepson) George Washington Parke Custis (step-grandson, adopted son) Eleanor Parke Custis (step-granddaughter, adopted daughter) Augustine Washington (father) Mary Ball Washington (mother) Lawrence Washington (half-brother) Augustine Washington Jr.

(half-brother) Elizabeth Washington Lewis (sister) Samuel Washington (brother) John A. Washington (brother) Charles Washington (brother) Lawrence Washington (grandfather) Mildred Gale (grandmother) John Washington (great-grandfather) George Reade (2nd great-grandfather) Bushrod Washington (nephew) Slavery Washington and slavery List of enslaved people of Mount Vernon Betty Caroline Branham William Costin West Ford Sarah Johnson Oney Judge Philip Lee William Lee Hercules Posey Christopher Sheels Deborah Squash Harry Washington John Adams → Category Outline v t e United States History By period 1776–1789 1789–1815 1815–1849 1849–1865 1865–1917 1917–1945 1945–1964 1964–1980 1980–1991 1991–2016 2016–present By event Pre-colonial era Colonial era Stamp Act Congress Thirteen Colonies Continental Congress Continental Association United Colonies military history Founding Fathers Halifax Resolves Lee Resolution Declaration of Independence American Revolution War Treaty of Paris Articles of Confederation Perpetual Union Confederation period American frontier Constitution drafting and ratification Bill of Rights Federalist Era War of 1812 Territorial evolution Mexican–American War Civil War Reconstruction era Indian Wars Native genocide Gilded Age Progressive Era Women's suffrage Civil rights movement 1865–1896 1896–1954 1954–1968 Spanish–American War Imperialism World War I Roaring Twenties Great Depression World War II home front American Century Cold War Korean War Space Race Feminist Movement LGBTQ Movement Vietnam War Post-Cold War (1991–2016) September 11 attacks War on Terror War in Afghanistan Iraq War Great Recession COVID-19 pandemic By topic Outline of U.S. history Demographic Discoveries Economic Inventions Military Postal Technological and industrial Geography Territory Contiguous United States counties federal district federal enclaves Indian reservations insular zones minor outlying islands populated places states Earthquakes Extreme points Islands Mountains peaks ranges Appalachian Rocky Sierra Nevada National Park Service National Parks Regions East Coast West Coast Great Plains Gulf Mid-Atlantic Midwestern New England Pacific Central Eastern Northern Northeastern Northwestern Southern Southeastern Southwestern Western Longest rivers Arkansas Colorado Columbia Mississippi Missouri Red (South) Rio Grande Yukon Time Water supply and sanitation World Heritage Sites Politics Federal Executive President of the United States powers Executive Office Vice President Cabinet Executive departments Independent agencies Intelligence Community Director of National Intelligence Central Intelligence Agency National Security Agency National Reconnaissance Office Law enforcement ATF CBP Diplomatic Security DEA FBI ICE Marshals Secret Service TSA Inspector generals Civil service Public policy Legislative House of Representatives current members Speaker Senate current members President pro tempore President Capitol Police Library of Congress Congressional Budget Office Government Accountability Office Government Publishing Office Judicial Supreme Court Chief Justice Associate Justices list Courts of appeals list of judges District courts / Territorial courts list of courts list of judges Other tribunals U.S. attorney Law Bill of Rights civil liberties Code of Federal Regulations Constitution federalism preemption separation of powers civil rights United States Code Uniformed Armed Forces Army Marine Corps Navy Air Force Space Force Coast Guard National Guard NOAA Corps Public Health Service Corps State , Federal District , and Territorial Executive Governor list Lieutenant governor list Secretary of state Attorney general Treasurer Auditor/Comptroller Agriculture commissioner Insurance commissioner Public utilities commission State police list Legislative List of legislatures List of legislators Judicial Supreme courts Chief justices District attorney list Law State constitutions Statutory codes Uniform act Comparison of governments Tribal Tribal sovereignty Native American recognition in the United States Federally recognized tribes Federally recognized Alaska Native tribes State-recognized tribes Indian reservation list Hawaiian home land Local County List of counties and county equivalents County executive Sheriff Clerk Cities Consolidated city-county Independent city Coterminous municipality Charter Mayor–council government Council–manager government City commission government Mayor City manager City council Minor divisions Township Town meeting Special district School district list Corruption Democratic backsliding Elections Electoral College Red states and blue states Foreign relations foreign policy Imperial presidency Ideologies Anti-Americanism exceptionalism nationalism Parties Democratic Republican Third parties Scandals Economy By sector Agriculture Banking Communications Companies Energy Insurance Manufacturing Mining Science and technology Tourism Trade by state Currency Exports Federal budget Greenhouse gas emissions by the United States Federal Reserve System Financial position Labor unions Public debt Social welfare programs Taxation Unemployment Wall Street Transport Aviation Driving Public transportation Rail transportation Transportation policy Transportation safety Trucking industry Society Culture Americana Architecture Cinema Crime Cuisine Dance Demographics Economic issues affluence eviction homeownership household income income inequality middle class personal income poverty standard of living wealth working class Education attainment literacy Family Fashion Flag list Folklore Holidays Federal holidays Homelessness Housing Human rights Languages American English Indigenous languages ASL Literature Media journalism internet newspapers radio television Music Names National anthem National symbols Columbia Mount Rushmore Statue of Liberty Uncle Sam People Philosophy Political ideologies Race Religion Sexuality Social class Society Sports history Theater Transportation Video games Visual art Social class Affluence American Dream Educational attainment Homelessness Homeownership Household income Income inequality Middle class Personal income Poverty Standard of living Health Aging Healthcare Abortion Birth control Prenatal care Hospice care Immigrant health care Rationing Health care finance Health insurance costs Health care prices Prescription drug prices Disability Health insurance Food safety Physician shortage Poverty and health Race and health Obesity Medical deserts Women's reproductive health Life expectancy Issues Capital punishment Crime incarceration Criticism of government Discrimination affirmative action antisemitism intersex rights Islamophobia LGBTQ rights racism Native American African American Energy policy Environmental issues Environmental movement Climate change Gun politics Mass shootings Hunger Smoking Human rights Immigration illegal National security Terrorism Opioid epidemic Separation of church and state Xenophobia Outline Index Category Authority control databases National Germany Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=American_Revolution&oldid=1304535122 " Categories : American Revolution 1760s conflicts 1770s conflicts 1780s conflicts 1770s in the United States 1780s in the United States 18th-century rebellions 18th-century revolutions Age of Enlightenment Legal history of the United States Coups d'état and coup attempts in the United States Democratization Hidden categories: All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from March 2023 Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from April 2022 CS1: long volume value Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Use mdy dates from October 2024 Use American English from February 2019 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Wikipedia articles with style issues from July 2025 All articles with style issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2025 Articles with unsourced statements from September 2022 Articles with unsourced statements from March 2021 Articles with excerpts All articles with incomplete citations Articles with incomplete citations from October 2024 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from May 2024 Citation overkill Articles tagged with the inline citation overkill template from May 2024 CS1 errors: ISBN date This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 16:24 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents American Revolution 80 languages Add topic

