Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Geology and biology 2 Politics and society Toggle Politics and society subsection 2.1 Conspiracy theories 3 Linguistics and language change 4 Morality Toggle Morality subsection 4.1 Christianity 4.2 Buddhism, Theravada and Yoga 5 Philosophy 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Gradualism 22 languages العربية Български Català Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Galego Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Kreyòl ayisyen Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Русский Simple English Svenska Taqbaylit Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Philosophy of step-by-step proceeding Gradualism , from the Latin gradus ("step"), is a hypothesis, a theory or a tenet assuming that change comes about gradually or that variation is gradual in nature and happens over time as opposed to in large steps.

[ 1 ] Uniformitarianism , incrementalism , and reformism are similar concepts.

Gradualism can also refer to desired, controlled change in society, institutions, or policies. For example, social democrats and democratic socialists see the socialist society as achieved through gradualism.

Geology and biology [ edit ] Further information: Alternatives to Darwinism and Phyletic gradualism In the natural sciences, gradualism is the theory which holds that profound change is the cumulative product of slow but continuous processes, often contrasted with catastrophism .  The theory was proposed in 1795 by James Hutton , a Scottish geologist, and was later incorporated into Charles Lyell 's theory of uniformitarianism .  Tenets from both theories were applied to biology and formed the basis of early evolutionary theory.

Charles Darwin was influenced by Lyell's Principles of Geology , which explained both uniformitarian methodology and theory. Using uniformitarianism, which states that one cannot make an appeal to any force or phenomenon which cannot presently be observed (see catastrophism ), Darwin theorized that the evolutionary process must occur gradually, not in saltations , since saltations are not presently observed, and extreme deviations from the usual phenotypic variation would be more likely to be selected against.

Gradualism is often confused with the concept of phyletic gradualism . It is a term coined by Stephen Jay Gould and Niles Eldredge to contrast with their model of punctuated equilibrium , which is gradualist itself, but argues that most evolution is marked by long periods of evolutionary stability (called stasis), which is punctuated by rare instances of branching evolution.

[ 2 ] Phyletic gradualism is a model of evolution which theorizes that most speciation is slow, uniform and gradual.

[ 3 ] When evolution occurs in this mode, it is usually by the steady transformation of a whole species into a new one (through a process called anagenesis ). In this view no clear line of demarcation exists between an ancestral species and a descendant species, unless splitting occurs.

Punctuated gradualism is a microevolutionary hypothesis that refers to a species that has "relative stasis over a considerable part of its total duration [and] underwent periodic, relatively rapid, morphologic change that did not lead to lineage branching". It is one of the three common models of evolution . While the traditional model of palaeontology, the phylogenetic model, states that features evolved slowly without any direct association with speciation, the relatively newer and more controversial idea of punctuated equilibrium claims that major evolutionary changes do not happen over a gradual period but in localized, rare, rapid events of branching speciation.  Punctuated gradualism is considered to be a variation of these models, lying somewhere in between the phyletic gradualism model and the punctuated equilibrium model. It states that speciation is not needed for a lineage to rapidly evolve from one equilibrium to another but may show rapid transitions between long-stable states.

Politics and society [ edit ] Part of a series on Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Critical theory Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Institutional abuse Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Structural abuse Structural violence Trade union Tripartism Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman İnönü Jaurès Jenkins Jumblatt Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (Wilhelm) Liebknecht (Karl) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Myrdal (Alva) Myrdal (Gunnar) Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Radbruch Reich Rustin Sánchez Sanders Savage Scholz Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists Network of Social Democracy in Asia Parties CPDS ESDP MLSTP–PSD MSZDP MSZP PES PS Andorra France PSD PSDE PSDSH PSSh S Denmark Latvia SAP SD SDE SDF SDK SDLP SDP Croatia Finland Japan Montenegro SDPI SDSM Smer SOCDEM SocDems SPD SDP BiH SPDS SP SPÖ Related Bevanism Figuerism Kirchnerism Lulism " The Internationale " Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e In politics , gradualism is the hypothesis that social change can be achieved in small, discrete increments rather than in abrupt strokes such as revolutions or uprisings . Gradualism is one of the defining features of political liberalism and reformism .

[ 4 ] Machiavellian politics pushes politicians to espouse gradualism.

Gradualism in social change implemented through reformist means is a moral principle to which the Fabian Society is committed. In a more general way, reformism is the assumption that gradual changes through and within existing institutions can ultimately change a society 's fundamental economic system and political structures; and that an accumulation of reforms can lead to the emergence of an entirely different economic system and form of society than present-day capitalism . That hypothesis of social change grew out of opposition to revolutionary socialism , which contends that revolution is necessary for fundamental structural changes to occur.

In socialist politics and within the socialist movement, the concept of gradualism is frequently distinguished from reformism, with the former insisting that short-term goals need to be formulated and implemented in such a way that they inevitably lead into long-term goals. It is most commonly associated with the libertarian socialist concept of dual power and is seen as a middle way between reformism and revolutionism .

Martin Luther King Jr.

was opposed to the idea of gradualism as a method of eliminating segregation . The United States government wanted to try to integrate African-Americans and European-Americans slowly into the same society, but many believed it was a way for the government to put off actually doing anything about racial segregation: This is no time to engage in the luxury of cooling off or to take the tranquilizing drug of gradualism. Now is the time to make real the promises of democracy.

— Martin Luther King Jr.'s " I Have a Dream " speech, delivered August 28, 1963 at the Lincoln Memorial in Washington, D.C.

[ 5 ] Conspiracy theories [ edit ] In the terminology of NWO -related speculations, gradualism refers to the gradual implementation of a totalitarian world government .

Linguistics and language change [ edit ] In linguistics , language change is seen as gradual, the product of chain reactions and subject to cyclic drift .

[ 6 ] The view that creole languages are the product of catastrophism is heavily disputed.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] Morality [ edit ] Christianity [ edit ] Main article: Law of gradualness Buddhism, Theravada and Yoga [ edit ] Gradualism is the approach of certain schools of Buddhism and other Eastern philosophies (e.g.

Theravada or Yoga ), that enlightenment can be achieved step by step, through an arduous practice. The opposite approach, that insight is attained all at once, is called subitism . The debate on the issue was very important to the history of the development of Zen , which rejected gradualism, [ 9 ] and to the establishment of the opposite approach within the Tibetan Buddhism , after the Debate of Samye . It was continued in other schools of Indian and Chinese philosophy .

[ 10 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Contradictorial gradualism is the paraconsistent treatment of fuzziness developed by Lorenzo Peña which regards true contradictions as situations wherein a state of affairs enjoys only partial existence.

See also [ edit ] Evolution Uniformitarianism Incrementalism Normalization (sociology) Reformism Catastrophism Saltation Punctuated equilibrium Accelerationism Boiling frog References [ edit ] ^ Brian McGowran. (2008).

Biostratigraphy: Microfossils and Geological Time . Cambridge University Press. p. 384.

ISBN 978-0521048170 ^ Eldredge, Niles, and S. J. Gould (1972).

"Punctuated equilibria: an alternative to phyletic gradualism" . In T.J.M. Schopf, ed., Models in Paleobiology . San Francisco: Freeman, Cooper and Company, pp. 82-115.

^ Eldredge, N. and S. J. Gould (1972).

"Punctuated equilibria: an alternative to phyletic gradualism" In T.J.M. Schopf, ed., Models in Paleobiology . San Francisco: Freeman Cooper. p. 84.

^ Paul Blackledge (2013).

"Left reformism, the state and the problem of socialist politics today" . International Socialist Journal . Retrieved 14 November 2013 .

^ King, Martin Luther (August 28, 1963).

"I have a dream speech" . Retrieved 1 November 2015 .

^ Henri Wittmann (1983). "Les réactions en chaîne en morphologie diachronique".

Actes du Colloque de la Société internationale de linguistique fonctionnelle 10.285-92.

[1] [ permanent dead link ] ^ Classic presentations of catastrophe theory include René Thom, Stabilité structurelle et morphogénèse . Reading MA: Benjamin, 1972; Monte Davis and Alexander Woodcock, Catastrophe Theory . NY: Dutton, 1978; and Saunders, An Introduction to Catastrophe Theory . Cambridge University Press, 1980.

^ For a more-recent overview on the pidgin/creole language-change literature, see Sarah C. Thomasen, "Pidgins/Creoles and Historical Linguistics", esp. 246-60, in Silvia Kouwenberg and John Victor Singler, eds., The Handbook of Pidgin and Creole Studies . London: John Wiley, 2009. books.google.com/books?id=AyFK3L-U_PIC&pg=PA246
and ISBN 9781444305999 ^ Bernard Faure, Chan/Zen Studies in English: The State Of The Field ^ Gregory, Peter N., ed. (1991), Sudden and Gradual. Approaches to Enlightenment in Chinese Thought , Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Private Limited NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐q68xm
Cached time: 20250814215206
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.408 seconds
Real time usage: 0.528 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1123/1000000
Revision size: 10671/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 44623/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2009/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 31506/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.284/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15850709/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  455.076      1 -total
 28.50%  129.716      2 Template:Reflist
 27.65%  125.819      1 Template:Social_democracy_sidebar
 27.03%  122.996      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 20.11%   91.501      1 Template:Lang
 14.06%   64.003      1 Template:Short_description
 11.82%   53.808      2 Template:ISBN
  7.82%   35.606      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.14%   32.508      3 Template:Portal-inline
  6.35%   28.880      2 Template:Cite_web Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:11877:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215206 and revision id 1299873811. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gradualism&oldid=1299873811 " Categories : Geology theories Rate of evolution Liberalism Social democracy Democratic socialism Historical linguistics Social theories Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from January 2018 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text This page was last edited on 10 July 2025, at 22:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gradualism 22 languages Add topic

