Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Milestones Toggle Milestones subsection 2.1 The discovery of hyperbolic geometry 2.2 Begriffsschrift 2.3 Principia Mathematica 2.4 Gödel's incompleteness theorem 2.5 Tarski's definition of model-theoretic satisfaction 2.6 The undecidability of the Entscheidungsproblem 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Metamathematics 21 languages العربية Deutsch Ελληνικά Español 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Қазақша Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Study of mathematics itself This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Metamathematics" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The title page of the Principia Mathematica (shortened version), an important work of metamathematics Metamathematics is the study of mathematics itself using mathematical methods. This study produces metatheories , which are mathematical theories about other mathematical theories. Emphasis on metamathematics (and perhaps the creation of the term itself) owes itself to David Hilbert 's attempt to secure the foundations of mathematics in the early part of the 20th century. Metamathematics provides "a rigorous mathematical technique for investigating a great variety of foundation problems for mathematics and logic " (Kleene 1952, p. 59). An important feature of metamathematics is its emphasis on differentiating between reasoning from inside a system and from outside a system. An informal illustration of this is categorizing the proposition "2+2=4" as belonging to mathematics while categorizing the proposition "'2+2=4' is valid" as belonging to metamathematics.

History [ edit ] Metamathematical metatheorems about mathematics itself were originally differentiated from ordinary mathematical theorems in the 19th century to focus on what was then called the foundational crisis of mathematics .

Richard's paradox (Richard 1905) concerning certain 'definitions' of real numbers in the English language is an example of the sort of contradictions that can easily occur if one fails to distinguish between mathematics and metamathematics. Something similar can be said around the well-known Russell's paradox (Does the set of all those sets that do not contain themselves contain itself?).

Metamathematics was intimately connected to mathematical logic , so that the early histories of the two fields, during the late 19th and early 20th centuries, largely overlap. More recently, mathematical logic has often included the study of new pure mathematics, such as set theory , category theory , recursion theory and pure model theory .

Serious metamathematical reflection began with the work of Gottlob Frege , especially his Begriffsschrift , published in 1879.

David Hilbert was the first to invoke the term "metamathematics" with regularity (see Hilbert's program ), in the early 20th century. In his hands, it meant something akin to contemporary proof theory , in which finitary methods are used to study various axiomatized mathematical theorems (Kleene 1952, p. 55).

Other prominent figures in the field include Bertrand Russell , Thoralf Skolem , Emil Post , Alonzo Church , Alan Turing , Stephen Kleene , Willard Quine , Paul Benacerraf , Hilary Putnam , Gregory Chaitin , Alfred Tarski , Paul Cohen and Kurt Gödel .

Today, metalogic and metamathematics broadly overlap, and both have been substantially subsumed by mathematical logic in academia.

Milestones [ edit ] The discovery of hyperbolic geometry [ edit ] See also: Non-Euclidean geometry § History , and Hyperbolic geometry § History The discovery of hyperbolic geometry had important philosophical consequences for metamathematics. Before its discovery there was just one geometry and mathematics; the idea that another geometry existed was considered improbable.

When Gauss discovered hyperbolic geometry, it is said that he did not publish anything about it out of fear of the "uproar of the Boeotians ", which would ruin his status as princeps mathematicorum (Latin, "the Prince of Mathematicians").

[ 1 ] The "uproar of the Boeotians" came and went, and gave an impetus to metamathematics and great improvements in mathematical rigour , analytical philosophy and logic .

Begriffsschrift [ edit ] Main article: Begriffsschrift Begriffsschrift (German for, roughly, "concept-script") is a book on logic by Gottlob Frege , published in 1879, and the formal system set out in that book.

Begriffsschrift is usually translated as concept writing or concept notation ; the full title of the book identifies it as "a formula language , modeled on that of arithmetic , of pure thought ." Frege's motivation for developing his formal approach to logic resembled Leibniz 's motivation for his calculus ratiocinator (despite that, in his Foreword Frege clearly denies that he reached this aim, and also that his main aim would be constructing an ideal language like Leibniz's, what Frege declares to be quite hard and idealistic, however, not impossible task). Frege went on to employ his logical calculus in his research on the foundations of mathematics , carried out over the next quarter century.

Principia Mathematica [ edit ] Main article: Principia Mathematica Principia Mathematica , or "PM" as it is often abbreviated, was an attempt to describe a set of axioms and inference rules in symbolic logic from which all mathematical truths could in principle be proven. As such, this ambitious project is of great importance in the history of mathematics and philosophy, [ 2 ] being one of the foremost products of the belief that such an undertaking may be achievable. However, in 1931, Gödel's incompleteness theorem proved definitively that PM, and in fact any other attempt, could never achieve this goal; that is, for any set of axioms and inference rules proposed to encapsulate mathematics, there would in fact be some truths of mathematics which could not be deduced from them.

One of the main inspirations and motivations for PM was the earlier work of Gottlob Frege on logic, which Russell discovered allowed for the construction of paradoxical sets .

PM sought to avoid this problem by ruling out the unrestricted creation of arbitrary sets. This was achieved by replacing the notion of a general set with notion of a hierarchy of sets of different ' types ', a set of a certain type only allowed to contain sets of strictly lower types. Contemporary mathematics, however, avoids paradoxes such as Russell's in less unwieldy ways, such as the system of Zermelo–Fraenkel set theory .

Gödel's incompleteness theorem [ edit ] Main article: Gödel's incompleteness theorem Gödel's incompleteness theorems are two theorems of mathematical logic that establish inherent limitations of all but the most trivial axiomatic systems capable of doing arithmetic .  The theorems, proven by Kurt Gödel in 1931, are important both in mathematical logic and in the philosophy of mathematics . The two results are widely, but not universally, interpreted as showing that Hilbert's program to find a complete and consistent set of axioms for all mathematics is impossible, giving a negative answer to Hilbert's second problem .

The first incompleteness theorem states that no consistent system of axioms whose theorems can be listed by an " effective procedure " (e.g., a computer program, but it could be any sort of algorithm) is capable of proving all truths about the relations of the natural numbers ( arithmetic ).  For any such system, there will always be statements about the natural numbers that are true, but that are unprovable within the system. The second incompleteness theorem, an extension of the first, shows that such a system cannot demonstrate its own consistency.

Tarski's definition of model-theoretic satisfaction [ edit ] Main article: T-schema The T-schema or truth schema (not to be confused with ' Convention T ') is used to give an inductive definition of truth which lies at the heart of any realisation of Alfred Tarski 's semantic theory of truth . Some authors refer to it as the "Equivalence Schema", a synonym introduced by Michael Dummett .

[ 3 ] The T-schema is often expressed in natural language , but it can be formalized in many-sorted predicate logic or modal logic ; such a formalisation is called a T-theory .  T-theories form the basis of much fundamental work in philosophical logic , where they are applied in several important controversies in analytic philosophy .

As expressed in semi-natural language (where 'S' is the name of the sentence abbreviated to S):
'S' is true if and only if S Example: 'snow is white' is true if and only if snow is white.

The undecidability of the Entscheidungsproblem [ edit ] Main article: Entscheidungsproblem The Entscheidungsproblem ( German for ' decision problem ') is a challenge posed by David Hilbert in 1928.

[ 4 ] The Entscheidungsproblem asks for an algorithm that takes as input a statement of a first-order logic (possibly with a finite number of axioms beyond the usual axioms of first-order logic) and answers "Yes" or "No" according to whether the statement is universally valid , i.e., valid in every structure satisfying the axioms. By the completeness theorem of first-order logic , a statement is universally valid if and only if it can be deduced from the axioms, so the Entscheidungsproblem can also be viewed as asking for an algorithm to decide whether a given statement is provable from the axioms using the rules of logic.

In 1936, Alonzo Church and Alan Turing published independent papers [ 5 ] showing that a general solution to the Entscheidungsproblem is impossible, assuming that the intuitive notation of " effectively calculable " is captured by the functions computable by a Turing machine (or equivalently, by those expressible in the lambda calculus ). This assumption is now known as the Church–Turing thesis .

See also [ edit ] Mathematics portal Meta Metalogic Model theory Philosophy of mathematics Proof theory References [ edit ] ^ Torretti, Roberto (1978).

Philosophy of Geometry from Riemann to Poincare . Dordrecht Holland: Reidel. p. 255.

^ Irvine, Andrew D. (1 May 2003).

"Principia Mathematica (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)" . Metaphysics Research Lab, CSLI, Stanford University . Retrieved 5 August 2009 .

^ Wolfgang Künne (2003).

Conceptions of truth . Clarendon Press. p.

18 .

ISBN 978-0-19-928019-3 .

^ Hilbert and Ackermann ^ Church's paper was presented to the American Mathematical Society on 19 April 1935 and published on 15 April 1936. Turing, who had made substantial progress in writing up his own results, was disappointed to learn of Church's proof upon its publication (see correspondence between Max Newman and Church in Alonzo Church papers Archived 2010-06-07 at the Wayback Machine ). Turing quickly completed his paper and rushed it to publication; it was received by the Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society on 28 May 1936, read on 12 November 1936, and published in series 2, volume 42 (1936-7); it appeared in two sections: in Part 3 (pages 230-240), issued on Nov 30, 1936 and in Part 4 (pages 241-265), issued on Dec 23, 1936; Turing added corrections in volume 43(1937) pp. 544–546. See the footnote at the end of Soare:1996.

Further reading [ edit ] W. J. Blok and Don Pigozzi, " Alfred Tarski's Work on General Metamathematics ", The Journal of Symbolic Logic , v. 53, No. 1 (Mar., 1988), pp. 36–50.

I. J. Good. "A Note on Richard's Paradox".

Mind , New Series, Vol. 75, No. 299 (Jul., 1966), p. 431.

JStor Douglas Hofstadter , 1980.

Gödel, Escher, Bach . Vintage Books. Aimed at laypeople.

Stephen Cole Kleene , 1952.

Introduction to Metamathematics . North Holland. Aimed at mathematicians.

Jules Richard, Les Principes des Mathématiques et le Problème des Ensembles , Revue Générale des Sciences Pures et Appliquées (1905); translated in Heijenoort J. van (ed.), Source Book in Mathematical Logic 1879-1931 (Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1964).

Alfred North Whitehead , and Bertrand Russell .

Principia Mathematica , 3 vols, Cambridge University Press, 1910, 1912, and 1913. Second edition, 1925 (Vol. 1), 1927 (Vols 2, 3). Abridged as Principia Mathematica to *56 , Cambridge University Press, 1962.

v t e Metalogic and metamathematics Cantor's theorem Entscheidungsproblem Church–Turing thesis Consistency Effective method Foundations of mathematics of geometry Gödel's completeness theorem Gödel's incompleteness theorems Soundness Completeness Decidability Interpretation Löwenheim–Skolem theorem Metatheorem Satisfiability Independence Type–token distinction Use–mention distinction v t e Major mathematics areas History Timeline Future Lists Glossary Foundations Category theory Information theory Mathematical logic Philosophy of mathematics Set theory Type theory Algebra Abstract Commutative Elementary Group theory Linear Multilinear Universal Homological Analysis Calculus Real analysis Complex analysis Hypercomplex analysis Differential equations Functional analysis Harmonic analysis Measure theory Discrete Combinatorics Graph theory Order theory Geometry Algebraic Analytic Arithmetic Differential Discrete Euclidean Finite Number theory Arithmetic Algebraic number theory Analytic number theory Diophantine geometry Topology General Algebraic Differential Geometric Homotopy theory Applied Engineering mathematics Mathematical biology Mathematical chemistry Mathematical economics Mathematical finance Mathematical physics Mathematical psychology Mathematical sociology Mathematical statistics Probability Statistics Systems science Control theory Game theory Operations research Computational Computer science Theory of computation Computational complexity theory Numerical analysis Optimization Computer algebra Related topics Mathematicians lists Informal mathematics Films about mathematicians Recreational mathematics Mathematics and art Mathematics education Mathematics portal Category Commons WikiProject v t e Logic History Major fields Computer science Formal semantics (natural language) Inference Philosophy of logic Proof Semantics of logic Syntax Logics Classical Informal Critical thinking Reason Mathematical Non-classical Philosophical Theories Argumentation Metalogic Metamathematics Set Foundations Abduction Analytic and synthetic propositions Antecedent Consequent Contradiction Paradox Antinomy Deduction Deductive closure Definition Description Dichotomy Entailment Linguistic Form Induction Logical truth Name Necessity and sufficiency Premise Probability Proposition Reference Statement Substitution Truth Validity Lists Topics Mathematical logic Boolean algebra Set theory Other Logicians Rules of inference Paradoxes Fallacies Logic symbols Category Outline Portal WikiProject changes Authority control databases National Germany Japan Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐89xl4
Cached time: 20250814220835
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.402 seconds
Real time usage: 0.498 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1423/1000000
Revision size: 13452/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 68876/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1036/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 10/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 47730/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.280/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 22781557/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  418.386      1 -total
 20.41%   85.374      1 Template:Reflist
 20.22%   84.618      5 Template:Navbox
 17.97%   75.168      3 Template:Lang
 15.26%   63.852      1 Template:Metalogic
 15.03%   62.892      2 Template:Cite_book
 12.08%   50.522      1 Template:Short_description
 11.80%   49.388      1 Template:Refimprove
 10.88%   45.522      1 Template:Ambox
  7.48%   31.298      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:183508:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220835 and revision id 1305888381. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metamathematics&oldid=1305888381 " Categories : Mathematical logic Logic Metatheory Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles containing German-language text This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 17:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Metamathematics 21 languages Add topic

