Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Formation 2 Historic panhandle hooks 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Panhandle hook 1 language Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia A common track of a Panhandle Hook winter storm as it curves from Texas, northeastward towards the Great Lakes region.

A panhandle hook (also called a pan handle hook [ 1 ] or Texas hooker [ 2 ] ) is a relatively infrequent winter storm system whose cyclogenesis occurs in the South to southwestern United States from the late fall through winter and into the early spring months. They trek to the northeast on a path towards the Great Lakes region , as the southwesterly jet streams are most prevalent, usually affecting the Midwestern United States and Eastern Canada .  Panhandle hooks account for some of the most memorable and deadly blizzards and snowstorms in North America .

[ 2 ] The name is derived from the region of surface cyclogenesis in the Texas panhandle and Oklahoma panhandle regions. In some winters, there are no panhandle hook storms; in others, there are several.

Formation [ edit ] Typical Southwest circulation, east of the Rockies, of a Colorado low . For a Panhandle hook, the flow should be slightly further east.

A panhandle hook storm has its origins as a strong shortwave low pressure system which traverses the base of a long-wave low pressure trough while geographically coincident with the southwestern United States. Such systems ubiquitously develop a surface low-pressure system in the northwestern Texas and western Oklahoma area (as an eddy effect interaction of the topography of the Rocky Mountains in relation to the jet stream) with associated warm front and cold front , with attending snow to the northwest of the low and severe thunderstorms to the southeast -- the "hook" refers to the left-ward east to northeast jog in the track of the surface low as it is plotted on a weather analysis chart.

If the associated jet stream is stronger than normal and there is colder than normal air in place in central Canada to provide a greater than normal temperature contrast with Gulf of Mexico moisture drawn northward by the developing panhandle low, surface cyclogenesis can be particularly energetic and cause a great swath of heavy snow to develop and blanket a large portion of the American Great Plains and upper-midwestern states in conjunction with very strong winds, the combination of which exceeds blizzard criteria. Over the Great Lakes ,  the interaction of these storms with the lakes can amplify windspeeds causing extreme heavy sometimes localized snowfall, thundersnow and often shoreline erosion. Initially pleasant weather ahead of the northeast-bound storm can lull the unwary into dressing lightly and then being surprised by heavy snow accompanied by howling easterly and northerly winds as the low traverses south to east of their location.

Historic panhandle hooks [ edit ] Famous storms that were panhandle hooks are the Armistice Day Blizzard of November 11, 1940, and the storm which sank the Edmund Fitzgerald on November 10, 1975.

[ 3 ] See also [ edit ] Alberta clipper Colorado low Gulf low Nor'easter Salient (geography) , official name for panhandle References [ edit ] ^ "Jet Stream - Weather Glossary: P's" .

National Weather Service . Retrieved 5 February 2018 .

^ a b Holthaus, Eric (19 February 2014).

" "Texas Hooker" to Bring Midwest Blizzard, Tornadoes at the Same Time" .

Slate . Retrieved 5 February 2018 .

^ Heidorn, Keith (1 November 2010).

"The Edmund Fitzgerald Storm" . The Weather Doctor . Retrieved 5 February 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Panhandle hook at Wikimedia Commons v t e Cyclones and anticyclones of the world ( centers of action ) Concepts Anticyclonic storm Storm High-pressure area Low-pressure area Rapid intensification Explosive cyclogenesis Central dense overcast Annular tropical cyclone Bar (tropical cyclone) Superstorm Hypercane Tropical cyclones and climate change Post-tropical cyclone Sting jet List Rainband Anticyclone Northern Hemisphere North Polar High Siberian High Azores High North American High North Pacific High Ridiculously Resilient Ridge Subtropical ridge Southern Hemisphere South Polar High South Atlantic High South Pacific High Kalahari High Australian High Subtropical ridge Cyclone Synoptic scale Surface-based Polar North Polar low South Polar low Great Arctic Cyclone of 2012 Extratropical North America Continental Lee Cyclone Alberta clipper Colorado low Great Basin low Bighorn Low Other Panhandle hook November gale Oceanic Aleutian Low Hatteras low Nor'easter Gulf low Pacific Northwest windstorm Europe Icelandic Low Genoa low European windstorm Asia Asiatic Low Western Disturbance Continental North Asian storms East Asian-northwest Pacific storms Southern Hemisphere Southern Ocean cyclone Sudestada Subtropical Kona storm Australian east coast low Black nor'easter Lake Huron cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Thermal Tropical ( Outline ) Northern Hemisphere Atlantic hurricane Cape Verde hurricane Pacific hurricane Typhoon North Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Mediterranean tropical-like cyclone Black Sea tropical-like cyclone Southern Hemisphere South-West Indian Ocean tropical cyclone Australian region tropical cyclone South Pacific tropical cyclone South Atlantic tropical cyclone Upper level Cold-core low Cut-off low Polar vortex Upper tropospheric cyclonic vortex Mesoscale Mesoscale ocean eddies Catalina eddy Haida Eddies Mesoscale convective system Wake Low Mesohigh Mesoscale convective vortex Line echo wave pattern Whirlwind Major Mesocyclone Supercell Low-topped supercell Wall cloud Funnel cloud Tornado Multiple-vortex tornado Satellite tornado Anticyclonic tornado Landspout Waterspout Minor Gustnado Dust devil Steam devil Fire whirl Tropical cyclones portal Tornadoes portal Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Panhandle_hook&oldid=1268312509 " Category : Extratropical cyclones Hidden category: Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 January 2025, at 04:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Panhandle hook 1 language Add topic

