Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 See also 2 References 3 External links Toggle the table of contents Historicity 13 languages العربية Català Čeština الدارجة Deutsch Español فارسی Bahasa Indonesia עברית Polski Português Română Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Historical actuality of persons or events This article is about the use of the term in the context of historical accuracy or actuality. For the use of the term in the broader philosophical context, see Historicity (philosophy) . For the 2009 album by Vijay Iyer, see Historicity (album) .

Historicity is the historical actuality of persons and events, meaning the quality of being part of history instead of being a historical myth , legend , or fiction . The historicity of a claim about the past is its factual status.

[ 1 ] Historicity denotes historical actuality, authenticity, factuality and focuses on the true value of knowledge claims about the past.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Some theoreticians characterize historicity as a dimension of all natural phenomena that take place in space and time. Other scholars characterize it as an attribute reserved to certain human occurrences, in agreement with the practice of historiography .

[ 4 ] Herbert Marcuse explained historicity as that which "defines history and thus distinguishes it from 'nature' or the 'economy'" and "signifies the meaning we intend when we say of something that is 'historical'." [ 5 ] The Blackwell Dictionary of Western Philosophy defines historicity as "denoting the feature of our human situation by which we are located in specific concrete temporal and historical circumstances".

[ 6 ] For Wilhelm Dilthey , historicity identifies human beings as unique and concrete historical beings.

[ 6 ] Questions regarding historicity concern not just the issue of "what really happened", but also how modern observers can come to know "what really happened".

[ 7 ] This second issue is closely tied to historical research practices and methodologies for analyzing the reliability of primary sources and other evidence. Because various methodologies thematize historicity differently, it is not possible to reduce historicity to a single structure to be represented. Some methodologies like historicism can make historicity subject to constructions of history based on submerged value commitments.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The historiographer François Hartog introduced the notion of regimes of historicity to describe a society that considers its past and attempts to deal with it, a process that is also cited as "a method of self-awareness in a human community".

[ 10 ] The historicity of a reported event may be distinct from the historicity of persons involved in the event. For example, a popular story says that as a child, George Washington chopped down a cherry tree, and when confronted about it, honestly took responsibility for the act. Although there is no doubt that Washington existed as a historical figure, the historicity of this specific account has been found lacking.

[ 11 ] Questions of historicity are particularly relevant to partisan or poetic accounts of past events. For example, the historicity of the Iliad has become a topic of debate because later archaeological finds suggest that the work was based on some true event.

[ 12 ] Questions of historicity frequently arise in relation to historical studies of religion . In these cases, value commitments can influence the choice of research methodology .

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Historicity of the Bible Historicity of Jesus Historicity of the canonical Gospels Historicism (Christian eschatology) , a specific brand of Biblical literalism Historicity of Muhammad Historicity of Rama Historicity of the Book of Mormon Historicism Historical method Historicity of King Arthur Historicity of William Tell Historicity of Robin Hood Historicity of Ragnar Lodbrok Historicity of Laozi Parallelomania Temporality References [ edit ] ^ Margolis, Joseph (2016).

History, Historicity and Science . Oxon: Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-351-93058-1 .

^ Wandersee, J. H. (1992). "The historicality of cognition: Implications for science education research".

J. Res. Sci. Teach .

29 (4): 423– 434.

Bibcode : 1992JRScT..29..423W .

doi : 10.1002/tea.3660290409 .

^ Harre, R., & Moghaddam, F.M. (2006). Historicity, social psychology, and change. In Rockmore, T. & Margolis, J. (Eds.), History, historicity, and science (pp. 94–120). London: Ashgate Publishing Limited.

[1] ^ Jones, Michael S., " Lucian Blaga, The Historical Phenomenon: An Excerpt from The Historical Being " (2012). Faculty Publications and Presentations. Paper 1.

^ Herbert Marcuse, Hegel’s Ontology and the Theory of Historicity , trans. by Seyla Benhabib (Cambridge, MA; London: The MIT Press, 1987), 1.

^ a b Bunnin, Nicholas; Yu, Jiyuan (2004).

The Blackwell Dictionary of Western Philosophy . Malden, MA: John Wiley & Sons. p. 308.

ISBN 1405106794 .

^ William J. Hamblin , professor of history at Brigham Young University. Two part article on historicity, [2] and [3] ^ Hall, J. (2007).

Historicity and Sociohistorical Research.

In W. Outhwaite, & S. Turner (Eds.), The Sage Handbook of Social Science Methodology.

(pp. 82–102). London: Sage Publications Ltd.

doi : 10.4135/9781848607958.n5 ^ a b Hall, J. (2007).

History, Methodologies, and the Study of Religion.

In J. Beckford, & N. Demerath (Eds.), The SAGE Handbook of the Sociology of Religion (pp. 167–189). London: Sage Publications Ltd.

doi : 10.4135/9781848607965.n9 ^ Allred, Mason Kamana (2017).

Weimar Cinema, Embodiment, and Historicity: Cultural Memory and the Historical Films of Ernst Lubitsch . New York: Taylor & Francis. p. 3.

ISBN 9780415349185 .

^ D.R. Woolf, A Global Encyclopedia of Historical Writing - Volume 2 (2014), p. 642-43.

^ Haywood, Jan; Sweeney, Naoise Mac (2018).

Homer's Iliad and the Trojan War: Dialogues on Tradition . London: Bloomsbury Publishing. p. 108.

ISBN 978-1-350-01270-7 .

External links [ edit ] Look up historicity in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Media related to Historicity at Wikimedia Commons v t e Historicity Methodology Bayes' theorem Biblical criticism / Hadith studies ' Ilm al-rijāl Bibliography Demythologization Palaeography Philology Cognitive philology Decipherment Textual criticism Comparative linguistics Provenance Criteria Contextual credibility Dissimilarity Embarrassment Lectio difficilior potior Multiple attestation / Mutawatir Topics Texts Bible Acts of the Apostles Gospels Book of Esther Book of Joshua Book of Mormon The Iliad Quran People Abraham Bardiya / Smerdis The Buddha Caligula's horse Homer Jesus myth theory Quest Sources King Arthur King David Lei Feng Moses Muhammad Prester John Robin Hood Socrates Sun Tzu William Tell Events and places The Exodus Sources and parallels Founding of Rome Hanging Gardens of Babylon Kurukshetra War Massacre of the Innocents Geography of the Odyssey Related Apocrypha Pseudepigrapha Hadith terminology Historiography Religious studies Legends Linguistics Myth § Mythology Vaticinium ex eventu Category v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Authority control databases : National Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐4tx82
Cached time: 20250812021435
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1]
CPU time usage: 0.587 seconds
Real time usage: 0.745 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6302/1000000
Revision size: 6862/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 338742/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8245/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 41/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 58874/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.293/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 7163755/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  568.010      1 -total
 51.35%  291.675     19 Template:Navbox
 32.82%  186.401      1 Template:Historiography
 32.16%  182.650      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 21.13%  120.034      1 Template:Reflist
 18.64%  105.865     36 Template:Ill
 15.73%   89.336      4 Template:Cite_book
 15.71%   89.239      1 Template:Historicity
 12.53%   71.154      1 Template:Short_description
  6.54%   37.148      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:7058999:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812021435 and revision id 1282138050. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Historicity&oldid=1282138050 " Categories : Historicity Historiography Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 March 2025, at 15:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Historicity 13 languages Add topic

