Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Principles Toggle Principles subsection 2.1 Simple salt and water system 2.2 Water spray absorption refrigeration 2.3 Single pressure absorption refrigeration 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Absorption refrigerator 23 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Hausa हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Português Română Русский Suomi Svenska Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Refrigerator that uses a heat source Thermodynamics The classical Carnot heat engine Branches Classical Statistical Chemical Quantum thermodynamics Equilibrium / Non-equilibrium Laws Zeroth First Second Third Systems Closed system Open system Isolated system State Equation of state Ideal gas Real gas State of matter Phase (matter) Equilibrium Control volume Instruments Processes Isobaric Isochoric Isothermal Adiabatic Isentropic Isenthalpic Quasistatic Polytropic Free expansion Reversibility Irreversibility Endoreversibility Cycles Heat engines Heat pumps Thermal efficiency System properties Note: Conjugate variables in italics Property diagrams Intensive and extensive properties Process functions Work Heat Functions of state Temperature / Entropy ( introduction ) Pressure / Volume Chemical potential / Particle number Vapor quality Reduced properties Material properties Property databases Specific heat capacity c = {\displaystyle c=} T {\displaystyle T} ∂ ∂ S {\displaystyle \partial S} N {\displaystyle N} ∂ ∂ T {\displaystyle \partial T} Compressibility β β = − − {\displaystyle \beta =-} 1 {\displaystyle 1} ∂ ∂ V {\displaystyle \partial V} V {\displaystyle V} ∂ ∂ p {\displaystyle \partial p} Thermal expansion α α = {\displaystyle \alpha =} 1 {\displaystyle 1} ∂ ∂ V {\displaystyle \partial V} V {\displaystyle V} ∂ ∂ T {\displaystyle \partial T} Equations Carnot's theorem Clausius theorem Fundamental relation Ideal gas law Maxwell relations Onsager reciprocal relations Bridgman's equations Table of thermodynamic equations Potentials Free energy Free entropy Internal energy U ( S , V ) {\displaystyle U(S,V)} Enthalpy H ( S , p ) = U + p V {\displaystyle H(S,p)=U+pV} Helmholtz free energy A ( T , V ) = U − − T S {\displaystyle A(T,V)=U-TS} Gibbs free energy G ( T , p ) = H − − T S {\displaystyle G(T,p)=H-TS} History Culture History General Entropy Gas laws "Perpetual motion" machines Philosophy Entropy and time Entropy and life Brownian ratchet Maxwell's demon Heat death paradox Loschmidt's paradox Synergetics Theories Caloric theory Vis viva ("living force") Mechanical equivalent of heat Motive power Key publications An Inquiry Concerning the Source ... Friction On the Equilibrium of Heterogeneous Substances Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire Timelines Thermodynamics Heat engines Art Education Maxwell's thermodynamic surface Entropy as energy dispersal Scientists Bernoulli Boltzmann Bridgman Carathéodory Carnot Clapeyron Clausius de Donder Duhem Gibbs von Helmholtz Joule Kelvin Lewis Massieu Maxwell von Mayer Nernst Onsager Planck Rankine Smeaton Stahl Tait Thompson van der Waals Waterston Other Nucleation Self-assembly Self-organization Category v t e An absorption refrigerator is a refrigerator that uses a heat source to provide the energy needed to drive the cooling process.

Solar energy, burning a fossil fuel, waste heat from factories, and district heating systems are examples of heat sources that can be used. An absorption refrigerator uses two coolants: the first coolant performs evaporative cooling and then is absorbed into the second coolant; heat is needed to reset the two coolants to their initial states. Absorption refrigerators are commonly used in recreational vehicles (RVs), campers , and caravans because the heat required to power them can be provided by a propane fuel burner, by a low-voltage DC electric heater (from a battery or vehicle electrical system) or by a mains-powered electric heater. Absorption refrigerators can also be used to air-condition buildings using the waste heat from a gas turbine or water heater in the building. Using waste heat from a gas turbine makes the turbine very efficient because it first produces electricity , then hot water, and finally, air-conditioning— trigeneration .

Unlike more common vapor-compression refrigeration systems, an absorption refrigerator has no moving parts.

History [ edit ] In the early years of the 20th century, the vapor absorption cycle using water-ammonia systems was popular and widely used, but after the development of the vapor compression cycle it lost much of its importance because of its low coefficient of performance (about one fifth of that of the vapor compression cycle). Absorption refrigerators are a popular alternative to regular compressor refrigerators where electricity is unreliable, costly, or unavailable, or where noise from the compressor is problematic; or where surplus heat is available.

In 1748 in Glasgow, William Cullen invented the basis for modern refrigeration, although he is not credited with a usable application. More on history of refrigeration can be found in the paragraph Refrigeration Research on page Refrigeration .

Absorption refrigeration uses the same principle as adsorption refrigeration , which was invented by Michael Faraday in 1821, but instead of using a solid adsorber, in an absorption system an absorber absorbs the refrigerant vapour into a liquid.

Absorption cooling was invented by the French scientist Ferdinand Carré in 1858.

[ 1 ] The original design used water and sulphuric acid. In 1922, two students at the Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm , Sweden , Baltzar von Platen and Carl Munters , enhanced the principle with a three-fluid configuration. This "Platen-Munters" design can operate without a pump.

Commercial production began in 1923 by the newly-formed company AB Arctic , which was bought by Electrolux in 1925. In the 1960s, absorption refrigeration saw a renaissance due to the substantial demand for refrigerators for caravans (travel trailers). AB Electrolux established a subsidiary in the United States, named Dometic Sales Corporation. The company marketed refrigerators for recreational vehicles (RVs) under the Dometic brand. In 2001, Electrolux sold most of its leisure products line to the venture-capital company EQT which created Dometic as a stand-alone company. Dometic still sold absorption fridges as of 2021.

[ 2 ] In 1926, Albert Einstein and his former student Leó Szilárd proposed an alternative design known as the Einstein refrigerator .

[ 3 ] At the 2007 TED Conference , Adam Grosser presented his research of a new, very small, "intermittent absorption" vaccine refrigeration unit for use in third world countries. The refrigerator is a small unit placed over a campfire, that can later be used to cool 15 litres (3.3 imp gal; 4.0 US gal) of water to just above freezing for 24 hours in a 30 °C (86 °F) environment.

[ 4 ] The concept was similar to an early refrigeration device known as an Icyball .

Principles [ edit ] Common absorption refrigerators use a refrigerant with a very low boiling point (less than −18 °C (0 °F)) just like compressor refrigerators . Compression refrigerators typically use an HCFC or HFC , while absorption refrigerators typically use ammonia or water and need at least a second fluid able to absorb the coolant, the absorbent , respectively water (for ammonia) or brine (for water). Both types use evaporative cooling : when the refrigerant evaporates (boils), it takes some heat away with it, providing the cooling effect. The main difference between the two systems is the way the refrigerant is changed from a gas back into a liquid so that the cycle can repeat. An absorption refrigerator changes the gas back into a liquid using a method that needs only heat, and has no moving parts other than the fluids.

1: boiler 2: separation chamber 3: ammonia-poor water back-pipe 4: ammonia condenser 5: pressure balance pipe 6: liquid ammonia pipe 7: evaporator (inside cabinet) 8: ammonia gas pipe 9: absorber (water absorbs ammonia) The absorption cooling cycle can be described in three phases: Evaporation : A liquid refrigerant evaporates in a low partial pressure environment, thus extracting heat from its surroundings (e.g. the refrigerator's compartment). Because of the low partial pressure, the temperature needed for evaporation is also low.

Absorption : The second fluid, in a depleted state, sucks out the now gaseous refrigerant, thus providing the low partial pressure. This produces a refrigerant-saturated liquid which then flows to the next step: Regeneration : The refrigerant-saturated liquid is heated, causing the refrigerant to evaporate out.

The evaporation occurs at the lower end of a narrow tube; the bubbles of refrigerant gas push the refrigerant-depleted liquid into a higher chamber, from which it will flow by gravity to the absorption chamber.

The hot gaseous refrigerant passes through a heat exchanger, transferring its heat outside the system (such as to surrounding ambient-temperature air), and condenses at a higher place. The condensed (liquid) refrigerant will then flow by gravity to supply the evaporation phase.

The system thus silently provides for the mechanical circulation of the liquid without a usual pump.
A third fluid, gaseous, is usually added to avoid pressure concerns when condensation occurs (see below).

In comparison, a compressor based heat pump works by pumping refrigerant gas from an evaporator to a condenser.  This reduces the pressure and boiling temperature in the evaporator and increases the pressure and condensing temperature in the condenser.  Energy from an electric motor or internal combustion engine is required to operate the compressor pump.  Compressing the refrigerant uses this energy to do work on the gas, increasing its temperature. The warm, high pressure gas then enters the condenser where it undergoes a phase change to a liquid, releasing heat to the condenser's surroundings.  Warm liquid refrigerant moves from the high pressure condenser to the low pressure evaporator via an expansion valve, also known as a throttling valve or a Joule-Thomson valve. The expansion valve partially vaporizes the refrigerant cooling it via evaporative cooling and the resulting vapor is cooled via expansive cooling. (This is a combination of Joule-Thomson cooling and work done by the expanding gas, both at the expense of the internal energy of the gas) The cold, low pressure liquid refrigerant will now absorb heat from the evaporator's surroundings and vaporize.  The resulting gas enters the compressor and the cycle begins again.

Simple salt and water system [ edit ] A simple absorption refrigeration system common in large commercial plants uses a solution of lithium bromide or lithium chloride salt and water.  Water under low pressure is evaporated from the coils that are to be chilled. The water is absorbed by a lithium bromide/water solution. The system drives the water out of the lithium bromide solution with heat.

[ 5 ] Water spray absorption refrigeration [ edit ] Water spray absorption system Another variant uses air, water, and a salt water solution. The intake of warm, moist air is passed through a sprayed solution of salt water. The spray lowers the humidity but does not significantly change the temperature. The less humid, warm air is then passed through an evaporative cooler , consisting of a spray of fresh water, which cools and re-humidifies the air. Humidity is removed from the cooled air with another spray of salt solution, providing the outlet of cool, dry air.

The salt solution is regenerated by heating it under low pressure, causing water to evaporate. The water evaporated from the salt solution is re-condensed, and rerouted back to the evaporative cooler.

Single pressure absorption refrigeration [ edit ] Dometic absorption refrigerator.

1. Hydrogen enters the pipe with liquid ammonia 2. Ammonia and hydrogen enter the inner compartment. Volume increase causes a decrease in the partial pressure of the liquid ammonia. The ammonia evaporates, taking heat from the liquid ammonia (ΔH Vap ) lowering its temperature. Heat flows from the hotter interior of the refrigerator to the colder liquid, promoting further evaporation.

3. Ammonia and hydrogen return from the inner compartment, ammonia returns to absorber and dissolves in water. Hydrogen is free to rise.

4. Ammonia gas condensation (passive cooling).

5. Hot ammonia gas.

6. Heat insulation and distillation of ammonia gas from water.

7. Electric heat source.

8. Absorber vessel (water and ammonia solution).

Thermal image of a Dometic absorption refrigerator of a comparable type to the one in the labelled image above. Colour indicates relative temperature: blue=cold, red is hottest. The heat source (7) is contained entirely within the insulation section (6).

A single-pressure absorption refrigerator takes advantage of the fact that a liquid's evaporation rate depends upon the partial pressure of the vapor above the liquid and goes up with lower partial pressure.  While having the same total pressure throughout the system, the refrigerator maintains a low partial pressure of the refrigerant (therefore high evaporation rate) in the part of the system that draws heat out of the low-temperature interior of the refrigerator, but maintains the refrigerant at high partial pressure (therefore low evaporation rate) in the part of the system that expels heat to the ambient-temperature air outside the refrigerator.

The refrigerator uses three substances: ammonia , hydrogen gas, and water . The cycle is closed, with all hydrogen, water and ammonia collected and endlessly reused. The system is pressurized to raise the boiling point of ammonia higher than the temperature of the condenser coil (the coil which transfers heat to the air outside the refrigerator, by being hotter than the outside air.) This pressure is typically 14–16 standard atmospheres (1,400–1,600 kPa) putting the dew point of ammonia at about 35 °C (95 °F).

The cooling cycle starts with liquid ammonia at room temperature entering the evaporator. The volume of the evaporator is greater than the volume of the liquid, with the excess space occupied by a mixture of gaseous ammonia and hydrogen. The presence of hydrogen lowers the partial pressure of the ammonia gas, thus lowering the evaporation point of the liquid below the temperature of the refrigerator's interior. Ammonia evaporates, taking a small amount of heat from the liquid and lowering the liquid's temperature. It continues to evaporate, while the large enthalpy of vaporization (heat) flows from the warmer refrigerator interior to the cooler liquid ammonia and then to more ammonia gas.

In the next two steps, the ammonia gas is separated from the hydrogen so it can be reused.

The ammonia (gas) and hydrogen (gas) mixture flows through a pipe from the evaporator into the absorber. In the absorber, this mixture of gases contacts water (technically, a weak solution of ammonia in water). The gaseous ammonia dissolves in the water, while the hydrogen, which doesn't, collects at the top of the absorber, leaving the now-strong ammonia-and-water solution at the bottom. The hydrogen is now separate while the ammonia is now dissolved in the water.

The next step separates the ammonia and water. The ammonia/water solution flows to the generator (boiler), where heat is applied to boil off the ammonia, leaving most of the water (which has a higher boiling point) behind. Some water vapor and bubbles remain mixed with the ammonia; this water is removed in the final separation step, by passing it through the separator, an uphill series of twisted pipes with minor obstacles to pop the bubbles, allowing the water vapor to condense and drain back to the generator.

The pure ammonia gas then enters the condenser. In this heat exchanger , the hot ammonia gas transfers its heat to the outside air, which is below the boiling point of the full-pressure ammonia, and therefore condenses. The condensed (liquid) ammonia flows down to be mixed with the hydrogen gas released from the absorption step, repeating the cycle.

See also [ edit ] Adsorption refrigeration Icyball Quantum absorption refrigerator References [ edit ] ^ Granryd, Eric; Palm, Björn (2005), "4-3", Refrigerating engineering , Stockholm: Royal Institute of Technology ^ "ᐅ Mobile Refrigeration - Refrigerators and Cooling Units" .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ US 1781541 , Einstein & Szilárd, "Refrigeration", issued 1930-11-11 ^ Grosser, Adam (Feb 2007).

"Adam Grosser and his sustainable fridge" .

TED . Retrieved 2018-09-18 .

^ Sapali, S. N (11 February 2009). "Lithium Bromide Absorption Refrigeration System".

Textbook Of Refrigeration And Air-Conditioning . New Delhi: PHI learning. p. 258.

ISBN 978-81-203-3360-4 .

Further reading [ edit ] Levy, A.; Kosloff, R. (2012). "Quantum Absorption Refrigerator".

Phys. Rev. Lett .

108 (7): 070604.

arXiv : 1109.0728 .

Bibcode : 2012PhRvL.108g0604L .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevLett.108.070604 .

PMID 22401189 .

S2CID 6981288 .

External links [ edit ] Absorption Heat Pumps ( Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy ).

Arizona Energy Explanation with diagrams Lithium-Bromide / Water Cycle – Absorption Refrigeration for Campus Cooling at BYU.

American National Standards Institute .

"AHRI standard 560–2000 for absorption refrigerators" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2012-10-31 . Retrieved 2012-03-31 .

v t e Thermodynamic cycles External combustion / thermal Without phase change ( hot air engines ) Bell Coleman Brayton/Joule Carnot Ericsson Stirling Stirling (pseudo/adiabatic) Stoddard Manson With phase change Kalina Hygroscopic Rankine ( Organic Rankine ) Regenerative Internal combustion / thermal Atkinson Brayton/Joule Diesel Expander Gas-generator Homogeneous charge compression ignition Humphrey Lenoir Miller Otto Scuderi Staged combustion Mixed Combined HEHC Mixed/dual Refrigeration Hampson–Linde Kleemenko Pulse tube Regenerative cooling Transcritical Vapor absorption Vapor-compression Siemens Vuilleumier Ionocaloric v t e Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning Fundamental concepts Air changes per hour (ACH) Bake-out Building envelope Convection Dilution Domestic energy consumption Enthalpy Fluid dynamics Gas compressor Heat pump and refrigeration cycle Heat transfer Humidity Infiltration Latent heat Noise control Outgassing Particulates Psychrometrics Sensible heat Stack effect Thermal comfort Thermal destratification Thermal mass Thermodynamics Vapour pressure of water Technology Absorption-compression heat pump Absorption refrigerator Air barrier Air conditioning Antifreeze Automobile air conditioning Autonomous building Building insulation materials Central heating Central solar heating Chilled beam Chilled water Constant air volume (CAV) Coolant Cross ventilation Dedicated outdoor air system (DOAS) Deep water source cooling Demand controlled ventilation (DCV) Displacement ventilation District cooling District heating Electric heating Energy recovery ventilation (ERV) Firestop Forced-air Forced-air gas Free cooling Heat recovery ventilation (HRV) Hybrid heat Hydronics Ice storage air conditioning Kitchen ventilation Mixed-mode ventilation Microgeneration Passive cooling Passive daytime radiative cooling Passive house Passive ventilation Radiant heating and cooling Radiant cooling Radiant heating Radon mitigation Refrigeration Renewable heat Room air distribution Solar air heat Solar combisystem Solar cooling Solar heating Thermal insulation Thermosiphon Underfloor air distribution Underfloor heating Vapor barrier Vapor-compression refrigeration (VCRS) Variable air volume (VAV) Variable refrigerant flow (VRF) Ventilation Water heat recycling Components Air conditioner inverter Air door Air filter Air handler Air ionizer Air-mixing plenum Air purifier Air source heat pump Attic fan Automatic balancing valve Back boiler Barrier pipe Blast damper Boiler Centrifugal fan Ceramic heater Chiller Condensate pump Condenser Condensing boiler Convection heater Compressor Cooling tower Damper Dehumidifier Duct Economizer Electrostatic precipitator Evaporative cooler Evaporator Exhaust hood Expansion tank Fan Fan coil unit Fan filter unit Fan heater Fire damper Fireplace Fireplace insert Freeze stat Flue Freon Fume hood Furnace Gas compressor Gas heater Gasoline heater Grease duct Grille Ground-coupled heat exchanger Ground source heat pump Heat exchanger Heat pipe Heat pump Heating film Heating system HEPA High efficiency glandless circulating pump High-pressure cut-off switch Humidifier Infrared heater Inverter compressor Kerosene heater Louver Mechanical room Oil heater Packaged terminal air conditioner Plenum space Pressurisation ductwork Process duct work Radiator Radiator reflector Recuperator Refrigerant Register Reversing valve Run-around coil Sail switch Scroll compressor Solar chimney Solar-assisted heat pump Space heater Smoke canopy Smoke damper Smoke exhaust ductwork Thermal expansion valve Thermal wheel Thermostatic radiator valve Trickle vent Trombe wall TurboSwing Turning vanes Ultra-low particulate air (ULPA) Whole-house fan Windcatcher Wood-burning stove Zone valve Measurement and control Air flow meter Aquastat BACnet Blower door Building automation Carbon dioxide sensor Clean air delivery rate (CADR) Control valve Gas detector Home energy monitor Humidistat HVAC control system Infrared thermometer Intelligent buildings LonWorks Minimum efficiency reporting value (MERV) Normal temperature and pressure (NTP) OpenTherm Programmable communicating thermostat Programmable thermostat Psychrometrics Room temperature Smart thermostat Standard temperature and pressure (STP) Thermographic camera Thermostat Thermostatic radiator valve Professions, trades, and services Architectural acoustics Architectural engineering Architectural technologist Building services engineering Building information modeling (BIM) Deep energy retrofit Duct cleaning Duct leakage testing Environmental engineering Hydronic balancing Kitchen exhaust cleaning Mechanical engineering Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing Mold growth, assessment, and remediation Refrigerant reclamation Testing, adjusting, balancing Industry organizations AHRI AMCA ASHRAE ASTM International BRE BSRIA CIBSE Institute of Refrigeration IIR LEED SMACNA UMC Health and safety Indoor air quality (IAQ) Passive smoking Sick building syndrome (SBS) Volatile organic compound (VOC) See also ASHRAE Handbook Building science Fireproofing Glossary of HVAC terms Warm Spaces World Refrigeration Day Template:Fire protection Template:Home automation Template:Solar energy Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Absorption_refrigerator&oldid=1304505881 " Categories : Thermodynamic cycles Heat pumps Cooling technology Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning Gas technologies Refrigerators Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 6 August 2025, at 12:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Absorption refrigerator 23 languages Add topic

