Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Unit processing in chemical process 2 Academic research institutes in process chemistry 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Chemical process 23 languages العربية Bosanski Català Dansk Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Português Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Change in matter of constant composition, usually involving other such matters This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Chemical process" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Part of a series on Chemical engineering Outline History Index Fundamentals Industry Engineer Process Unit operations Kinetics Transport phenomena Unit processes Chemical plant Chemical reactor Separation processes Aspects Heat transfer Mass transfer Fluid dynamics Process design Process control Chemical thermodynamics Reaction engineering Process safety Glossaries Glossary of chemistry Glossary of engineering A–L M–Z Category v t e In a scientific sense, a chemical process is a method or means of somehow changing one or more chemicals or chemical compounds .

[ 1 ] Such a chemical process can occur by itself or be caused by an outside force, and involves a chemical reaction of some sort. In an " engineering " sense, a chemical process is a method intended to be used in manufacturing or on an industrial scale (see Industrial process ) to change the composition of chemical(s) or material(s), usually using technology similar or related to that used in chemical plants or the chemical industry .

Neither of these definitions are exact in the sense that one can always tell definitively what is a chemical process and what is not; they are practical definitions.  There is also significant overlap in these two definition variations.   Because of the inexactness of the definition, chemists and other scientists use the term "chemical process" only in a general sense or in the engineering sense.  However, in the "process (engineering)" sense, the term "chemical process" is used extensively.  The rest of the article will cover the engineering type of chemical processes.

Although this type of chemical process may sometimes involve only one step, often multiple steps, referred to as unit operations , are involved.  In a plant ,   each of the unit operations commonly occur in individual vessels or sections of the plant called units .  Often, one or more chemical reactions are involved, but other ways of changing chemical (or material) composition may be used, such as mixing or separation processes .  The process steps may be sequential in time or sequential in space along a stream of flowing or moving material; see Chemical plant .  For a given amount of a feed (input) material or product (output) material, an expected amount of material can be determined at key steps in the process from empirical data and material balance calculations.  These amounts can be scaled up or down to suit the desired capacity or operation of a particular chemical plant built for such a process.  More than one chemical plant may use the same chemical process, each plant perhaps at differently scaled capacities.  
Chemical processes like distillation and crystallization go back to alchemy in Alexandria , Egypt .

Such chemical processes can be illustrated generally as block flow diagrams or in more detail as process flow diagrams .  Block flow diagrams show the units as blocks and the streams flowing between them as connecting lines with arrowheads to show direction of flow.

In addition to chemical plants for producing chemicals, chemical processes with similar technology and equipment are also used in oil refining and other refineries , natural gas processing , polymer and pharmaceutical manufacturing, food processing , and water and wastewater treatment .

Unit processing in chemical process [ edit ] Unit processing is the basic processing in chemical engineering .  Together with unit operations it forms the main principle of the varied chemical industries.  Each genre of unit processing follows the same chemical law much as each genre of unit operations follows the same physical law.

Chemical engineering unit processing consists of the following important processes: Fractionation Decontamination Distillation Filtration Oxidation Reduction Refining / Refining (metallurgy) Hydrogenation Dehydrogenation Hydrolysis Hydration Dehydration Halogenation Nitrification Sulfonation Amination Alkylation Dealkylation Esterification Polymerization Polycondensation Purification Catalysis Academic research institutes in process chemistry [ edit ] Institute of Process Research & Development , University of Leeds See also [ edit ] Chemical plant Chemical reaction Foam fractionation Industrial process Process (engineering) Separation process References [ edit ] ^ Solen, Kenneth A. (2005).

Introduction to Chemical Process: Fundamentals & Design . Boston: McGraw-Hill Custom Publishing. p. 3.

ISBN 978-0073407937 .

v t e Chemical engineering topics History History of chemical engineering Concepts Unit operations Unit processes Chemical engineer Chemical process Unit operations Momentum transfer Heat transfer Mass transfer Unit process Chemical reaction engineering Chemical kinetics Chemical process modeling Branches Chemical thermodynamics Chemical plant design Fluid dynamics Process design Process safety Transport phenomena Others Outline of chemical engineering Index of chemical engineering articles Education for Chemical Engineers List of chemical engineers List of chemical engineering societies List of chemical process simulators Category Portal:Engineering Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Chemical_process&oldid=1242455648 " Categories : Chemical processes Secondary sector of the economy Industrial processes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from February 2024 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 26 August 2024, at 21:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Chemical process 23 languages Add topic

