Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology and origin 2 Practice Toggle Practice subsection 2.1 Cutting from live plants 3 Legality 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Proplifting Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia The examples and perspective in this article deal primarily with North America and do not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this article , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new article , as appropriate.

( September 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Practice of taking discarded plant material and propagating new plants from them A sign at a garden center asking people not to proplift, which it defines as taking cuttings Succulent leaves being propagated Proplifting (sometimes written prop-lifting [ 1 ] ) is the practice of taking discarded plant material and propagating new plants from them.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Some proplifters engage with the hobby as a form of self-administered horticultural therapy .

[ 4 ] Etymology and origin [ edit ] The word is a portmanteau of 'propagate' and ' shoplifting '.

[ 4 ] However, this derivation is misleading as ethical proplifters are advised to seek permission first to take such floor sweepings.

[ 4 ] Though much of the material would be thrown out, it is technically the property of the store or business where found. Also, ethical proplifting excludes the practice of removing leaves from living plants as such unauthorized removal is theft.

[ 2 ] The term was coined by Sarina Daniels, the founder of the r/proplifting subreddit , as a joke, while she was participating in r/Succulents in 2017.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] Though what started as a joke quickly became an on-line community of dedicated practitioners that has surprised its founder.

[ 4 ] Even so, proplifting practitioners have been accused of being common thieves.

[ 4 ] [ 6 ] Practice [ edit ] Practitioners often gather fallen leaves of succulents and other plants from the floors of big-box stores .

[ 7 ] Proponents state the practice rescues something that would otherwise go to waste, and gives the plants a new chance at life.

[ 4 ] It is also touted as much more economical than purchasing full-grown plants.

[ 4 ] Some chains have even publicly approved of the practice.

[ 8 ] Proplifting from smaller stores is discouraged as often these stores will propagate the material themselves.

[ 7 ] Cutting from live plants [ edit ] Clipping off pieces of living plants for sale is a discouraged practice even among proponents of proplifting.

[ 9 ] [ 7 ] This practice is becoming more common, and not just at large corporate chains.

[ 7 ] Smaller stores also have lost revenue when they cannot sell plants that have been damaged by cutting, [ 7 ] and even San Diego Botanic Garden was targeted by plant thieves cutting living plants.

[ 1 ] Enthusiasts are strongly encouraged by the community not to clip live plants and to trade or buy rarer cuttings within the community instead.

[ 7 ] [ 9 ] Despite communities of proplifters encouraging asking permission and discouraging cutting and outright theft, others see it as a slippery slope from one to the other.

[ 5 ] Legality [ edit ] Some plants cannot be propagated legally at all, even if purchased. In the United States such actions may violate the Plant Patent Act of 1930 or the Plant Variety Protection Act of 1970 . In the United States, there is no common law expectation of privacy for discarded materials , [ 10 ] making the collection of plant material from garbage legal.

See also [ edit ] Seed bombing Plant poaching The Orchid Thief Guerrilla gardening Dumpster diving References [ edit ] ^ a b Meyer, Matt (12 March 2021).

"Experts warn of houseplant black market after thief targets botanic garden" . Encinitas, CA: Nexstar Media Inc. Fox 5.

Archived from the original on 16 September 2021 . Retrieved 16 September 2021 .

^ a b Wilson, Tess (24 July 2018).

" "Proplifters" Are Getting Plants for Free from Big Box Stores" .

Apartment Therapy . Apartment Therapy, LLC . Retrieved 19 September 2021 .

^ " 'Proplifting' a budding trend" .

Star-Phoenix . Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. 4 August 2018. p. E.1.

ISSN 0832-4174 .

ProQuest 2082978933 .

Archived from the original on 16 September 2021 . Retrieved 15 September 2021 .

^ a b c d e f g h Brooke, Eliza (25 September 2019).

"This Booming Digital Community Is Obsessed With Bringing Plant Bits Back to Life" .

One Zero . Medium.

Archived from the original on 10 March 2021 . Retrieved 15 September 2021 .

^ a b Chapman, Gray (15 January 2020).

"A growing concern: is it ever OK to steal plant cuttings?" .

The Guardian .

Archived from the original on 16 September 2021 . Retrieved 16 September 2021 .

^ "I managed a garden center for years ... (Deleted Post)" .

r/proplifting . Reddit.Com. 12 August 2019 . Retrieved 19 September 2021 .

I managed a garden center for years and imagine how I felt when plants I'd grown and cared for became disfigured from people ripping off leaves. Many of my own plants are propagations but I only took what had fallen off. People like you are no better than common thieves.

^ a b c d e f Nance, Iseabel (20 May 2021).

"The ethics of proplifting and plant theft" .

The Daily of the University of Washington . Seattle, WA.

Archived from the original on 16 September 2021 . Retrieved 15 September 2021 .

^ Walmart [@Walmart] (1 September 2020).

"Replying to @bAlliecakes Good way to recycle. 🌱🥀🌿" ( Tweet ).

Archived from the original on 16 September 2021 . Retrieved 16 September 2021 – via Twitter .

^ a b Duer, Emma (2020).

"Rooted in Relationship" (PDF) .

SoFA Journal (4: Exchange). Portland, Oregon: PSU Art + Social Practice: 28– 29.

Archived from the original on 16 September 2021 . Retrieved 15 September 2021 .

^ California v. Greenwood , 486 U.S.

35, 40 (1988) External links [ edit ] Proplifting subreddit at Reddit v t e Horticulture and gardening Gardening Allotment Arboretum Butterfly Climate-friendly gardening Community Forest Foodscaping French intensive Garden Garden design computer-aided Groundskeeping Garden tool Green wall Guerrilla Historic conservation History Native Parterre Proplifting Raised bed Square foot Sustainable Xeriscaping Types of gardens Alpine Ancient Egypt Australian Back Baroque Biblical Bog Botanical Bottle Butterfly Byzantine Cactus Colonial Color Communal Garden square Community Container Cottage Dutch East Asian Chinese Suzhou Cantonese Japanese Roji Zen Korean Vietnamese English Sharawadgi Fernery Floating Flower Formal French formal landscape Renaissance Front German Greek Greenhouse Hanging Islamic Italian Renaissance Keyhole Kitchen Knot Market Mary Medieval Monastic Mughal Orchard Indonesian home garden Persian Bāgh Charbagh Paradise Physic Pleasure Prairie Pollinator Rain Rock Roman Roof Rose Sacred School Scottish Sculpture Sensory Shade Shakespeare Shrubbery Spanish Tea Therapeutic Trial Tropical Victory Walled Water Wildlife Winter Zoological Horticulture Agriculture Permaculture stock-free sustainable urban Arboriculture Bonsai Saikei Botany Companion planting Crop most valuable Cutting Flora Floriculture Canada Taiwan Hügelkultur Fruticulture Genetically modified tree Hydroculture Indigenous Intercropping Landscape architecture Olericulture Plant breeding cuttings free-flowering propagation drought tolerance hardiness Pomology Postharvest physiology Roguing Tropical Urban agriculture horticulture forestry reforestation Viticulture Monoculture Organic Biodynamic agriculture Grafting List of organic gardening and farming topics Vegan organic agriculture Plant protection Fungicide Herbicide Index of pesticide articles List of fungicides List of insecticides Pesticide Plant disease forecasting Pruning Weed control Aquamog weed remover Related articles Community orchard Features Floral design Floristry Ikebana Groundskeeping Garden centre Garden tourism List of gardens Lists of plants Perennial Plant collecting Turf management Gardening portal Category Commons WikiProject Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Proplifting&oldid=1269085004 " Categories : Retailing-related crime Horticultural techniques Hidden categories: Articles with limited geographic scope from September 2021 North America-centric Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 January 2025, at 23:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Proplifting Add languages Add topic

