Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Noted philosophers Toggle Noted philosophers subsection 1.1 Mozi 1.2 Thomas Hobbes 1.3 John Locke 1.4 Montesquieu 1.5 Jean-Jacques Rousseau 1.6 David Hume 1.7 John Calhoun 1.8 Karl Marx 1.9 John Rawls 1.10 Robert Nozick 2 Between nations 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents State of nature 28 languages العربية Български Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Simple English Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hypothetical conditions of human life before society For other uses, see State of Nature .

In ethics , political philosophy , social contract theory , religion, and international law , the term state of nature describes the way of life that existed before humans organised themselves into societies or civilisations .

[ 1 ] Philosophers of the state of nature theory propose that there was a historical period before societies existed, and seek answers to the questions: "What was life like before civil society ?", "How did government emerge from such a primitive start?", and "What are the reasons for entering a state of society by establishing a nation-state?".

In some versions of social contract theory, there are freedoms, but no rights in the state of nature; and, by way of the social contract, people create societal rights and obligations. In other versions of social contract theory, society imposes restrictions (law, custom, tradition, etc.) that limit the natural rights of a person. Societies existing before the political state are investigated and studied as Mesolithic history, as archaeology , and as cultural anthropology , as social anthropology , and as ethnology to determine the particulars of the indigenous society's social structures and power structures.

Noted philosophers [ edit ] Mozi [ edit ] The early Warring States philosopher Mozi was one of the first thinkers in recorded history to develop the idea of the state of nature.

[ citation needed ] He developed the idea  to defend the need for a single overall ruler. According to Mozi, in the state of nature, each person has their own moral rules ( yi , 義). As a result, people were unable to reach agreements and resources were wasted. Since Mozi promoted ways of strengthening and unifying the state (li, 利 ), such natural dis-organisation was rejected: In the beginning of human life, when there was yet no law and government, the custom was "everybody according to his rule (yi, 義)." Accordingly each man had his own rule, two men had two different rules and ten men had eleven different rules -- the more people the more different notions. And everybody approved his own moral views and disapproved the views of others, and so arose mutual disapproval among men. As a result, father and son and elder and younger brothers became enemies and were estranged from each other, since they were unable to reach any agreement. Everybody worked for the disadvantage of the others with water, fire, and poison. Surplus energy was not spent for mutual aid; surplus goods were allowed to rot without sharing; excellent teachings ( dao , 道 ) were kept secret and not revealed. The disorder in the (human) world could be compared to that among birds and beasts. — Chapter 3 - 1 [ 2 ] His proposal was to unify rules according to a single moral system or standard (fa, 法) that can be used by anyone: calculating benefit of each act. In that way, the ruler of the state and his subjects will have the same moral system; cooperation and joint efforts will be the rule. Later his proposal would be strongly rejected by Confucianism (especially Mencius ) because of the preference of benefit over morals.

[ 3 ] Thomas Hobbes [ edit ] The pure state of nature, or "the natural condition of mankind", was described by the 17th century English philosopher Thomas Hobbes in Leviathan and his earlier work De Cive .

[ 4 ] Hobbes argued that natural inequalities between humans are not so great as to give anyone clear superiority; and thus all must live in constant fear of loss or violence; so that "during the time men live without a common power to keep them all in awe, they are in that condition which is called war; and such a war as is of every man against every man". In this state, every person has a natural right to do anything one thinks necessary for preserving one's own life, and life is "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short " ( Leviathan, Chapters XIII–XIV). Hobbes described this natural condition with the Latin phrase ( bellum omnium contra omnes ) meaning "war of all against all", in De Cive .

Within the state of nature, there is neither personal property nor injustice since there is no law, except for certain natural precepts discovered by reason (" laws of nature "): the first of which is "that every man ought to endeavour peace, as far as he has hope of obtaining it" ( Leviathan , Ch. XIV); and the second is "that a man be willing, when others are so too, as far forth as for peace and defence of himself he shall think it necessary, to lay down this right to all things; and be contented with so much liberty against other men as he would allow other men against himself" ( loc. cit.

). From here, Hobbes developed the way out of the state of nature into political society and government by mutual contracts .

According to Hobbes, the state of nature exists at all times among independent countries, over whom there is no law except for those same precepts or laws of nature ( Leviathan , Chapters XIII, XXX end). His view of the state of nature helped to serve as a basis for theories of international law and relations [ 5 ] and even some theories about domestic relations.

[ 6 ] John Locke [ edit ] John Locke considers the state of nature in his Second Treatise on Civil Government written around the time of the Exclusion Crisis in England during the 1680s. For Locke, in the state of nature all men are free "to order their actions, and dispose of their possessions and persons, as they think fit, within the bounds of the law of nature." (2nd Tr., §4). "The state of Nature has a law of Nature to govern it", and that law is reason. Locke believes that reason teaches that "no one ought to harm another in his life, liberty, and or property" (2nd Tr., §6) ; and that transgressions of this may be punished. Locke describes the state of nature and civil society to be opposites of each other, and the need for civil society comes in part from the perpetual existence of the state of nature.

[ 7 ] This view of the state of nature is partly deduced from Christian belief (unlike Hobbes, whose philosophy is not dependent upon any prior theology).

Although it may be natural to assume that Locke was responding to Hobbes, Locke never refers to Hobbes by name, and may instead have been responding to other writers of the day, like Robert Filmer .

[ 8 ] In fact, Locke's First Treatise is entirely a response to Filmer's Patriarcha , and takes a step by step method to refuting Filmer's theory set out in Patriarcha . The conservative party at the time had rallied behind Filmer's Patriarcha , whereas the Whigs, scared of another persecution of Protestants, rallied behind the theory set out by Locke in his Two Treatises of Government as it gave a clear theory as to why the people would be justified in overthrowing a monarchy which abuses the trust they had placed in it.

[ citation needed ] Montesquieu [ edit ] Montesquieu makes use of the concept of the state of nature in his The Spirit of the Laws , first printed in 1748. Montesquieu states the thought process behind early human beings before the formation of society. He says that human beings would have the faculty of knowing and would first think to preserve their life in the state. Human beings would also at first feel themselves to be impotent and weak. As a result, humans would not be likely to attack each other in this state. Next, humans would seek nourishment and, out of fear and impulse, would eventually unite to create society. Once society was created, a state of war would ensue amongst societies, which would all have been created the same way. The purpose of war is the preservation of the society and the self. The formation of law within society is the reflection and application of reason for Montesquieu.

[ 9 ] Jean-Jacques Rousseau [ edit ] Hobbes' view was challenged in the eighteenth century [ 10 ] by Jean-Jacques Rousseau , who claimed that Hobbes was taking socialized people and simply imagining them living outside of the society in which they were raised. He affirmed instead that people were neither good nor bad, but were born as a blank slate, and later society and the environment influence which way we lean. In Rousseau's state of nature, people did not know each other enough to come into serious conflict and they did have normal values. The modern society, and the inception of private property, is blamed for the disruption of the state of nature which Rousseau sees as true freedom.

[ 11 ] David Hume [ edit ] David Hume offers in A Treatise of Human Nature (1739) that human beings are naturally social: "'Tis utterly impossible for men to remain any considerable time in that savage condition, which precedes society; but that his very first state and situation may justly be esteem'd social. This, however, hinders not, but that philosophers may, if they please, extend their reasoning to the suppos'd state of nature; provided they allow it to be a mere philosophical fiction, which never had, and never could have any reality." [ 12 ] Hume's ideas about human nature expressed in the Treatise suggest that he would be happy with neither Hobbes' nor his contemporary Rousseau's thought-experiments. He explicitly derides as incredible the hypothetical humanity described in Hobbes' Leviathan .

[ 13 ] Additionally, he argues in "Of the Origin of Justice and Property" that if mankind were universally benevolent, we would not hold Justice to be a virtue: "’tis only from the selfishness and confin’d generosity of men, along with the scanty provision nature has made for his wants, that justice derives its origin." [ 12 ] John Calhoun [ edit ] John C. Calhoun , in his A Disquisition on Government (1851), wrote that a state of nature is merely hypothetical and argues that the concept is self-contradictory and that political states naturally always existed.

It is, indeed, difficult to explain how an opinion so destitute of all sound reason, ever could have been so extensively entertained. . . . I refer to the assertion, that all men are equal in the state of nature; meaning, by a state of nature, a state of individuality, supposed to have existed prior to the social and political state; and in which men lived apart and independent of each other. . . . But such a state is purely hypothetical. It never did, nor can exist; as it is inconsistent with the preservation and perpetuation of the race. It is, therefore, a great misnomer to call it the state of nature . Instead of being the natural state of man, it is, of all conceivable states, the most opposed to his nature—most repugnant to his feelings, and most incompatible with his wants. His natural state is, the social and political—the one for which his Creator made him, and the only one in which he can preserve and perfect his race. As, then, there never was such a state as the, so-called, state of nature, and never can be, it follows, that men, instead of being born in it, are born in the social and political state; and of course, instead of being born free and equal, are born subject, not only to parental authority, but to the laws and institutions of the country where born, and under whose protection they draw their first breath.

[ 14 ] Karl Marx [ edit ] Karl Marx's concept of primitive communism —or the economic mode of production before the development of class systems—may be seen as analogous to the state of nature.

John Rawls [ edit ] John Rawls used what amounted to an artificial state of nature. To develop his theory of justice , Rawls places everyone in the original position . The original position is a hypothetical state of nature used as a thought experiment . People in the original position have no society and are under a veil of ignorance that prevents them from knowing how they may benefit from society. They lack foreknowledge of their intelligence, wealth, or abilities. Rawls reasons that people in the original position would want a society where they had their basic liberties protected and where they had some economic guarantees as well. If society were to be constructed from scratch through a social agreement between individuals, these principles would be the expected basis of such an agreement. Thus, these principles should form the basis of real, modern societies since everyone should consent to them if society were organized from scratch in fair agreements.

Robert Nozick [ edit ] Rawls' Harvard colleague Robert Nozick countered the liberal A Theory of Justice with the libertarian Anarchy, State, and Utopia , also grounded in the state of nature tradition.

[ 15 ] Nozick argued that a minimalist state of property rights and basic law enforcement would develop out of a state of nature without violating anyone's rights or using force. Mutual agreements among individuals rather than social contract would lead to this minimal state.

Between nations [ edit ] In Hobbes' view, once a civil government is instituted, the state of nature has disappeared between individuals because of the civil power which exists to enforce contracts and the laws of nature generally. Between nations, however, no such power exists and therefore nations have the same rights to preserve themselves—including making war—as individuals possessed. Such a conclusion led some writers to the idea of an association of nations or worldwide civil society , an example being Immanuel Kant 's work on perpetual peace .

Rawls also examines the state of nature between nations. In his work the Law of Peoples , Rawls applies a modified version of his original position thought experiment to international relationships. Rawls says that peoples, not states, form the basic unit that should be examined. States should be encouraged to follow the principles from Rawls' earlier A Theory of Justice .

Democracy seems like it would be the most logical means of accomplishing these goals, but benign non-democracies should be seen as acceptable at the international stage. Rawls develops eight principles for how a people should act on an international stage.

Within international relations theory , anarchy is the state of affairs wherein nations exist without a higher power to govern them. The three principal schools of international relations theory hold different beliefs about anarchy and how to approach it.

Realism approaches global politics as if the world's nations were each an individual under a state of nature: it tends to take anarchy for granted, and does not see a solution to it as possible or even necessarily desirable.

Liberalism claims that anarchy may be mitigated through the spread of liberal democracy and the use of international organizations , thus creating a global civil society; this approach may be summed up by the words of George H. W. Bush , who sought to create "a world where the rule of law, not the law of the jungle, governs the conduct of nations".

[ 16 ] Constructivist theorists, like liberals, also do not see anarchy as a given in international affairs, but are open to other approaches besides those given by realists and liberals.

See also [ edit ] Natural law Law of the jungle Antisocial personality disorder Noble savage Primitive communism Primitivism References [ edit ] ^ de Vattel, Emer , The Law of Nations , Preliminaries. Idea and General Principles. §4.

^ Adapted from Mei translation of the.

Mozi . Retrieved 18 September 2017 .

{{ cite book }} : |website= ignored ( help ) ^ Hansen, Chad (2000-08-17).

A Daoist Theory of Chinese Thought: A Philosophical Interpretation . Oxford University Press. pp.

158– 162.

ISBN 9780195350760 .

^ Hobbes, Thomas, Leviathan . 1651. Edwin Curley (Ed.) 1994. Hackett Publishing.

^ Yurdusev, A. Nuri (June 2006).

"Thomas Hobbes and international relations: from realism to rationalism" (PDF) .

Australian Journal of International Affairs .

60 (2): 305.

doi : 10.1080/10357710600696191 .

S2CID 214613777 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 August 2014 . Retrieved 2 February 2016 .

^ Donelson, Raff (2017). "Blacks, Cops, and the State of Nature".

Ohio State Journal of Criminal Law .

15 (1): 183– 192.

SSRN 2941467 .

^ Goldwin, Robert (March 1976). "Locke's State of Nature in Political Society".

The Western Political Quarterly .

29 (1): 126– 135.

doi : 10.2307/447588 .

JSTOR 447588 .

^ Skinner, Quentin .

Visions of Politics . Cambridge.

^ Translated by Thomas Nugent, revised by J. V. Prichard. Based on edition published in 1914 by G. Bell & Sons, Ltd., London. Rendered into HTML and text by Jon Roland of the Constitution Society, where the full text of this document may be found, Book 2 ^ "Hobbes vs Rousseau: Are We Inherently Evil or Good?" .

IAI TV - Changing how the world thinks . 2019-03-12 . Retrieved 2019-10-17 .

^ Jean-Jacques Rousseau, A Discourse on Inequality ^ a b Hume, David (1739).

A Treatise of Human Nature . Project Gutenberg. pp. Book III, Part II, Section II . Retrieved 2 February 2016 .

^ Hume, David (1739).

A Treatise of Human Nature . Project Gutenberg. pp. Book II, Part III, Section I . Retrieved 2 February 2016 .

^ Calhoun, John C. (1851).

A Disquisition on Government . In The Works of John C. Calhoun , edited by Richard K. Cralle. Vol. 1. New York: D. Appleton and Company, 1854. pp. 57–9.

^ Rothbard, Murray N.

(1977).

"Robert Nozick and the Immaculate Conception of the State" (PDF) .

Journal of Libertarian Studies . 1, Num 1.: 45– 47.

^ Jorgensen, Malcolm (2020).

American Foreign Policy Ideology and the International Rule of Law: Contesting Power through the International Criminal Court . Cambridge University Press. p. 2.

doi : 10.1017/9781108630658 .

ISBN 9781108481434 .

S2CID 216539635 .

v t e Political philosophy Terms Authority Citizenship‎ Duty Elite Emancipation Freedom Government Hegemony Hierarchy Justice Law Legitimacy Liberty Monopoly Nation Obedience Peace People Pluralism Power Progress Propaganda Property Regime Revolution Rights Ruling class Society Sovereignty‎ State Utopia War Government Aristocracy Oligarchy Autocracy Bureaucracy Dictatorship Democracy Ochlocracy Gerontocracy Meritocracy Monarchy Tyranny Plutocracy Technocracy Theocracy Ideologies Agrarianism Anarchism Capitalism Christian democracy Colonialism Communism Communitarianism Confucianism Conservatism Corporatism Distributism Environmentalism Fascism Feminism Feudalism Imperialism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Localism Marxism Monarchism Multiculturalism Nationalism Nazism Populism Republicanism Social Darwinism Social democracy Socialism Third Way Concepts Balance of power Bellum omnium contra omnes Body politic Clash of civilizations Common good Consent of the governed Divine right of kings Family as a model for the state Monopoly on violence Natural law Negative and positive rights Night-watchman state Noble lie Noblesse oblige Open society Ordered liberty Original position Overton window Separation of powers Social contract State of nature Statolatry Supermajority Tyranny of the majority Philosophers Antiquity Aristotle Chanakya Cicero Confucius Han Fei Lactantius Mencius Mozi Plato political philosophy Polybius Shang Sun Tzu Thucydides Xenophon Middle Ages Al-Farabi Aquinas Averroes Bruni Dante Gelasius al-Ghazali Ibn Khaldun Marsilius Muhammad Nizam al-Mulk Ockham Plethon Wang Early modern period Boétie Bodin Bossuet Calvin Campanella Filmer Grotius Guicciardini Hobbes political philosophy James Leibniz Locke Luther Machiavelli Milton More Müntzer Pufendorf Spinoza Suárez 18th and 19th centuries Bakunin Bastiat Beccaria Bentham Bolingbroke Bonald Burke Carlyle Comte Condorcet Constant Cortés Engels Fichte Fourier Franklin Godwin Haller Hegel Herder Hume Iqbal Jefferson Kant political philosophy Le Bon Le Play Madison Maistre Marx Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Nietzsche Owen Paine Renan Rousseau Sade Saint-Simon Smith Spencer de Staël Stirner Taine Thoreau Tocqueville Tucker Voltaire 20th and 21st centuries Agamben Ambedkar Arendt Aron Badiou Bauman Benoist Berlin Bernstein Burnham Chomsky Dmowski Du Bois Dugin Dworkin Evola Foucault Fromm Fukuyama Gandhi Gentile Gramsci Guénon Habermas Hayek Hoppe Huntington Kautsky Khomeini Kirk Kropotkin Laclau Lenin Luxemburg Mansfield Mao Marcuse Maurras Michels Mises Mosca Mouffe Negri Nozick Nussbaum Oakeshott Ortega Pareto Popper Qutb Rand Rawls Röpke Rothbard Russell Sartre Schmitt Scruton Shariati Sorel Spann Spengler Strauss Sun Taylor Voegelin Walzer Weber Works Republic (c. 375 BC) Politics (c. 350 BC) On the Republic (51 BC) Treatise on Law (c. 1274) Monarchy (1313) The Prince (1532) Leviathan (1651) Two Treatises of Government (1689) The Spirit of Law (1748) The Social Contract (1762) Reflections on the Revolution in France (1790) Rights of Man (1791) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Democracy in America (1835–1840) The Communist Manifesto (1848) On Liberty (1859) The Revolt of the Masses (1929) The Road to Serfdom (1944) The Open Society and Its Enemies (1945) The Origins of Totalitarianism (1951) A Theory of Justice (1971) The End of History and the Last Man (1992) Related Authoritarianism Collectivism and individualism Conflict theories Contractualism Critique of political economy Egalitarianism Elite theory Elitism History of political thought Institutional discrimination Jurisprudence Justification for the state Political ethics Political spectrum Left-wing politics Centrism Right-wing politics Political theology Political violence Separation of church and state Separatism Social justice Statism Totalitarianism Category:Political philosophy v t e Thomas Hobbes Concepts and philosophy Bellum omnium contra omnes Moral and political philosophy Hobbes–Wallis controversy Multitude Scientia potentia est Social contract State of nature Publications De Cive (1642) Leviathan (1651) De Corpore (1655) Behemoth (1681) Legacy Hobbes Studies Leviathan and the Air-Pump Authority control databases : National Germany Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=State_of_nature&oldid=1298744977 " Categories : Concepts in political philosophy Enlightenment philosophy John Locke Thomas Hobbes Hidden categories: CS1 errors: periodical ignored CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from February 2016 Articles containing Latin-language text Articles containing French-language text This page was last edited on 4 July 2025, at 11:52 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents State of nature 28 languages Add topic

