Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Signs and symptoms 2 Cause Toggle Cause subsection 2.1 Motion felt but not seen 2.1.1 Carsickness 2.1.2 Airsickness 2.1.3 Seasickness 2.1.4 Centrifuge motion sickness 2.1.5 Dizziness due to spinning 2.1.6 Virtual reality 2.1.7 Virtual reality to reverse motion sickness 2.2 Motion seen but not felt 2.2.1 Space motion sickness 2.2.2 Screen images 2.2.3 Virtual reality 2.3 Motion that is seen and felt 3 Pathophysiology Toggle Pathophysiology subsection 3.1 Sensory conflict theory 3.2 Neural mismatch 3.3 Defense against poisoning 3.4 Nystagmus hypothesis 4 Diagnosis 5 Treatment Toggle Treatment subsection 5.1 Behavioral measures 5.2 Medication 5.2.1 Scopolamine (antimuscarinic) 5.2.2 Antihistamines 5.2.3 Amphetamines 5.3 Alternative medicine 6 Epidemiology 7 See also 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Motion sickness 50 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gaeilge 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Latviešu Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål ଓଡ଼ିଆ Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ភាសាខ្មែរ Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Татарча / tatarça ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Sea sickness ) Nausea caused by motion or perceived motion For other uses, see Motion Sickness (disambiguation) .

Medical condition Motion sickness Other names Kinetosis, travel sickness, mal de mer, seasickness, airsickness , carsickness, simulation sickness, space motion sickness, space adaptation syndrome A drawing of people with seasickness from 1841 Specialty Neurology Symptoms Nausea , vomiting , cold sweat, increased salivation [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Complications Dehydration , electrolyte problems , lower esophageal tear [ 2 ] Causes Real or perceived motion [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Risk factors Pregnancy , migraines , Ménière's disease [ 2 ] Diagnostic method Based on symptoms [ 2 ] Differential diagnosis Benign paroxysmal positional vertigo , vestibular migraine , stroke [ 2 ] Prevention Avoidance of triggers [ 2 ] Treatment Behavioral measures, medications [ 3 ] Medication Scopolamine , dimenhydrinate , dexamphetamine [ 3 ] Prognosis Generally resolve within a day [ 2 ] Frequency Nearly all people with sufficient motion; roughly one-third highly susceptible [ 3 ] Motion sickness occurs due to a difference between actual and expected motion.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 4 ] Symptoms commonly include nausea , vomiting , cold sweat, headache, dizziness , tiredness, loss of appetite, and increased salivation .

[ 1 ] [ 5 ] Complications may rarely include dehydration , electrolyte problems , or a lower esophageal tear .

[ 2 ] The cause of motion sickness is either real or perceived motion.

[ 2 ] This may include car travel, air travel, sea travel, space travel , or reality simulation .

[ 2 ] Risk factors include pregnancy , migraines , and Ménière's disease .

[ 2 ] The diagnosis is based on symptoms.

[ 2 ] Treatment may include behavioral measures or medications.

[ 3 ] Behavioral measures include keeping the head still and focusing on the horizon .

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] Three types of medications are useful: antimuscarinics such as scopolamine , H 1 antihistamines such as dimenhydrinate , and amphetamines such as dexamphetamine .

[ 3 ] Side effects, however, may limit the use of medications.

[ 3 ] A number of medications used for nausea such as ondansetron are not effective for motion sickness.

[ 3 ] Many people can be affected with sufficient motion [ 2 ] and some people will experience motion sickness at least once in their lifetime.

[ 8 ] Susceptibility, however, is variable, with about one-third of the population being susceptible while other people can be affected only under very extreme conditions.

[ 2 ] Women can be more easily affected than men.

[ 9 ] Motion sickness has been described since at least the time of Homer ( c.

eighth century BC).

[ 10 ] Signs and symptoms [ edit ] Symptoms commonly include nausea , vomiting , cold sweat, headache, dizziness , tiredness, loss of appetite, and increased salivation .

[ 2 ] [ 5 ] Occasionally, tiredness can last for hours to days after an episode of motion sickness, known as " sopite syndrome ".

[ 2 ] Rarely severe symptoms such as the inability to walk, ongoing vomiting, or social isolation may occur while rare complications may include dehydration , electrolyte problems , or a lower esophageal tear from severe vomiting.

[ 2 ] Cause [ edit ] Motion sickness can be divided into three categories: [ citation needed ] Motion sickness caused by motion that is felt but not seen i.e. terrestrial motion sickness; Motion sickness caused by motion that is seen but not felt i.e. space motion sickness; Motion sickness caused when both systems detect motion but they do not correspond i.e. either terrestrial or space motion sickness.

Motion felt but not seen [ edit ] In these cases, motion is sensed by the vestibular system and hence the motion is felt, but no motion or little motion is detected by the visual system , as in terrestrial motion sickness.

[ citation needed ] Carsickness [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Motion sickness" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( February 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A specific form of terrestrial motion sickness, being carsick is quite common and evidenced by disorientation while reading a map, a book, or a small screen during travel. Carsickness results from the sensory conflict arising in the brain from differing sensory inputs. Motion sickness is caused by a conflict between signals arriving in the brain from the inner ear , which forms the base of the vestibular system , the sensory apparatus that deals with movement and balance, and which detects motion mechanically. If someone is looking at a stationary object within a vehicle, such as a magazine, their eyes will inform their brain that what they are viewing is not moving. Their inner ears, however, will contradict this by sensing the motion of the vehicle.

[ 11 ] Varying theories exist as to cause. The sensory conflict theory notes that the eyes view motion while riding in the moving vehicle while other body sensors sense stillness, creating conflict between the eyes and inner ear. Another suggests the eyes mostly see the interior of the car which is motionless while the vestibular system of the inner ear senses motion as the vehicle goes around corners or over hills and even small bumps. Therefore, the effect is worse when looking down but may be lessened by looking outside of the vehicle.

In the early 20th century, Austro-Hungarian scientist Róbert Bárány observed the back and forth movement of the eyes of railroad passengers as they looked out the side windows at the scenery whipping by. He called this "railway nystagmus ", also known as "optokinetic nystagmus". His findings were published in the journal Laeger , 83:1516, Nov.17, 1921.

Airsickness [ edit ] Main article: Airsickness Air sickness is a kind of terrestrial motion sickness induced by certain sensations of air travel.

[ 12 ] It is a specific form of motion sickness and is considered a normal response in healthy individuals. It is essentially the same as carsickness but occurs in an airplane. An airplane may bank and tilt sharply, and unless passengers are sitting by a window, they are likely to see only the stationary interior of the plane due to the small window sizes and during flights at night. Another factor is that while in flight, the view out of windows may be blocked by clouds, preventing passengers from seeing the moving ground or passing clouds.

[ citation needed ] Seasickness [ edit ] Seasickness is a form of terrestrial motion sickness characterized by a feeling of nausea and, in extreme cases, vertigo experienced after spending time on a boat.

[ 12 ] It is essentially the same as carsickness, though the motion of a watercraft tends to be more regular. It is typically brought on by the rocking motion of the craft [ 13 ] [ 14 ] or movement while the craft is immersed in water.

[ 15 ] As with airsickness, it can be difficult to visually detect motion even if one looks outside the boat since water does not offer fixed points with which to visually judge motion. Poor visibility conditions, such as fog, may worsen seasickness. The greatest contributor to seasickness is the tendency for people being affected by the rolling or surging motions of the craft to seek refuge below decks, where they are unable to relate themselves to the boat's surroundings and consequent motion. Some people with carsickness are resistant to seasickness and vice versa.

[ citation needed ] Adjusting to the craft's motion at sea is called "gaining one's sea legs"; it can take a significant portion of the time spent at sea after disembarking to regain a sense of stability "post-sea legs".

Centrifuge motion sickness [ edit ] Rotating devices such as centrifuges used in astronaut training and amusement park rides such as the Rotor , Mission: Space and the Gravitron can cause motion sickness in many people.  While the interior of the centrifuge does not appear to move, one will experience a sense of motion.

[ dubious – discuss ] In addition, centrifugal force can cause the vestibular system to give one the sense that downward is in the direction away from the center of the centrifuge rather than the true downward direction.

[ 16 ] Dizziness due to spinning [ edit ] When one spins and stops suddenly, fluid in the inner ear continues to rotate causing a sense of continued spinning while one's visual system no longer detects motion.

[ citation needed ] Virtual reality [ edit ] Main article: Virtual reality sickness Usually, VR programs would detect the motion of the user's head and adjust the rotation of vision to avoid dizziness. However, some cases such as system lagging or software crashing could cause lags in the screen updates. In such cases, even some small head motions could trigger the motion sickness by the defense mechanism mentioned below: the inner ear transmits to the brain that it senses motion, but the eyes tell the brain that everything is still.

Virtual reality to reverse motion sickness [ edit ] Main article: Virtual reality sickness Recent research has shown that virtual reality can also be used therapeutically to reverse seasickness by reintroducing visual cues that align more closely with the body’s sense of motion. One effective approach involves simulating a stable artificial horizon within the headset while simultaneously introducing low-amplitude visual motion that matches the real movement of the vessel, such as pitch, roll, and heave. By restoring coherence between visual and vestibular input, this method can help the brain reestablish sensory integration, thereby reducing or even eliminating symptoms of motion sickness within minutes. Systems that synchronize VR environments with vessel dynamics have demonstrated significant promise in field trials.

[ 17 ] It may also be noted that commercial VR products based on this approach now exist , and some have gained traction in the marine industry for their proven effectiveness in reversing seasickness within approximately 12 minutes , without the side effects commonly associated with pharmaceutical interventions.

Motion seen but not felt [ edit ] In these cases, motion is detected by the visual system and hence the motion is seen, but no motion or little motion is sensed by the vestibular system . Motion sickness arising from such situations has been referred to as "visually induced motion sickness" (VIMS).

[ 18 ] Space motion sickness [ edit ] Main article: Space adaptation syndrome Zero gravity interferes with the vestibular system's gravity-dependent operations, so that the two systems, vestibular and visual, no longer provide a unified and coherent sensory representation. This causes unpleasant disorientation sensations often quite distinct from terrestrial motion sickness, but with similar symptoms. The symptoms may be more intense because a condition caused by prolonged weightlessness is usually quite unfamiliar.

[ citation needed ] Space motion sickness was effectively unknown during the earliest spaceflights because the very cramped conditions of the spacecraft allowed for only minimal bodily motion, especially head motion. Space motion sickness seems to be aggravated by being able to freely move around, and so is more common in larger spacecraft.

[ 12 ] Around 60% of Space Shuttle astronauts experienced it on their first flight; the first case of space motion sickness is now thought to be the Soviet cosmonaut Gherman Titov , in August 1961 onboard Vostok 2 , who reported dizziness, nausea, and vomiting. The first severe cases were in early Apollo flights; Frank Borman on Apollo 8 and Rusty Schweickart on Apollo 9 . Both experienced identifiable and quite unpleasant symptoms—in the latter case causing the mission plan to be modified.

[ citation needed ] Screen images [ edit ] This type of terrestrial motion sickness is particularly prevalent when susceptible people are watching films presented on very large screens such as IMAX , but may also occur in regular format theaters or even when watching TV or playing games.  For the sake of novelty, IMAX and other panoramic type theaters often show dramatic motions such as flying over a landscape or riding a roller coaster .

In regular-format theaters, an example of a movie that caused motion sickness in many people is The Blair Witch Project .  Theaters warned patrons of its possible nauseating effects, cautioning pregnant women in particular.

Blair Witch was filmed with a handheld camcorder , which was subjected to considerably more motion than the average movie camera, [ 19 ] and lacks the stabilization mechanisms of steadicams .

Home movies, often filmed with a cell phone camera, also tend to cause motion sickness in those who view them.  The person holding the cell phone or other camera usually is unaware of this as the recording is being made since the sense of motion seems to match the motion seen through the camera's viewfinder.  Those who view the film afterward only see the movement, which may be considerable, without any sense of motion.  Using the zoom function seems to contribute to motion sickness as well since zooming is not a normal function of the eye.  The use of a tripod or a camera or cell phone with image stabilization while filming can reduce this effect.

[ citation needed ] Virtual reality [ edit ] See also: Virtual reality sickness Motion sickness due to virtual reality is very similar to simulation sickness and motion sickness due to films.

[ 20 ] In virtual reality the effect is made more acute as all external reference points are blocked from vision, the simulated images are three-dimensional and in some cases stereo sound that may also give a sense of motion. The NADS-1, a simulator located at the National Advanced Driving Simulator , is capable of accurately stimulating the vestibular system with a 360-degree horizontal field of view and 13 degrees of freedom motion base.

[ 21 ] Studies have shown that exposure to rotational motions in a virtual environment can cause significant increases in nausea and other symptoms of motion sickness.

[ 22 ] In a study conducted by the U.S. Army Research Institute for the Behavioral and Social Sciences in a report published May 1995 titled "Technical Report 1027 – Simulator Sickness in Virtual Environments", out of 742 pilot exposures from 11 military flight simulators, "approximately half of the pilots (334) reported post-effects of some kind: 250 (34%) reported that symptoms dissipated in less than one hour, 44 (6%) reported that symptoms lasted longer than four hours, and 28 (4%) reported that symptoms lasted longer than six hours. There were also four (1%) reported cases of spontaneously occurring flashbacks." [ 23 ] Motion that is seen and felt [ edit ] When moving within a rotating reference frame such as in a centrifuge or environment where gravity is simulated with centrifugal force, the coriolis effect causes a sense of motion in the vestibular system that does not match the motion that is seen.

[ citation needed ] Pathophysiology [ edit ] There are various hypotheses that attempt to explain the cause of the condition.

Sensory conflict theory [ edit ] Contemporary sensory conflict theory, referring to "a discontinuity between either visual, proprioceptive, and somatosensory input, or semicircular canal and otolith input", is probably the most thoroughly studied.

[ 24 ] According to this theory, when the brain presents the mind with two incongruous states of motion, the result is often nausea and other symptoms of disorientation known as motion sickness.

[ why?

] Such conditions happen when the vestibular system and the visual system do not present a synchronized and unified representation of one's body and surroundings.

[ 25 ] According to sensory conflict theory, the cause of terrestrial motion sickness is the opposite of the cause of space motion sickness. The former occurs when one perceives visually that one's surroundings are relatively immobile while the vestibular system reports that one's body is in motion relative to its surroundings.

[ 12 ] The latter can occur when the visual system perceives that one's surroundings are in motion while the vestibular system reports relative bodily immobility (as in zero gravity.) [ citation needed ] Neural mismatch [ edit ] A variation of the sensory conflict theory is known as neural mismatch, implying a mismatch occurring between ongoing sensory experience and long-term memory rather than between components of the vestibular and visual systems. This theory emphasizes "the limbic system in the integration of sensory information and long-term memory, in the expression of the symptoms of motion sickness, and the impact of anti-motion-sickness drugs and stress hormones on limbic system function. The limbic system may be the neural mismatch center of the brain." [ 26 ] Defense against poisoning [ edit ] It has also been proposed that motion sickness could function as a defense mechanism against neurotoxins .

[ 27 ] The area postrema in the brain is responsible for inducing vomiting when poisons are detected, and for resolving conflicts between vision and balance. When feeling motion but not seeing it (for example, in the cabin of a ship with no portholes), the inner ear transmits to the brain that it senses motion, but the eyes tell the brain that everything is still. As a result of the incongruity, the brain concludes that the individual is hallucinating and further concludes that the hallucination is due to poison ingestion. The brain responds by inducing vomiting, to clear the supposed toxin. Treisman's indirect argument has recently been questioned via an alternative direct evolutionary hypothesis, as well as modified and extended via a direct poison hypothesis.

[ 28 ] The direct evolutionary hypothesis essentially argues that there are plausible means by which ancient real or apparent motion could have contributed directly to the evolution of aversive reactions, without the need for the co-opting of a poison response as posited by Treisman. Nevertheless, the direct poison hypothesis argues that there still are plausible ways in which the body's poison response system may have played a role in shaping the evolution of some of the signature symptoms that characterize motion sickness.

[ citation needed ] Nystagmus hypothesis [ edit ] Yet another theory, known as the nystagmus hypothesis, [ 29 ] has been proposed based on stimulation of the vagus nerve resulting from the stretching or traction of extra-ocular muscles co-occurring with eye movements caused by vestibular stimulation. There are three critical aspects to the theory: first is the close linkage between activity in the vestibular system, i.e., semicircular canals and otolith organs , and a change in tonus among various of each eye's six extra-ocular muscles. Thus, with the exception of voluntary eye movements, the vestibular and oculomotor systems are thoroughly linked. Second is the operation of Sherrington's Law [ 30 ] describing reciprocal inhibition between agonist-antagonist muscle pairs, and by implication the stretching of extraocular muscle that must occur whenever Sherrington's Law is made to fail, thereby causing an unrelaxed (contracted) muscle to be stretched. Finally, there is the critical presence of afferent output to the Vagus nerves as a direct result of eye muscle stretch or traction.

[ 31 ] Thus, tenth nerve stimulation resulting from eye muscle stretch is proposed as the cause of motion sickness. The theory explains why labyrinthine-defective individuals are immune to motion sickness; [ 32 ] [ 33 ] why symptoms emerge when undergoing various body-head accelerations; why combinations of voluntary and reflexive eye movements may challenge the proper operation of Sherrington's Law, and why many drugs that suppress eye movements also serve to suppress motion sickness symptoms.

[ 34 ] A recent theory [ 35 ] argues that the main reason motion sickness occurs is due to an imbalance in vestibular outputs favoring the semicircular canals ( nauseogenic ) vs.

otolith organs (anti-nauseogenic). This theory attempts to integrate previous theories of motion sickness. For example, there are many sensory conflicts that are associated with motion sickness and many that are not, but those in which canal stimulation occurs in the absence of normal otolith function (e.g., in free fall ) are the most provocative. The vestibular imbalance theory is also tied to the different roles of the otoliths and canals in autonomic arousal (otolith output more sympathetic).

[ citation needed ] Diagnosis [ edit ] The diagnosis is based on symptoms.

[ 2 ] Other conditions that may present similarly include vestibular disorders such as benign paroxysmal positional vertigo and vestibular migraine and stroke .

[ 2 ] Treatment [ edit ] Treatment may include behavioral measures or medications.

[ 3 ] Behavioral measures [ edit ] Behavioral measures to decrease motion sickness include holding the head still and lying on the back.

[ 3 ] Focusing on the horizon may also be useful.

[ 2 ] Listening to music, mindful breathing, being the driver, and not reading while moving are other techniques.

[ 2 ] Habituation is the most effective technique but requires significant time.

[ 2 ] It is often used by the military for pilots.

[ 2 ] These techniques must be carried out at least every week to retain effectiveness.

[ 2 ] A head-worn, computer device with a transparent display can be used to mitigate the effects of motion sickness (and spatial disorientation ) if visual indicators of the wearer's head position are shown.

[ 36 ] Such a device functions by providing the wearer with digital reference lines in their field of vision that indicate the horizon's position relative to the user's head. This is accomplished by combining readings from accelerometers and gyroscopes mounted in the device. This technology has been implemented in both standalone devices [ 37 ] and Google Glass .

[ 38 ] [ 39 ] One promising looking treatment is to wear LCD shutter glasses that create a stroboscopic vision of 4 Hz with a dwell of 10 milliseconds.

[ 40 ] Medication [ edit ] Three types of medications are sometimes prescribed to improve symptoms of motion sickness: antimuscarinics such as scopolamine , H 1 antihistamines such as dimenhydrinate , and amphetamines such as dexamphetamine .

[ 3 ] Benefits are greater if used before the onset of symptoms or shortly after symptoms begin.

[ 2 ] Side effects, however, may limit the use of medications.

[ 3 ] A number of medications used for nausea such as ondansetron and metoclopramide are not effective in motion sickness.

[ 3 ] [ 2 ] Scopolamine (antimuscarinic) [ edit ] Scopolamine is the most effective medication.

[ 2 ] Evidence is best for when it is used preventatively.

[ 41 ] It is available as a skin patch .

[ 2 ] Side effects may include blurry vision.

[ 2 ] Antihistamines [ edit ] First generation H1 antihistamine medications are sometimes given to prevent or treat motion sickness. This class of medication is often effective at reducing the risk of getting motion sickness while in motion, however, the effectiveness of antihistamines at treating or stopping motion sickness once a person is already experiencing it has not been well studied.

[ 42 ] Effective first generation antihistamines include doxylamine , diphenhydramine , promethazine , meclizine , cyclizine , and cinnarizine .

[ 2 ] In pregnancy meclizine, dimenhydrinate and doxylamine are generally felt to be safe.

[ 2 ] Side effects include sleepiness.

[ 2 ] [ 42 ] Second generation antihistamines have not been found to be useful.

[ 2 ] Some, but not all, antihistamines used for motion sickness are also antimuscarinics.

[ 2 ] Amphetamines [ edit ] Dextroamphetamine may be used together with an antihistamine or an antimuscarinic with synergistic effects.

[ 2 ] Concerns include their addictive potential.

[ 2 ] Those involved in high-risk activities, such as SCUBA diving, should evaluate the risks versus the benefits of medications.

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] [ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] Promethazine combined with ephedrine to counteract the sedation is known as "the Coast Guard cocktail".

[ 48 ] Alternative medicine [ edit ] Alternative treatments include acupuncture and ginger , although their effectiveness against motion sickness is variable.

[ 3 ] [ 49 ] [ 50 ] [ 51 ] Providing smells does not appear to have a significant effect on the rate of motion sickness.

[ 3 ] Epidemiology [ edit ] Roughly one-third of people are highly susceptible to motion sickness, and most of the rest get motion sick under extreme conditions. Around 80% of the general population is susceptible to cases of medium to high motion sickness. The rates of space motion sickness have been estimated at between forty and eighty percent of those who enter weightless orbit. Several factors influence susceptibility to motion sickness, including sleep deprivation and the cubic footage allocated to each space traveler. Studies indicate that women are more likely to be affected than men, [ 2 ] and that the risk decreases with advancing age. There is some evidence that people with Asian ancestry may develop motion sickness more frequently than people of European ancestry, and there are situational and behavioral factors, such as whether a passenger has a view of the road ahead, and diet and eating behaviors.

[ 52 ] See also [ edit ] Mal de debarquement - disembarkment syndrome, usually follows a cruise or other motion experience References [ edit ] ^ a b c d Keshavarz, Behrang; Hecht, Heiko; Lawson, Ben (2014). "Visually induced motion sickness: Characteristics, causes, and countermeasures". In Hale, K.S.; Stanney, K.M. (eds.).

Handbook of Virtual Environments: Design, Implementation, and Applications, Second Edition . Human Factors and Ergonomics. Taylor & Francis. pp.

648– 697.

ISBN 978-1-4665-1184-2 . Retrieved 2021-11-13 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r s t u v w x y z aa ab ac ad ae af ag ah ai aj ak al am Takov, V; Tadi, P (January 2019).

Motion Sickness (in StatPearls) .

PMID 30969528 .

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Golding, J. F. (2016). "Motion sickness".

Neuro-Otology . Handbook of Clinical Neurology. Vol. 137. pp.

371– 390.

doi : 10.1016/B978-0-444-63437-5.00027-3 .

ISBN 9780444634375 .

ISSN 0072-9752 .

PMID 27638085 .

^ Reason, J.T.; Brand, J.J. (1975).

Motion Sickness . Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0-12-584050-7 . Retrieved 2021-11-13 .

^ a b Hromatka, Bethann S.; Tung, Joyce Y.; Kiefer, Amy K.; Do, Chuong B.; Hinds, David A.; Eriksson, Nicholas (1 May 2015).

"Genetic variants associated with motion sickness point to roles for inner ear development, neurological processes and glucose homeostasis" .

Human Molecular Genetics .

24 (9): 2700– 2708.

doi : 10.1093/hmg/ddv028 .

PMC 4383869 .

PMID 25628336 .

^ Hemmerich, Wanja; Keshavarz, Behrang; Hecht, Heiko (2020-11-24).

"Visually Induced Motion Sickness on the Horizon" .

Frontiers in Virtual Reality .

1 . Frontiers Media SA.

doi : 10.3389/frvir.2020.582095 .

ISSN 2673-4192 .

^ Munafo, Justin; Wade, Michael G.; Stergiou, Nick; Stoffregen, Thomas A. (2016-12-14). Balasubramaniam, Ramesh (ed.).

"The Rim and the Ancient Mariner: The Nautical Horizon Affects Postural Sway in Older Adults" .

PLOS ONE .

11 (12). Public Library of Science (PLoS): e0166900.

Bibcode : 2016PLoSO..1166900M .

doi : 10.1371/journal.pone.0166900 .

ISSN 1932-6203 .

PMC 5156431 .

PMID 27973576 .

^ Herron, Dorothy G. (2010).

"The Ups and Downs of Motion Sickness" (PDF) .

The American Journal of Nursing .

110 (12). Ovid Technologies (Wolters Kluwer Health): 49– 51.

doi : 10.1097/01.naj.0000391242.75887.17 .

ISSN 0002-936X .

PMID 21107067 .

S2CID 17695817 .

^ Hemmerich, Wanja A.; Shahal, Avner; Hecht, Heiko (2019). "Predictors of visually induced motion sickness in women".

Displays .

58 . Elsevier BV: 27– 32.

doi : 10.1016/j.displa.2018.11.005 .

ISSN 0141-9382 .

S2CID 115757932 .

^ Huppert, Doreen; Benson, Judy; Brandt, Thomas (2017-04-04).

"A Historical View of Motion Sickness—A Plague at Sea and on Land, Also with Military Impact" .

Frontiers in Neurology .

8 . Frontiers Media SA: 114.

doi : 10.3389/fneur.2017.00114 .

ISSN 1664-2295 .

PMC 5378784 .

PMID 28421029 .

^ "Preventing passengers in autonomous cars from feeling queasy" .

The Economist . 2018-02-01 . Retrieved 2018-02-05 .

^ a b c d Benson, Alan J. (2002).

"Motion Sickness" (PDF) . In Kent B. Pandoff; Robert E. Burr (eds.).

Medical Aspects of Harsh Environments . Vol. 2.

Washington, D.C.

: Borden Institute . pp.

1048– 83.

ISBN 978-0-16-051184-4 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2 October 2022 . Retrieved 27 Mar 2017 .

^ Gahlinger, P. M. (2000).

"A comparison of motion sickness remedies in severe sea conditions" .

Wilderness Environ Med .

11 (2): 136– 37.

doi : 10.1580/1080-6032(2000)011[0136:LTTE]2.3.CO;2 .

PMID 10921365 .

^ Shri Kamal Sharma (1992).

Resource Utilization and Development: A Perspective Study of Madhya Pradesh, India . Northern Book Centre. pp. 1078–.

ISBN 978-81-7211-032-1 . Retrieved 30 June 2013 .

^ Norfleet, W. T.; Peterson, R. E.; Hamilton, R. W.; Olstad, C. S. (January 1992).

"Susceptibility of divers in open water to motion sickness" .

Undersea Biomed Res .

19 (1): 41– 47.

PMID 1536062 . Archived from the original on October 16, 2008 . Retrieved 2008-05-09 .

^ Bertolini, Giovanni; Straumann, Dominik (2016).

"Moving in a Moving World: A Review on Vestibular Motion Sickness" .

Frontiers in Neurology .

7 : 14.

doi : 10.3389/fneur.2016.00014 .

ISSN 1664-2295 .

PMC 4753518 .

PMID 26913019 .

^ Y. J. Kim and S. Park, “Motion Sickness Reduction by Presenting a Stable Reference Frame in a Virtual Environment,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 2048–2057, May 2020. doi:10.1109/TVCG.2019.2934432. [Online]. Available: https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/8797800 ^ So, R.H.Y. and Ujike, H. (2010) Visually induced motion sickness, visual stress and photosensitive epileptic seizures: what do they have in common?  Preface to the special issue. Applied Ergonomics, 41(4), pp. 491–93.

^ Wax, Emily (30 July 1999).

"The Dizzy Spell of 'Blair Witch Project' " .

The Washington Post . Retrieved 8 February 2017 .

^ "Combating VR Sickness: Debunking Myths And Learning What Really Works" .

ARVI Games .

^ "The National Advanced Driving Simulator – The NADS-1" . Nads-sc.uiowa.edu . Retrieved 2014-03-02 .

^ So, R.H.Y.; Lo, W.T. (1999).

Proceedings IEEE Virtual Reality (Cat. No. 99CB36316) . pp.

237– 41.

doi : 10.1109/VR.1999.756957 .

ISBN 978-0-7695-0093-5 .

S2CID 38505388 .

^ "CyberEdge Information Services: Health & Safety, Simulator Sickness in Virtual Environments: Executive Summary" . Archived from the original on 2007-10-09 . Retrieved 2007-05-29 .

^ Kohl, R. L. (1983). "Sensory conflict theory of space motion sickness: An anatomical location for the neuroconflict".

Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine .

54 (5): 464– 5.

PMID 6870740 .

^ "How To Cure Motion Sickness Permanently" .

Captain Arthur's . Retrieved 2022-11-16 .

^ Lackner, J. R. (2014).

"Motion sickness: More than nausea and vomiting" .

Experimental Brain Research .

232 (8): 2493– 2510.

doi : 10.1007/s00221-014-4008-8 .

PMC 4112051 .

PMID 24961738 .

^ Treisman, Michel (1977-07-29). "Motion Sickness: An Evolutionary Hypothesis".

Science .

197 (4302). American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS): 493– 495.

Bibcode : 1977Sci...197..493T .

doi : 10.1126/science.301659 .

ISSN 0036-8075 .

PMID 301659 .

^ Lawson, B. D. (2014). Motion sickness symptomatology and origins. Handbook of Virtual Environments: Design, Implementation, and Applications, 531–99.

^ Ebenholtz SM, Cohen MM, Linder BJ (November 1994). "The possible role of nystagmus in motion sickness: a hypothesis".

Aviat Space Environ Med .

65 (11): 1032– 35.

PMID 7840743 .

^ Sherrington, C.S. (1893).

"Further experimental note on the correlation of action of antagonistic muscles" .

Proceedings of the Royal Society .

B53 (1693): 407– 20.

Bibcode : 1893RSPS...53..407S .

doi : 10.1136/bmj.1.1693.1218 .

PMC 2403312 .

PMID 20754272 .

^ Milot JA, Jacob JL, Blanc VF, Hardy JF (December 1983). "The oculocardiac reflex in strabismus surgery".

Can. J. Ophthalmol .

18 (7): 314– 17.

PMID 6671149 .

^ Kennedy, R.S.; Graybiel, A.; McDonough, R.C.; Beckwith, F.D. (1968). "Symptomatology under storm conditions in the North Atlantic in control subjects and in persons with bilateral labyrinthine defects".

Acta Oto-Laryngologica .

66 ( 1– 6): 533– 40.

doi : 10.3109/00016486809126317 .

hdl : 2060/19650024320 .

PMID 5732654 .

^ Cheung BS, Howard IP, Money KE (June 1991). "Visually-induced sickness in normal and bilaterally labyrinthine-defective subjects".

Aviat Space Environ Med .

62 (6): 527– 31.

PMID 1859339 .

^ Ebenholtz, S.M.Oculomotor Systems and Perception. Cambridge University Press, 2005, 148–53 ^ Previc, F.H. (2018). "An intravestibular theory of motion sickness".

Aerospace Medicine and Human Performance .

89 (2): 130– 40.

doi : 10.3357/AMHP.4946.2018 .

ISSN 2375-6314 .

PMID 29463358 .

^ Krueger WW (January 2011).

"Controlling motion sickness and spatial disorientation and enhancing vestibular rehabilitation with a user-worn see-through display" .

Laryngoscope . 121 Suppl 2 (2): S17–35.

doi : 10.1002/lary.21373 .

PMC 4769875 .

PMID 21181963 .

^ "Air Force to examine AdviTech's motion-sickness product for combat pilots" .

San Antonio Business Journal . Nov 10, 2010 . Retrieved 15 July 2014 .

^ "BCMC, LLC" . Retrieved 15 July 2014 .

^ "Google Glass Treating Motion Sickness" .

YouTube . 15 May 2014.

Archived from the original on 2021-11-13 . Retrieved 15 July 2014 .

^ Reschke, MF; Somers, JT; Ford, G (January 2006). "Stroboscopic vision as a treatment for motion sickness: strobe lighting vs. shutter glasses".

Aviation, Space, and Environmental Medicine .

77 (1): 2– 7.

PMID 16422446 .

^ Spinks A, Wasiak J (2011).

"Scopolamine (hyoscine) for preventing and treating motion sickness" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2007 (6): 1– 21.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD002851.pub4 .

hdl : 10072/19480 .

PMC 7138049 .

PMID 21678338 .

^ a b Karrim, Nadine; Byrne, Ryan; Magula, Nombulelo; Saman, Yougan (2022-10-17).

"Antihistamines for motion sickness" .

The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews .

2022 (10): CD012715.

doi : 10.1002/14651858.CD012715.pub2 .

ISSN 1469-493X .

PMC 9575651 .

PMID 36250781 .

^ Schwartz, Henry JC; Curley, Michael D (1986).

"Transdermal Scopolamine in the Hyperbaric Environment" .

United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit Technical Report . Archived from the original on October 7, 2008 . Retrieved 2008-05-09 .

^ Lawson, B. D.; McGee, H. A.; Castaneda, M. A.; Golding, J. F.; Kass, S. J.; McGrath, C. M. (2009).

Evaluation of Several Common Antimotion Sickness Medications and Recommendations Concerning Their Potential Usefulness During Special Operations .

(No. NAMRL-09-15) (Report). Pensacola, Florida.: Naval aerospace medical research laboratory. Archived from the original on 2016-04-27 . Retrieved 2017-02-07 .

^ Bitterman N, Eilender E, Melamed Y (May 1991).

"Hyperbaric oxygen and scopolamine" .

Undersea Biomedical Research .

18 (3): 167– 74.

PMID 1853467 . Archived from the original on 2008-08-20 . Retrieved 2008-05-09 .

^ Williams TH, Wilkinson AR, Davis FM, Frampton CM (March 1988).

"Effects of transcutaneous scopolamine and depth on diver performance" .

Undersea Biomedical Research .

15 (2): 89– 98.

PMID 3363755 . Archived from the original on August 20, 2008 . Retrieved 2008-05-09 .

^ Arieli R, Shupak A, Shachal B, Shenedrey A, Ertracht O, Rashkovan G (1999).

"Effect of the anti-motion-sickness medication cinnarizine on central nervous system oxygen toxicity" .

Undersea and Hyperbaric Medicine .

26 (2): 105– 09.

PMID 10372430 . Archived from the original on October 7, 2008 . Retrieved 2008-05-09 .

^ East Carolina University Department of Diving & Water Safety.

"Seasickness: Information and Treatment" (PDF) . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2017-08-29 . Retrieved 2017-02-07 .

^ Stern, RM; Jokerst, MD; Muth, ER; Hollis, C (Jul–Aug 2001). "Acupressure relieves the symptoms of motion sickness and reduces abnormal gastric activity".

Alternative Therapies in Health and Medicine .

7 (4): 91– 94.

PMID 11452572 .

^ Brainard A, Gresham C (2014). "Prevention and treatment of motion sickness".

Am Fam Physician .

90 (1): 41– 46.

PMID 25077501 .

^ Han-Chung, Lien; Wei Ming, Sun; Yen-Hsueh, Chen; Hyerang, Kim; William, Hasler; Chung, Owyang (11 March 2003). "Effects of ginger on motion sickness and gastric slow-wave dysrhythmias induced by circular vection".

American Journal of Physiology. Gastrointestinal and Liver Physiology .

284 (3): 481– 489.

doi : 10.1152/ajpgi.00164.2002 .

PMID 12576305 .

^ Hromatka BS, Tung JY, Kiefer AK, Do CB, Hinds DA, Eriksson N (May 2015).

"Genetic variants associated with motion sickness point to roles for inner ear development, neurological processes and glucose homeostasis" .

Hum. Mol. Genet .

24 (9): 2700– 08.

doi : 10.1093/hmg/ddv028 .

PMC 4383869 .

PMID 25628336 .

External links [ edit ] Look up motion sickness in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Motion sickness .

Davis, Christopher J.; Lake-Bakaar, Gerry V.; Grahame-Smith, David G. (2012).

Nausea and Vomiting: Mechanisms and Treatment . Springer Science & Business Media. p. 123.

ISBN 978-3-642-70479-6 .

Motion Sickness from MedlinePlus Classification D ICD - 10 : T75.3 ICD - 9-CM : 994.6 OMIM : 158280 MeSH : D009041 DiseasesDB : 11908 External resources eMedicine : article/2060606 v t e Motion sickness Types Airsickness Seasickness Simulator sickness Ski sickness Space adaptation syndrome Virtual reality sickness Medicine treatment Bonine Cinnarizine Dramamine Marezine Promethazine Transdermscop Related Bárány chair Sickness bag v t e Consequences of external causes Temperature Elevated Burn Hyperthermia Heat syncope Reduced Hypothermia Immersion foot syndromes Trench foot Tropical immersion foot Warm water immersion foot Non-freezing cold injury Chilblains Frostbite Aerosol burn Cold intolerance Acrocyanosis Erythrocyanosis crurum Radiation Chronic radiation keratosis Eosinophilic, polymorphic, and pruritic eruption associated with radiotherapy Radiation acne Radiation burn Radiation-induced cancer Radiation-induced erythema multiforme Radiation-induced hypertrophic scar Radiation-induced keloid Radiation-induced morphea Radiation poisoning Radiation recall reaction Sunburn Oxygen Hypoxia / Asphyxia Oxygen toxicity Pressure Barotrauma Arterial gas embolism Aerosinusitis Middle ear barotrauma Pneumothorax Decompression sickness Inner ear decompression sickness High altitude Altitude sickness Chronic mountain sickness Death zone High-altitude pulmonary edema (HAPE) High-altitude cerebral edema (HACE) Food Starvation Maltreatment Physical abuse Sexual abuse Psychological abuse Travel Motion sickness Seasickness Airsickness Space adaptation syndrome Adverse effect Hypersensitivity Anaphylaxis Angioedema Allergy Arthus reaction Adverse drug reaction Other Electrical injury Lightning injuries Drowning Ungrouped skin conditions resulting from physical factors Dermatosis neglecta Pinch mark Pseudoverrucous papules and nodules Sclerosing lymphangitis Tropical anhidrotic asthenia UV-sensitive syndrome environmental skin conditions Electrical burn frictional/traumatic/sports Black heel and palm Equestrian perniosis Fissure of the nipple Pulling boat hands Runner's rump Surfer's knots Tennis toe Vibration white finger Weathering nodule of ear Wrestler's ear Coral cut Painful fat herniation Uranium dermatosis iv use Skin pop scar Skin track Slap mark Pseudoacanthosis nigricans Narcotic dermopathy Category Commons Glossary Outline Portal v t e Underwater diving Diving activities Diving modes Atmospheric pressure diving Freediving Saturation diving Scuba diving Snorkeling Surface oriented diving Surface-supplied diving Unmanned diving Diving equipment Cleaning and disinfection of personal diving equipment Human factors in diving equipment design List of diving equipment manufacturers Basic equipment Diving mask Snorkel Swimfin Breathing gas Bailout gas Bottom gas Breathing air Decompression gas Emergency gas supply Heliox Hydreliox Hydrox Nitrox Oxygen Travel gas Trimix Buoyancy and trim equipment Avelo diving system Buoyancy compensator Power inflator Dump valve Variable buoyancy pressure vessel Diving weighting system Ankle weights Integrated weights Trim weights Weight belt Decompression equipment Decompression buoy Decompression chamber Decompression cylinder Decompression trapeze Dive computer Diving bell Diving shot Diving stage Jersey upline Jonline Diving suit Atmospheric diving suit JIM suit Newtsuit Dry suit Sladen suit Standard diving suit Rash vest Wetsuit Dive skins Hot-water suit Helmets and masks Anti-fog Diving helmet Free-flow helmet Lightweight demand helmet Orinasal mask Reclaim helmet Shallow water helmet Standard diving helmet Diving mask Band mask Full-face mask Half mask Instrumentation Bottom timer Depth gauge Dive computer Dive timer Diving watch Helium release valve Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Pneumofathometer Submersible pressure gauge Mobility equipment Diver propulsion vehicle Human torpedo Wet sub Diving bell Closed bell Wet bell Diving stage Swimfin Monofin PowerSwim Towboard Safety equipment Alternative air source Octopus regulator Pony bottle Bolt snap Buddy line Dive light Diver's cutting tool Diver's knife Diver's telephone Through-water communications Underwater acoustic communication Diving bell Diving safety harness Emergency gas supply Bailout block Bailout bottle Lifeline Screw gate carabiner Emergency locator beacon Rescue tether Safety helmet Shark-proof cage Snoopy loop Navigation equipment Distance line Diving compass Dive reel Line marker Surface marker buoy Silt screw Underwater breathing apparatus Atmospheric diving suit Diving cylinder Burst disc Scuba cylinder valve Diving helmet Reclaim helmet Diving regulator Mechanism of diving regulators Regulator malfunction Regulator freeze Single-hose regulator Twin-hose regulator Full-face diving mask Open-circuit scuba Scuba set Bailout bottle Decompression cylinder Independent doubles Manifolded twin set Scuba manifold Pony bottle Scuba configuration Sidemount Sling cylinder Diving rebreathers Carbon dioxide scrubber Carleton CDBA Clearance Divers Life Support Equipment Cryogenic rebreather CUMA DSEA Dolphin Halcyon PVR-BASC Halcyon RB80 IDA71 Interspiro DCSC LAR-5 LAR-6 LAR-V LARU Mark IV Amphibian Porpoise Ray Siebe Gorman CDBA Salvus Siva Surface-supplied diving equipment Air line Diver's umbilical Diving air compressor Gas panel Hookah Scuba replacement Snuba Standard diving dress Diving equipment manufacturers AP Diving Apeks Aqua Lung America Aqua Lung/La Spirotechnique Beuchat René Cavalero Cis-Lunar Cressi-Sub Dacor DESCO Dive Xtras Divex Diving Unlimited International Drägerwerk Faber Fenzy Maurice Fernez Technisub Oscar Gugen Heinke HeinrichsWeikamp Johnson Outdoors Mares Morse Diving Nemrod Oceanic Worldwide Porpoise Shearwater Research Siebe Gorman Submarine Products Suunto Diving support equipment Access equipment Boarding stirrup Diver lift Diving bell Diving ladder Diving platform (scuba) Diving stage Downline Jackstay Launch and recovery system Messenger line Moon pool Breathing gas handling Air filtration Activated carbon Hopcalite Molecular sieve Silica gel Booster pump Carbon dioxide scrubber Cascade filling system Diver's pump Diving air compressor Diving air filter Water separator High pressure breathing air compressor Low pressure breathing air compressor Gas blending Gas blending for scuba diving Gas panel Gas reclaim system Gas storage bank Gas storage quad Gas storage tube Helium analyzer Nitrox production Membrane gas separation Pressure swing adsorption Oxygen analyser Electro-galvanic oxygen sensor Oxygen compatibility Decompression equipment Air-lock Built-in breathing system Decompression tables Diving bell Bell cursor Closed bell Clump weight Launch and recovery system Wet bell Diving chamber Diving stage Recreational Dive Planner Saturation system Platforms Dive boat Canoe and kayak diving Combat rubber raiding craft Liveaboard Subskimmer Diving support vessel HMS Challenger (K07) Underwater habitat Aquarius Reef Base Continental Shelf Station Two Helgoland Habitat Scott Carpenter Space Analog Station SEALAB Tektite habitat Remotely operated underwater vehicles 8A4-class ROUV ABISMO Atlantis ROV Team COTSBot CURV Deep Drone Épaulard Global Explorer ROV Goldfish-class ROUV Kaikō ROV Kaşif ROUV Long-Term Mine Reconnaissance System Mini Rover ROV OpenROV ROV KIEL 6000 ROV PHOCA Scorpio ROV Sea Dragon-class ROV Seabed tractor Seafox drone SeaPerch SJT-class ROUV T1200 Trenching Unit VideoRay UROVs Safety equipment Diver down flag Diving shot ENOS Rescue-System Hyperbaric lifeboat Hyperbaric stretcher Jackstay Jonline Reserve gas supply General Diving spread Air spread Saturation spread Hot water system Sonar Underwater acoustic positioning system Underwater acoustic communication Freediving Activities Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Haenyeo Pearl hunting Ama Snorkeling Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Underwater rugby Underwater target shooting Competitions Nordic Deep Vertical Blue Disciplines Constant weight (CWT) Constant weight bi-fins (CWTB) Constant weight without fins (CNF) Dynamic apnea (DYN) Dynamic apnea without fins (DNF) Free immersion (FIM) No-limits apnea (NLT) Static apnea (STA) Skandalopetra diving Variable weight apnea (VWT) Variable weight apnea without fins Equipment Diving mask Diving suit Hawaiian sling Polespear Snorkel (swimming) Speargun Swimfins Monofin Water polo cap Freedivers Deborah Andollo Simone Arrigoni Peppo Biscarini Michael Board Sara Campbell Derya Can Göçen Goran Čolak Carlos Coste Robert Croft Mandy-Rae Cruickshank Yasemin Dalkılıç Leonardo D'Imporzano Flavia Eberhard Şahika Ercümen Emma Farrell Francisco Ferreras Pierre Frolla Flavia Eberhard Mehgan Heaney-Grier Elisabeth Kristoffersen Andriy Yevhenovych Khvetkevych Loïc Leferme Enzo Maiorca Jacques Mayol Audrey Mestre Karol Meyer Kate Middleton Stéphane Mifsud Alexey Molchanov Natalia Molchanova Dave Mullins Patrick Musimu Guillaume Néry Herbert Nitsch Umberto Pelizzari Liv Philip Annelie Pompe Stig Severinsen Tom Sietas Martin Štěpánek Walter Steyn Tanya Streeter William Trubridge Devrim Cenk Ulusoy Fatma Uruk Danai Varveri Alessia Zecchini Nataliia Zharkova Kateryna Sadurska Hazards Barotrauma Drowning Freediving blackout Deep-water blackout Shallow-water blackout Hypercapnia Hypothermia Historical Ama Octopus wrestling Swimming at the 1900 Summer Olympics – Men's underwater swimming Organisations AIDA International Scuba Schools International Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins Performance Freediving International Professional diving Occupations Ama Commercial diver Commercial offshore diver Hazmat diver Divemaster Diving instructor Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Haenyeo Media diver Police diver Public safety diver Scientific diver Underwater archaeologist Military diving Army engineer diver Canadian Armed Forces Divers Clearance diver Frogman Minentaucher Royal Navy ships diver United States military divers U.S. Navy diver U.S.Navy master diver Military diving units 7th Marine Brigade Clearance Diving Branch (RAN) Commando Hubert Combat Divers Service (Lithuania) Comando Raggruppamento Subacquei e Incursori Teseo Tesei Decima Flottiglia MAS Frogman Corps (Denmark) Fuerzas Especiales Fukuryu GRUMEC Grup Gerak Khas Jagdkommando JW Formoza JW GROM JW Komandosów Kommando Spezialkräfte Marine KOPASKA MARCOS Marine Commandos Marinejegerkommandoen Marine Raider Regiment Minedykkerkommandoen Namibian Marine Corps Operational Diving Unit Naval Diving Unit (Singapore) Naval Service Diving Section Naval Special Operations Command Operational Diving Division (SA Navy) Royal Engineers Russian commando frogmen Sappers Divers Group Shayetet 13 Special Air Service Special Air Service Regiment Special Actions Detachment Special Boat Service Special Boat Squadron (Sri Lanka) Special Forces Command (Turkey) Special Forces Group (Belgium) Special Operations Battalion (Croatia) Special Service Group (Navy) Special Warfare Diving and Salvage Tactical Divers Group US Marine Corps Force Reconnaissance US Marine Corps Reconnaissance Battalions US Navy SEALs Underwater Construction Teams Underwater Demolition Command Underwater Demolition Team Underwater Offence (Turkish Armed Forces) UNGERIN Underwater work Commercial offshore diving Dive leader Diver training Recreational diver training Hazmat diving Hyperbaric welding Marine construction Offshore construction Underwater construction Media diving Pearl hunting Police diving Potable water diving Public safety diving Scientific diving Ships husbandry Sponge diving Submarine pipeline Underwater archaeology Archaeology of shipwrecks Underwater cutting and welding Underwater demolition Underwater inspection Nondestructive testing Underwater logging Underwater photography Underwater search and recovery Underwater searches Underwater videography Underwater survey Salvage diving SS Egypt Kronan La Belle SS Laurentic RMS Lusitania Mars Mary Rose USS Monitor HMS Royal George Vasa Diving contractors COMEX Helix Energy Solutions Group International Marine Contractors Association Tools and equipment Abrasive waterjet Airlift Baited remote underwater video In-water surface cleaning Brush cart Cavitation cleaning Pressure washing Pigging Hot stab Lifting bag Remotely operated underwater vehicle Thermal lance Tremie Water jetting Underwater weapons Limpet mine Speargun Hawaiian sling Polespear Underwater firearm Gyrojet Mk 1 Underwater Defense Gun Powerhead Underwater pistols Heckler & Koch P11 SPP-1 underwater pistol Underwater revolvers AAI underwater revolver Underwater rifles ADS amphibious rifle APS underwater rifle ASM-DT amphibious rifle QBS-06 Recreational diving Recreational dive sites Index of recreational dive sites List of wreck diving sites Outline of recreational dive sites Specialties Altitude diving Cave diving Deep diving Ice diving Muck diving Open-water diving Rebreather diving Sidemount diving Solo diving Technical diving Underwater photography Wreck diving Diver organisations British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) Quintana Roo Speleological Survey (QRSS) Woodville Karst Plain Project (WKPP) Diving tourism industry Dive center Diving in Timor-Leste Diving in the Maldives Environmental impact of recreational diving Scuba diving tourism Scuba diving in the Cayman Islands Shark tourism Sinking ships for wreck diving sites Underwater diving in Guam Diving events and festivals Diversnight Underwater Bike Race Diving safety Human factors in diving equipment design Human factors in diving safety Life-support system Safety-critical system Scuba diving fatalities Underwater diving emergency Water safety Water surface searches Diving hazards List of diving hazards and precautions Environmental Current Delta-P Entanglement hazard Overhead Silt out Wave action Equipment Freeflow Use of breathing equipment in an underwater environment Failure of diving equipment other than breathing apparatus Single point of failure Physiological Cold shock response Decompression Nitrogen narcosis Oxygen toxicity Seasickness Uncontrolled decompression Diver behaviour and competence Incompetence Overconfidence effect Panic Task loading Trait anxiety Willful violation Consequences Barotrauma Decompression sickness Drowning Hypothermia Hypoxia Hypercapnia Hyperthermia Non-freezing cold injury Diving procedures Ascending and descending Emergency ascent Boat diving Canoe and kayak diving Buddy diving buddy check Decompression Decompression practice Pyle stop Ratio decompression Dive briefing Dive log Dive planning Rule of thirds Scuba gas planning Diver communications Diver rescue Diver training Doing It Right Drift diving Gas blending for scuba diving Night diving Rebreather diving Scuba gas management Solo diving Wall diving Risk management Checklist Hazard identification and risk assessment Hazard analysis Job safety analysis Risk assessment Hyperbaric evacuation and rescue Risk control Hierarchy of hazard controls Incident pit Lockout–tagout Permit To Work Redundancy Safety data sheet Situation awareness Diving team Bellman Chamber operator Diver medical technician Diver's attendant Diving supervisor Diving systems technician Gas man Life support technician Stand-by diver Equipment safety Breathing gas quality Testing and inspection of diving cylinders Hydrostatic test Sustained load cracking Diving regulator Breathing performance of regulators Occupational safety and health Association of Diving Contractors International International Marine Contractors Association Code of practice Contingency plan Diving regulations Emergency response plan Diving safety officer Diving superintendent Diving supervisor Operations manual Standard operating procedure Diving medicine Diving disorders List of signs and symptoms of diving disorders Cramp Motion sickness Surfer's ear Pressure related Alternobaric vertigo Barostriction Barotrauma Air embolism Aerosinusitis Barodontalgia Dental barotrauma Middle ear barotrauma Pulmonary barotrauma Compression arthralgia Decompression illness Dysbarism Oxygen Freediving blackout Hyperoxia Hypoxia Oxygen toxicity Inert gases Avascular necrosis Decompression sickness Dysbaric osteonecrosis Inner ear decompression sickness Isobaric counterdiffusion Taravana High-pressure nervous syndrome Hydrogen narcosis Nitrogen narcosis Carbon dioxide Hypercapnia Hypocapnia Breathing gas contaminants Carbon monoxide poisoning Immersion related Asphyxia Drowning Hypothermia Immersion diuresis Instinctive drowning response Laryngospasm Salt water aspiration syndrome Swimming-induced pulmonary edema Treatment Demand valve oxygen therapy First aid Hyperbaric medicine Hyperbaric treatment schedules In-water recompression Oxygen therapy Therapeutic recompression Personnel Diving Medical Examiner Diving Medical Practitioner Diving Medical Technician Hyperbaric nursing Screening Atrial septal defect Effects of drugs on fitness to dive Fitness to dive Psychological fitness to dive Research Researchers in diving physiology and medicine Arthur J. Bachrach Albert R. Behnke Peter B. Bennett Paul Bert George F. Bond Robert Boyle Alf O. Brubakk Albert A. Bühlmann John R. Clarke Guybon Chesney Castell Damant Kenneth William Donald William Paul Fife John Scott Haldane Robert William Hamilton Jr.

Henry Valence Hempleman Leonard Erskine Hill Brian Andrew Hills Felix Hoppe-Seyler Christian J. Lambertsen Simon Mitchell Charles Momsen Neal W. Pollock John Rawlins Charles Wesley Shilling Edward D. Thalmann Jacques Triger Diving medical research organisations Aerospace Medical Association Divers Alert Network (DAN) Diving Diseases Research Centre (DDRC) Diving Medical Advisory Council (DMAC) European Diving Technology Committee (EDTC) European Underwater and Baromedical Society (EUBS) National Board of Diving and Hyperbaric Medical Technology Naval Submarine Medical Research Laboratory Royal Australian Navy School of Underwater Medicine Rubicon Foundation South Pacific Underwater Medicine Society (SPUMS) Undersea and Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS) United States Navy Experimental Diving Unit (NEDU) Law Civil liability in recreational diving Diving regulations Duty of care List of legislation regulating underwater diving Investigation of diving accidents Convention on the Protection of the Underwater Cultural Heritage History of underwater diving History of decompression research and development History of dive computers History of Diving Museum History of scuba diving List of researchers in underwater diving Lyons Maritime Museum Man in the Sea Museum Timeline of atmospheric diving suits Timeline of diving technology Pearling in Western Australia US Navy decompression models and tables Archeological sites SS Commodore USS Monitor Queen Anne's Revenge Whydah Gally Underwater art and artists The Diver Jason deCaires Taylor Engineers and inventors Jerónimo de Ayanz y Beaumont William Beebe Georges Beuchat Giovanni Alfonso Borelli Joseph-Martin Cabirol John R. Clarke Jacques Cousteau Charles Anthony Deane John Deane Louis de Corlieu Auguste Denayrouze Ted Eldred Henry Fleuss Émile Gagnan Karl Heinrich Klingert Peter Kreeft Christian J. Lambertsen Yves Le Prieur John Lethbridge Ernest William Moir Joseph Salim Peress Auguste Piccard Joe Savoie Willard Franklyn Searle Gordon Smith Augustus Siebe Pierre-Marie Touboulic Jacques Triger Historical equipment Aqua-Lung RV Calypso SP-350 Denise Magnesium torch Nikonos Porpoise regulator Standard diving dress Sub Marine Explorer Vintage scuba Diver propulsion vehicles Advanced SEAL Delivery System Cosmos CE2F series Dry Combat Submersible Human torpedo Motorised Submersible Canoe Necker Nymph R-2 Mala-class swimmer delivery vehicle SEAL Delivery Vehicle Shallow Water Combat Submersible Siluro San Bartolomeo Welfreighter Wet Nellie Military and covert operations Raid on Alexandria (1941) Sinking of the Rainbow Warrior Scientific projects 1992 cageless shark-diving expedition Mission 31 Awards and events Hans Hass Award International Scuba Diving Hall of Fame London Diving Chamber Dive Lectures NOGI Awards Women Divers Hall of Fame Incidents Dive boat incidents Sinking of MV Conception Diver rescues Alpazat cave rescue Tham Luang cave rescue Early diving John Day (carpenter) Charles Spalding Ebenezer Watson Freediving fatalities Stephen Keenan Loïc Leferme Audrey Mestre Nicholas Mevoli Natalia Molchanova Offshore diving incidents Byford Dolphin diving bell accident Drill Master diving accident Star Canopus diving accident Stena Seaspread diving accident Venture One diving accident Waage Drill II diving accident Wildrake diving accident Professional diving fatalities Roger Baldwin John Bennett Victor F. Guiel Jr.

Francis P. Hammerberg Craig M. Hoffman Peter Henry Michael Holmes Johnson Sea Link accident Edwin Clayton Link Gerard Anthony Prangley Per Skipnes Robert John Smyth Albert D. Stover Richard A. Walker Lothar Michael Ward Joachim Wendler Bradley Westell Arne Zetterström Scuba diving fatalities 1973 Mount Gambier cave diving accident Ricardo Armbruster Allan Bridge David Bright Berry L. Cannon Cotton Coulson Cláudio Coutinho E. Yale Dawson Deon Dreyer Milan Dufek Sheck Exley Maurice Fargues Fernando Garfella Palmer Guy Garman Steve Irwin death Jim Jones Henry Way Kendall Artur Kozłowski Yuri Lipski Kirsty MacColl Linnea Mills Agnes Milowka François de Roubaix Chris and Chrissy Rouse Dave Shaw Wesley C. Skiles Dewey Smith Rob Stewart Esbjörn Svensson Josef Velek Publications Manuals NOAA Diving Manual U.S. Navy Diving Manual Basic Cave Diving: A Blueprint for Survival Underwater Handbook Bennett and Elliott's physiology and medicine of diving Encyclopedia of Recreational Diving The new science of skin and scuba diving Professional Diver's Handbook Basic Scuba Standards and Codes of Practice Code of Practice for Scientific Diving (UNESCO) DIN 7876 IMCA Code of Practice for Offshore Diving ISO 24801 Recreational diving services — Requirements for the training of recreational scuba divers General non-fiction The Darkness Beckons Goldfinder The Last Dive Shadow Divers The Silent World: A Story of Undersea Discovery and Adventure Research List of Divers Alert Network publications Dive guides Training and registration Diver training Competence and assessment Competency-based learning Refresher training Skill assessment Diver training standard Diving instructor Diving school Occupational diver training Commercial diver training Military diver training Public safety diver training Scientific diver training Recreational diver training Introductory diving ISO training standards Teaching method Muscle memory Overlearning Stress exposure training Skills Combat sidestroke Diver navigation Diver trim Ear clearing Frenzel maneuver Valsalva maneuver Finning techniques Scuba skills Buddy breathing Low impact diving Diamond Reef System Surface-supplied diving skills Underwater searches Recreational scuba certification levels Core diving skills Advanced Open Water Diver Autonomous diver CMAS* scuba diver CMAS** scuba diver Introductory diving Low Impact Diver Master Scuba Diver Open Water Diver Supervised diver Leadership skills Dive leader Divemaster Diving instructor Master Instructor Specialist skills Rescue Diver Solo diver Diver training certification and registration organisations European Underwater Federation (EUF) International Diving Regulators and Certifiers Forum (IDRCF) International Diving Schools Association (IDSA) International Marine Contractors Association (IMCA) List of diver certification organizations National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Nautical Archaeology Society Recreational diver course referral World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC) Commercial diver certification authorities Australian Diver Accreditation Scheme (ADAS) Commercial diver registration in South Africa Divers Institute of Technology Health and Safety Executive (HSE) Department of Employment and Labour Commercial diving schools Divers Academy International Norwegian diver school Free-diving certification agencies AIDA International (AIDA) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Performance Freediving International (PI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Recreational scuba certification agencies American Canadian Underwater Certifications (ACUC) American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) Association nationale des moniteurs de plongée (ANMP) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Comhairle Fo-Thuinn (CFT) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas (FEDAS) Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins (FFESSM) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) International Association for Handicapped Divers (IAHD) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) International Life Saving Federation (ILS) Israeli Diving Federation (TIDF) National Academy of Scuba Educators (NASE) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Nederlandse Onderwatersport Bond (NOB) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Sub-Aqua Association (SAA) Scuba Diving International (SDI) Scuba Educators International (SEI) Scuba Schools International (SSI) Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu (TSSF) United Diving Instructors (UDI) YMCA SCUBA Program Scientific diver certification authorities American Academy of Underwater Sciences (AAUS) CMAS Scientific Committee Technical diver certification agencies American Nitrox Divers International (ANDI) British Sub-Aqua Club (BSAC) Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques (CMAS) Diving Science and Technology (DSAT) Federazione Italiana Attività Subacquee (FIAS) International Association of Nitrox and Technical Divers (IANTD) Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) Professional Diving Instructors Corporation (PDIC) Professional Technical and Recreational Diving (ProTec) Rebreather Association of International Divers (RAID) Trimix Scuba Association (TSA) Technical Extended Range (TXR) Cave diving Cave Divers Association of Australia (CDAA) Cave Diving Group (CDG) Global Underwater Explorers (GUE) National Speleological Society#Cave Diving Group (CDG) National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI) Technical Diving International (TDI) Military diver training centres Defence Diving School Navy Diving Salvage and Training Center Underwater Escape Training Unit Military diver training courses United States Marine Corps Combatant Diver Course Underwater sports Surface snorkeling Finswimming Snorkeling/breath-hold Spearfishing Underwater football Underwater hockey Australia Turkey Underwater rugby Colombia United States Underwater target shooting Breath-hold Aquathlon Apnoea finswimming Freediving Open Circuit Scuba Immersion finswimming Sport diving Underwater cycling Underwater orienteering Underwater photography Rebreather Underwater photography Sports governing organisations and federations International AIDA International Confédération Mondiale des Activités Subaquatiques ) National AIDA Hellas Australian Underwater Federation British Freediving Association British Octopush Association British Underwater Sports Association Comhairle Fo-Thuinn Federación Española de Actividades Subacuáticas Fédération Française d'Études et de Sports Sous-Marins South African Underwater Sports Federation Türkiye Sualtı Sporları Federasyonu Underwater Society of America ) Competitions 14th CMAS Underwater Photography World Championship Underwater Hockey World Championships Underwater Orienteering World Championships Underwater Rugby World Championships Underwater divers Pioneers of diving Eduard Admetlla i Lázaro Aquanaut Mary Bonnin Amelia Behrens-Furniss James F. Cahill Jacques Cousteau Billy Deans Dottie Frazier Trevor Hampton Hans Hass Hannes Keller Dick Rutkowski Teseo Tesei Arne Zetterström Underwater scientists archaeologists and environmentalists Michael Arbuthnot Robert Ballard George Bass Mensun Bound Louis Boutan Jeffrey Bozanic Hugh Bradner Cathy Church Eugenie Clark James P. Delgado Sylvia Earle John Christopher Fine George R. Fischer Anders Franzén Honor Frost Fernando Garfella Palmer David Gibbins Graham Jessop Swietenia Puspa Lestari Pilar Luna Robert F. Marx Anna Marguerite McCann Innes McCartney Charles T. Meide Mark M. Newell Lyuba Ognenova-Marinova John Peter Oleson Mendel L. Peterson Richard Pyle Andreas Rechnitzer William R. Royal Margaret Rule Gunter Schöbel Stephanie Schwabe Myriam Seco E. Lee Spence Robert Sténuit Peter Throckmorton Cristina Zenato Scuba record holders Pascal Bernabé Jim Bowden Mark Ellyatt Sheck Exley Nuno Gomes Claudia Serpieri Krzysztof Starnawski Underwater filmmakers and presenters Samir Alhafith David Attenborough Ramón Bravo Jean-Michel Cousteau Richie Kohler Paul Rose Andy Torbet Ivan Tors Andrew Wight James Cameron Underwater photographers Doug Allan Tamara Benitez Georges Beuchat Adrian Biddle Jonathan Bird Eric Cheng Neville Coleman Jacques Cousteau John D. Craig Ben Cropp Bernard Delemotte David Doubilet Candice Farmer John Christopher Fine Rodney Fox Ric Frazier Stephen Frink Peter Gimbel Monty Halls Hans Hass Henry Way Kendall Rudie Kuiter Joseph B. MacInnis Luis Marden Agnes Milowka Noel Monkman Pete Oxford Steve Parish Zale Parry Pierre Petit Leni Riefenstahl Peter Scoones Brian Skerry Wesley C. Skiles E. Lee Spence Philippe Tailliez Ron Taylor Valerie Taylor Albert Tillman John Veltri Stan Waterman Michele Westmorland John Ernest Williamson J. Lamar Worzel Underwater explorers Caves Graham Balcombe Sheck Exley Martyn Farr Jochen Hasenmayer Jill Heinerth Jarrod Jablonski Brian Kakuk William Hogarth Main Tom Mount Jack Sheppard Bill Stone Reefs Arthur C. Clarke Wrecks Leigh Bishop John Chatterton Clive Cussler Bill Nagle Valerie van Heest Aristotelis Zervoudis Aquanauts Andrew Abercromby Joseph M. Acaba Clayton Anderson Richard R. Arnold Serena Auñón-Chancellor Michael Barratt (astronaut) Robert A. Barth Robert L. Behnken Randolph Bresnik Timothy J. Broderick Justin Brown Berry L. Cannon Scott Carpenter Gregory Chamitoff Steve Chappell Catherine Coleman Robin Cook Craig B. Cooper Fabien Cousteau Philippe Cousteau Timothy Creamer Jonathan Dory Pedro Duque Sylvia Earle Jeanette Epps Sheck Exley Albert Falco Andrew J. Feustel Michael Fincke Satoshi Furukawa Ronald J. Garan Jr.

Michael L. Gernhardt Christopher E. Gerty David Gruber Chris Hadfield Jeremy Hansen José M. Hernández John Herrington Paul Hill Akihiko Hoshide Mark Hulsbeck Emma Hwang Norishige Kanai Les Kaufman Scott Kelly Karen Kohanowich Timothy Kopra Dominic Landucci Jon Lindbergh Kjell N. Lindgren Michael López-Alegría Joseph B. MacInnis Sandra Magnus Thomas Marshburn Matthias Maurer K. Megan McArthur Craig McKinley Jessica Meir Simone Melchior Dorothy Metcalf-Lindenburger Andreas Mogensen Karen Nyberg John D. Olivas Takuya Onishi Luca Parmitano Nicholas Patrick Tim Peake Thomas Pesquet Marc Reagan Garrett Reisman Kathleen Rubins Dick Rutkowski Tara Ruttley David Saint-Jacques Josef Schmid Robert Sheats Dewey Smith Steve Squyres Heidemarie Stefanyshyn-Piper Robert Sténuit Hervé Stevenin Nicole Stott James Talacek Daniel M. Tani Robert Thirsk Bill Todd Mark T. Vande Hei Koichi Wakata Rex J. Walheim Shannon Walker John Morgan Wells Joachim Wendler Douglas H. Wheelock Peggy Whitson Dafydd Williams Jeffrey Williams Sunita Williams Reid Wiseman Kimiya Yui Writers and journalists Michael C. Barnette Victor Berge Philippe Diolé Gary Gentile Bret Gilliam Bob Halstead Hillary Hauser Trevor Jackson Steve Lewis John Mattera Rescuers Craig Challen Richard Harris Rick Stanton John Volanthen Frogmen Lionel Crabb Ian Edward Fraser Sydney Knowles James Joseph Magennis Commercial salvors Keith Jessop Science of underwater diving List of researchers in underwater diving Diving physics Metre sea water Neutral buoyancy Underwater acoustics Modulated ultrasound Underwater vision Underwater computer vision Diving physiology Blood shift Cold shock response Diving reflex Equivalent narcotic depth Maximum operating depth Physiological response to water immersion Thermal balance of the underwater diver Underwater vision Work of breathing Decompression theory Decompression models: Bühlmann decompression algorithm Haldane's decompression model Reduced gradient bubble model Thalmann algorithm Thermodynamic model of decompression Varying Permeability Model Equivalent air depth Oxygen window Physiology of decompression Diving environments Underwater exploration Deep-sea exploration Classification List of diving environments by type Altitude diving Benign water diving Confined water diving Deep diving Inland diving Inshore diving Muck diving Night diving Open-water diving Black-water diving Blue-water diving Penetration diving Cave diving Torricellian chamber Ice diving Wreck diving Recreational dive sites Underwater environment Underwater diving environment Impact Environmental impact of recreational diving Low impact diving Other Bathysphere Defense against swimmer incursions Diver detection sonar Offshore survey Rugged compact camera Underwater domain awareness Underwater vehicle Deep-submergence vehicle Aluminaut DSV Alvin American submarine NR-1 Bathyscaphe Archimède FNRS-2 FNRS-3 Harmony class bathyscaphe Sea Pole -class bathyscaphe Trieste II Deepsea Challenger Ictineu 3 JAGO Jiaolong Konsul -class submersible Limiting Factor Russian submarine Losharik Mir Nautile Pisces -class deep submergence vehicle DSV Sea Cliff DSV Shinkai DSV Shinkai 2000 DSV Shinkai 6500 DSV Turtle DSV-5 Nemo Submarine rescue International Submarine Escape and Rescue Liaison Office Submarine Escape and Rescue system (Royal Swedish Navy) McCann Rescue Chamber Submarine rescue ship Deep-submergence rescue vehicle LR5 LR7 MSM-1 Mystic -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle DSRV-1 Mystic DSRV-2 Avalon NATO Submarine Rescue System Priz -class deep-submergence rescue vehicle Russian deep submergence rescue vehicle AS-28 Russian submarine AS-34 ASRV Remora SRV-300 Submarine Rescue Diving Recompression System Type 7103 DSRV URF (Swedish Navy) Submarine escape Escape trunk Submarine escape training facility Submarine Escape Training Facility (Australia) Escape set Davis Submerged Escape Apparatus Momsen lung Steinke hood Submarine Escape Immersion Equipment Special interest groups Artificial Reef Society of British Columbia CMAS Europe Coral Reef Alliance Divers Alert Network Green Fins Finger Lakes Underwater Preserve Association Karst Underwater Research Nautical Archaeology Program Nautical Archaeology Society Naval Air Command Sub Aqua Club PADI AWARE Reef Check Reef Life Survey Rubicon Foundation Save Ontario Shipwrecks SeaKeys Sea Research Society Society for Underwater Historical Research Society for Underwater Technology Underwater Archaeology Branch, Naval History & Heritage Command Neutral buoyancy facilities for Astronaut training Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory Neutral buoyancy pool Neutral buoyancy simulation as a training aid Neutral Buoyancy Simulator Space Systems Laboratory Yuri Gagarin Cosmonaut Training Center Other Nautilus Productions Helicopter Aircrew Breathing Device Scuba diving therapy Seabed mining Category Commons Glossary Indexes: Dive sites Divers Diving Outline Portal NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐ghlgg
Cached time: 20250817044530
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.362 seconds
Real time usage: 1.700 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 9219/1000000
Revision size: 48391/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 690805/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 12705/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 12/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 244364/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.722/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 9058708/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1220.840      1 -total
 36.25%  442.540      1 Template:Reflist
 24.57%  299.951     39 Template:Navbox
 16.11%  196.710     30 Template:Cite_journal
 10.52%  128.448      8 Template:Cite_book
  9.42%  114.954     12 Template:Citation_needed
  9.35%  114.205      1 Template:Underwater_diving
  8.94%  109.111      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  8.86%  108.218     14 Template:Fix
  8.31%  101.434      1 Template:Motion_sickness Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:62580:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817044530 and revision id 1301401659. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Motion_sickness&oldid=1301401659 " Categories : Motion sickness Neurological disorders Effects of external causes Vomiting Underwater diving hazards Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL CS1: long volume value Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2021 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2021 Articles needing additional references from February 2018 All articles needing additional references Articles with unsourced statements from February 2017 All accuracy disputes Articles with disputed statements from March 2018 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2017 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from April 2024 Commons category link from Wikidata Wikipedia medicine articles ready to translate This page was last edited on 19 July 2025, at 16:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Motion sickness 50 languages Add topic

