Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Art 2 Music 3 Literature 4 Architecture 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Cinquecento 26 languages Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara Français Galego Hrvatski Кыргызча Lietuvių Magyar Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Polski Русский Simple English Slovenčina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian culture and art from 1500 to 1599 For other uses, see Cinquecento (disambiguation) .

For the Fiat car, see Fiat Cinquecento .

Art of Italy Periods Nuragic Etruscan Ancient Roman Italo-Byzantine Gothic architecture Renaissance painting and sculpture Mannerism Baroque and Rococo Neoclassical and 19th century Modern and contemporary Centennial divisions Duecento Trecento Quattrocento Cinquecento Seicento Settecento Important art museums Uffizi Pinacoteca di Brera Vatican Museums Villa Borghese Sabauda Gallery Gallerie dell'Accademia Pitti Palace Accademia di Belle Arti Firenze Bargello Important art festivals Venice Biennale Rome Quadriennale Major works The Tribute Money (Masaccio) The Birth of Venus Primavera Mona Lisa The Last Supper Annunciation (Leonardo) Sistine Chapel ceiling Sistine Madonna Pietà The Last Judgment The Creation of Adam David (Michelangelo) The School of Athens The Battle of San Romano Venus of Urbino David (Donatello) The Calling of St. Matthew Unique Forms of Continuity in Space Italian artists Painters Sculptors Architects Photographers Illustrators Italian art schools Bolognese school Ferrarese school Forlivese school Florentine school Lucchese and Pisan School Sienese school Venetian school Art movements Italo-Byzantine Renaissance Pittura infamante Mannerism Baroque Macchiaioli Futurism Novecento Italiano Metaphysical art Scuola Romana Aeropittura Arte Povera Transavantgarde Other topics Italian architecture Sculpture of Italy Timeline of Italian artists to 1800 Raphael Rooms v t e The cultural and artistic events of Italy during the period 1500 to 1599 are collectively referred to as the Cinquecento ( / ˌ tʃ ɪ ŋ k w ɪ ˈ tʃ ɛ n t oʊ / , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Italian: [ˌtʃiŋkweˈtʃɛnto] ), from the Italian for the number 500, in turn from millecinquecento , which is Italian for the year 1500. Cinquecento encompasses the styles and events of the High Italian Renaissance , and Mannerism .

Art [ edit ] Main articles: High Renaissance and Mannerism Especially in Northern Italy, artists began to use new techniques in the manipulation of light and darkness, such as the tone contrast evident in many of Titian 's portraits and the development of sfumato and chiaroscuro by Leonardo da Vinci and Giorgione .

[ 4 ] The period also saw the first secular (non-religious) themes. Debate has ensued as to the secularism of the Renaissance emphasized by early 20th-century writers like Jacob Burkhardt due to the presence of these – actually few – mythological paintings.

Botticelli was one of the main painters whose secular work comes down to us today, though he was deeply religious (a follower of Savonarola ) and painted plenty of traditional religious paintings as well.

[ 5 ] The period known as the High Renaissance represents the culmination of the goals of the earlier period, namely the accurate representation of figures in space rendered with credible motion and an appropriately decorous style. The most famous painters from this time period are Leonardo da Vinci , Raphael , and Michelangelo Buonarroti .

[ 6 ] Their images are among the most widely known works of art in the world. Leonardo's The Last Supper , Raphael's The School of Athens and Michelangelo's Sistine Chapel ceiling are the textbook examples of this period.

High Renaissance painting evolved into Mannerism (c. 1520–1580), especially in Florence. Mannerist artists, who consciously rebelled against the principles of High Renaissance, tend to represent elongated figures in illogical spaces.

[ 7 ] Contemporaries criticized this period as seeming artificial. Modern scholarship has recognized the capacity of Mannerist art to convey strong (often religious) emotion where the High Renaissance failed to do so. Some of the main artists of this period are Pontormo , Rosso Fiorentino , Parmigianino and Giulio Romano .

After 1580, the Carracci brothers, Annibale and Agostino , began to develop the Baroque style of painting focused on greater drama, rich colors and the use of extreme light and darkness. After 1590, Caravaggio developed a realistic approach to the human figure, [ 8 ] painted directly from life and dramatically spotlit against a dark background having an even larger impact on painting moving the Baroque style to the forefront after 1600.

Music [ edit ] Main article: Renaissance music The music of Giovanni Pierluigi da Palestrina is probably the most archetypical Cinquecento music.

[ 9 ] He simplified some of the complexities of the music of the time, and advocated a more homophonic style. He was partially reacting to the strictures of the Council of Trent , which discouraged excessively complex polyphony as inhibiting understanding the text. He was the foremost member of the Roman School , a group of composers of predominantly church music, in Rome, spanning the late Renaissance into early Baroque eras.  Many of the composers had a direct connection to the Vatican and the papal chapel, though they worked at several churches, stylistically they are often contrasted with the Venetian School of composers, a concurrent movement which was much more progressive.

In Venice , from about 1534 until around 1600, an impressive polychoral style developed, [ 10 ] which gave Europe some of the grandest, most sonorous music composed up until that time, with multiple choirs of singers, brass and strings in different spatial locations in the Basilica San Marco di Venezia (see Venetian School ).  These multiple revolutions spread over Europe in the next several decades, beginning in Germany and then moving to Spain, France and England somewhat later, demarcating the beginning of what we now know as the Baroque musical era.

In the late 16th century, as the Renaissance era closes, an extremely manneristic style develops.  In secular music, especially in the madrigal , there was a trend towards complexity and even extreme chromaticism (as exemplified in madrigals of Luzzaschi , Marenzio , and Gesualdo ). The term mannerism derives from art history.

Literature [ edit ] Main article: Renaissance literature The most famous works of the Italian Renaissance by Boccaccio , and Petrarch were written in the 14th century, but continued to exert influence.

Ludovico Ariosto ( Orlando furioso ), Baldassare Castiglione ( The Book of the Courtier ) and Niccolò Machiavelli ( The Prince ) were eminent writers of the Cinquecento.

Architecture [ edit ] Main article: Renaissance architecture It was the result of the revival of classic architecture known as Renaissance , but the change had commenced already a century earlier, in the works of Ghiberti and Donatello in sculpture, and of Brunelleschi and Alberti in architecture.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Duecento – the 13th century in Italian culture Trecento – the 14th century in Italian culture Quattrocento – the 15th century in Italian culture Seicento – the 17th century in Italian culture Settecento – the 18th century in Italian culture Ottocento – the 19th century in Italian culture Novecento - the 20th century in Italian culture References [ edit ] ^ "cinquecento" (US) and "cinquecento" .

Lexico UK English Dictionary .

Oxford University Press . Archived from the original on 2020-12-02.

^ "cinquecento" .

The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language (5th ed.). HarperCollins . Retrieved 1 June 2019 .

^ "cinquecento" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster . Retrieved 1 June 2019 .

^ "GLI ECHI DI LEONARDO E GIORGIONE NEL PAESAGGIO IDEALISTA E SIMBOLISTA IN ITALIA. DALLA TRADIZIONE ALL'ASTRAZIONE" (PDF) (in Italian) . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ "Sandro Botticelli, vita e opere dell'artista simbolo del Rinascimento" (in Italian) . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ "Il Rinascimento maturo a Firenze. Leonardo, Michelangelo, Raffaello, stili, temi" (in Italian) . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ "Manierismo" (in Italian) . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ "Caravaggio" (in Italian) . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ "Palestrina, Giovanni Pierluigi da" (in Italian) . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ "Andrea e Giovanni Gabrieli" (in Italian) . Retrieved 30 December 2023 .

^ One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Cinque Cento ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 377.

External links [ edit ] The dictionary definition of cinquecento at Wiktionary v t e Italy articles History Overview Timeline of Italian history By topic Citizenship Currency and coinage Economy Fashion Flags Genetic Historic states Judaism LGBT Military Music Name Postage Railways Prehistory Prehistory Neolithic Villanovan Terramare Rinaldone Apennine Nuragic Golasecca Canegrate Latial Ancient Ancient peoples Italic peoples Latins Osci Picentes Samnites Umbri Veneti Etruscans Celts Magna Graecia Ligures Messapians Ancient Rome Kingdom Republic Roman conquest Roman Italy Empire Western Empire Middle Ages Middle Ages Italy under Odoacer Ostrogoths Byzantium Lombards Papal States the Holy Roman Empire the Sardinian Judicates Arabs Normans Guelphs and Ghibellines Lombard League Kingdom of Sicily War of the Sicilian Vespers Kingdom of Naples Early modern Italian city-states Florence Siena Milan Maritime republics Venice Genoa Pisa Amalfi Kingdom of Sardinia Grand Duchy of Tuscany Duchy of Savoy Renaissance Italian Wars Early Modern period Napoleonic Italy Austrian occupation and Kingdom of Lombardy-Venetia Kingdom of the Two Sicilies Late modern Unification First War of Independence Second War of Independence Niçard exodus Expedition of the Thousand Proclamation of the Kingdom of Italy Third War of Independence Capture of Rome Monarchy and the World Wars Kingdom of Italy Colonial Empire World War I Fourth War of Independence Fascist Italy World War II Fall of the Fascist regime Resistance and Social Republic Civil War Contemporary Republic Institutional referendum Istrian–Dalmatian exodus Economic Boom Years of Lead Maxi Trial Mani pulite Coronavirus pandemic Geography Italian geographical region Peninsula Climate Climate change Geology Fauna Flora Mountains Prealps Alps Apennines Volcanism Volcanoes Beaches Canals Caves Earthquakes Islands Lakes Marine protected areas National parks Regional parks Rivers Valleys Politics Constitution Elections Foreign relations Government Human rights LGBT rights Judiciary Law Law enforcement Military Nationality Parliament Political parties President ( List ) Prime Minister ( List ) Council of Ministers Regions Provinces Metropolitan cities Cities Comune Municipalities Security and intelligence Economy Economy Italian regions by GDP Agriculture Automotive industry Banking Banks Central Bank Brands Companies Energy Exports Science and technology Southern question Stock exchange Taxation Telecommunications Tourism Trade unions Transport air rail road Welfare Wine Society Aristocracy Censorship Corruption Crime Demographics Education Emigration and diaspora Gambling Health Healthcare Immigration Inventions and discoveries Italians People Languages Italian Regional Life expectancy Orders, decorations, and medals Poverty Prostitution Public administration Racism Religion Social class Terrorism Water supply and sanitation Women Culture Duecento Trecento Quattrocento Cinquecento Seicento Settecento Ottocento Anthem Architecture Art Castles Cathedrals Cinema Coat of arm Cuisine Design Fashion Flag Folklore Gardens Internet Italophilia Libraries Literature Media Museums Music Mythology National symbols Palaces Philosophy Public holidays Sport Television Theatre Traditions World Heritage Sites Italy portal Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐q68xm
Cached time: 20250814221425
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.504 seconds
Real time usage: 0.669 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1490/1000000
Revision size: 9005/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 85024/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1863/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 8/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 58475/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.339/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 14284637/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  543.413      1 -total
 28.35%  154.074      1 Template:Reflist
 20.09%  109.154      1 Template:IPA
 15.86%   86.175      1 Template:Art_of_Italy
 15.52%   84.363      1 Template:Sidebar
 13.37%   72.645      1 Template:Cite_dictionary
 12.81%   69.615      1 Template:Short_description
  8.07%   43.851      1 Template:Italy_topics
  7.36%   40.019      8 Template:Cite_web
  7.19%   39.072      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:4410913:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814221425 and revision id 1275215020. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Cinquecento&oldid=1275215020 " Categories : Italian Renaissance 16th century in Italy Cultural history of Italy Renaissance art Italian Renaissance painters Italian Renaissance sculptors 16th-century Italian architects 16th-century Italian literature 16th-century Italian painters 16th-century Italian sculptors Hidden categories: CS1 Italian-language sources (it) Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Pages with Italian IPA Articles containing Italian-language text This page was last edited on 11 February 2025, at 19:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Cinquecento 26 languages Add topic

