Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Terminology 2 Components 3 Tetrapod legs 4 Robotic leg 5 Prosthetic leg 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Leg 113 languages Ænglisc العربية Aragonés ܐܪܡܝܐ Авар Aymar aru Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Bikol Central Български Boarisch Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Чӑвашла Čeština ChiShona Cymraeg Dansk Deitsch Deutsch ދިވެހިބަސް Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Frysk Gaeilge Gàidhlig 贛語 ગુજરાતી Gungbe 客家語 / Hak-kâ-ngî 한국어 Hausa Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia Iñupiatun IsiXhosa Italiano עברית Jawa Kabɩyɛ ಕನ್ನಡ ქართული کٲشُر Kiswahili Лакку Latina Latviešu Lëtzebuergesch Lietuvių Lingála Magyar Македонски მარგალური مازِرونی Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Na Vosa Vakaviti Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Nouormand Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча ਪੰਜਾਬੀ پنجابی Polski Português Ripoarisch Română Runa Simi Русский Sakizaya संस्कृतम् ᱥᱟᱱᱛᱟᱲᱤ Setswana Shqip Simple English سنڌي Soomaaliga کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Tagalog தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย ತುಳು Türkçe Tyap Українська اردو ئۇيغۇرچە / Uyghurche Vahcuengh Vèneto Tiếng Việt Võro 吴语 Yorùbá 粵語 Zazaki Žemaitėška 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read View source View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read View source View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Weight bearing and locomotive anatomical structure "Legs" redirects here. For specifically legs in humans, see Human leg . For other uses, see Leg (disambiguation) .

Leg Diagram of an insect leg Details Identifiers Latin membrum inferius TA98 A01.1.00.031 TA2 156 FMA 24879 Anatomical terminology [ edit on Wikidata ] A leg is a weight-bearing and locomotive anatomical structure, usually having a columnar shape. During locomotion, legs function as "extensible struts".

[ 1 ] The combination of movements at all joints can be modeled as a single, linear element capable of changing length and rotating about an omnidirectional "hip" joint.

As an anatomical animal structure, it is used for locomotion . The distal end is often modified to distribute force (such as a foot ). Most animals have an even number of legs.

As a component of furniture, it is used for the economy of materials needed to provide the support for the useful surface, such as the table top or chair seat.

Terminology Uniped : one leg, such as clams Biped : two legs, such as humans and birds Triped : three legs, which typically does not occur naturally in healthy animals Quadruped : four legs, such as dogs and horses Many taxa are characterized by the number of legs: Tetrapods have four legs. Squamates of genus Bipes have only two. Caecilians and many squamate lineages convergently lost their legs.

Panarthropoda : no less than four legs. Velvet worms and some arthropods have more than a dozen legs; a few species possess over one hundred. Despite what their names might suggest, centipedes ("hundred feet") may have fewer than twenty or more than 300 legs, and millipedes ("thousand feet") have fewer than 1,000 legs, but up to 750.

Components A leg is a structure of gross anatomy , meaning that it is large enough to be seen unaided.  The components depend on the animal.  In humans and other mammals, a leg includes the bones , muscles , tendons , ligaments , blood vessels , nerves , and skin .  In insects , the leg includes most of these things, except that insects have an exoskeleton that replaces the function of both the bones and the skin.

Sometimes the end of the leg, or foot , is considered part of the leg; other times it is considered separate.  Similarly, the hip joint or other place where the leg attaches to the main body may be considered separate or part of the leg.

Tetrapod legs The leg of a woolly mammoth (reconstruction).

In tetrapod anatomy , leg is used to refer to the entire limb . In human medicine, the precise definition refers [ 2 ] [ 3 ] [ 4 ] only to the segment between the knee and the ankle . This lower segment is also called the shank , [ 5 ] [ 6 ] and the front (anterior) of the segment is called the shin or pretibia .

In bipedal tetrapods , the two lower limbs are referred to as the "legs" and the two upper limbs as "arms" or "wings" as the case may be.  In quadrupedal tetrapods, the limbs are generally called forelegs, fore legs or front legs and hindlegs, hind legs or back legs.

Robotic leg A robotic leg is moved by an actuator , which is a type of motor for moving or controlling a mechanism or system.  It is operated by a source of energy, usually in the form of an electric current, hydraulic fluid pressure or pneumatic pressure, and converts that energy into motion.

Prosthetic leg Cameron de Burgh , an Australian Paralympic swimmer, who has a prosthetic leg A prosthetic leg is an artificial leg that is used to replace one that has been lost.

References ^ Gray, J. (1944).

"Studies in the Mechanics of the Tetrapod Skeleton" .

Journal of Experimental Biology .

20 (2). Biologists.org: 88– 116.

Bibcode : 1944JExpB..20...88G .

doi : 10.1242/jeb.20.2.88 .

Archived from the original on 9 July 2008 . Retrieved 21 September 2010 .

^ "Leg" .

Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) . National Library of Medicine. Archived from the original on 22 December 2015 . Retrieved 18 April 2009 .

^ "Leg" .

Dorland's Medical Dictionary for Healthcare Consumers . Mercksource. Archived from the original on 14 October 2011 . Retrieved 18 April 2009 .

^ "leg" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster.

^ Kardong, Kenneth V. (2009).

Vertebrates: Comparative anatomy, function, evolution (5th ed.). McGraw-Hill. p. 340.

ISBN 978-0-07-304058-5 .

^ "shank" .

Merriam-Webster.com Dictionary . Merriam-Webster.

External links Media related to Leg at Wikimedia Commons Authority control databases National Czech Republic Latvia Other Terminologia Anatomica Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Leg&oldid=1301016449 " Categories : Animal locomotion Animal anatomy Lower limb anatomy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia indefinitely semi-protected pages Wikipedia indefinitely move-protected pages Commons link from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2024 This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 17:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Leg 113 languages Add topic

