Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life and education 2 Career 3 Personal life 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Johann Benedict Listing 26 languages العربية تۆرکجه Български Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français Galego Italiano עברית Lëtzebuergesch مصرى Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia German mathematician (1808–1882) Johann Benedict Listing Listing, c. 1860 Born ( 1808-07-25 ) 25 July 1808 Frankfurt , Principality of Frankfurt Died 24 December 1882 (1882-12-24) (aged 74) Göttingen , Kingdom of Prussia , German Empire Nationality German Alma mater University of Göttingen Known for Back-and-forth method Listing number Listing's knot Listing's law Scientific career Fields Mathematics Doctoral advisor Carl Friedrich Gauss Doctoral students Edward Leamington Nichols Johann Benedict Listing (25 July 1808 – 24 December 1882) was a German mathematician.

Early life and education [ edit ] J. B. Listing was born in Frankfurt and died in Göttingen . He finished his studies at the University of Göttingen in 1834, and in 1839 he succeeded Wilhelm  Weber as professor of physics .

Career [ edit ] Listing first introduced the term " topology " to replace the older term "geometria situs" (also called sometimes "Analysis situs"), in a famous article published in 1847, although he had used the term in correspondence some years earlier.

[ 1 ] He (independently) discovered the properties of the Möbius strip , or half-twisted strip, at the same time (1858) as August Ferdinand Möbius , and  went further in exploring the properties of strips with higher-order twists ( paradromic rings). He discovered topological invariants which came to be called Listing numbers .

[ 2 ] In ophthalmology , Listing's law describes an essential element of extraocular eye muscle coordination.

In geodesy , he coined in 1872 the term " geoid " for the idealized geometric surface of the figure of the Earth , as previously conceptualized by his doctoral adviser, Gauss .

[ 3 ] Personal life [ edit ] Listing's granddaughter was British War Artist Anna Airy , by his younger daughter Anna.

[ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Johann Benedict Listing – Biography" .

Maths History . Retrieved 24 December 2021 .

^ Peirce, C. S.

, 1992, Reasoning and the Logic of Things: The Cambridge Conference Lectures of 1898 , edited with introduction by Kenneth Laine Ketner and with commentary by Hilary Putnam , who discusses Listing numbers starting on page 99. It is currently difficult to find anything online about Listing numbers except in connection with Peirce .

^ Listing, Johann Benedict (1872).

Über unsere jetzige Kenntniss der Gestalt und Grösse der Erde: Aus den Nachrichten der K. Ges. der Wiss (in German). Göttingen: Dieterich . Retrieved 6 July 2021 .

^ "Suffolk Artists - AIRY, Anna" .

suffolkartists.co.uk . Retrieved 4 March 2025 .

External links [ edit ] O'Connor, John J.; Robertson, Edmund F.

, "Johann Benedict Listing" , MacTutor History of Mathematics Archive , University of St Andrews A reprint of (part of) his famous 1847 article introducing Topology , published in Vorstudien zur Topologie, Vandenhoeck und Ruprecht , Göttingen, pp. 67, 1848.

Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Netherlands Norway Israel Academics Mathematics Genealogy Project zbMATH MathSciNet People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX This article about a German mathematician is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Johann_Benedict_Listing&oldid=1295815240 " Categories : 1808 births 1882 deaths 19th-century German mathematicians Scientists from Frankfurt German topologists Fellows of the Royal Society of Edinburgh Vision scientists German mathematician stubs Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from April 2022 Articles with hCards All stub articles This page was last edited on 16 June 2025, at 01:06 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Johann Benedict Listing 26 languages Add topic

