Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Criticism of technology 6 languages العربية Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Not to be confused with Technocriticism .

Criticism of technology is an analysis of adverse impacts of industrial and digital technologies. It is argued that, in all advanced industrial societies (not necessarily only capitalist ones), technology becomes a means of domination, control, and exploitation, [ 1 ] or more generally something which threatens the survival of humanity.  Some of the technology opposed by the most radical critics may include everyday household products, such as refrigerators , computers , and medication .

[ 2 ] However, criticism of technology comes in many shades.

Overview [ edit ] Some authors such as Chellis Glendinning and Kirkpatrick Sale consider themselves Neo-Luddites and hold that technological progress has had a negative impact on humanity. Their work focused on seeking meaning out of technological change, specifically wrestling with the question of "how tools and their affordances change and alter the fabric of everyday life." [ 3 ] Ellul, for instance, maintained that when people assert that technology is an instrument of freedom or the means to achieve historical destiny or the execution of divine vocation, it results in the glorification and sanctification of Technique so that it becomes that which gives meaning and value to life rather than mere ensemble of materials.

[ 4 ] This is echoed by rhetorical critics who cite the way technological discourse damages institutions and individuals who make up those institutions due to its idealization and capacity to define social hierarchies .

[ 5 ] In its most extreme, criticisms of technology produce analyses of technology as potentially leading to catastrophe. For instance, activist Naomi Klein described how technology is employed by capitalism in its commitment to a "shock doctrine", which promotes a series of crises so that speculative profit can be accumulated.

[ 4 ] There are theorists who also cite the 2008 financial crisis as well as the Chernobyl and Fukushima disasters to support their critique.

[ 4 ] Critiques also focus on specific issues such as how technology—through robotics , automation , and software —is destroying people's jobs faster than it is creating them, contributing to the incidence of poverty and inequality.

[ 6 ] In the 1970s in the US, the critique of technology became the basis of a new political perspective called anarcho-primitivism , which was forwarded by thinkers such as Fredy Perlman , John Zerzan , and David Watson . They proposed differing theories about how it became an industrial society, and not capitalism as such, that was at the root of contemporary social problems. This theory was developed in the journal Fifth Estate in the 1970s and 1980s, and was influenced by the Frankfurt School , the Situationist International , Jacques Ellul and others.

The critique of technology overlaps with the philosophy of technology but whereas the latter tries to establish itself as an academic discipline the critique of technology is basically a political project, not limited to academia . It features prominently in neo-Marxist ( Herbert Marcuse and Andrew Feenberg ), ecofeminism ( Vandana Shiva ) and in post development ( Ivan Illich ) See also [ edit ] Critical theory Deep ecology Development criticism Frankfurt School Luddite Medicalization Paradigm shift Science, technology and society Social criticism Social effect of evolutionary theory Technology and society History of science and technology References [ edit ] ^ Lorenzano, Pablo; Rheinberger, Hans-Jörg ; Ortiz, Eduardo; Galles, Carlos (2010).

History and Philosophy of Science and Technology . Oxford: EOLSS Publishers Co. Ltd. pp.

124– 125.

ISBN 9781848267763 .

^ Glendinning, Chellis .

Notes towards a Neo-Luddite manifesto . Utne Reader, 1990.

^ Watson, Sara (October 2016).

"Toward a Constructive Technology Criticism" .

Columbia Journalism Review . Retrieved 2018-10-19 .

^ a b c Jeronimo, Helena; Garcia, Jose; Mitcham, Carl (2013).

Jacques Ellul and the Technological Society in the 21st Century . Dordrecht: Springer Science+Business Media. p. 116.

ISBN 9789400766570 .

^ Enos, Theresa (2013).

Encyclopedia of Rhetoric and Composition: Communication from Ancient Times to the Information Age . New York: Routledge. p. 619.

ISBN 978-0824072001 .

^ Rotman, David.

"How Technology Is Destroying Jobs" .

MIT Technology Review . Retrieved 2018-10-19 .

Further reading [ edit ] Wendy Hui Kyong Chun , Control and freedom (2006) Donna J. Haraway , A Cyborg Manifesto (1985) Gilles Deleuze , Postscript on the Societies of Control (1992) Lewis Mumford , Technics and Civilization (1934) Layla AbdelRahim , Children's Literature, Domestication, and Social Foundation: Narratives of Civilization and Wilderness , Routledge, 2018 paperback ISBN 9781138547810 ; 2015 hardback ISBN 9780415661102 Michael Adas, Machines as the Measure of Men: Science, Technology, and Ideologies of Western Dominance , Cornell University Press 1990 Braun, Ernest (2009).

Futile Progress: Technology’s Empty Promise , Routledge.

Jacques Ellul , The Technological Society , Trans. John Wilkinson. New York: Knopf, 1964. London: Jonathan Cape, 1965. Rev. ed.: New York: Knopf/Vintage, 1967. with introduction by Robert K. Merton (professor of sociology, Columbia University).

Jacques Ellul , The Technological Bluff , Trans. Geoffrey W. Bromiley. Grand Rapids: Eerdmans, 1990.

Andrew Feenberg , Transforming Technology. A Critical Theory Revisited , Oxford University Press, 2nd edition 2002, ISBN 0-19-514615-8 - Feenberg offers a "coherent starting point for anticapitalist technical politics" [ citation needed ] to overcome what he considers to be the "fatalism" of Ellul, Heidegger, and other proponents of "substantive" theories of technology.

Martin Heidegger , The Question Concerning Technology, and Other Essays , B&T 1982, ISBN 0-06-131969-4 Huesemann, Michael H., and Joyce A. Huesemann (2011).

Technofix: Why Technology Won’t Save Us or the Environment , New Society Publishers, Gabriola Island, British Columbia, Canada, ISBN 0865717044 .

Derrick Jensen and George Draffan, Welcome to the Machine: Science, Surveillance, and the Culture of Control , Chelsea Green Publishing Company, 2004, ISBN 1-931498-52-0 Mander, Jerry (1992).

In the Absence of the Sacred: The Failure of Technology and the Survival of the Indian Nations , Sierra Club Books.

Postman, Neil (1993).

Technopoly: The Surrender of Culture to Technology , Vintage.

David Watson, Against the Megamachine , Brooklyn: Autonomedia, 1998, ISBN 1-57027-087-2 - The title essay is available online here Joseph Weizenbaum , Computer Power and Human Reason: From Judgement to Calculation , W.H.Freeman & Co Ltd, New Edition 1976 Langdon Winner , Autonomous Technology: Technics-Out-Of-Control as a Theme in Political Thought , MIT Press 1977, ISBN 978-0-262-23078-0 Peter Zelchenko (1999).

Exploring Alternatives to Hype .

Educational Leadership 56(5), pp. 78–81.

Theodore John Kaczynski , Anti-Tech Revolution: Why and How , Fitch & Madison, 2016 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Criticism of technology .

Collection of early anarcho-primitivist articles published in Fifth Estate S. Ravi Rajan - Science, State and Violence: An Indian Critique Reconsidered Wikiversity: The limits of technological potential v t e Science and technology studies Economics Economics of science Economics of scientific knowledge History History and philosophy of science History of science and technology History of technology Languages of science Scientific language Philosophy Anthropocene Antipositivism Empiricism Fuzzy logic Neo-Luddism Philosophy of science Philosophy of social science Philosophy of technology Positivism Postpositivism Religion and science Scientism Social constructivism Social epistemology Transhumanism Sociology Actor–network theory Social construction of technology shaping of technology Sociology of knowledge scientific Sociology of scientific ignorance Sociology of the history of science Sociotechnology Strong programme Science studies Academic bias Antiscience Bibliometrics Boundary-work Consilience Criticism of science Demarcation problem Double hermeneutic Logology Mapping controversies Metascience Paradigm shift black swan events Pseudoscience Psychology of science Science citizen communication education normal Neo-colonial post-normal rhetoric wars Scientific community consensus controversy dissent enterprise literacy method misconduct priority skepticism Scientocracy Scientometrics Team science Traditional knowledge ecological Unity of science Women in science STEM Technology studies Co-production Cyborg anthropology Design studies Dematerialization Digital anthropology Digital media use and mental health Early adopter Engineering studies Financial technology Hype cycle Innovation diffusion disruptive linear model system user Leapfrogging Normalization process theory Media studies Reverse salient Skunkworks project Sociotechnical system Technical change Technocracy Technoscience feminist Technological change convergence determinism revolution transitions Technology and society criticism of dynamics theories of transfer Women in engineering Policy Academic freedom Digital divide Evidence-based policy Factor 10 Funding of science Horizon scanning Politicization of science Regulation of science Research ethics Right to science Science policy history of science of Technology assessment Technology policy Transition management Portals Science History of science Technology Category Associations Journals Scholars Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Criticism_of_technology&oldid=1293879202 " Categories : Criticisms Technology Technology in society Science and technology studies Criticism of science Philosophy of technology Technology systems Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2012 This page was last edited on 4 June 2025, at 05:32 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Criticism of technology 6 languages Add topic

