Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition and history 2 See also 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Halo orbit 21 languages Afrikaans भोजपुरी Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Italiano 日本語 Norsk bokmål Русский Simple English Slovenčina Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Periodic, three-dimensional orbit For the hypothetical satellite employing a solar sail, see Statite .

Halo orbit Polar view Equatorial view SOHO 's trajectory, a halo orbit around the Sun-Earth L 1 point Earth · SOHO Polar view of the Sun-Earth Lagrange points . Halo orbits orbit L 1 , L 2 , or L 3 (orbits not shown in diagram).

Part of a series on Astrodynamics Orbital mechanics Orbital elements Apsis Argument of periapsis Eccentricity Inclination Mean anomaly Orbital nodes Semi-major axis True anomaly Types of two-body orbits by eccentricity Circular orbit Elliptic orbit Transfer orbit ( Hohmann transfer orbit Bi-elliptic transfer orbit ) Parabolic orbit Hyperbolic orbit Radial orbit Decaying orbit Equations Dynamical friction Escape velocity Kepler's equation Kepler's laws of planetary motion Orbital period Orbital velocity Surface gravity Specific orbital energy Vis-viva equation Celestial mechanics Gravitational influences Barycenter Hill sphere Perturbations Sphere of influence N-body orbits Lagrangian points ( Halo orbits ) Lissajous orbits Lyapunov orbits Engineering and efficiency Preflight engineering Mass ratio Payload fraction Propellant mass fraction Tsiolkovsky rocket equation Efficiency measures Gravity assist Oberth effect Propulsive maneuvers Orbital maneuver Orbit insertion v t e A halo orbit is a periodic, non-planar orbit associated with one of the L 1 , L 2 or L 3 Lagrange points in the three-body problem of orbital mechanics . Although a Lagrange point is just a point in empty space, its peculiar characteristic is that it can be orbited by a Lissajous orbit or by a halo orbit. These can be thought of as resulting from an interaction between the gravitational pull of the two planetary bodies and the Coriolis and centrifugal force on a spacecraft. Halo orbits exist in any three-body system, e.g., a Sun – Earth –orbiting satellite system or an Earth– Moon –orbiting satellite system. Continuous "families" of both northern and southern halo orbits exist at each Lagrange point. Because halo orbits tend to be unstable, station-keeping using thrusters may be required to keep a satellite on the orbit.

Most satellites in halo orbit serve scientific purposes, for example space telescopes .

Definition and history [ edit ] Robert W. Farquhar first used the name "halo" in 1966 for orbits around L 2 which were made periodic using thrusters.

[ 1 ] Farquhar advocated using spacecraft in such an orbit beyond the Moon (Earth–Moon L 2 ) as a communications relay station for an Apollo mission to the far side of the Moon . A spacecraft in such an orbit would be in continuous view of both the Earth and the far side of the Moon, whereas a Lissajous orbit would sometimes make the spacecraft go behind the Moon. In the end, no relay satellite was launched for Apollo, since all landings were on the near side of the Moon.

[ 2 ] In 1973 Farquhar and Ahmed Kamel found that when the in-plane amplitude of a Lissajous orbit was large enough there would be a corresponding out-of-plane amplitude that would have the same period, [ 3 ] so the orbit ceased to be a Lissajous orbit and became approximately an ellipse.

[ citation needed ] They used analytical expressions to represent these halo orbits; in 1984, Kathleen Howell showed that more precise trajectories could be computed numerically. Additionally, she found that for most values of the ratio between the masses of the two bodies (such as the Earth and the Moon) there was a range of stable orbits.

[ 4 ] The first mission to use a halo orbit was ISEE-3 , a joint ESA and NASA spacecraft launched in 1978. It traveled to the Sun–Earth L 1 point and remained there for several years. The next mission to use a halo orbit was Solar and Heliospheric Observatory (SOHO), also a joint ESA/NASA mission to study the Sun, which arrived at Sun–Earth L 1 in 1996. It used an orbit similar to ISEE-3.

[ 5 ] Although several other missions since then have traveled to Lagrange points, they (eg.

Gaia astrometric space observatory) typically have used the related non-periodic variations called Lissajous orbits rather than an actual halo orbit.

Although halo orbits were well known in the RTBP (Restricted Three Body Problem), it was difficult to obtain Halo orbits for the real Earth-Moon system.  Translunar halo orbits were first computed in 1998 by M.A. Andreu, who introduced a new model for the motion of a spacecraft in the Earth-Moon-Sun system, which was called Quasi-Bicircular Problem (QBCP).

[ 6 ] In May 2018, Farquhar's original idea was finally realized when China placed the first communications relay satellite, Queqiao , into a halo orbit around the Earth-Moon L 2 point.

[ 7 ] On 3 January 2019, the Chang'e 4 spacecraft landed in the Von Kármán crater on the far side of the Moon, using the Queqiao relay satellite to communicate with the Earth.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The James Webb Space Telescope entered a halo orbit around the Sun-Earth L 2 point on 24 January 2022.

[ 10 ] Euclid entered a similar orbit around this point in August 2023.

India's space agency ISRO launched Aditya-L1 to study the Sun from a halo orbit around the Sun-Earth L 1 point.

[ 11 ] On 6 January 2024, the spacecraft, India's first solar mission, successfully entered a halo orbit with a period of approximately approximately 178 days, at a distance of approximately 1.5 million kilometers from Earth .

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Interplanetary Transport Network – Low-energy trajectories in the Solar System Interplanetary spaceflight – Crewed or uncrewed travel between stars or planets Lissajous orbit – Quasi-periodic orbital trajectory, another Lagrangian-point orbit which generalizes halo orbits.

Near-rectilinear halo orbit – Periodic, three-dimensional orbit Category:Spacecraft using halo orbits Libration point orbit – Quasiperiodic orbit around a Lagrange point References [ edit ] ^ Robert Farquhar (1966). "Station-Keeping in the Vicinity of Collinear Libration Points with an Application to a Lunar Communications Problem".

AAS Science and Technology Series: Space Flight Mechanics Specialist Symposium .

11 : 519– 535.

, see Farquhar, R.W.: "The Control and Use of Libration-Point Satellites" , Ph.D. Dissertation, Dept. of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Stanford University, Stanford, California, 1968, pp. 103, 107–108.

^ Schmid, P. E. (1 June 1968).

"Lunar far-side communication satellites" .

NASA , Goddard Space Flight Center . Retrieved 16 July 2008 .

^ Farquhar, R. W.; Kamel, A. A. (June 1973).

"Quasi-Periodic Orbits about the Translunar Libration Point" . Springer.

^ Howell, Kathleen C.

(1984).

"Three-Dimensional Periodic Halo Orbits" .

Celestial Mechanics .

32 (1): 53– 71.

Bibcode : 1984CeMec..32...53H .

doi : 10.1007/BF01358403 .

S2CID 189831091 .

^ Dunham, D. W.; Farquhar, R. W. (2003). "Libration Point Missions, 1978–2002".

Libration Point Orbits and Applications . pp.

45– 73.

doi : 10.1142/9789812704849_0003 .

ISBN 978-981-238-363-1 .

^ Andreu, M.A. (1998).

The Quasi-bicircular problem . Ph. D. Thesis, Dept. Matemática Aplicada i Anàlisi, Universitat de Barcelona. Publicacions Universitat de Barcelona.

ISBN 84-475-2319-5 .

^ Xu, Luyuan (15 June 2018).

"How China's lunar relay satellite arrived in its final orbit" .

The Planetary Society .

This is the first-ever lunar relay satellite at this location.

^ Jones, Andrew (5 December 2018).

"China to launch Chang'e-4 lunar far side landing mission on December 7" .

gbtimes.com . Archived from the original on 15 April 2019.

^ Jones, Andrew (3 January 2019).

"Chang'e-4 returns first images from lunar farside following historic landing" .

SpaceNews.com . Retrieved 8 January 2019 .

^ Roulette, Joey (24 January 2022).

"After Million-Mile Journey, James Webb Telescope Reaches Destination – The telescope's safe arrival is a relief to scientists who plan to spend the next 10 or more years using it to study ancient galaxies" .

The New York Times .

Archived from the original on 24 January 2022 . Retrieved 24 January 2022 .

^ "After Chandrayaan-3, ISRO getting ready for Sun mission ADITYA-L1. Key things to know" .

The Economic Times . 24 July 2023 . Retrieved 24 July 2023 .

^ "Halo-Orbit Insertion of Aditya-L1 Successfully Accomplished" .

www.isro.gov.in . Retrieved 6 January 2024 .

External links [ edit ] SOHO – The Trip to the L1 Halo Orbit Low Energy Interplanetary Transfers Using Halo Orbit Hopping Method with STK/Astrogator Gaia's Lissajous Type Orbit – a Lissajous-type orbit, i.e.

, a near-circular ellipse or "halo" v t e Gravitational orbits Types General Box Capture Circular Elliptical / Highly elliptical Escape Horseshoe Hyperbolic trajectory Inclined / Non-inclined Kepler Lagrange point Osculating Parabolic trajectory Parking Prograde / Retrograde Synchronous semi sub Transfer orbit Geocentric Geosynchronous Geostationary Geostationary transfer Graveyard High Earth Low Earth Medium Earth Molniya Near-equatorial Orbit of the Moon Polar Sun-synchronous Transatmospheric Tundra Very low Earth About other points Mars Areocentric Areosynchronous Areostationary Lagrange points Distant retrograde Halo Lissajous Libration Lunar Sun Heliocentric Earth's orbit Mars cycler Heliosynchronous Other Lunar cycler Parameters Shape Size e Eccentricity a Semi-major axis b Semi-minor axis Q , q Apsides Orientation i Inclination Ω Longitude of the ascending node ω Argument of periapsis ϖ Longitude of the periapsis Position M Mean anomaly ν , θ , f True anomaly E Eccentric anomaly L Mean longitude l True longitude Variation T Orbital period n Mean motion v Orbital speed t 0 Epoch Maneuvers Bi-elliptic transfer Collision avoidance (spacecraft) Delta-v Delta-v budget Gravity assist Gravity turn Hohmann transfer Inclination change Low-energy transfer Oberth effect Phasing Rocket equation Rendezvous Trans-lunar injection Transposition, docking, and extraction Orbital mechanics Astronomical coordinate systems Characteristic energy Escape velocity Ephemeris Equatorial coordinate system Ground track Hill sphere Interplanetary Transport Network Kepler's laws of planetary motion Kozai mechanism Lagrangian point n -body problem Orbit equation Orbital state vectors Perturbation Retrograde and prograde motion Specific orbital energy Specific angular momentum Two-line elements List of orbits Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Halo_orbit&oldid=1295858032 " Categories : Three-body orbits Trojans (astronomy) Lagrangian mechanics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from January 2023 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from February 2024 This page was last edited on 16 June 2025, at 07:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Halo orbit 21 languages Add topic

