Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Development 2 Royal portraits 3 Survey Toggle Survey subsection 3.1 Architecture 3.2 Painting and sculpture 3.3 Tapestry 4 Peak of the movement 5 Ending of the International moment 6 Gallery 7 See also 8 Notes 9 References 10 Further reading 11 External links Toggle the table of contents International Gothic 28 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Català Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska ไทย Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Art style, form of Gothic art The Agony in the Garden with the Donor Louis I, Duke of Orléans , Colart de Laon , c.

1405 -1408, Prado Museum International Gothic is a period of Gothic art that began in Burgundy , France, and northern Italy in the late 14th and early 15th century.

[ 1 ] It then spread very widely across Western Europe, hence the name for the period, which was introduced by the French art historian Louis Courajod at the end of the 19th century.

[ 2 ] The spread of ideas and portable works, such as illuminated manuscripts throughout Europe led to consensus among artists and their patrons that considerably reduced variation in national styles. The main influences were northern France , the Duchy of Burgundy , Flanders and Brabant, the Imperial court in Prague , and Italy. Royal marriages such as that between Richard II of England and Anne of Bohemia helped to spread the style.

It was initially a style of courtly sophistication, but somewhat more robust versions spread to art commissioned by the emerging mercantile classes and the smaller nobility.  In Northern Europe "Late Gothic" continuations of the style, especially in its decorative elements, could still be found until the early 16th century, as no alternative decorative vocabulary emerged locally to replace it before the Renaissance revival of Classicism .

Detail of the Annunciation (1333) by the Sienese Simone Martini , Uffizi Usage of the terms by art historians varies somewhat, with some using the term more restrictively than others.

[ 3 ] Some art historians feel the term is "in many ways ... not very helpful ... since it tends to skate over both differences and details of transmission." [ 4 ] Development [ edit ] The important Bohemian version of the style developed in the court of Charles IV, Holy Roman Emperor in Prague, which for a brief period [ 5 ] became a leading force in the development of European art. Charles came from the Luxembourg dynasty , was tutored by the future Pope Clement VI , and as a youth spent seven years at the French court, as well as visiting Italy twice. This and family relationships gave him intimate links with the various courts of France, including that of the Avignon Papacy , and from 1363 the separate Valois Duchy of Burgundy under Philip the Bold . The Bohemian style initially lacked the elongated figures of other centres, but had a richness and sweetness in female figures that were very influential. Charles had at least one Italian altarpiece, apparently made in Italy and sent to Prague, near where it remains today in his showpiece Karlštejn Castle . For St. Vitus Cathedral in Prague, he first used a French architect, and then the German Peter Parler .

[ 6 ] Lorenzo Monaco , The Flight into Egypt ( c.

1405 , predella ) Tempera on poplar, 21,2 x 35,5 cm Much of the development of the style occurred in Italy, and it probably spread north of the Alps to influence France partly through the colony of Italian artists attached to the Papal Court at Avignon, and the works displayed from the residence there in the 1330s and 1340s of Simone Martini , a Sienese precursor of the style.

Republican Siena had a large influence on the development of the style, but kept to its own dignified Gothic style throughout the period, and afterwards, while the flamboyant Visconti court at Milan, also closely related to the French royal family, was the most important Italian centre of the courtly style.

[ 7 ] As the style developed in Northern Europe, Italian artists were in turn influenced by it.

[ citation needed ] The marriage in 1384 between the young King Richard II of England and Charles IV's daughter Anne of Bohemia helped to connect Prague and London, and bring the style to England, although Anne died in 1394.

Royal portraits [ edit ] A number of central works of International Gothic work are votive portraits of monarchs with a sacred figure – in some cases being received into Heaven by them, as with a miniature of Jean, Duc de Berry , and some of his relatives, being welcomed by Saint Peter in the Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry .

[ 8 ] From this period come the earliest surviving panel portraits of monarchs, and royal manuscripts show a greatly increased number of realistic portraits of the monarch who commissioned them.

[ citation needed ] The Votive Panel of Jan Očko of Vlašim . Kneeling Emperor Charles IV and his son Wenceslaus before the Virgin, Bohemia, 1371. (detail) Jean de Vaudetar, chamberlain of king Charles V of France , presents his gift of a manuscript to the King, 1372.

The Wilton Diptych 1395–99. King Richard II of England kneels. (left side of the diptych) The Wilton Diptych , painted in England by a French or English artist. (right side) The Parement of Narbonne by the French Master of the Parement , 1364–78, a painted silk altar frontal with donor portraits of the King and Queen Survey [ edit ] Two angels from Bohemia A page from the luxury illuminated manuscript Wenceslas Bible , a German translation of the 1390s.

[ 9 ] Architecture [ edit ] In architecture , where the style was long-lasting, local varieties of it are often known as Perpendicular architecture in England, and as Sondergotik in Germany and Central Europe, Flamboyant Gothic in France , and later the Manueline in Portugal , and the Isabelline in Spain .

[ citation needed ] Painting and sculpture [ edit ] In painting and sculpture, the style is sometimes known in German as the "Schöne Stil" or "Weicher Stil" ("Beautiful style" or "Soft style").

[ 10 ] Stylistic features are a dignified elegance, which replaces monumentality, along with rich decorative colouring, elongated figures and flowing lines.  It also makes a more practised use of perspective, modelling, and setting. Figures begin to be given more space in their settings, and interest is taken in realistically depicted plants and animals.  In some works, above all the famous calendar scenes of the Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry , the beginnings of real landscape painting are seen.  Decoration became increasingly ornate as the style developed in Northern Europe, whereas in Italy the increased sophistication of figure painting was absorbed into Early Renaissance painting .

[ citation needed ] In sculpture the leading Italian artists remained closer to classicism, and were less affected by the movement; Lorenzo Ghiberti is in many respects close to the style, but already seems infused with Early Renaissance classicism.

Claus Sluter was the leading sculptor in Burgundy, and was one artist able to use the style with a strongly monumental effect.  Most sculptors are unknown, and the style tended to survive longer in Northern sculpture than painting, as the detailed realism of Early Netherlandish painting was harder to translate into sculpture. Smaller painted wood figures, most often of the Madonna, were significant, and being relatively portable, probably helped to disseminate the style across Europe.

[ citation needed ] The Garden of Eden from the Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry by the Limbourg Brothers , 1410s Notable painters included Master Theoderic and the Master of the Třeboň Altarpiece in Bohemia, the Master of the Parement , Jacquemart de Hesdin and the Netherlandish Limbourg brothers in France, and Gentile da Fabriano , Lorenzo Monaco and Pisanello in Italy, the last taking the style into the Early Renaissance .  In Burgundy Jean Malouel , Melchior Broederlam and Henri Bellechose were succeeded by Robert Campin and Jan van Eyck who took Early Netherlandish painting in the direction of greater illusionism.

Master Bertram and Conrad von Soest were leading regional masters in Germany, working largely for city burghers.  Surviving panel paintings of the best quality from before 1390 are very rare except from Italy and the Prague court.  Many of these artists moved between countries or regions during their careers, exposing them to the styles of other centres.  In particular Broederlam had spent some years in Italy, and it has been speculated that the Master of the Parement was himself Bohemian, as his known French works are very few, and extremely close to Bohemian art.

[ 11 ] Illuminated manuscripts remained important vehicles of the style, and in works like the Sherborne Missal [ 12 ] were the main English contribution, apart from the stained glass of John Thornton in York Minster and of Thomas Glazier in Oxford and elsewhere.

[ 13 ] Nottingham alabaster carvings, produced in considerable quantities by workshops to standard patterns, were exported all over Western Europe to value-conscious parish churches. The Hours of Gian Galeazzo Visconti from Milan was a key work, as was the Wenceslas Bible (with the text in German) of Charles IV's son. Both, like the Sherborne Missal, are marked by extravagantly decorated borders.

John, Duke of Berry , son and brother of French kings, was the most extravagant commissioner of manuscripts, and the main employer of the Limbourg Brothers, the Master of the Brussels Initials and Jacquemart de Hesdin, as well as using many other artists.  Other large-scale collectors included Wenceslas , the son of Charles IV, John of Lancaster, 1st Duke of Bedford , son of Henry IV of England and "Regent" of English-occupied France, and the Dukes of Burgundy.  In the fifteenth century the cities of Flanders , especially Bruges , came to outstrip Paris as a centre of both manuscript illumination and panel painting.

[ citation needed ] Tapestry [ edit ] Arras tapestry of about 1410 (the dog and rabbits signify lust) A further vehicle of the International Gothic style was provided by the tapestry -weaving centers of Arras , Tournai and Paris, [ 14 ] where tapestry production was permanently disordered by the English occupation of 1418–36.  Under the consistent patronage of the Dukes of Burgundy , [ 15 ] their courtly International Gothic style, elongated figures, rich details of attire, crowded composition, with figures disposed in tiers, owe their inspiration to manuscript illuminators and directly to painters: Baudouin de Bailleul, a painter established at Arras, supplied cartoons for tapestry workshops there and at Tournai, where elements of a local style are hard to distinguish (Weigert, p. 44). The Chatsworth Hunts ( Victoria and Albert Museum ) are inspired by Gaston de Foix 's book on hunting and the many weavings of Trojan War cycles by contemporary romances.

[ citation needed ] Tapestry too was an art that was portable. Suites accompanied their seigneurial owners from one unheated and empty château to another. Tapestry weavers themselves could be induced to move workshops, though they remained tied to the accessibility of English wool. Religious and secular subjects vied in this essentially secular art.

[ 16 ] A medium of Late Gothic style that is easily overlooked because it has virtually entirely disappeared is that of painted hangings, which served as a less expensive substitute for woven hangings but could be produced, with appropriate themes, on short notice.

[ citation needed ] Peak of the movement [ edit ] In a period lasting approximately between 1390 and 1420 there was a particularly close correspondence between works produced far apart in Europe. In the north the miniatures of the Très Riches Heures Limbourg brothers, in Italy the Adoration of the Magi of Lorenzo Monaco, and sculpture and miniatures in many countries show very stylised tall figures, the older men with imposingly long beards and swaying figures.  Exotic clothes, based loosely on those of the contemporary Middle East or Byzantine Empire , are worn by figures in biblical scenes; many figures seem to be included just to show off these costumes.  The number of figures in many standard religious scenes is greatly increased; the Magi have large retinues, and the Crucifixion often becomes a crowded event.  This innovation was to survive the style itself.

[ citation needed ] Statue of Moses , c.

1390 , Toruń , Poland Conrad von Soest , based in Dortmund Germany, Crucifixion , 1403 The Meeting of the Magi from the Très Riches Heures by the Limbourg brothers, from the Northern Netherlands but working in France.

Lorenzo Monaco , Adoration of the Magi , 1420–22 Ending of the International moment [ edit ] Gentile da Fabriano 's Adoration of the Magi (1423–5) Tempera on wood, 300 x 282 cm.

The unveiling of Gentile da Fabriano's Adoration of the Magi (below) in Florence in 1423, "the culminating work of International Gothic painting", was almost immediately followed by the painting of the Brancacci Chapel by Masolino and Masaccio (1424–26), which was recognised as a breakthrough to a new style.

[ 17 ] In similar fashion the Limbourg brothers' masterpiece the Très Riches Heures du Duc de Berry was followed within a few years by the Turin-Milan Hours , a continuation of a manuscript started decades before by the Parement Master for the Duke of Berry, which despite a Gothic framework pioneered a very different style of painting.

But outside Florence and the leading courts the International Gothic still held sway, gradually developing in directions that once again diverged considerably between Italy and Europe north of the Alps. The arts and architecture transitioned into the Early Renaissance .

Gallery [ edit ] Mary Magdalen and angels, end 14th century (?), from the Hanseatic city of Toruń in Poland Roudnice Madonna , c.

1385 –90, Master of the Třeboň Altarpiece , Bohemia The Virgin and the Child of Poligny by the Dutch sculptor Claus de Werve , 1396– c.

1439 Madonna by André Beauneveu from one of the Duke of Berry's manuscripts, with a richly populated grisaille background, ca 1402 Mary of Guelders (the wife of Reinoud IV ) depicted as the Virgin Mary, Dutch, 1415 Adoration of the Magi by Conrad von Soest , German, c.

1420 Madonna by Sassetta , a late representative of the distinctive Siennese style. 1432–36 Beautiful Madonna from Wrocław , National Museum in Warsaw .

Page from the Hours of Gian Galeazzo Visconti , Milan See also [ edit ] International Gothic art in Italy Madonna of Nesvačily Notes [ edit ] ^ Ingo F. Walther, Robert Shia Lebouf Wundram, Masterpieces of Western Art: A History of Art in 900 Individual Studies from the Gothic to the Present Day , Taschen, 2002, ISBN 3-8228-1825-9 ^ Thomas, 8 ^ WGA: Definition of the International Gothic style ^ Syson and Gordon, 58 ^ Prague's prominence as a style-setting center was repeated with the Mannerism of the court of Emperor Rudolph II in the late 16th century.

^ Levey, 24-7, 37 & passim ^ Syson & Gordon, 59–60 ^ Levey, 12–38, discusses several of these. The Berry miniature is BnF MS. Lat. 919, f.96R. They also have Gian Galeazzo Visconti being received into Heaven on MSfonds. Lat. 5888 ^ Walther & Wolf, pp. 242–47 ^ The German equivalent "Weicher Stil" was introduced by H. Börger and found wide reception through the works of Wilhelm Pinder. Czech art historians coined the term "Beautiful Style" (Schöner Stil), particularly because of a number of "Schöne Madonnen" or "Beautiful Madonnas".

^ Thomas, 12 ^ "Turn the pages of eight sacred texts on screen" .

British Library . Archived from the original on 2011-08-14 . Retrieved 2008-09-27 .

^ Marks and Morgan, 29 ^ This paragraph follows Roger-Armand Weigert, French Tapestry (1956, translated by Donald and Monique King, 1962). Secondary centres mentioned by Weigert are Lille , Valenciennes , Cambrai , Enghien , Oudenaarde and Brussels ^ Arras was attached to the Burgundian inheritance in 1384 and captured by Louis XI in 1470, after which Arras rapidly declined as a tapestry-weaving centre.

^ Tapestries that have been preserved in the treasuries of cathedrals have originally been the gifts of their owners, as have those in today's museums.

^ Hyman, pp. 139–140.  Quote p. 140 References [ edit ] Michael Levey , Painting at Court , Weidenfeld & Nicolson, London, 1971.

Timothy Hyman ; Sienese Painting , Thames & Hudson, 2003 ISBN 0-500-20372-5 .

Marks, Richard and Morgan, Nigel; The Golden Age of English Manuscript Painting, 1200–1400 , 1981, Chatto & Windus, ISBN 0-7011-2540-3 .

Luke Syson & Dillian Gordon , "Pisanello, Painter to the Renaissance Court", 2001, National Gallery Company, London, ISBN 1-85709-946-X .

Thomas, Marcel; The Golden Age: Manuscript Painting at the Time of Jean, Duc de Berry , 1979, Chatto & Windus, ISBN 0-7011-2472-5 .

Further reading [ edit ] Boehm, Barbara Drake; et al. (2005).

Prague : the Crown of Bohemia, 1347–1437 . New York: The Metropolitan Museum of Art.

ISBN 1588391612 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to International Gothic .

Metropolitan exhibition Prague, The Crown of Bohemia, 1347–1437 v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=International_Gothic&oldid=1287272799 " Categories : Gothic art Gothic architecture Gothic painters Gothic sculptors Trecento painters 14th century in art 15th century in art 14th-century architecture 15th-century architecture 14th-century paintings 15th-century paintings 14th-century sculptures 15th-century sculptures Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2025 Articles containing French-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 April 2025, at 04:01 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents International Gothic 28 languages Add topic

