Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Buildings and grounds 2 History 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents United States Capitol Complex 6 languages العربية Deutsch עברית Português Suomi Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°53′27″N 77°00′26″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.89083°N 77.00722°W ﻿ / 38.89083; -77.00722 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Government buildings of the US This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations .

Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( January 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) United States Capitol Complex Aerial view of the central portion of the United States Capitol Complex looking east (2007) Website www .aoc .gov /explore-capitol-campus www .capitol .gov The United States Capitol Complex is a group of twenty buildings, grounds, and facilities in Washington, D.C.

, that are used by the United States Congress , and federal courts . The buildings and grounds within the complex are managed and supervised by the Architect of the Capitol .

Buildings and grounds [ edit ] Map of the United States Capitol Complex The Capitol Building is the central feature of the complex. Other parts of the Capitol Complex include: I.

United States Congress House of Representatives Office Buildings Cannon House Office Building Ford House Office Building Longworth House Office Building O'Neill House Office Building Rayburn House Office Building Senate Office Buildings Dirksen Senate Office Building Hart Senate Office Building Russell Senate Office Building Daniel Webster Senate Page Residence Library of Congress Buildings John Adams Building Thomas Jefferson Building James Madison Memorial Building Parks Upper Senate Park Lower Senate Park Spirit of Justice Park Bartholdi Park United States Botanic Garden Capitol Power Plant Capitol Visitor Center The Capitol Grounds II.

United States Courts Buildings Supreme Court Building Thurgood Marshall Federal Judiciary Building In addition to the buildings listed above, several monuments , sculptures , and other works of art are located in and around the Capitol Complex.  These include the National Statuary Hall Collection and the Statue of Freedom among many others.

The westernmost part of the grounds is the Capitol Reflecting Pool, which reflects the Capitol and the Ulysses S. Grant Memorial .

With the exception of the Ford and O'Neill House Office Buildings, all House and Senate office buildings within the Capitol Complex are linked to the Capitol via an underground network of people movers or footpath tunnels .

History [ edit ] Daguerreotype of the Capitol, c.

1846 Construction of the Capitol began in 1792. When built, it was the only existing building for the use by the nation's legislature . In addition to Congress, the building was also designed to house the Library of Congress , the Supreme Court , the district courts , and other offices.

Following the completion of the building and as the nation grew, so did the size of the Congress. The Capitol and its grounds were enlarged accordingly, and by 1892 the building had reached essentially its present size and appearance (with the exception of the east front extension 1958–1962 and courtyard infill areas 1991–1993).

Even with the enlargements, Congress eventually grew too big for the building and new facilities had to be constructed to meet the needs of the government. With the moving of the Library of Congress into its own building in 1897, and with the construction of new office buildings for the House and Senate in the early 20th century, the Capitol Complex was born.

Known simply as the "House Office Building" and "Senate Office Building" when they opened in 1908 and 1909, the Cannon House Office Building and Russell Senate Office Building became the first buildings solely for use as offices by the House of Representatives and the Senate. These new buildings were heated and provided with electricity by the new Capitol Power Plant which opened in 1910 and is still used today.

Aerial view of the United States Capitol Complex, c.

1923 The 1930s was a decade of major construction within the growing Capitol Complex. In 1933 alone the U.S. Botanic Garden Conservatory , Director's residence, and Bartholdi Park were completed; the Senate Office Building's First Street wing, which had been omitted during construction for funding reasons, was added; and the Additional House Office Building (later named the Longworth House Office Building ) was occupied. The Supreme Court at last found a permanent home when its own building was completed in 1935. The last building constructed within the complex in this decade was the Library of Congress Annex, now named the John Adams Building , which opened in 1939.

Within twenty years, attention returned to the need for more Congressional office space; this led to the construction of a second building for the Senate (now named the Dirksen Senate Office Building ), which was completed in 1958. The House's third building, the Rayburn House Office Building , opened in 1965.

Capitol Complex (in foreground, 2007) looking west toward the National Mall In the 1970s, two more buildings became available for the House: the former Congressional Hotel, the O'Neill House Office Building (demolished in 2002), and a larger building originally constructed for the Federal Bureau of Investigation (now the Ford House Office Building ).  A third building for the Library of Congress, the James Madison Memorial Building , opened in 1980 and the Senate's third building, the Hart Senate Office Building , was occupied in 1982.  The most recent large structure within the Capitol complex is the Thurgood Marshall Federal Judiciary Building , which was opened in 1992.

Renovations to the Botanic Garden Conservatory began in September 1997 and continued for four years until December 2001 when the building reopened. The Conservatory's aluminum framework, glazing, interior floors, doors, and lighting were replaced; all electrical, plumbing, and environmental control systems were upgraded, and air conditioning was added to the display halls.

The newest addition to the Capitol Complex is the Capitol Visitor Center . Despite many delays, the Center opened in December 2008, and includes an exhibition gallery, two theaters, a dining facility, and gift shops. The budget for construction of the center was $584 million.

On January 6, 2021, the Capitol was stormed by supporters of President Donald Trump after a rally in front of the White House . A Capitol Police officer was wounded and was pronounced dead a day later at a nearby hospital. Additionally, one of the protesters was shot and later pronounced dead at a nearby hospital. A further three deaths from medical emergencies were reported while over a hundred injuries were reported by Capitol Police.

See also [ edit ] Architecture of Washington, D.C.

References [ edit ] Some text from this article came from the public domain webpages of the Architect of the Capitol : A Brief History of the U.S. Capitol Complex The Capitol Visitor Center Archived 2005-12-27 at the Wayback Machine External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to United States Capitol .

Architect's Virtual Capitol v t e United States Capitol Complex United States Capitol House House chamber Office buildings ( office lottery ): Cannon House Library Ford Longworth Rayburn O'Neill O'Neill (former) Senate Senate chamber Old Senate Chamber Senate Reception Room Hideaways Office buildings : Dirksen Hart Mountains and Clouds Russell Senate Library Library of Congress Adams Jefferson Madison Law Library of Congress Mary Pickford Theater Individual features Cornerstone Dome Statue of Freedom The Apotheosis of Washington Rotunda Columbus Doors Declaration of Independence painting Frieze of American History General George Washington Resigning His Commission Surrender of General Burgoyne Surrender of Lord Cornwallis Jefferson statue Lincoln statue Washington statue National Statuary Hall Statues Crypt Hall of Columns Brumidi Corridors Apotheosis of Democracy Progress of Civilization Pediment First Reading of the Emancipation Proclamation of President Lincoln Abraham Lincoln (Bittinger) Scene at the Signing of the Constitution of the United States Revolutionary War Door George Washington and the Revolutionary War Door Washington at Princeton Westward the Course of Empire Takes Its Way Vice Presidential Bust Collection Ohio Clock President's Room Vice President's Room Congressional Prayer Room Old Supreme Court Chamber Washington's Tomb Visitor Center Lincoln catafalque Former features George Washington as Zeus (sculpture, 1841–1908) Discovery of America (sculpture, 1844–1958) The Rescue (sculpture, 1853–1958) National Capitol Columns U.S. Capitol Gatehouses and Gateposts Others Art List of art List of portraits (A-J) Confederate Botanic Garden Capitol Hill James A. Garfield Monument Ulysses S. Grant Memorial Peace Monument Judiciary Building Power Plant Providence Park Reflecting Pool Subway System Supreme Court Building Union Square Senate Page Residence Pennsylvania Avenue v t e United States Congress House of Representatives Senate Joint session ( 118th → 119th → 120th ) Lists of the United States Congress Members and leaders Membership Members By length of service By shortness of service Youngest members Non-voting members Unseated members Senate Members seniority Dean Former Expelled or censured Classes Born outside the U.S.

Resigned Appointed Switched parties House Members seniority Dean Former Expelled, censured, and reprimanded Served a single term Lost re-election in a primary Switched parties Elected but did not serve New members 90th (1967) 91st (1969) 92nd (1971) 93rd (1973) 94th (1975) 95th (1977) 96th (1979) 97th (1981) 98th (1983) 99th (1985) 100th (1987) 101st (1989) 102nd (1991) 103rd (1993) 104th (1995) 105th (1997) 106th (1999) 107th (2001) 108th (2003) 109th (2005) 110th (2007) 111th (2009) 112th (2011) 113th (2013) 114th (2015) 115th (2017) 116th (2019) 117th (2021) 118th (2023) 119th (2025) Leaders Senate President list President pro tempore list Leaders Democratic Caucus Chair Secretary Policy Committee Chair Republican Conference Chair Vice-Chair Policy Committee Chair House Speaker list Leaders Bipartisan Legal Advisory Group Democratic Caucus Republican Conference Districts List Apportionment Gerrymandering Groups Congressional caucus Caucuses of the United States Congress Ethnic and racial African-American members Senate House Black Caucus Arab and Middle Eastern members Asian Pacific American members Asian Pacific American Caucus Hispanic and Latino members list Hispanic Caucus Hispanic Conference Jewish members Jewish Caucus Native American members Gender and sexual identity LGBTQ members Equality Caucus Women Senate House Issues Caucus current House Occupation Physicians Religion Buddhist members Hindu members Jewish members Mormon (LDS) members Muslim members Quaker members Sikh members Related By length of service historically Current members by wealth From multiple states Died in office 1790–1899 1900–1949 1950–1999 2000–present Killed or wounded in office Party switchers Slave owners Powers, privileges, procedure, committees, history, media Powers Article I Copyright Commerce (Dormant) Contempt of Congress Declaration of war Impeachment Inquiries Trial Naturalization "Necessary and Proper" Power of enforcement Taxing/spending Privileges Salaries Franking Immunity Procedure Act of Congress list Appropriation bill Bill Budget process Censure Closed sessions House Senate Cloture Concurrent resolution Continuing resolution Dear Colleague letter Discharge petition Enrolled bill Expulsion Joint resolution Joint session list Lame-duck session Magic minute Majority of the majority (Hastert Rule) Multiple referral House procedures Quorum call Reconciliation Rider Saxbe fix Sponsorship Suspension of the rules Unanimous consent Veto Line-item veto Pocket veto Senate-specific Advice and consent Blue slip (U.S. Senate) Classes Executive communication Executive session Filibuster Jefferson's Manual Senate Journal Morning business Nuclear option Presiding Officer Recess appointment Reconciliation Riddick's Senate Procedure Senate hold Senatorial courtesy Seniority Standing Rules Tie-breaking votes Traditions Treaty Clause Committees Chairman and ranking member Of the Whole Conference Discharge petition Hearings Markup Oversight List (Joint) List (House) List (Senate) Select and special Standing Subcommittees Items Gavels Mace of the House Seal of the Senate History House history memoirs speaker elections Senate history election disputes memoirs Continental Congress Federal Hall (1789–1790) Congress Hall (1790–1800) Old Brick Capitol (1815–1819) Biographical Directory Divided government Party divisions Media C-SPAN Congressional Quarterly The Hill Politico Roll Call Capitol Complex ( Capitol Hill ) Legislative offices Congressional staff Gov. Accountability Office (GAO) Comptroller General Architect of the Capitol Cap. Police Board Cap. Guide Service Congr. Budget Office (CBO) Congr. Workplace Rights (OCWR) Library of Congress Gov. Publishing Office (GPO) Technology Assessment Offices Senate Curator Historical Library House Congr. Ethics Emergency Planning, Preparedness, and Operations Interparliamentary Affairs Law Revision Counsel Legislative Counsel Library Employees Senate Secretary Chaplain Curator Historian Librarian Pages Parliamentarian Sergeant at Arms and Doorkeeper House Chaplain Chief Administrative Officer Clerk Doorkeeper Floor Operations Floor Services Chief Historian Pages Board Parliamentarian Postmaster Reading Clerk Sergeant at Arms Library of Congress Congressional Research Service reports Copyright Office Register of Copyrights Law Library Poet Laureate THOMAS Adams Building Jefferson Building Madison Building Gov.

Publishing Office Public Printer Congressional Pictorial Directory Congressional Record Official Congressional Directory U.S. Gov. Manual Serial Set Statutes at Large United States Code Capitol Building List of artwork at the United States Capitol complex List of portraits in the United States House of Representatives collection (A-J) Brumidi Corridors Congressional Prayer Room Crypt Dome Statue of Freedom Rotunda Hall of Columns Statuary Hall Visitor Center The Apotheosis of Washington Statue of Freedom Declaration of Independence painting Scene at the Signing of the Constitution of the United States Apotheosis of Democracy Progress of Civilization Pediment First Reading of the Emancipation Proclamation of President Lincoln Surrender of General Burgoyne Surrender of Lord Cornwallis George Washington and the Revolutionary War Door Revolutionary War Door Columbus Doors Washington at Princeton Westward the Course of Empire Takes Its Way VP's Room VP Bust Collection Office buildings Senate Dirksen Hart Mountains and Clouds Russell House Building Commission office lottery Cannon Ford Longworth O'Neill Rayburn Other facilities Botanic Garden Health and Fitness Facility House Recording Studio Senate chamber Old Senate Chamber Old Supreme Court Chamber Power Plant Webster Page Residence Subway Related Capitol Hill United States Capitol cornerstone laying Authority control databases International VIAF FAST National United States Israel 38°53′27″N 77°00′26″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.89083°N 77.00722°W ﻿ / 38.89083; -77.00722 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=United_States_Capitol_Complex&oldid=1279502651 " Categories : Buildings of the United States government in Washington, D.C.

United States Capitol grounds Capitol Hill Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use mdy dates from March 2025 Articles lacking in-text citations from January 2020 All articles lacking in-text citations Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link is locally defined Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 8 March 2025, at 23:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents United States Capitol Complex 6 languages Add topic

