Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Usage 2 Plato 3 Aristotle 4 Plotinus 5 Aquinas 6 References 7 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Intelligible form 1 language العربية Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept in philosophy Part of a series on Platonism Life Works Theory of forms Intelligible form Hyperuranion Theory of soul Nous Thumos Phren Epistemology Anamnesis Peritrope Dianoia Cardinal virtues Moral rationalism Political philosophy Mimesis Orthotes onomaton Euthyphro dilemma The Republic Allegory of the cave Analogy of the Sun Analogy of the divided line Form of the Good Noble lie Philosopher king Plato's number Ship of State Ring of Gyges Myth of Er Timaeus Atlantis Demiurge World soul Organicism Classical element Platonic solid Tertium quid Khôra Related articles Commentaries The Academy in Athens Middle Platonism Neoplatonism Neoplatonism and Gnosticism Neoplatonism and Christianity Platonism in Islamic philosophy Platonism in the Renaissance Allegorical interpretations of Plato Plato's unwritten doctrines Pseudo-Platonica Related categories Plato Philosophy portal v t e An intelligible form in philosophy refers to a form that can be apprehended by the intellect, in contrast to sense perception.  According to Ancient and Medieval philosophers , the intelligible forms are the things by which we understand. These are Genera and species. Genera and species are abstract concepts, not concrete objects. For example, “animal”, “man” and “horse” are general terms that do not refer to any particular individual in the natural world. Only specific animals, men and horses exist in reality.

Usage [ edit ] The objects or concepts that have intelligibility may be called intelligible . Some possible examples are numbers and the logical law of non-contradiction .

There may be a distinction between everything that is intelligible and everything that is visible, called the intelligible world and the visible world in e.g. the analogy of the divided line as written by Plato .

[ 1 ] Plato [ edit ] Plato referred to the intelligible realm of mathematics , forms , first principles , logical deduction , and the dialectical method .  The intelligible realm of thought thinking about thought does not necessarily require any visual images, sensual impressions, and material causes for the contents of mind.

Aristotle [ edit ] See also: On the Soul The concept of the form as being what makes knowledge possible dates back to the time of Socrates .

Aristotle is credited with making the distinction that led to the idea of the intelligible form. He argued that the mind is divided into the active and passive intellect , where the passive intellect receives the forms of things in order to be known, and the active intellect then turns possible knowledge into knowledge in act.

[ 2 ] Plotinus [ edit ] According to Plotinus , the power of the Demiurge (the 'craftsman' of the cosmos ) is derived from the power of thought. When the demiurge creates, he governs the purely passive nature of matter by imposing a sensible form, which is an image of the intelligible forms contained as thoughts within the mind of the Demiurge, upon the pure passivity of matter. The form establishes its existence in the sensible realm merely through the thought of the Demiurge, which is nous .

[ 3 ] Aquinas [ edit ] In his Compendium Theologiae, St. Thomas Aquinas discusses a hierarchy of intellectual substances , and the relation thereof to intelligible forms as apprehended by the human intellect: [. . .] the higher an intellectual substance is in perfection, the more universal are the intelligible forms it possesses. Of all the intellectual substances, consequently, the human intellect, which we have called possible, has forms of the least universality. This is the reason it receives its intelligible forms from sensible things. [. . .] A form must have some proportion to the potency which receives it. Therefore, since of all intellectual substances man’s possible intellect is found to be the closest to corporeal matter, its intelligible forms must, likewise, be most closely allied to material things.

[ 4 ] References [ edit ] ^ http://faculty.cua.edu/hoffmann/courses/201_1068/Plato [ dead link ] ^ Aristotle, De Anima , Bk. III, ch. 5 (430 a 10-25).

^ Plotinus at the Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy Retrieved on May 15, 2009 ^ Aquinas, Thomas.

"Compendium theologiae, B.I, c.81" .

aquinas.cc .

Archived from the original on 2025-06-23 . Retrieved 2025-06-23 .

Further reading [ edit ] Miguel Espinoza , A Theory of Intelligibility. A Contribution to the Revival of the Philosophy of Nature , Thombooks Press, Toronto, ON, 2020.

Werner Beierwaltes , Intelligibel, das Intelligible, Intelligibilität , in: Historisches Wörterbuch der Philosophie (1971–2007; in German).

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Intelligible_form&oldid=1297146326 " Categories : Medieval philosophy Concepts in epistemology Platonism Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2022 Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 June 2025, at 11:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Intelligible form 1 language Add topic

