Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Fictional astronauts Toggle Fictional astronauts subsection 1.1 Early period 1.2 Classic period 1.3 Modern period 1.4 Futuristic 2 Astronauts in other media 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Lists of fictional astronauts Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Actor William Lundigan as Col. Edward McCauley, Men into Space (TV series) This is a dynamic list and may never be able to satisfy particular standards for completeness. You can help by adding missing items with reliable sources .

These are a series of incomplete lists of fictional astronauts appearing in various media, including books, film, television shows (live or animated), radio shows, records, and comic books.

To be included in these lists, a fictional astronaut must be modeled upon actual astronauts of real-world space programs , as they have actually existed since the beginning of the Space Age , or were envisioned in the years leading up to the Space Age. Criteria include: A fictional astronaut must be human (not an alien, robot, or animal).

A fictional astronaut must be on a flight originating from the Earth; space travellers engaging in casual voyages between other planets (as in Star Wars or Battlestar Galactica ) are not eligible.

A fictional astronaut must be presented as living in the period of the early exploration of space, i.e. from the beginning of the Space Age to the present, and for a few decades into the future; currently, in the period of about 1960–2060.

A fictional astronaut is preferably part of a real space program, like NASA or the Soviet / Russian space program , or fictional knockoffs of the same (e.g. ANSA, IASA).

A fictional astronaut preferably uses space travel technology within the realm of the possible. Preference should be given to astronauts depicted using real technology (e.g.

Apollo , Soyuz , Space Shuttle ) or close fictional knockoffs of the same.

Fictional astronauts [ edit ] Lists of fictional astronauts Early period Project Mercury Project Gemini Project Apollo 1975–1989 1990–1999 2000–2009 2010–2029 Moon Inner Solar System Outer Solar System Other Far future Due to the length of this list, it has been divided into the following sections: Early period [ edit ] List of fictional astronauts (early period) Classic period [ edit ] List of fictional astronauts (Project Mercury era) List of fictional astronauts (Project Gemini era) List of fictional astronauts (Project Apollo era) Modern period [ edit ] List of fictional astronauts (modern period, works released 1975–1989) List of fictional astronauts (modern period, works released 1990–1999) List of fictional astronauts (modern period, works released 2000–2009) List of fictional astronauts (modern period, works released 2010–2029) Futuristic [ edit ] List of fictional astronauts (futuristic exploration of Moon) List of fictional astronauts (exploration of inner Solar System) List of fictional astronauts (exploration of outer Solar System) List of fictional astronauts (miscellaneous futuristic activities) List of fictional astronauts (beyond near-future capabilities) Astronauts in other media [ edit ] Several toy astronaut dolls and action figures were produced in response to the popularity of astronauts in the 1960s. Most of them had no associated storylines. They included: Johnny and Jane Apollo, 1968 plastic toys with accessories including a "Moon Rover".

Barbie , the world's most popular doll, was released with a variant space suit costume in the 1960s.

Billy Blastoff , an apparently juvenile astronaut of the 1960s.

The Major Matt Mason line of toys from 1968, including Major Mason himself, Lt. Jeff Long, Sgt. Storm, and Doug Davis.

[ 1 ] Moon McDare , a generic astronaut figure from 1965, packaged with various accessories.

John Blackstar , Earth astronaut who crashes on planet Sagar.

[ 2 ] Kaito Momota , from Danganronpa V3: Killing Harmony , called "the Ultimate Astronaut".

References [ edit ] ^ Pyle, Rod (2017). "Major Matt Mason: A Man for the New Space Age".

Amazing Stories of the Space Age .

Prometheus Books . pp.

291– 297.

ISBN 978-1-63388-221-8 .

^ Blackstar , TV.com External links [ edit ] Altner, Patricia (March 2009).

"The Moon in Science Fiction" . Archived from the original on 2012-03-07 . Retrieved 2017-01-12 .

Murphy, Ken (January 8, 2008).

"The Bicentilune (or 200 tales of Lunar Adventure)" . Out of the Cradle. Archived from the original on January 17, 2008 . Retrieved 2017-11-23 .

Murphy, Ken (July 18, 2016).

"Stories of cislunar suspense: Literary adventure on the near frontier (part 1)" .

The Space Review . Retrieved 2017-10-30 .

Murphy, Ken (July 25, 2016).

"Stories of cislunar suspense: Literary adventure on the near frontier (part 2)" .

The Space Review . Retrieved 2017-10-30 .

Scheib, Richard.

"Films Depicting NASA and the Space Program" .

Moria Science Fiction, Horror and Fantasy Film Review . Retrieved March 9, 2025 .

v t e Science fiction Outline Authors Definitions Anthropological Hard Scientific romance Soft History Pulp era Golden Age New Wave Timeline Subgenres Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic Comedy Sitcoms Feminist Grimdark Inner space Mecha Anime and manga Mundane Space warfare Military Space opera Space Western Parallel universes Isekai Science fantasy Dying Earth Planetary romance Superhero Sword and planet Social Climate fiction Christian Libertarian Utopian and dystopian Tech noir Spy-Fi Techno-thriller Tokusatsu Kaiju Underwater Cyberpunk derivatives Cyberpunk Japanese Biopunk Dieselpunk Nanopunk Solarpunk Steampunk Culture Conventions Fandom Fanzines ISFDB Libraries and museums Science Fiction Museum Studies Women in SF Worldcon Region Australian Bengali Brazilian Canadian Chilean Chinese Croatian Czech Estonian French Hungarian Japanese Korean Norwegian Polish Romanian Russian Serbian Spanish Yugoslav Awards Cinematic Jules Verne Saturn Literary, art, and audio Astounding Aurealis BSFA Campbell Memorial Chesley Clarke Crook Deutscher Dick Ditmar Endeavor FantLab Galaxy Gaughan Geffen Golden Duck Grand Master Grand Prix Harland Heinlein Ignotus Kitschies Lambda Laßwitz Locus Nautilus Nebula Nommo Norton Parsec Prometheus Rhysling SFERA Sidewise Skylark Sturgeon Sunburst Tähtivaeltaja TBD Tiptree Tour-Apollo Translation Urania Vogel Writers and Illustrators of the Future Zajdel Multimedia Aurora Chandler Dragon Hugo Seiun Spectrum Media Film Film history Films Indian Japanese Anime Tokusatsu Literature Comics Magazines Novels Publishers Short stories Stage Opera Theatre Television List of TV shows Australasian British Canadian European Japanese Anime Live-action U.S.

Themes Architectural Dyson sphere Ecumenopolis Matrioshka brain Space stations and habitats Stellar engine Terraforming Topopolis Biological Biological warfare Evolution Extraterrestrials List Gender Genetic engineering Invisibility Nanotechnology Organ transplantation Parasitism Sex and sexuality Symbiosis Physical Black holes Extrasolar planets Multiverse Parallel universes Portable hole Space travel Stars Tachyons Teleportation Time travel Time viewer Wormhole Psychological Group mind Mind uploading Psionics Simulated consciousness Social Africanfuturism Afrofuturism Alien invasion Alien language Ancient astronauts Black Evil corporation First contact Frankenstein complex Galactic empire LGBT Message from space Transhumanism Uplift Xenoarchaeology Technological Ansible Artificial intelligence AI takeover Astroengineering Force field Holography Hyperspace Inertialess Robots and Cyborgs Self-replicating machines Simulated reality Spacecraft Stargate Warp drive Weapons Religious Christian science fiction Related Alternate history Fantasy Fictional astronauts Fictional technology Future history Horror Magic realism Museum of Science Fiction Rubber science Science and technology studies Sense of wonder Speculative fiction Supernatural Technology and society Weird Category Portal v t e Fictional professionals Entertainers Hypnotists Actors Journalists Medical Medical examiners Doctors in television Dentists Psychiatrists Veterinarians Nurses Science Actuaries Anthropologists Astronauts Geneticists Scientists and engineers Education Professors Librarians Politics Politicians Monarchs fictional countries Presidents of the United States Nobility Prime Ministers of the United Kingdom Dictators Princes Princesses Detectives and private investigators Female detectives Police detectives Sci-fi and fantasy detectives Private investigators Double agents Secret agents Spymasters Other Butlers Clergy and religious figures Housekeepers Language interpreters Nannies Patent attorneys Pirates Postal workers Salespeople Valets Category This article includes an outer space-related list of lists .

Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lists_of_fictional_astronauts&oldid=1279603723 " Categories : Lists of outer space lists Lists of fictional astronauts Science fiction themes Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Dynamic lists CS1: unfit URL This page was last edited on 9 March 2025, at 13:57 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lists of fictional astronauts Add languages Add topic

