Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Arcesilaus 3 Carneades 4 Philo of Larissa 5 See also 6 Notes 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Academic skepticism 13 languages العربية Català Español فارسی Français 한국어 مازِرونی پښتو Português Русский Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Skeptical period of ancient Academy Skeptics in Raphael's School of Athens painting. 1. Pythodorus 2. Arcesilaus of Pitane 3. Carneades of Cyrene 4. Pyrrho of Elis 5. Timon of Phlius 6. Theodorus the Atheist of Cyrene Academic skepticism refers to the skeptical period of the Academy dating from around 266 BCE, when Arcesilaus became scholarch , until around 90 BCE, when Antiochus of Ascalon rejected skepticism, although individual philosophers, such as Favorinus and his teacher Plutarch , continued to defend skepticism after this date. Unlike the existing school of skepticism, the Pyrrhonists , they maintained that knowledge of things is impossible . Ideas or notions are never true; nevertheless, there are degrees of plausibility, and hence degrees of belief, which allow one to act. The school was characterized by its attacks on the Stoics , particularly their dogma that convincing impressions led to true knowledge . The most important Academics were Arcesilaus , Carneades , and Philo of Larissa . The most extensive ancient source of information about Academic skepticism is Academica , written by the Academic skeptic philosopher Cicero .

Overview [ edit ] Part of a series on Pyrrhonism Pyrrhonists Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus Concepts Ataraxia Acatalepsy Adiaphora Aporia Dogma Epoché Similar philosophies Academic skepticism Modern influence Münchhausen trilemma Benson Mates Robert Fogelin Philosophy portal v t e Greek philosophical skepticism , as a distinct philosophical movement , began with Pyrrho of Elis ( c.

360 – c.

270 BCE ), with antecedents in Xenophanes and Democritus . His followers, the Pyrrhonists , pointed out the problem of the criterion : that our theories and our sense impressions are unable to accurately distinguish truth from falsehood; therefore we must suspend judgment ( epoche ).

[ 1 ] They were consistent enough to extend their doubt even to their own principle of doubt, making their skepticism universal, thus escaping reproach for basing it upon a fresh dogmatism . Mental imperturbability ( ataraxia ) was the result to be attained by cultivating such a frame of mind.

[ 1 ] Around 266 BCE, Arcesilaus became head of the Platonic Academy . He adopted skepticism as a central tenet of Platonism , making Platonism nearly the same as Pyrrhonism.

[ 2 ] After Arcesilaus, the Academics diverged from Pyrrhonism.

[ 3 ] This skeptical period of ancient Platonism, from Arcesilaus to Philo of Larissa , became known as the new Academy , although some ancient authors added further subdivisions, such as a middle Academy . Following the death of the Pyrrhonist Timon of Phlius , the Platonic Academy became the primary advocate of skepticism until the mid-first century BCE.

[ 4 ] While early Academic skepticism was influenced in part by Pyrrho, [ 5 ] it grew more and more dogmatic until Aenesidemus , in the first century BCE, broke with the Academic skeptics and adopted Pyrrhonism, denouncing the Academy as " Stoics fighting against Stoics." [ 6 ] The Academics did not doubt the existence of truth ; they just doubted that humans had the capacities for obtaining it.

[ 7 ] They based this position on Plato 's Phaedo , [ 8 ] in which Socrates discusses how knowledge is not accessible to mortals.

[ 9 ] While the objective of the Pyrrhonists was the attainment of ataraxia , after Arcesilaus the Academics did not hold up ataraxia as the central objective. The Academics focused on criticizing the dogmas of other schools of philosophy, in particular of the dogmatism of the Stoics .

[ 1 ] They acknowledged some vestiges of a moral law within, at best merely a plausible guide, the possession of which, however, formed the real distinction between the sage and the fool.

[ 7 ] Slight as the difference may appear between the positions of the Academics and the Pyrrhonists, a comparison of their lives leads to the conclusion that a practical philosophical moderation was the characteristic of the Academics [ 7 ] whereas the objectives of the Pyrrhonists were more psychological. The second-century Roman historian Aulus Gellius described the distinction between the Academic skeptics and the Pyrrhonists as follows: "...the Academics apprehend (in some sense) the very fact that nothing can be apprehended, and they determine (in some sense) that nothing can be determined, whereas the Pyrrhonists assert that not even that seems to be true, since nothing seems to be true." [ 10 ] Arcesilaus [ edit ] Main article: Arcesilaus Up to Arcesilaus , the Platonic Academy accepted the principle of finding a general unity in all things, by the aid of which a principle of certainty might be found.

[ 11 ] Arcesilaus, however, broke new ground by attacking the very possibility of certainty and denied the possibility of even the Socratic minimum of certainty: "I cannot know even whether I know or not." [ 11 ] The doctrines of Arcesilaus, which must be gathered from the writings of others, [ 12 ] represent an attack on the Stoic phantasia kataleptike (criterion) and are based on the skepticism which was latent in the later writings of Plato .

[ 13 ] Arcesilaus held that strength of intellectual conviction cannot be regarded as valid, inasmuch as it is characteristic equally of contradictory convictions. The uncertainty of sense data applies equally to the conclusions of reason, and therefore man must be content with probability which is sufficient as a practical guide. "We know nothing, not even our ignorance"; therefore the wise man will be content with an agnostic attitude.

[ 13 ] Carneades [ edit ] Main article: Carneades Carneades of Cyrene, the most important of the Academic skeptics The next stage in Academic skepticism was the moderate skepticism of Carneades , which he said owed its existence to his opposition to Chrysippus .

[ 11 ] To the Stoic theory of perception, the phantasia kataleptike , by which they expressed a conviction of certainty arising from impressions so strong as to amount to science, he proposed the doctrine of acatalepsia , which denied any necessary correspondence between perceptions and the objects perceived.

[ 11 ] All our sensations are relative, and acquaint us, not with things as they are, but only with the impressions that things produce upon us. Experience, he said, clearly shows that there is no true impression. There is no notion that may not deceive us; it is impossible to distinguish between false and true impressions; therefore the Stoic phantasia kataleptike must be given up. There is no phantasia kataleptike ("criterion") of truth. Carneades also assailed Stoic theology and physics . In answer to the doctrine of final cause, of design in nature, he pointed to those things which cause destruction and danger to man, to the evil committed by men endowed with reason, to the miserable condition of humanity, and to the misfortunes that assail the good man. There is, he concluded, no evidence for the doctrine of a divine superintending providence. Even if there were orderly connexion of parts in the universe , this may have resulted quite naturally. No proof can be advanced to show that this world is anything but the product of natural forces.

[ 14 ] Knowledge being impossible, a wise man should practice epoche (suspension of judgment).

[ 14 ] He will not even be sure that he can be sure of nothing. He saved himself, however, from absolute skepticism by the doctrine of plausibility, which may serve as a practical guide in life.

[ 11 ] Ideas or notions are never true, but only plausible; nevertheless, there are degrees of plausibility, and hence degrees of belief, leading to action. According to Carneades, an impression may be plausible in itself; plausible and uncontradicted (not distracted by synchronous sensations, but shown to be in harmony with them) when compared with others; plausible, uncontradicted, and thoroughly investigated and confirmed. In the first degree there is a strong persuasion of the propriety of the impression made; the second and third degrees are produced by comparisons of the impression with others associated with it, and an analysis of itself.

[ 14 ] Carneades left no written works; his opinions seem to have been systematized by his pupil Clitomachus , whose works, which included one " on suspension of judgment ", were made use of by Cicero .

[ 15 ] Philo of Larissa [ edit ] Main article: Philo of Larissa In Philo of Larissa , we find a tendency not only to reconcile the internal divergences of the Academy itself, but also to connect it with parallel systems of thought.

[ 11 ] In general, his philosophy was a reaction against the skeptic or agnostic position of the middle and new Academy in favor of the dogmatism of Plato.

[ 16 ] Philo of Larissa endeavored to show that Carneades was not opposed to Plato, and further that the apparent antagonism between Platonism and Stoicism was because they were arguing from different points of view. From this syncretism emerged the eclectic middle Platonism of Antiochus of Ascalon , the last product of Academic development.

[ 11 ] See also [ edit ] Probabilism Scientific skepticism Notes [ edit ] ^ a b c One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Scepticism ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 24 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

306– 309.

^ Sextus Empiricus , "Outlines of Pyrrhonism" I.33.232 ^ Sextus Empiricus, "Outlines of Pyrrhonism" I.33.225–231 ^ Thorsrud, Harald (2009).

Ancient Scepticism . Stocksfield [U.K.]: Acumen. pp.

120– 121.

ISBN 978-1844654093 .

OCLC 715184861 .

Pyrrhonism, in whatever form it might have taken after Timon's death in 230 BCE, was utterly neglected until Aenesidemus brought it back to public attention ^ Thorsrud 2014 , p. 45.

^ Thorsrud 2014 , pp. 102–103.

^ a b c This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870). "Arcesilaus".

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .

^ Phaedo , 64–67 ^ Veres, Máté (2009).

"Carlos Lévy, Les Scepticismes; Markus Gabriel, Antike und moderne Skepsis zur Einführung" .

Rhizai. A Journal for Ancient Philosophy and Science .

6 (1): 107. Archived from the original on October 22, 2021 . Retrieved April 29, 2020 .

: 111 ^ Gellius, Aulus (2008).

Noctes Atticae . Josef Feix (3. Dr ed.). Paderborn: Schöningh.

ISBN 978-3140107143 .

OCLC 635311697 .

^ a b c d e f g One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Academy, Greek ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 1 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

105– 106.

^ Cicero, Acad.

i. 12, iv. 24; De Orat.

iii. 18; Diogenes Laertius iv. 28; Sextus Empiricus, Adv. Math.

vii. 150, Pyrrh. Hyp.

i. 233 ^ a b One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Arcesilaus ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 2 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 342.

^ a b c One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Carneades ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 5 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. pp.

363– 364.

^ One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Clitomachus ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 531.

^ One or more of the preceding sentences incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Chisholm, Hugh , ed. (1911). " Philo of Larissa ".

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 21 (11th ed.). Cambridge University Press. p. 413.

References [ edit ] Thorsrud, Harald (2014).

Ancient Scepticism . Routledge.

ISBN 978-1-317-49283-2 .

External links [ edit ] Groarke, Leo .

"Ancient Skepticism" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Harold Thorsrud.

"Ancient Greek Skepticism" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Links to related articles v t e Philosophical skepticism Skeptical philosophies Academic Skepticism Ajñana Cartesian Charvaka Humeanism Pyrrhonism Solipsism Skeptical philosophers Sanjaya Belatthiputta Xenophanes Xeniades Metrodorus of Chios Anaxarchus Nausiphanes Pyrrho Timon Academic skeptics Arcesilaus Diocles of Cnidus Lacydes Telecles and Evander Hegesinus Carneades Hagnon of Tarsus Metrodorus of Stratonicea Aristanax Clitomachus Charmadas Aeschines of Neapolis Philo of Larissa Cicero Gaius Aurelius Cotta Dio of Alexandria Aenesidemus Favorinus Agrippa Sextus Empiricus Jayarāśi Bhaṭṭa Nicholas of Autrecourt Montaigne Pierre Charron Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa William Chillingworth René Descartes Simon Foucher Pierre Bayle David Hume Gottlob Ernst Schulze William Drummond Benson Mates Peter Unger Robert Fogelin Skeptical scenarios Acatalepsy Aporia Brain in a vat Dream argument Epoche Evil demon Five-minute hypothesis Münchhausen trilemma Ignoramus et ignorabimus Problem of the criterion Problem of induction Reductio ad absurdum Regress argument Simulation hypothesis Suspension of judgment Wax argument Responses Here is one hand Semantic externalism Process reliabilism Epistemic closure Contextualism Relativism Skeptical philosophical literature Barhaspatya sutras Academica ( Cicero ) Outlines of Pyrrhonism Against the Dogmatists Against the Mathematicians Essays ( Montaigne ) Discourse on the Method A Treatise of Human Nature Aenesidemus Types of skepticism Radical Local Moral Scientific Religious Jewish skeptics Pseudoskepticism v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐hjghg
Cached time: 20250812030114
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.659 seconds
Real time usage: 0.810 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 3692/1000000
Revision size: 12699/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 187652/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 40738/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 18/100
Expensive parser function count: 7/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 89959/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.389/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8360977/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  671.657      1 -total
 39.72%  266.774      1 Template:Reflist
 22.91%  153.876      6 Template:EB1911
 18.57%  124.705      1 Template:Pyrrhonism_sidebar
 18.28%  122.797      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 11.32%   76.008     13 Template:Navbox
 11.26%   75.626      1 Template:Short_description
  9.99%   67.123      1 Template:Navboxes
  7.27%   48.843      2 Template:Pagetype
  7.21%   48.451      2 Template:Sfn Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:25390717:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812030114 and revision id 1304664373. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Academic_skepticism&oldid=1304664373 " Categories : Academic skepticism Ancient Greek epistemology Epistemological theories Epistemology Schools and traditions in hellenistic philosophy Philosophical skepticism Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the 1911 Encyclopædia Britannica Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM with no wstitle or title parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from April 2021 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from April 2021 Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 11:50 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Academic skepticism 13 languages Add topic

