Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 1.1 Frisia and the Lower Elbe 1.2 Scandinavia 1.3 The Alpine region 2 See also 3 References 4 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Peasant republic 9 languages Deutsch Français 한국어 Italiano 日本語 Occitan Русский Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Concept of a self-governing polity or entity made up of and/or by peasants You can help expand this article with text translated from the corresponding article in German .

(January 2022) Click [show] for important translation instructions.

View a machine-translated version of the German article.

Machine translation, like DeepL or Google Translate , is a useful starting point for translations, but translators must revise errors as necessary and confirm that the translation is accurate, rather than simply copy-pasting machine-translated text into the English Wikipedia.

Consider adding a topic to this template: there are already 1,844 articles in the main category , and specifying |topic= will aid in categorization.

Do not translate text that appears unreliable or low-quality. If possible, verify the text with references provided in the foreign-language article.

You must provide copyright attribution in the edit summary accompanying your translation by providing an interlanguage link to the source of your translation. A model attribution edit summary is Content in this edit is translated from the existing German Wikipedia article at [[:de:Bauernrepublik]]; see its history for attribution.

You may also add the template {{Translated|de|Bauernrepublik}} to the talk page .

For more guidance, see Wikipedia:Translation .

Part of the Politics series on Republicanism Concepts Anti-monarchism Anti-corruption Civic virtue Civil society Consent of the governed Democracy Democratization Liberty as non-domination Mixed government Political representation Popular sovereignty Public participation Republic Res publica Rule of law Self-governance Separation of powers Social contract Social equality Schools Classical Federal Kemalism Khomeinism Modern Nasserism Neo-republicanism Venizelism Types Autonomous Capitalist Christian Democratic Federal Imperial Islamic Maritime Parliamentary Peasant People's Revolutionary Secular Sister Soviet Philosophers Arendt Baggini Bello Bentham Bodin Cattaneo Chappell Cicero Condorcet Crick Franklin Harrington Honderich Jefferson Kant Locke Machiavelli Madison Mazzini Mill Montesquieu Paine Pettit Polybius Rousseau Sandel Sidney Sunstein Tocqueville Warburton Wollstonecraft Politicians Adams (Gerry) Adams (John) Atatürk Azaña Bartley Benn Bennett Bolívar Chapman Clark (Katy) Clarke (Tom) Connolly Cromwell Davidson Drakeford Etherington Fabiani Ferguson Flynn Gambetta Garibaldi de Gaulle Grévy Griffith Griffiths Harvie Hatton Hébert Hopkins Huppert Iorwerth Jackson Jay Jefferson Jones (Elin) Jones (Lynne) Juárez Kane Khomeini La Malfa Lenin Lewis Lincoln Lucas Mackay Mackenzie Madison Magid Mannin McDonnell McKechin Mullin Nandy Naysmith Nehru Pound Prescott Ritchie Robespierre Sayed Skates Skinner Slater Slaughter Smith Spadolini Sun Taverne Venizelos Wilson Wood Theoretical works Republic (c. 375 BC) De re publica (54–51 BC) Discourses on Livy (1531) The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates (1649) The Commonwealth of Oceana (1656) Discourses Concerning Government (1698) The Spirit of Law (1748) Discourse on Inequality (1755) The Social Contract (1762) The Federalist Papers (1787–1788) Rights of Man (1791) Perpetual Peace: A Philosophical Sketch (1794) Democracy in America (1835–1840) On Revolution (1963) History Roman Republic Gaṇasaṅgha Classical Athens Republic of Venice Republic of Genoa Republic of Florence Dutch Republic American Revolution French Revolution Spanish American wars of independence Trienio Liberal French Revolution of 1848 5 October 1910 revolution Chinese Revolution Russian Revolution German Revolution of 1918–1919 Turkish War of Independence Mongolian Revolution of 1921 11 September 1922 Revolution 1935 Greek coup d'état attempt Spanish Civil War 1946 Italian institutional referendum 1952 Egyptian revolution 14 July Revolution North Yemen civil war Zanzibar Revolution 1969 Libyan coup d'état 1970 Cambodian coup d'état Metapolitefsi Iranian revolution 1987 Fijian coups d'état Nepalese Civil War Barbadian Republic Proclamation National variants Antigua and Barbuda Australia Bahamas Barbados Canada Ireland Jamaica Japan Morocco Netherlands New Zealand Norway Spain Sweden United Kingdom Scotland Wales United States Republic days Armenia Azerbaijan China Iceland India Iran Italy Kazakhstan Malta Moldova Nepal Niger North Korea North Macedonia Pakistan Philippines Taiwan Turkey Related topics Classical radicalism Common good Communitarianism Criticism of monarchy Egalitarianism The Emperor's New Clothes Jacobinism Liberalism List of republics Monarchism Peasant republic Primus inter pares Republic without republicans Republican empire Republican Party Politics portal v t e Peasant republic (a calque of the German word Bauernrepublik ) is a term used to describe rural societies in the Middle Ages , especially in the Holy Roman Empire and in parts of the Nordics , in which royal , aristocratic and ecclesiastical power was unusually weak or non-existent, allowing the local farmers to enjoy a high degree of autonomy. In this context the term ' republic ' does not necessarily imply the existence of the apparatus of a formal state , though this did exist in some such communities, but rather simply the absence of effective royal/princely power. Typically peasant republics were located in remote and inaccessible areas (such as marshlands and mountain valleys) which were difficult for outside authorities to interfere in, and generally too poor to attract a lot of attention.

Examples [ edit ] Frisia and the Lower Elbe [ edit ] The German term Bauernrepublik was originally coined to refer to autonomous districts in Frisia and northwest Saxony , a region in which the tradition of ' Frisian Freedom ' remained strong throughout the Middle Ages. Notable 'peasant republics' in this area included Butjadingen , [ 1 ] Stadland , Stedingen , [ 2 ] Land Wursten , Land Hadeln and Dithmarschen .

Some of these peasant republics disappeared through the consolidation of power in the hands of individual farmers, enabling them to set themselves up as petty lords on the feudal model, [ 3 ] while others were annexed or conquered by neighbouring princes.

[ 4 ] The various peasant republics in East Frisia were united under the rule of the Cirksena family in the fifteenth century, and in 1464 Ulrich I von Cirksena was able to declare himself Count of East Frisia . During the same period, Friesland , also known as West Frisia was subsumed into the Burgundian Netherlands , which later became the Spanish Netherlands and ultimately the Dutch Republic . Thus Friesland is today part of the Netherlands , whereas East Frisia is part of modern Germany . After the 1234 Battle of Altenesch [ de ] , the Stedinger were subjected to the Prince-Archbishop of Bremen and to the Count of Oldenburg . The Prince-Archbishops also subjected Kehdingen , and in 1524 also the Land Wursten to their rule, while the Counts of Oldenburg acquired Butjadingen and Stadland in 1514. The peasants of Hadeln were comparatively lucky; although they fell under the rule of the weak Duchy of Saxe-Lauenburg in the 13th century, the dukes were too weak to enforce their will and consequently the farmers were able to preserve much of their autonomy right up to the 19th century.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Scandinavia [ edit ] The term 'peasant republic' is sometimes applied to certain communities in Scandinavia during the Viking Age and High Middle Ages , especially in Sweden , where royal power seems to have been initially somewhat weak, [ 7 ] and in areas of modern day Sweden that were not under the rule of the Swedish king yet, as well as in Iceland where the Icelandic Commonwealth serves as an example of an unusually large and sophisticated peasant republic building on the same democratic traditions.

[ 8 ] Some historians have also argued that Gotland was a peasant republic before the attack by the Danes in 1361 .

[ 9 ] Central for the old Scandinavian democratic traditions was the assemblies called the Thing or Moot .

The Alpine region [ edit ] There are parallels between the situation in Friesland and that in the Swiss Confederation . In many of the Swiss cantons sovereignty was invested in the local farmers in the form of the Landsgemeinde , although executive authority was delegated to councils of sixty men. These free communities of Alpine farmers later joined with self-governing cities (such as Bern and Geneva ) to form the Swiss Confederation, which was dominated by free farmers until the end of the 18th century.

[ 10 ] Peasant republics also existed elsewhere in the Alpine region, such as in the Bregenzerwald , in what is now the far west of Austria .

[ 11 ] [ 12 ] Some German-language sources also speak of Bauernrepublik to describe the case of the Republic of the Escartons of Briançon , a group of mountain territories having enjoyed particular fiscal and social provisions from the 14th to the 18th centuries.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Frisian Freedom Dithmarschen Icelandic Commonwealth Medieval commune Swiss Confederation References [ edit ] ^ "Geschichtliche Entwicklung Butjadingens im Überblick" [An overview of the historical development of Butjadingen].

Gemeinde Butjadingen (in German).

^ Lorenz, Hans Holger (2020-11-24).

"Stedinger Bauernrepublik 1204 bis 1234" [Stedinger Peasant Republic 1204 to 1234].

bauernkriege.de (in German) . Retrieved 2021-12-24 .

^ z. B. etzel-ostfriesland.de: Ine Widdeken Archived 2013-03-16 at the Wayback Machine ^ Heimatkundlicher Arbeitskreis e. V. Weenermoor - Möhlenwarf - St. Georgiwold - Beschotenweg: " 1509–2009: 500 Jahre Cosmas- und Damianflut. Die Entstehung des Dollarts . Abschnitt Nicht nur eine Naturgewalt. Menschliche Mitschuld " . Archived from the original on 2012-09-11 . Retrieved 2021-12-24 .

^ Land Niedersachsen: Die Friesen ^ "Landsknechte fallen vor 500 Jahren ein. Freie Friesen an der Niederweser – Vortrag von Professor Dr. Bernd Ulrich Hucker" [Landsknechts invade 500 years ago. Free Frisians on the Niederweser - Lecture by Professor Dr. Bernd Ulrich Hucker].

Nordwestzeitung (in German). 16 February 2007.

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Peter Sawyer: The Making of Sweden . 1988, pp.3-4 ^ Arnulf Krause: Die Welt der Wikinger . Campus, Frankfurt/Main 2006, pp.155–158 ^ Staecker, Jörn (2000). "Die normierte Bestattung – Gotlands Kirchfriedhöfe im Spiegel mittelalterlicher Normen und Gesetze" [The standardized burial – Gotland's church cemeteries as reflected in medieval norms and laws]. In Ruhe, Doris; Spieß, Karl-Heinz (eds.).

Prozesse der Normbildung und Normveränderung im mittelalterlichen Europa [ Processes of norm formation and norm change in medieval Europe ] (in German). Stuttgart: Steiner. p. 149f.

^ Kurt Breysig (2001).

Die Geschichte der Menschheit (2nd ed.). New York / Berlin: De Gruyter. Vol. 4–5. p. 202 ^ "bregenzerwald" .

Bregenzerwald Tourismus (in German). Archived from the original on 19 June 2009.

^ Mathias Moosbrugger (7 November 2008).

"Jenseits von Bauernrepublik und Bezegg. Neue Perspektiven auf die Geschichte der Gerichtsgemeinde im Hinteren Bregenzerwald" [Beyond peasant republic and Bezegg: New perspectives on the history of the justice community in the Hinter Bregenz Forest]. Lecture at the invitation of the Volkshochschule Bregenzerwald-Egg on the occasion of "200 Years of Community Organization in Vorarlberg 1808–2008" in Egg Gymnasium ^ Gerhard Fitzthum (17 February 2006).

"Zwischen Milchstraße und Mondlandschaft" .

Der Freitag (in German) . Retrieved 6 March 2013 .

Further reading [ edit ] Jens Schmeyers: Die letzten freien Friesen zwischen Weser und Ems: Die Geschichte Butjadingens und Stadlands bis zur Schlacht an der Hartwarder Schanze . Lemwerder. Stedinger Verlag 2006 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Peasant_republic&oldid=1266802510 " Categories : History of East Frisia Medieval politics Peasant revolts Types of republics Hidden categories: CS1 German-language sources (de) Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links Articles containing German-language text Articles with short description Short description with empty Wikidata description Articles needing translation from German Wikipedia This page was last edited on 2 January 2025, at 07:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Peasant republic 9 languages Add topic

