Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types 2 Dangers 3 Indicators 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Flashover 17 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Français 한국어 Italiano Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Rapid ignition of combustible material in an enclosed area For other uses, see Flashover (disambiguation) and Electric arc .

A flashover is the near-simultaneous ignition of most of the directly exposed combustible material in an enclosed area. When certain organic materials are heated, they undergo thermal decomposition and release flammable gases . Flashover occurs when the majority of the exposed surfaces in a space are heated to their autoignition temperature and emit flammable gases (see also flash point ). Flashover normally occurs at 500 °C (932 °F) or 590 °C (1,100 °F) for ordinary combustibles and an incident heat flux at floor level of 20 kilowatts per square metre (2.5 hp/sq ft).

[ jargon ] An example of flashover is the ignition of a piece of furniture in a domestic room. The fire involving the initial piece of furniture can produce a layer of hot smoke , which spreads across the ceiling in the room. The hot buoyant smoke layer grows in depth, as it is bounded by the walls of the room. The radiated heat from this layer heats the surfaces of the directly exposed combustible materials in the room, causing them to give off flammable gases, via pyrolysis . When the temperatures of the evolved gases become high enough, these gases will ignite throughout their extent.

[ 1 ] Types [ edit ] A lean flashover (sometimes called rollover ) is the ignition of the gas layer under the ceiling, leading to total involvement of the compartment. The air–fuel ratio is at the bottom region of the flammability range (i.e. lean).

A rich flashover occurs when the flammable gases are ignited while at the upper region of the flammability range (i.e. rich). This can happen in rooms where the fire subsided because of lack of oxygen. The ignition source can be a smouldering object, or the stirring up of embers by the air track. Such an event is known as backdraft .

A delayed flashover occurs when the colder gray smoke cloud ignites after congregating outside of its room of origin. This results in a volatile situation, and if the ignition occurs at the ideal mixture, the result can be a violent smoke gas explosion . This is referred to as smoke explosion or fire gas ignition depending on the severity of the combustion process.

A hot rich flashover occurs when the hot smoke with flammable gas ratio above the upper limit of flammability range and temperature higher than the ignition temperature leaves the compartment. Upon dilution with air it can spontaneously ignite, and the resultant flame can propagate back into the compartment, resulting in an event similar to a rich flashover. The common definition of this process is known as auto-ignition , which is another form of fire gas ignition.

Dangers [ edit ] Flashover is one of the most feared phenomena among firefighters . Firefighters are taught to recognize the signs of imminent rollovers and flashovers and to avoid backdrafts. For example, there are certain routines for opening closed doors to buildings and compartments on fire, known as door entry procedures, ensuring fire crew safety where possible.

Indicators [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Flashover" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The following are some of the signs that firefighters are looking for when they attempt to determine whether a flashover is likely to occur.

Fast dark smoke.

The neutral plane is moving down towards the floor. In this situation, a flashover is plausible.

All directly exposed combustible materials are showing signs of pyrolysis .

" Rollover " or tongues of fire appear (known as "angel fingers" to firefighters) as gases reach their auto-ignition temperatures.

There is a rapid build-up (or "spike") in temperature due to the compound effect of rapidly burning (i.e., deflagrating) gases and the thermal cycle they produce. This is generally the best indication of a flashover.

[ 2 ] The fire is in a ventilated compartment, so there is no shortage of oxygen in the room.

[ citation needed ] Firefighters memorize a chant to help remember these during training: "Thick dark smoke, high heat, rollover, free burning." [ citation needed ] The colour of the smoke is often considered as well, but there is no connection between the colour of the smoke and the risk of flashovers. Traditionally, black, dense smoke was considered particularly dangerous, but history shows this to be an unreliable indicator. For example, there was a fire in a rubber mattress factory in London in 1975 which produced white smoke. The white smoke was not considered dangerous, so firefighters decided to ventilate , which caused a smoke explosion and killed two firefighters. The white smoke from the pyrolysis of the rubber turned out to be extremely flammable.

[ citation needed ] See also [ edit ] Air Canada Flight 797 Burning of Parliament (1834; flashover seen 20 miles (32 km) away) Charleston Sofa Super Store fire Firestorm Kilbirnie Street fire (1972) King's Cross fire (1987; flashover happened in escalator shaft) MGM Grand fire (1980) Saudia Flight 163 Stardust fire (1981) Ufa train disaster (1989; caused by massive gas leak in the open air, triggered by sparks from trains' brakes) References [ edit ] ^ "Understanding Flashover" .

Fire Engineering . June 22, 2010 . Retrieved August 21, 2023 .

^ "Guidance | NFCC CPO" .

www.ukfrs.com .

Archived from the original on 2020-10-09 . Retrieved 2020-10-06 .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Flashover .

Living Room Flashover Video Rapid Fire Progress & Flashover related fire development Realistic hot fire training to deal safely with flashover and backdraft Flashover / Backdraft training Presentation and video of a flashover in a living room (Forschungsstelle für Brandschutztechnik (Karlsruhe Institute of Technology - KIT)) Flashover training Croatia French site about structural firefighting Flashover during house fire in Baltimore, MD.  Video taken January 2010 Flashover Slow Motion v t e Fire protection Fundamental concepts Backdraft Boiling liquid expanding vapor explosion (BLEVE) Boilover Combustibility and flammability Conflagration Dangerous goods (HAZMAT) Deflagration Detonation Dust explosion Enthalpy of vaporization Explosive Fire classification Fire control Fire loading Fire point Fire triangle Flammability diagram Flammability limit Flammable liquid Flashover Flash point Friction loss Gas leak Heat transfer Jet fire K-factor (fire protection) Pool fire Pyrolysis Spontaneous combustion Structure fire Thermal radiation Water pressure Technology Active fire protection Automatic fire suppression Condensed aerosol fire suppression Detonation flame arrester External water spray system Fire bucket Fire prevention Fire protection Fire retardant Fire-retardant fabric Fire retardant gel Fire-safe polymers Fire safety Fire sprinkler system Fire suppression system Firefighting foam Flame arrester Flame retardant Flashback arrestor Fusible link Gaseous fire suppression Hypoxic air technology for fire prevention Inerting system Intumescent Passive fire protection Personal protective equipment (PPE) Relief valve Spark arrestor Tank blanketing Vehicle fire suppression system Building design Annulus (firestop) Area of refuge Booster pump Compartmentation Crash bar Electromagnetic door holder Electromagnetic lock Emergency exit Emergency light Exit sign Fire curtain Fire cut Fire damper Fire door Fire escape Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire pump Fire sprinkler Firestop Firestop pillow Firewall (construction) Grease duct Heat and smoke vent Packing (firestopping) Penetrant (mechanical, electrical, or structural) Penetration (firestop) Pressurisation ductwork Safety glass Smoke control Smoke damper Smoke exhaust ductwork Smokeproof enclosure Standpipe (firefighting) Fire alarm systems Aspirating smoke detector Carbon monoxide detector Circuit integrity Explosive gas leak detector Fire alarm call box Fire alarm control panel Fire alarm notification appliance Fire drill Flame detector Heat detector Manual fire alarm activation Smoke detector Professions, trades, and services Duct cleaning Fire insurance Fire protection engineering Fireproofing Fire-resistance rating Fire Safety Evaluation System (FSES) Fire test Kitchen exhaust cleaning Listing and approval use and compliance Sprinkler fitting Industry organizations Institution of Fire Engineers (IFE) National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (NCEES) National Fire Protection Association (NFPA) Society of Fire Protection Engineers (SFPE) Underwriters Laboratories (UL) Standards CE marking EN 3 EN 54 EN 16034 Flame spread GHS hazard statements GHS precautionary statements Life Safety Code (NFPA 101) List of R-phrases List of S-phrases Safety data sheet UL 94 Awards Arthur B. Guise Medal Harry C. Bigglestone Award See also Template:Fire Template:Firefighting Template:HVAC Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Flashover&oldid=1274882673 " Categories : Combustion Fire protection Firefighting Thermodynamics Types of fire Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles that are too technical Wikipedia articles that are too technical from April 2024 All articles needing expert attention Articles needing expert attention from April 2024 Articles needing additional references from August 2016 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2013 Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 February 2025, at 20:05 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Flashover 17 languages Add topic

