Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Typical use 2 Valve construction Toggle Valve construction subsection 2.1 Bonnet 2.1.1 Pressure seal bonnet 2.1.2 Knife gate valve 3 Images 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Gate valve 24 languages العربية Català Čeština Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hrvatski Italiano Lietuvių Lombard Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenčina Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Svenska తెలుగు Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Gate valve" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Flow control device An electric multi-turn actuator on a gate valve A gate valve , also known as a sluice valve , is a valve that opens by lifting a barrier (gate) out of the path of the fluid . Gate valves require very little space along the pipe axis and hardly restrict the flow of fluid when the gate is fully opened. The gate faces can be parallel but are most commonly wedge-shaped (in order to be able to apply pressure on the sealing surface).

Typical use [ edit ] Gate valves are used to shut off the flow of liquids rather than for flow regulation, which is frequently done with a globe valve . When fully open, the typical gate valve has no obstruction in the flow path, resulting in very low flow resistance .

[ 1 ] The size of the open flow path generally varies in a nonlinear manner as the gate is moved. This means that the flow rate does not change evenly with stem travel. Depending on the construction, a partially open gate can vibrate from the fluid flow.

[ 1 ] Gate valves are mostly used with larger pipe diameters (from 2" to the largest pipelines) since they are less complex to construct than other types of valves in large sizes.

At high pressures, friction can become a problem. As the gate is pushed against its guiding rail by the pressure of the medium, it becomes harder to operate the valve. Large gate valves are sometimes fitted with a bypass controlled by a smaller valve to be able to reduce the pressure before operating the gate valve itself.

Gate valves without an extra sealing ring on the gate or the seat are used in applications where minor leaking of the valve is not an issue, such as heating circuits or sewer pipes.

Valve construction [ edit ] Common gate valves are actuated by a threaded stem that connects the actuator (e.g. handwheel or motor) to the gate. They are characterised as having either a rising or a nonrising stem, depending on which end of the stem is threaded.  Rising stems are fixed to the gate and rise and lower together as the valve is operated, providing a visual indication of valve position. The actuator is attached to a nut that is rotated around the threaded stem to move it. Nonrising stem valves are fixed to, and rotate with, the actuator, and are threaded into the gate.  They may have a pointer threaded onto the stem to indicate valve position, since the gate's motion is concealed inside the valve. Nonrising stems are used where vertical space is limited.

Gate valves may have flanged ends drilled according to pipeline-compatible flange dimensional standards.

Gate valves are typically constructed from cast iron , cast carbon steel , ductile iron , gunmetal , stainless steel , alloy steels , and forged steels .

All-metal gate valves are used in ultra-high vacuum chambers to isolate regions of the chamber.

[ 2 ] Bonnet [ edit ] Bonnets provide leakproof closure for the valve body. Gate valves may have a screw-in, union, or bolted bonnet. A screw-in bonnet is the simplest, offering a durable, pressure-tight seal. A union bonnet is suitable for applications requiring frequent inspection and cleaning. It also gives the body added strength. A bolted bonnet is used for larger valves and higher pressure applications.

[ 3 ] Pressure seal bonnet [ edit ] Another type of bonnet construction in a gate valve is pressure seal bonnet . This construction is adopted for valves for high pressure service, typically in excess of 2250 psi (15 MPa ). The unique feature of the pressure seal bonnet is that the bonnet ends in a downward-facing cup that fits inside the body of the valve.  As the internal pressure in the valve increases, the sides of the cup are forced outward. improving the body-bonnet seal. Other constructions where the seal is provided by external clamping pressure tend to create leaks in the body-bonnet joint.

Knife gate valve [ edit ] For plastic solids and high-viscosity slurries such as paper pulp, a specialty valve known as a knife gate valve is used to cut through the material to stop the flow. A knife gate valve is usually not wedge shaped and has a tapered knife-like edge on its lower surface.

[ 4 ] Images [ edit ] A 2″ stainless steel gate valve with flanged ends.  Bolts connect the lower valve body with the upper “bonnet”.  Visible threads on the valve stem protruding above the handwheel show that this is a rising-stem valve.

Gate valve being installed on a new water service to a fire hydrant . The valve material is ductile iron .

Gate valves See also [ edit ] Ball valve Blast gate Butterfly valve Control valve Diaphragm valve Globe valve Needle valve Process flow diagram Piping and instrumentation diagram References [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Gate valves .

^ a b Beasley, Albert Jr. (July 1990), Fluid Power (PDF) , United States Navy, p. 6-3, NAVEDTRA 14105, archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-12-06 , retrieved 2016-06-19 ^ "Valves" .

www.pfeiffer-vacuum.com . Retrieved 2019-08-23 .

^ "ANIX Gate Valve. ANIX Valve USA - Stainless Steel and Carbon/Cast Steel Valves" .

anixusa.com . Retrieved 2022-06-13 .

^ "Knife Valves, All Types of Valves" .

www.stoneleigh-eng.com . Retrieved 2019-08-23 .

v t e Plumbing Fundamental concepts Air gap (plumbing) Backflow Compatibility (chemical) Corrosion Drain (plumbing) Drinking water Fuel gas Friction loss Grade (slope) Greywater Heat trap Hydrostatic loop Leak Neutral axis Onsite sewage facility Pressure Sanitary sewer Sewer gas Sewage Sewerage Siphon Storm sewer Stormwater Surface tension Tap water Thermal expansion Thermal insulation Thermosiphon Trap (plumbing) Venturi effect Wastewater Water hammer Water supply network Water table Well Technology Brazing British Standard Pipe (BSP) Cast iron pipe Chemical drain cleaners Compression fitting Copper tubing Crimp (joining) Drain-waste-vent system Ductile iron pipe Flare fitting Garden Hose Thread (GHT) Gasket Hydronics Leak detection National pipe thread (NPT) Nominal Pipe Size (NPS) O-ring Oakum Pipe (fluid conveyance) Pipe dope Pipe support Plastic pipework Push-to-pull compression fittings Putty Sealant Sewage pumping Soldering Solvent welding Swaging Thread seal tape Threaded pipe Tube bending Water heat recycling Components Atmospheric vacuum breaker Automatic bleeding valve Automatic faucet Backflow prevention device Ball valve Bleed screw Booster pump Butterfly valve Check valve Chemigation valve Chopper pump Circulator pump Cistern Closet flange Concentric reducer Condensate pump Coupling (piping) Diaphragm valve Dielectric union Double check valve Eccentric reducer Expansion tank Faucet aerator Float switch Float valve Floor drain Flow limiter Flushing trough Flushometer Gate valve Globe valve Grease trap Grinder pump Hose coupling Manifold Needle valve Nipple (plumbing) Pinch valve Piping and plumbing fitting Plug (sanitation) Pressure regulator Pressure vacuum breaker Pressure-balanced valve Pump Radiator (heating) Reduced pressure zone device Reducer Relief valve Riser clamp Rooftop water tower Safety valve sewage pumping Street elbow Submersible pump Tap (valve) Thermostatic mixing valve Trench drain Vacuum breaker Vacuum ejector Valve Water tank Zone valve Plumbing fixtures Accessible bathtub Bathtub Bidet Dehumidifier Dishwasher Drinking fountain Electric water boiler Evaporative cooler Flush toilet Garbage disposal unit Hot water storage tank Humidifier Icemaker Instant hot water dispenser Laundry tub Shower water recycling shower Sink Storage water heater Sump pump Tankless water heating Urinal Washing machine Washlet Water dispenser Water filter Water heating Water softening Specialized tools Basin wrench Blowtorch Borescope Core drill Drain cleaner Driving cap Flare-nut wrench Pipecutter Pipe wrench Plumber's snake Plumber wrench Plunger Strap wrench Tap and die Measurement and control Control valve Flow sensor Pressure sensor Water detector Water metering Professions, trades, and services Hydronic balancing Hydrostatic testing Leak detection Mechanical, electrical, and plumbing Pipe marking Pipefitter Pipelayer Plumber Industry organizations and standards International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials (IAPMO) NSF International Plumbing & Drainage Institute (PDI) Uniform Plumbing Code (UPC) World Plumbing Council (WPC) Health and safety Plumbing code Scalding Waterborne disease See also Fire sprinkler system Piping Template:HVAC Template:Public health Template:Sewerage Template:Human waste elimination Template:Wastewater Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gate_valve&oldid=1283815228 " Categories : Plumbing valves Valves Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from March 2009 All articles needing additional references Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Commons category link is on Wikidata Articles containing video clips This page was last edited on 3 April 2025, at 20:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gate valve 24 languages Add topic

