Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Description 3 Usage 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Dialing scales Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Dialing scales are used to lay out the face of a sundial geometrically. They were proposed by Samuel Foster in 1638, and produced by George Serle and Anthony Thompson in 1658 on a ruler. There are two scales: the latitude scale and the hour scale.  They can be used to draw all gnomonic dials – and reverse engineer existing dials to discover their original intended location.

[ 1 ] History [ edit ] Dialing scales were first discussed by Samuel Foster in 1638. P. Pierre Bobynet, a Jesuit drew a scale in his book L'horographie ingenieuse contenant des Connoissances, &  Curiositez Agréables dans la composition des Cadrans , in 1647.

[ 2 ] It was however George Serles 1657 book, Dialling Universal , printed by R & W Leybourn that brought them to popular attention. These scales remained virtually unchanged for 250 years. E. C. Middleton, who had been engraving dialling scales from about 1895, supplied dialling scales accompanied by a typewritten instruction book from Birmingham in 1913– these were the scales calculated by Serle. The North American Sundial Society has printed facsimiles of both the Serle and Middleton books.
The Middleton dial appeared without explanation in the 1994 Encyclopedia de Diderot et Alembert (French).

[ 3 ] Further work has done on these rulers by F.W. Cousins, and by Fred W Sawyer from 1997–2009.

[ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] Description [ edit ] The traditional scales (Foster Serle scales) are drawn on a ruler. The hour scale shows sin ⁡ ⁡ t sin ⁡ ⁡ t + cos ⁡ ⁡ t {\displaystyle \sin t \over \sin t+\cos t} and the latitude scale shows sin ⁡ ⁡ φ φ 1 + sin 2 ⁡ ⁡ φ φ {\displaystyle \sin \varphi  \over {\sqrt {1+\sin ^{2}\varphi }}} .

[ 7 ] The graduation of these rulers is independent of latitude, making them suitable for drawing all dials. The Foster Serle dial is randomly set for a value of 45°, and is more precise for latitudes below 45°. It is thus a special case in an infinite set of rulers.

Usage [ edit ] A right-angle is drawn on the dial-face and the latitude scale is laid against the x -axis. The target latitude point is marked across on to the dial face. The hour scale is placed from this point to the noon line (conventionally, the zero point is on the noon line). Each of the hour points is copied over to the dial face, and this procedure is repeated, giving the hours both sides of noon. A straight edge is used to connect these points to the origin, thus drawing the hour lines for that location. A vertical line from the target latitude point, and a horizontal line through the noon point will bisect at the three-hour (9 am–3 pm) marker.

In the northern hemisphere the hours run clockwise. Symmetries about the noon line, the six-hour line and the three-hour marker can be detected – and these can be used to add additional lines.

The style will be at the same angle as the latitude. It can be simply drawn using the Line of Chords scale on the dialing ruler. A set of compasses is extended to the 60° point on the line of chords. A radius is drawn from the substyle. The compasses are set to the target latitude on the line of chords scale. This measurement is transferred along the radius. That angle represents the style height.

They can be used to draw all gnomonic dials – and reverse engineer existing dials to discover their original intended location.

[ 1 ] [ 8 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b Sawyer, Fred (1995). "Serle's Dialing Scales".

Compendium .

2 (2). Glastonbury, CT,USA: North American Sundial Society: 5.

^ Bouchard, Andre E (1999). "Quelques exemples de règles à cadran".

Gnomoniste .

VI (2). 42 Ave de la Brunante, Outremont, Québec, H3T 1R4, Canada: La Commission des Cadrans solaires du Québec: 21.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) ^ Guicheteau, Claude (1999). "Des décourvertes en décourvertes".

Gnomoniste .

VI (2). 42 Ave de la Brunante,Outremont, Québec, H3T 1R4, Canada: La Commission des Cadrans solaires du Québec: 21.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: location ( link ) ^ Sawyer, Fred (1997). "Towards a general theory of Dialing Scales".

Compendium .

4 (4). Glastonbury, CT,USA: North American Sundial Society: 14– 20.

^ Sawyer, Fred (1998). "Vertical Decliner by Dialing Scales an Schema".

Compendium .

5 (1). Glastonbury, CT,USA: North American Sundial Society: 5.

^ Sawyer, Fred (2009). "Differential Dialing Scales".

Compendium .

16 (3). Glastonbury, CT,USA: North American Sundial Society: 36– 38.

^ Sawyer, Fred (2003). "A Note on the origin of Dialing Scales".

Compendium .

10 (1). Glastonbury, CT,USA: North American Sundial Society: 21.

^ Wall, Roderick (2007). "How a Sundial Works And Using Serle's Dialing to make your own Horizontal Sundial".

Compendium .

14 (3). Glastonbury, CT,USA: North American Sundial Society: Digital Bonus.

External links [ edit ] British Sundial Society – Time line and register Illustrating Shadows – A Middleton Serle ruler v t e Time Key concepts Past Present Future Eternity Measurement and standards Chronometry UTC Universal Time TAI Unit of time Orders of magnitude (time) Measurement systems Italian six-hour clock Thai six-hour clock 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Relative hour Daylight saving time Chinese Decimal Hexadecimal Hindu Metric Roman Sidereal Solar Time zone Calendars Main types Solar Lunar Lunisolar Gregorian Julian Hebrew Islamic Solar Hijri Chinese Hindu Panchang Maya List Clocks Main types astronomical astrarium atomic quantum hourglass marine sundial watch 24-hour wristwatch mechanical stopwatch water-based Cuckoo clock Digital clock Grandfather clock History Timeline Chronology History Astronomical chronology Big History Calendar era Deep time Periodization Regnal year Timeline Philosophy of time A series and B series B-theory of time Chronocentrism Duration Endurantism Eternal return Eternalism Event Moving spotlight theory Perdurantism Presentism Temporal finitism Temporal parts The Unreality of Time Religion Mythology Ages of Man Destiny Immortality Dreamtime Kāla Time and fate deities Father Time Wheel of time Kalachakra Human experience and use of time Chronemics Generation time Mental chronometry Music tempo time signature Rosy retrospection Tense–aspect–mood Time management Yesterday – Today – Tomorrow Time in science Geology Geological time age chron eon epoch era period Geochronology Geological history of Earth Physics Absolute space and time Arrow of time Chronon Coordinate time Instant Proper time Spacetime Theory of relativity Time domain Time translation symmetry Time reversal symmetry Other fields Chronological dating Chronobiology Circadian rhythms Clock reaction Glottochronology Time geography Related Leap year Memory Moment Six-hour day Space System time Tempus fugit Time capsule Time immemorial Time travel Category Commons v t e Time measurement and standards Chronometry Orders of magnitude Metrology International standards Coordinated Universal Time offset UT ΔT DUT1 International Earth Rotation and Reference Systems Service ISO 31-1 ISO 8601 International Atomic Time 12-hour clock 24-hour clock Barycentric Coordinate Time Barycentric Dynamical Time Civil time Daylight saving time Geocentric Coordinate Time International Date Line IERS Reference Meridian Leap second Solar time Terrestrial Time Time zone 180th meridian Obsolete standards Ephemeris time Greenwich Mean Time Prime meridian Time in physics Absolute space and time Spacetime Chronon Continuous signal Coordinate time Cosmological decade Discrete time and continuous time Proper time Theory of relativity Time dilation Gravitational time dilation Time domain Time-translation symmetry T-symmetry Horology Clock Astrarium Atomic clock Complication History of timekeeping devices Hourglass Marine chronometer Marine sandglass Radio clock Watch stopwatch Water clock Sundial Dialing scales Equation of time History of sundials Sundial markup schema Calendar Gregorian Hebrew Hindu Holocene Islamic (lunar Hijri) Julian Solar Hijri Astronomical Dominical letter Epact Equinox Intercalation Julian day Leap year Lunar Lunisolar Solar Solstice Tropical year Weekday determination Weekday names Archaeology and geology Chronological dating Geologic time scale International Commission on Stratigraphy Astronomical chronology Galactic year Nuclear timescale Precession Sidereal time Other units of time Instant Flick Shake Jiffy Second Minute Moment Hour Day Week Fortnight Month Year Olympiad Lustrum Decade Century Saeculum Millennium Related topics Chronology Duration music Mental chronometry Decimal time Metric time System time Time metrology Time value of money Timekeeper Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Dialing_scales&oldid=1266231897 " Category : Sundials Hidden category: CS1 maint: location This page was last edited on 30 December 2024, at 18:31 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Dialing scales Add languages Add topic

