Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin of concept 2 Historical examples 3 See also 4 References 5 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Social engineering (political science) 28 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Čeština Deutsch Español Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Italiano עברית Latina Magyar മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Српски / srpski Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Discipline in social science For social engineering in the context of information security, see Social engineering (security) .

Part of a series on Nudge theory Social scientists Richard Thaler Shlomo Benartzi Cass Sunstein Maya Shankar Government programs Race to the Top Affordable Care Act tax provisions Social Credit System Vision Zero Government agencies Behavioural Insights Team (UK) Social and Behavioral Sciences Team (US) Nudge theory in business Loyalty program Safety culture Related concepts Behavioral economics Choice architecture Default effect Design for behaviour change Libertarian paternalism Paternalism Social engineering Social proof IT-backed authoritarianism v t e Social engineering is a term which has been used to refer to efforts in influencing particular attitudes and social behaviors on a large scale. This is often undertaken by governments , but may be also carried out by mass media , academia or private groups in order to produce desired characteristics in a target population.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Origin of concept [ edit ] The Dutch industrialist J.C. Van Marken ( nl ) used the term sociale ingenieurs ("social engineers") in an essay in 1894. The idea was that modern employers needed the assistance of specialists in handling the human challenges, just as they needed technical expertise (traditional engineers) to deal with non-human challenges (materials, machines, processes). "Social engineering" was the title of a small journal in 1899 (renamed "Social Service" from 1900), and in 1909 it was the title of a book by the journal's former editor, William H. Tolman (translated into French in 1910). With the Social Gospel sociologist Edwin L. Earp's The Social Engineer , published during the "efficiency craze" of 1911 in the U.S., a new usage of the term was launched that has since then become standard: "Social engineering" came to refer to an approach of treating social relations as "machineries", [ 3 ] to be dealt with in the manner of the technical engineer.

[ 3 ] Historical examples [ edit ] In the 1920s, the government of the Soviet Union embarked on a campaign to fundamentally alter the behavior and ideals of Soviet citizens, to replace the old social frameworks of the Russian Empire with a new Soviet culture , and to develop the New Soviet man .

Commissars became agents of social engineering.

[ 4 ] In India , social engineering was said to have been done by the state of Bihar, on a grand scale, to unify different castes after 2005.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] In his political science book, The Open Society and Its Enemies , volume I, The Spell of Plato (1945), Karl Popper made a distinction between the principles of what he called "piecemeal social engineering" and Utopian social engineering.

[ 9 ] See also [ edit ] Media manipulation Nudge theory Political engineering Psychological operations Social control References [ edit ] ^ "Masters of Crowds: The Rise of Mass Social Engineering" . 29 June 2022.

^ Davis, Joseph S. “Statistics and Social Engineering.” Journal of the American Statistical Association 32, no. 197 (1937): 1–7.

^ a b Östlund, David (2007).

"A knower and friend of human beings, not machines: The business career of the terminology of social engineering, 1894–1910" .

Ideas in History .

2 (2): 43– 82.

ISSN 1890-1832 . Retrieved 2016-09-05 .

^ Kort, Michael G.

(17 April 2019) [1985]. "Into the Fire: The Civil War".

The Soviet Colossus: History and Aftermath (8 ed.). New York: Routledge (published 2019).

ISBN 9781351171861 . Retrieved 18 November 2021 .

[...] class war [...] was a fundamental part of Bolshevik social engineering and the party's mission to build a new socialist world. [...] along with victory in the civil war came the rise to prominence of a new type of party cadre: the tough, utterly ruthless functionary [...] these cadres fit the popular image of the gruff, leather-jacketed commissar rushing from emergency to emergency on his motorcycle.

^ "Bihar polls 2015: BJP banks on PM Narendra Modi's popularity and its social engineering experiment" .

Economictimes.indiatimes.com . The Economic Times. 2015-10-12 . Retrieved 2016-04-01 .

^ "Bihar, after Delhi" .

The Indian Express . Retrieved 2016-04-01 .

^ "Nitish's dismal show a case of monumental miscalculation" .

Indiatoday.intoday.in . Bihar, News – India Today. 2014-05-16 . Retrieved 2016-04-01 .

^ Mishra, Mayank (2015-07-11).

"Social engineering: Bharatiya Janata Party's Bihar formula to swing a vote?" .

Business Standard India . Business Standard News . Retrieved 2016-04-01 .

^ Popper, K.

1971 The Open Society and Its Enemies Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press Further reading [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Social engineering (political science) .

" The Best That Money Can’t Buy: Beyond Politics, Poverty, and War ", Jacque Fresco , 2002.

Peter Swirski .

American Utopia and Social Engineering in Literature, Social Thought, and Political History . New York, Routledge, 2011.

Charles Arthur Willard .

Liberalism and the Social Grounds of Knowledge . Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1992.

Manufacturing Consent: The Political Economy of the Mass Media .

Noam Chomsky . 1998.

Seeing Like a State . James C. Scott. 1999.

Social Engineering . Adam Podgórecki. 1996.

v t e Authoritarian and totalitarian forms of government Forms Absolute monarchy Autocracy Liberal Tsarist Communist state Counterintelligence state Dictatorship Benevolent Civilian Constitutional Dictablanda Grassroots Military Proletarian Right-wing Dominant-party system Illiberal democracy Totalitarian Libertarian authoritarianism Mafia state Managerial state Mediacracy Ochlocracy One-party state Oligarchy Police state Theocracy Islamic state Tyranny Majoritarian Soft Ideologies Authoritarian conservatism Chiangism Francoism Putinism Metaxism Authoritarian capitalism Pinochetism Authoritarian socialism Marxism–Leninism Stalinism Maoism Deng Xiaoping Theory Xi Jinping Thought Juche Despotism Enlightened Soft Ecoauthoritarianism Fascism Eco Neo Imperialism Nazism Neo Religious Caesaropapism Khomeinism Ziaism Shōwa Statism Techno See also Democracy indices Deep state Inverted totalitarianism Personality Leadership style Left-wing Right-wing Social dominance orientation Statism Strongman List of totalitarian states Authority control databases National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Social_engineering_(political_science)&oldid=1304981227 " Categories : Social engineering (political science) Social influence Political science terminology Political terminology Left-wing politics Liberalism Linguistic controversies Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 9 August 2025, at 09:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Social engineering (political science) 28 languages Add topic

