Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Convergent boundaries (subduction zones) Toggle Convergent boundaries (subduction zones) subsection 1.1 Back arc basins 1.2 Orogenic belts 2 Divergent boundaries 3 Transform boundaries 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents List of tectonic plate interactions 2 languages Gaeilge Norsk nynorsk Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Movements of Earth's lithosphere For broader coverage of this topic, see plate tectonics .

This article relies largely or entirely on a single source .

Relevant discussion may be found on the talk page . Please help improve this article by introducing  citations to additional sources .

Find sources: "List of tectonic plate interactions" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2016 ) Three types of plate boundary Convergent boundary Divergent boundary Transform boundary Tectonic plate interactions are classified into three basic types: [ 1 ] Convergent boundaries are areas where plates move toward each other and collide. These are also known as compressional or destructive boundaries.

Obduction zones occurs when the continental plate is pushed under the oceanic plate, but this is unusual as the relative densities of the tectonic plates favours subduction of the oceanic plate. This causes the oceanic plate to buckle and usually results in a new mid-ocean ridge forming and turning the obduction into subduction.

[ citation needed ] Orogenic belts occur where two continental plates collide and push upwards to form large mountain ranges . These are also known as collision boundaries .

Subduction zones occur where an oceanic plate meets a continental plate and is pushed underneath it. Subduction zones are marked by oceanic trenches .  The descending end of the oceanic plate melts and creates pressure in the mantle , causing volcanoes to form.

Back-arc basins can form from extension in the overriding plate, in response to the displacement of the subducting slab at some oceanic trenches . This paradoxically results in divergence which was only incorporated in the theory of plate tectonics in 1970, but still results in net destruction when summed over major plate boundaries.

[ 2 ] Divergent boundaries are areas where plates move away from each other, forming either mid-ocean ridges or rift valleys . These are also known as constructive boundaries.

Transform boundaries occur when two plates grind past each other with only limited convergent or divergent activity.

Convergent boundaries (subduction zones) [ edit ] Main article: Convergent boundary Further information: Subduction See also: Obduction The oceanic Nazca plate subducts beneath the continental South American plate at the Peru–Chile Trench .

Just north of the Nazca plate, the oceanic Cocos plate subducts under the Caribbean plate and forms the Middle America Trench .

Oceanic crust of the South American plate subducts under the Caribbean plate in the Lesser Antilles subduction zone .

The Cascadia subduction zone is where the oceanic Juan de Fuca , Gorda and Explorer Plates subduct under the continental North American plate.

The oceanic Pacific plate subducts under the North American plate (composed of both continental and oceanic sections) forming the Aleutian Trench .

The oceanic Pacific plate subducts beneath the continental Okhotsk microplate at the Japan Trench .

The oceanic Philippine Sea plate subducts beneath the Eurasian plate at the Ryukyu Trench .

The oceanic Pacific plate subducts under the oceanic Philippine Sea plate forming the Mariana Trench .

The oceanic Philippine Sea plate is subducting under the Philippine Mobile Belt forming the Philippine Trench and the East Luzon Trench .

The Eurasian plate is subducting under the Philippine Mobile Belt at the Manila Trench .

The Sunda plate is subducting under the Philippine Mobile Belt at the Negros Trench and the Cotobato Trench .

The oceanic Australian plate is subducted beneath the continental Sunda plate along the Sunda Trench .

The oceanic Solomon Sea plate is subducting beneath the South Bismarck plate and the New Hebrides plate driven by the mutual movements of the Australian and Pacific plates and local spreading centres.

The oceanic Pacific plate is subducting under the Tonga plate at the Tonga Trench driven by the mutual movements of the Australian and Pacific plates and local spreading centres.

The oceanic Pacific plate is subducting under the Kermadec plate at the Kermadec Trench north and east of New Zealand but the direction of subduction reverses south of the Alpine Fault where the Australian plate starts subducting under the Pacific plate at the Puysegur Trench .

The South American plate is subducting under the South Sandwich plate , forming the South Sandwich Trench .

The oceanic Australian plate is subducting underneath the New Hebrides plate forming the New Hebrides Trench .

Back arc basins [ edit ] Main article: Back arc basin These are often associated with minor plates and include: The Tyrrhenian Basin The Mariana Trough The North Fiji Basin The Lau Basin Orogenic belts [ edit ] Main article: Orogeny Further information: List of orogenies The most dramatic orogenic belt on the planet is the one between the African plate and the Indo-Australian plate on one side (to the south) and the Eurasian plate on the other side (to the north). This belt runs from New Zealand in the east-south-east, through Indonesia , along the Himalayas , through the Middle East up to the Mediterranean in the west-north-west. It is also called the "Tethyan" Zone, as it constitutes the zone along which the ancient Tethys Ocean was deformed and disappeared. The following mountain belts can be distinguished: The European Alps The Carpathians The Pyrenees The Apennines The Dinarides The North African mountain belts such as the Atlas Mountains The Karst Plateau of the Balkan Peninsula The Caucasus The Zagros The Himalayas The Indonesian Archipelago The Southern Alps of New Zealand The Andes orogenic belt is the latest of a series of orogenies along the western margin of the South American plate .

Divergent boundaries [ edit ] Main article: Divergent boundary Plate tectonics map The East African Rift (Great Rift Valley) in eastern Africa The Mid-Atlantic Ridge system separates the North American plate and the South American plate in the west from the African plate and the Eurasian plate in the east The Gakkel Ridge is a slow spreading ridge located in the Arctic Ocean The East Pacific Rise , extending from the South Pacific to the Gulf of California The Baikal Rift Zone in eastern Russia The Red Sea Rift The Aden Ridge along the southern shore of the Arabian Peninsula The Carlsberg Ridge in the eastern Indian Ocean The Woodlark Basin undergoing transition from continental rifting to sea floor spreading to the east of New Guinea The Gorda Ridge off the northwest coast of North America The Explorer Ridge off the northwest coast of North America The Juan de Fuca Ridge off the northwest coast of North America The Chile Rise off the southeast Pacific Transform boundaries [ edit ] Main article: Transform fault The San Andreas Fault in California is an active transform boundary. The Pacific plate (carrying the city of Los Angeles ) is moving northwards with respect to the North American plate.

The Queen Charlotte Fault on the Pacific Northwest coast of North America The Motagua Fault , which crosses through Guatemala , is a transform boundary between the southern edge of the North American plate and the northern edge of the Caribbean plate .

New Zealand's Alpine Fault is another active transform boundary.

The Dead Sea Transform (DST) fault which runs through the Jordan River Valley in the Middle East.

The Owen fracture zone along the southeastern boundary of the Arabian plate .

The East Anatolian and North Anatolian faults run across much of Turkey and cause large and deadly earthquakes such as the 1999 İzmit earthquake See also [ edit ] Triple junction – Meeting point of three tectonic plates References [ edit ] ^ "Tectonic Plates and Plate Boundaries" .

GNS Science . Retrieved 2014-09-12 .

^ Karig, Daniel E (1970). "Ridges and basins of the Tonga-Kermadec island arc system".

Journal of Geophysical Research .

75 (2): 239– 254.

Bibcode : 1970JGR....75..239K .

doi : 10.1029/JB075i002p00239 .

v t e Structural geology Underlying theory Deformation mechanism Lamé's stress ellipsoid Mohr–Coulomb theory Mohr's circle Overburden pressure Rock mechanics Strain Strain partitioning Stress Stress field Tension Measurement conventions Brunton compass Inclinometer Orthographic projection Rake Stereographic projection Strike and dip Large-scale tectonics Accretionary wedge Allochthon Autochthon Back-arc basin Continental collision Convergent boundary Décollement Divergent boundary Extensional tectonics Fault block Fenster Fold and thrust belt Fold mountains Foreland basin Graben Half-graben Horse Horst Horst and graben Intra-arc basin Inversion Klippe List of tectonic plate interactions Mélange Mountain formation Nappe Obduction Orogeny Passive margin Plate tectonics Pull-apart basin Rift valley Rift Saddle Strike-slip tectonics Structural basin Suture Syneclise Terrane Thick-skinned deformation Thin-skinned deformation Thrust tectonics Fracturing Columnar jointing Dike Exfoliation joint Fissure Joint Vein Faulting Asperity Cataclasite Cataclastic rock Detachment fault Disturbance Fault friction Fault mechanics Fault scarp Fault trace Thrust fault Transfer zone Transform fault Foliation and lineation Cleavage Compaction Crenulation Fissility Oblique foliation Pressure solution Rock microstructure Slickenside Stylolite Tectonic phase Tectonite Folding Anticline Chevron Detachment fold Dome Homocline Monocline Syncline Vergence Boudinage Competence Kinematic analysis 3D fold evolution Paleostress inversion Paleostress Section restoration Shear zone Mylonite Pure shear Shear Category NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐t88vs
Cached time: 20250814222147
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.360 seconds
Real time usage: 0.495 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1092/1000000
Revision size: 9286/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 38264/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1160/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 13/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 21471/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.258/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 19076788/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 0/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  424.854      1 -total
 22.79%   96.810      1 Template:Reflist
 21.30%   90.501      1 Template:Annotated_link
 17.95%   76.261      1 Template:Cite_web
 17.44%   74.096      1 Template:Structural_geology
 16.90%   71.816      1 Template:Navbox
 14.24%   60.499      1 Template:Short_description
 11.92%   50.633      1 Template:One_source
 10.60%   45.053      1 Template:Ambox
  7.15%   30.372      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:146184:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814222147 and revision id 1262165748. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=List_of_tectonic_plate_interactions&oldid=1262165748 " Category : Plate tectonics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from January 2016 All articles needing additional references All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from October 2017 This page was last edited on 9 December 2024, at 23:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents List of tectonic plate interactions 2 languages Add topic

