Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Contents 2 Reception 3 See also 4 Citations 5 References Toggle the table of contents The Only Possible Argument in Support of a Demonstration of the Existence of God 4 languages العربية Deutsch Español Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 1763 book by Immanuel Kant The Only Possible Argument in Support of a Demonstration of the Existence of God German edition published in Leipzig in 1911 Author Immanuel Kant Original title Der einzig mögliche Beweisgrund zu einer Demonstration des Daseins Gottes Language German Subject Religion Published 1763 Media type Print The Only Possible Argument in Support of a Demonstration of the Existence of God ( German : Der einzig mögliche Beweisgrund zu einer Demonstration des Daseins Gottes ) is a book by Immanuel Kant , published in 1763. It was published during the earlier period of Kant's philosophy, often referred to as the "pre-critical" period, during which he expressed little doubt about the possibility of rational metaphysics as conducted in the Leibnizian-Wolffian philosophical system which dominated German philosophy during that time. Kant later came to view this period of his philosophical career as a " dogmatic slumber".

Contents [ edit ] In The Only Possible Argument , Kant questions both the ontological argument for God (as proposed by Anselm of Canterbury ) and the argument from design . Kant argues that the internal possibility of all things presupposes some existence: [ 1 ] Accordingly, there must be something whose nonexistence would cancel all internal possibility whatsoever. This is a necessary thing.

[ 2 ] Kant then argues that this necessary thing must have all the characteristics commonly ascribed to God.  Therefore, God necessarily exists. This a priori step in Kant's argument is followed by a step a posteriori , in which he establishes the necessity of an absolutely necessary being. He argues that matter itself contains the principles which give rise to an ordered universe , and this leads us to the concept of God as a Supreme Being, which "embraces within itself everything which can be thought by man." "God includes all that is possible or real." [ 3 ] : 141 The Only Possible Argument anticipates his approach to divine being and the existence of God in the Critique of Pure Reason .

Reception [ edit ] "[T]he very substantial and favourable review published by Mendelssohn ... was responsible for establishing Kant's reputation in Germany as a major philosopher." [ 4 ] : page lx See also [ edit ] Transcendental argument for God Ontological argument Citations [ edit ] ^ Kant, Ak. 2:78 ^ Manfred Kuehn (2001).

Kant: A Biography . New York: Cambridge University Press. p. 140.

ISBN 0-521-49704-3 .

^ Manfred Kuehn (2001).

Kant: A Biography . New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-49704-3 .

^ David Walford, ed. (1992). "Introductions to the translations".

Theoretical Philosophy, 1755-1770 . The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant. Translated by Walford, David. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

xlix– lxxiv.

ISBN 0-521-53170-5 .

References [ edit ] Immanuel Kant (1799). "The Only Possible Argument for the Demonstration of the Existence of God". In Jakob Sigismund Beck (ed.).

Essays and Treatises on Moral, Political, Religious and Various Philosophical Subjects . Vol. 2. Translated by Jakob Sigismund Beck. London: William Richardson. pp.

227– 366.

The first English translation of this work, originally published in 1797, is in a two volume collection of translations of the works of Kant. This 1799 edition is available in a photocopy published in 1993 by Thoemmes Press of Bristol, England, ISBN 1-85506-179-1 Immanuel Kant (1979). Gordon Treash (ed.).

The One Possible Basis for a Demonstration of the Existence of God . Translated by Gordon Treash. New York: Abaris Books.

Immanuel Kant (1992). "The Only Possible Argument In Support of a Demonstration of the Existence of God". In David Walford (ed.).

Theoretical Philosophy, 1755-1770 . The Cambridge Edition of the Works of Immanuel Kant. Translated by David Walford. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. pp.

107–201 .

ISBN 0-521-53170-5 .

This article about a book related to Christianity is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=The_Only_Possible_Argument_in_Support_of_a_Demonstration_of_the_Existence_of_God&oldid=1268990535 " Categories : 1763 non-fiction books Books by Immanuel Kant German non-fiction books Arguments for the existence of God Metaphysics books Christian studies book stubs Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing German-language text All stub articles This page was last edited on 12 January 2025, at 14:02 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents The Only Possible Argument in Support of a Demonstration of the Existence of God 4 languages Add topic

