Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Roles 2 Variations 3 Pattern 4 Images 5 See also 6 References 7 External links Toggle the table of contents Fog nozzle 9 languages Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Català Deutsch 한국어 Lëtzebuergesch Română Русский Українська Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Type of firefighting hose This article includes a list of references , related reading , or external links , but its sources remain unclear because it lacks inline citations .

Please help improve this article by introducing more precise citations.

( March 2015 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A fog nozzle A fog nozzle is a firefighting hose spray nozzle that breaks its stream into small droplets . By doing so, its stream achieves a greater surface area , and thus a greater rate of heat absorption, which, when compared to that of a smoothbore nozzle, speeds its transformation into the steam that smothers the fire by displacing its oxygen . Specially designed fog nozzles (with no stream adjustment) have been certified by Underwriters Laboratories (UL) for use on Class B & C hazards.

[ citation needed ] Roles [ edit ] Fog nozzles play an important part in firefighting tactics due to their versatility. The wide variety of fog nozzle manufacturers allows them to accommodate different sizes of fire hose —most often attack hand line—and streams and are capable in both fire protection and attack. With regard to flow rate, it is imperative to be sure that each fog nozzle be able to handle the flow rate of its water supply because the master stream devices to which they are sometimes attached can expel up to 2,000 US gallons (7.6 m 3 ) per minute. Nevertheless, as with almost all fog nozzles, those on master stream devices come with either automatic or manual spray pattern and stream adjustments. However, one significant disadvantage of fog nozzles is that the ratio of surface area to volume of the compressed air foam (CAF) bubbles (which are formed by mixing air into a solution of water and foaming agents at the pump) exceeds that of fog nozzles' water droplets; therefore, the mechanical deflection in the nozzles themselves causes a loss of bubble structure, thereby reducing the CAF's ability to absorb heat. Despite this drawback, provided an appropriate nozzle pressure and water supply , fog nozzles are effective for any ground fire situation.

[ citation needed ] Variations [ edit ] Fog nozzles come in many in different styles and sizes, but there are three types which encompass most: automatic, selectable, and manually adjustable. All contain an adjustable baffle that, like a thumb placed on the end of a garden hose, keeps their flow rates and stream reaches steady and finely adjustable despite variations in water pressure at the nozzle. To adjust the flow, the first two types use a control handle, or 'bale' located at the top of nozzle; however, selectable nozzles have a fixed set of flow rates (e.g., 60, 95, and 125 GPM (gallons per min) [ clarification needed ] ) that are chosen with a ring or bezel located at their tips. Selectable nozzles will only flow if the pump pressure exceeds the nozzle pressure. Moreover, the selectable nozzle will change its nozzle pressure and reach as the handle is moved, but the automatic nozzle will automatically re-adjust its opening as the firefighter adjusts its flow rate in order to maintain the correct pressure.

[ citation needed ] Pattern [ edit ] All styles of fog nozzles have a spray pattern adjustment. These nozzles can produce three different types of streams; the straight stream for long reach, the narrow-angle cone for advancing an attack line into a structure or fire room, and the wide-angle cone for protection and ventilation.

[ citation needed ] Images [ edit ] Automatic 1½″ fog nozzle Manually adjustable 1½″ fog nozzle Manually adjustable 2½″ fog nozzle Automatic master stream fog nozzle Automatic 2½″ fog nozzle See also [ edit ] Impulse Fire Extinguishing System Spray characteristics Spray nozzle References [ edit ] Fundamentals of Fire Fighting Skills . Sunbury: Jones and Bartlett Publishers, Inc. 2004.

Hall, Richard; Barbara Adams (1998).

Essentials of Fire Fighting (6th ed.). Stillwater, OK: Fire Protection Publications, Oklahoma State University.

ISBN 9780879391461 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Fog nozzle at Wikimedia Commons v t e Firefighting General By place Antarctica Belgium Finland France Germany Japan South Korea United Kingdom United States History Personnel and organization Battalion chief Chief fire officer Fire captain Fire chief Station officer Retained firefighter Fire marshal Fire police Firefighter assist and search team Handcrew Special operations firefighter Volunteer fire department Women in firefighting Fire department ranks by country Facilities Drill tower Fire department list Fire lookout tower Fire station Hose tower Apparatus Airport crash tender Fire command vehicle Fire engine Fire motorcycle Fireboat Firefighting apparatus Hazardous materials apparatus Light and air unit Quint Rescue vehicle Water tender Equipment Bunker gear Escape chair Fire blanket Fire brigade keys Fire bucket Fire extinguisher Fire hose Fire hydrant Fire proximity suit Fire retardant Fire shelter Fireman's pole Fireman's switch Flame retardant Fog nozzle Halligan bar Hard suction hose Hazmat suit Heat detector Hose bridge Hydraulic rescue tool ("Jaws of life") Kelly tool Nomex New York roof hook PASS device The pig Portable water tank Rotary saw Secure information box Self-contained breathing apparatus Siren Smoke detector Thermal imaging camera Terminology Backdraft Barn fire Chimney fire Dead man zone Deluge gun Door breaching Draft False alarm Fire classification Fire control Fire safety Fire triangle Fireman's carry Firewall Flash fire Flashover Gaseous fire suppression Multiple-alarm fire Rollover Stop, drop and roll Structure fire Two-in, two-out Ventilation Miscellaneous Candidate Physical Ability Test Fire camp Fire engine red Fire photography Fire protection engineering International Firefighters' Day International organizations International Fire Marshals Association International Association of Fire Chiefs International Association of Fire Fighters List of films Muster Saint Florian World Firefighters Games World Police and Fire Games Wildfires General Wildfire emergency management Wildfire suppression Equipment and tactics Aerial firefighting Controlled burn Driptorch Fire flapper Fire hose Fire lookout tower Fire rake Fire retardant Fire retardant gel Fire trail Firebreak Firefighting apparatus Firefighting foam Helicopter bucket Hose pack McLeod Modular Airborne FireFighting System Pulaski Wildfire suppression equipment and personnel Wildland fire engine Wildland water tender Personnel Fire lookout Handcrew Helitack Hotshot crew Smokejumper Wildland fire module By location Ancient Rome Australia United States History California Washington Lists Glossary of wildfire terms List of wildfires See also Fire Fire protection Category Commons Glossary Index Outline Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Fog_nozzle&oldid=1259128142 " Categories : Firefighting equipment Nozzles Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles lacking in-text citations from March 2015 All articles lacking in-text citations All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from June 2023 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from March 2015 Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 23 November 2024, at 14:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Fog nozzle 9 languages Add topic

