Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Philosophy Toggle Philosophy subsection 2.1 Relativism 2.2 Agnosticism 2.3 Spectrum of topics 3 See also 4 Notes 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Protagoras 70 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه বাংলা Български བོད་ཡིག Bosanski Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Gàidhlig Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Íslenska Italiano עברית ქართული Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски مصرى مازِرونی Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Piemontèis Polski Português Română Русский سرائیکی Scots Shqip Simple English Slovenčina Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 文言 Winaray 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pre-Socratic Greek philosopher (c.490–c.420 BC) For other uses, see Protagoras (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Pythagoras .

Protagoras Protagoras by Jusepe de Ribera , 1637 Born c.

490 BC Abdera Died c.

420 BC (aged c. 70) Philosophical work Era Pre-Socratic philosophy Region Western philosophy School Sophism Main interests Language , semantics , relativism , rhetoric , agnosticism , ethics Protagoras ( / p r oʊ ˈ t æ ɡ ər ə s , - æ s / proh- TAG -ər-əs, -⁠ass ; Greek : Πρωταγόρας ; c.

490 BC – c.

420 BC ) [ 1 ] was a pre-Socratic Greek philosopher and rhetorical theorist. He is numbered as one of the sophists by Plato . In his dialogue Protagoras , Plato credits him with inventing the role of the professional sophist.

Protagoras is also believed to have created a major controversy during ancient times through his statement that "Of all things the measure is Man, of the things that are, that they are, and of the things that are not, that they are not" which was usually rendered simply as "Man is the measure of all things," interpreted (possibly wrongly, since he disagreed [ clarification needed ] ) by Plato to mean that there is no objective truth ; Protagoras seems to have meant that each person's own personal history, experiences and expectations, developed over their lifetime, determine their judgments, opinions, and statements regarding "truth" (which is the title of the book in which Protagoras made this statement). When a person makes a judgment about a certain thing—good or bad or beautiful or unjust—that person will differ from other people's judgments because their experience has been different.

[ 2 ] This concept of individual relativity was intended to be provocative; naturally, it was criticized by Plato and other philosophers, contrasting with both popular opinion and other philosophical doctrine that reality and its truth must have an objective grounding . However, it was part of Protagoras' point that the statement is somewhat counterintuitive. He argued that this concept—believing that others' opinions about the world are valid and must be respected, even if our own experience of truth is different—is necessary for a community to base itself and its decisions on open, democratic debate.

[ 3 ] Biography [ edit ] Protagoras was born in Abdera, Thrace , opposite the island of Thasos , around 490 BC.

[ 1 ] [ 4 ] According to Aulus Gellius , he originally made his living as a porter , but one day he was seen by the philosopher Democritus carrying a load of small pieces of wood he had tied with a short cord. Democritus realized that Protagoras had tied the load together with such perfect geometric accuracy that he must be a mathematical prodigy . Democritus promptly took him into his own household and taught him philosophy .

[ 5 ] Protagoras became well known in Athens and even became a friend of Pericles .

[ 6 ] The dates of his life are not recorded but extrapolated from writings that have survived the ages. In Protagoras Plato wrote that, before a gathering of Socrates , Prodicus , and Hippias , Protagoras stated that he was old enough to be the father of any of them. This suggests a birth date of not later than 490 BC. In the Meno he is said to have died at approximately the age of 70, after 40 years as a practising Sophist.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] His death, then, may be presumed to have occurred circa 420 BC, but is not known for certain, since assumptions about it are based on an apparently fake story about his trial for asebeia (impiety) in Athens.

[ 9 ] Plutarch wrote that Pericles and Protagoras spent a whole day discussing an interesting point of legal responsibility , that probably involved a more philosophical question of causation : [ 10 ] "In an athletic contest, a man had been accidentally hit and killed with a javelin. Was his death to be attributed to the javelin, to the man who threw it, or to the authorities responsible for the conduct of the games?" [ 11 ] Philosophy [ edit ] Democritus and Protagoras by Salvator Rosa ; it is said that Protagoras was educated on philosophy by Democritus, but this is likely apocryphal.

Even though he was mentored by Democritus, Protagoras did not share his enthusiasm for the pursuit of mathematics . "For perceptible lines are not the kind of things the geometer talks about, since no perceptible thing is straight or curved in that way, nor is a circle tangent to a ruler at a point, but the way Protagoras used to say in refuting the geometers" (Aristotle, Metaphysics 997b34-998a4). Protagoras was skeptical about the application of theoretical mathematics to the natural world ; he did not believe they were really worth studying at all.  According to Philodemus, Protagoras said that "The subject matter is unknowable and the terminology distasteful".  Nonetheless, mathematics was considered to be by some a very viable form of art , and Protagoras says on the arts , "art ( tekhnê ) without practice and practice without art are nothing" (Stobaeus, Selections 3.29.80).

Protagoras taught subjects related to virtue and political life. He especially was involved in the question of whether virtue could be taught, a commonplace issue of fifth century BC Greece, that has been related to modern readers through Plato's dialogue. Rather than educators who offered specific, practical training in rhetoric or public speaking, Protagoras attempted to formulate a reasoned understanding, on a very general level, of a wide range of human phenomena, including language and education. In Plato's Protagoras , he claims to teach "the proper management of one's own affairs, how best to run one's household, and the management of public affairs, how to make the most effective contribution to the affairs of the city by word and action".

[ 12 ] He also seems to have had an interest in "orthoepeia"—the correct use of words—although this topic is more strongly associated with his fellow sophist Prodicus . In his eponymous Platonic dialogue, Protagoras interprets a poem by Simonides, focusing on the use of words, their literal meaning, and the author's original intent. This type of education would have been useful for the interpretation of laws and other written documents in the Athenian courts.

[ 13 ] Diogenes Laërtius reports that Protagoras devised a taxonomy of speech acts, such as assertion, question, answer, command, etc.

Aristotle also says that Protagoras worked on the classification and proper use of grammatical gender.

[ 14 ] [ 15 ] The titles of his books, such as Technique of Eristics ( Technē Eristikōn , literally "Practice of Wranglings"— wrestling used as a metaphor for intellectual debate), prove that Protagoras also was a teacher of rhetoric and argumentation. Diogenes Laërtius states that he was one of the first to take part in rhetorical contests in the Olympic games .

[ 14 ] Eusebius quoting Aristocles of Messene says that Protagoras was a member of a line of philosophy that began with Xenophanes and culminated in Pyrrhonism .

[ 16 ] Relativism [ edit ] Part of a series on Rhetoric History Ancient Greece Asianism Atticism Attic orators Calliope Sophists Ancient India Ancient Rome The age of Cicero Second Sophistic Middle Ages Byzantine rhetoric Trivium Renaissance Studia humanitatis Modern period Concepts Captatio benevolentiae Chironomia Decorum Delectare Docere Device Eloquence Eloquentia perfecta Eunoia Enthymeme Facilitas Fallacy Informal Figure of speech Scheme Trope Five canons Inventio Dispositio Elocutio Memoria Pronuntiatio Hypsos Imitatio Kairos Method of loci Modes Operations Persuasion Ethos Pathos Logos Situation Style Grand Sotto voce Topos Genres Apologetics Debate Declamation Controversia Deliberative Demagogy Dialectic Socratic method Dissoi logoi Elocution Epideictic Encomium Panegyric Eulogy Farewell speech Forensic Funeral oration Homiletics‎ Sermon Invitational Lecture Public Lightning talk Maiden speech Oratory Polemic Diatribe Eristic Philippic Progymnasmata Suasoria Propaganda Spin Resignation speech Stump speech War-mongering Criticism Cluster Dramatic Pentadic Frame Genre Ideological Metaphoric Mimesis Narrative Neo-Aristotelian Rhetoricians Aeschines Aelius Aristides Antiphon Aristotle Aspasia Augustine Bakhtin Booth Brueggemann Burke Cicero de Man Demosthenes Derrida Dio Chrysostom Erasmus Gorgias Hobbes Hypereides Isocrates Lucian Lysias McLuhan Ong Perelman Pizan Protagoras Quintilian Ramus Richards Seneca the Elder Smith Toulmin Vico Weaver Works Gorgias (380 BC) Phaedrus (c. 370 BC) Rhetoric (c. 350 BC) Rhetoric to Alexander (c. 350 BC) De Sophisticis Elenchis (c. 350 BC) Topics (c. 350 BC) De Inventione (84 BC) Rhetorica ad Herennium (80 BC) De Oratore (55 BC) A Dialogue Concerning Oratorical Partitions (c. 50 BC) De Optimo Genere Oratorum (46 BC) Orator (46 BC) On the Sublime (c. 50) Institutio Oratoria (95) Panegyrici Latini (100–400) Dialogus de oratoribus (102) De doctrina Christiana (426) De vulgari eloquentia (1305) Copia: Foundations of the Abundant Style (1521) Language as Symbolic Action (1966) A General Rhetoric (1970) Subfields Argumentation Cognitive Contrastive Constitutive Digital Feminist Native American New Health and medicine Pedagogy Procedural Science Technology Therapy Visual Composition Related Ars dictaminis Communication studies Composition studies Doxa Glossary of rhetorical terms Glossophobia List of feminist rhetoricians List of speeches Oral skills Orator Pistis Public rhetoric Rhetoric of social intervention model Rhetrickery Rogerian argument Seduction Speechwriting Talking point TED Terministic screen Toulmin model Wooden iron v t e Protagoras also said that on any matter, there are two arguments ( logoi ) opposed to one another. Consequently, he may have been the author of Dissoi logoi , an ancient Sophistic text on such opposing arguments.

[ 17 ] According to Aristotle , Protagoras was criticized for having claimed "to make the weaker argument stronger".

[ 18 ] [ 14 ] Protagoras is credited with the philosophy of relativism , which he discussed in his lost work, Truth (also known as Refutations ).

[ 13 ] [ 19 ] Although knowledge of Protagoras' position is limited, his relativism is inferred from one of his most famous statements: "Man is the measure of all things: of the things that are, that they are, of the things that are not, that they are not." [ 20 ] [ 21 ] Protagoras appears to have meant that each individual is the measure of how things are perceived by that individual. Therefore, things are, or are not, true according to how the individual perceives them. For example, Person X may believe that the weather is cold, whereas Person Y may believe that the weather is hot. According to the philosophy of Protagoras, there is no absolute evaluation of the nature of a temperature because the evaluation will be relative to who is perceiving it. Therefore, to Person X, the weather is cold, whereas to Person Y, the weather is hot. This philosophy implies that there are no absolute "truths". The truth, according to Protagoras, is relative, and differs according to each individual.

[ 13 ] Plato ascribes relativism to Protagoras and uses his character Socrates as a foil for his own commitment to objective and transcendent realities and values. Plato ascribes to Protagoras an early form of what John Wild categorized as phenomenalism .

[ 22 ] That being an assertion that something that is, or appears for a single individual, is true or real for that individual. However, as described in Plato's Theaetetus , Protagoras's views allow that some views may result from an ill body or mind. He stressed that although all views may appear equally true, and perhaps, should be equally respected, they certainly are not of equal gravity. One view may be useful and advantageous to the person who has it, while the perception of another may prove harmful. Hence, Protagoras believed that the sophist was there to teach the student how to discriminate between them, i.e., to teach virtue .

Both Plato and Aristotle argue against some of Protagoras's claims regarding relativity; however, they argue that the concept provides Protagoras with too convenient an exemption from his own theory and that relativism is true for him yet false for those who do not believe it. They claim that by asserting that truth is relative, Protagoras then could say that whatever further theory he proposed must be true.

[ 23 ] Agnosticism [ edit ] Protagoras was a proponent of either agnosticism or, as Tim Whitmarsh claims, atheism , on the grounds that since he held that if something is not able to be known it does not exist.

[ 24 ] Reportedly, in Protagoras's lost work, On the Gods , he wrote: "Concerning the gods, I have no means of knowing whether they exist or not, nor of what sort they may be, because of the obscurity of the subject, and the brevity of human life." [ 25 ] [ 26 ] [ 27 ] According to Diogenes Laërtius , the outspoken, agnostic position taken by Protagoras aroused anger, causing the Athenians to expel him from the city, and all copies of his book were collected and burned in the marketplace. The deliberate destruction of his works is also mentioned by Cicero .

[ 28 ] The classicist John Burnet doubts this account, however, as both Diogenes Laërtius and Cicero wrote hundreds of years later and as no such persecution of Protagoras is mentioned by contemporaries who make extensive references to this philosopher.

[ 29 ] Burnet notes that even if some copies of the Protagoras books were burned, enough of them survived to be known and discussed in the following century.

Spectrum of topics [ edit ] Nonetheless, very few fragments from Protagoras have survived, although he is known to have written several different works: Antilogiae and Truth . The latter is cited by Plato, and was known alternatively as, The Throws (a wrestling term referring to the attempt to floor an opponent). It began with the "Man is the measure" (ἄνθρωπος μέτρον) pronouncement. According to Diogenes Laërtius other books by Protagoras include: On the Gods , Art of Eristics , Imperative , On Ambition , On Incorrect Human Actions , On Those in Hades , On Sciences , On Virtues , On the Original State of Things and Trial over a Fee .

[ 14 ] See also [ edit ] Anthropocentrism Paradox of the Court Notes [ edit ] ^ a b Guthrie, p. 262–263.

^ Jaap Mansfeld, article on "Protagoras," p. 44-46, in Heft 44 (1981; Steiner: Wiesbaden) of the journal Hermes, ed. B. Kerferd, The Sophists and Their Legacy: Proceedings of the Fourth International Colloquium on Ancient Philosophy. Held in Cooperation with Projektgruppe Altertumswissenschaften Der Thyssen Stiftung at Bad Homburg, 29th August - 1st September 1979.

ISBN 9783515034272 ^ Bonazzi, Mauro, "Protagoras", The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2020 Edition), Edward N. Zalta (ed.), URL = < https://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2020/entries/protagoras/ >.

^ Silvermintz, Daniel (2016).

Protagoras . Bloomsbury Publishing Plc.

ISBN 9781472510921 .

^ Aulus Gellius, Noctes Atticae 5.3.

^ O'Sullivan, Neil. (1995) "Pericles and Protagoras".

Greece & Rome , Vol. 42 (1): 15–23 ^ Plato, Meno , 91e ^ Silvermintz, Daniel (2016).

Protagoras . Bloomsbury Publishing Plc.

ISBN 9781472510921 .

^ Filonik, Jakub (2013).

"Athenian impiety trials: a reappraisal" .

Dike .

16 (16): 36– 39.

doi : 10.13130/1128-8221/4290 .

^ Guthrie, p. 263.

^ Plutarch, Life of Pericles ^ Plato, Protagoras , (319a).

^ a b c Poster, Carol (2005) [2002].

"Protagoras" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 22 October 2013 .

^ a b c d "The Sophists (Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy)" .

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Retrieved 2012-05-01 .

^ Aristotle 1407b Greek from Tufts U., with decipherment tools , English and Greek from U. Chicago both in the Perseus Digital Library. The page is from Rhetoric, Book III, Chapter 5.

^ Eusebius , Praeparatio Evangelica Chapter XVII.

^ Gera, D.L. Two Thought Experiments in the Dissoi Logoi .

The American Journal of Philology 121(1): 24.

^ ton hēttō logon kreittō poiein ^ Mattey, G.J.

"Protagoras on Truth" . Retrieved 22 October 2013 .

^ Bostock, D (1988).

Plato's Theaetetus . Oxford.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ This quotation is restated in Plato's Theaetetus at 152a .

Sextus Empiricus gives a direct quotation in Adv. math.

7.60: πάντων χρημάτων μέτρον ἐστὶν ἄνθρωπος, τῶν μὲν ὄντων ὡς ἔστιν, τῶν δὲ οὐκ ὄντων ὡς οὐκ ἔστιν.

Man is the traditional translation for the Greek word anthrōpos ( human being, person ), representing a general statement about human beings.

^ John Wild , " On the Nature and Aims of Phenomenology ," Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 3 (1942), p. 88: "Phenomenalism is as old as Protagoras." ^ Lee, Mi-Kyoung (2005).

Epistemology after Protagoras: Responses to relativism in Plato, Aristotle . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 0-19-926222-5 .

^ Tim Whitmarsh , Battling the Gods , Alfred A. Knopf, 2015, pp. 88–89.

^ περἰ μἐν θεῶν οὐκ ἔχω εἰδέναι, οὔθ᾽ ὡς εἰσὶν οὔθ᾽ ὡς οὐκ εἰσιν οὔθ ὁποῖoί τινες ἰδέαν· πολλὰ γὰρ τὰ κωλύοντά με εἰδέναι, ἥ τε ἀδηλότης καὶ βραχὺς ὤν ὁ βίος ἀνθρώπου.

^ DK 80B4.

^ The Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy - Protagoras ( c.

490 BCE – c.

420 BCE ) , Accessed: October 6, 2008. "While the pious might wish to look to the gods to provide absolute moral guidance in the relativistic universe of the Sophistic Enlightenment, that certainty also was cast into doubt by philosophic and sophistic thinkers, who pointed out the absurdity and immorality of the conventional epic accounts of the gods. Protagoras' prose treatise about the gods began "Concerning the gods, I have no means of knowing whether they exist or not or of what sort they may be. Many things prevent knowledge including the obscurity of the subject and the brevity of human life".

^ Cicero, De Natura Deorum , 1.23.6.

^ John Burnet, "Greek Philosophy: From Thales to Plato", 1914.

References [ edit ] Guthrie, W. K. C.

, The Sophists . New York: Cambridge University Press (May 27, 1977).

ISBN 0-521-09666-9 .

Lee, Mi-Kyoung (2005).

Epistemology after Protagoras: responses to relativism in Plato, Aristotle, and Democritus .

ISBN 978-0-19-926222-9 . Retrieved September 22, 2016 .

van Ophuijsen, J.M., van Raalte, M., Stork, P., Protagoras of Abdera: The Man, His Measure . Brill, 2013.

ISBN 978-90-04-25120-5 (hardback); ISBN 978-90-04-25124-3 (e-book) Bartlett, R., "Sophistry and Political Philosophy: Protagoras' Challenge to Socrates". Univ. of Chicago, 2016.

ISBN 978-0-226-39428-2 (hardback) External links [ edit ] Quotations related to Protagoras at Wikiquote Laërtius, Diogenes .

"Others: Protagoras" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 2:9. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library.

"Protagoras" .

Encyclopædia Britannica (11th ed.). 1911.

Mauro Bonazzi.

"Protagoras" . In Zalta, Edward N.

(ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

Poster, Carol.

"Protagoras" .

Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy .

v t e Sophists of the 5th century BC Antiphon Callicles Critias Damon Dionysodorus Euthydemus Gorgias Hippias Lycophron Prodicus Protagoras Thrasymachus v t e Ancient Greek schools of philosophy Proto-philosophy Epimenides Pherecydes Seven Sages Thales Solon Pittacus Bias Periander Cleobulus Chilon Pre-Socratic ( list ) Ionian Milesian Thales Anaximander Anaximenes Heraclitean Heraclitus Cratylus Diogenes Italian Pythagorean Pythagoras Hippasus Philolaus Archytas Lamiskos Alcmaeon Brontinus Theano Damo Calliphon Hermotimus Metrodorus of Cos Arignote Myia Eurytus more...

Skeptic Xenophanes Xeniades Eleatic Parmenides Zeno Melissus Hippo Pluralist Ionian Anaxagoras Archelaus Metrodorus of Lampsacus Italian Empedocles Acron Pausanias Atomist Leucippus Democritus Sophist Ionian Protagoras Prodicus Hippias Thrasymachus Damon more...

Italian Gorgias Callicles Lycophron Dionysodorus Euthydemus more...

Classical Socrates ( students ) Xenophon Cynic Antisthenes Diogenes Crates Menippus more...

Cyrenaic Aristippus Aristippus the Younger Theodorus the Atheist Hegesias of Cyrene Anniceris more...

Eretrian Phaedo of Elis Menedemus Asclepiades of Phlius Megarian Euclid of Megara Ichthyas Thrasymachus of Corinth Eubulides Stilpo Nicarete Pasicles Bryson Dialecticians Clinomachus Apollonius Cronus Euphantus Dionysius Diodorus Cronus Philo Alexinus Panthoides Platonic Plato Speusippus Xenocrates more...

Peripatetic Aristotle ( Aristotelianism ) Theophrastus Strato of Lampsacus Lyco of Troas Alexander of Aphrodisias more...

Hellenistic Pyrrhonist Pyrrho Timon of Phlius Aenesidemus Agrippa the Skeptic Sextus Empiricus more...

Stoic Zeno of Citium Cleanthes Chrysippus Panaetius Posidonius Seneca Lucius Annaeus Cornutus Musonius Rufus Epictetus Arrian Marcus Aurelius more...

Epicurean Epicurus Metrodorus Zeno of Sidon Philodemus Lucretius Diogenes of Oenoanda more...

Academic Skeptic Arcesilaus Carneades Philo of Larissa Cicero more...

Middle Platonic Antiochus Eudorus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Plutarch Gaius Apuleius Alcinous Galen more...

Neopythagorean Nigidius Figulus Apollonius of Tyana Moderatus of Gades Nicomachus Numenius of Apamea more...

Neoplatonist Ammonius Saccas Plotinus students Origen Porphyry Iamblichus Julian Plutarch of Athens Syrianus Proclus Ammonius Hermiae Damascius Simplicius more...

Second Sophistic Nicetes of Smyrna Dio Chrysostom Favorinus Lucian Philostratus more...

v t e Ancient Greece Timeline History Geography Periods Cycladic civilization Minoan civilization Mycenaean Greece Greek Dark Ages Archaic Greece Classical Greece Hellenistic Greece Roman Greece Geography Aegean Sea Aeolis Crete Cyrenaica Cyprus Doris Epirus Hellespont Ionia Ionian Sea Macedonia Magna Graecia Peloponnesus Pontus Taurica Ancient Greek colonies City states Politics Military City states Argos Athens Byzantion Chalcis Corinth Ephesus Miletus Pergamon Eretria Kerkyra Larissa Megalopolis Thebes Megara Rhodes Samos Sparta Lissus (Crete) Kingdoms Bithynia Cappadocia Epirus Greco-Bactrian Kingdom Indo-Greek Kingdom Macedonia Pergamon Pontus Ptolemaic Kingdom Seleucid Empire Federations / Confederations Doric Hexapolis ( c.

1100 – c.

560 BC ) Italiote League ( c.

800 –389 BC) Ionian League (c. 650–404 BC) Peloponnesian League ( c.

550 –366 BC) Amphictyonic League ( c.

595 –279 BC) Acarnanian League (c. 500–31 BC) Hellenic League (499–449 BC) Delian League (478–404 BC) Chalcidian League (430–348 BC) Boeotian League (c. 424–c. 395 BC) Aetolian League (c. 400–188 BC) Second Athenian League (378–355 BC) Thessalian League (374–196 BC) Arcadian League (370–c. 230 BC) Epirote League (370–168 BC) League of Corinth (338–322 BC) Euboean League (c. 300 BC–c. 300 AD) Achaean League (280–146 BC) Politics Boule Free city Koinon Proxeny Stasis Tagus Tyrant Athenian Agora Areopagus Ecclesia Graphe paranomon Heliaia Ostracism Spartan Ekklesia Ephor Gerousia Macedon Synedrion Koinon Military Wars Athenian military Scythian archers Antigonid Macedonian army Army of Macedon Ballista Cretan archers Hellenistic armies Hippeis Hoplite Hetairoi Macedonian phalanx Military of Mycenaean Greece Phalanx Peltast Pezhetairos Sarissa Sacred Band of Thebes Sciritae Seleucid army Spartan army Strategos Toxotai Xiphos Xyston People List of ancient Greeks Rulers Kings of Argos Archons of Athens Kings of Athens Kings of Commagene Diadochi Kings of Macedonia Kings of Paionia Attalid kings of Pergamon Kings of Pontus Ptolemaic dynasty Seleucid dynasty Kings of Sparta Tyrants of Syracuse Artists & scholars Astronomers Geographers Historians Mathematicians Philosophers Playwrights Poets Seven Sages Writers Philosophers Anaxagoras Anaximander Anaximenes Antisthenes Aristotle Democritus Diogenes of Sinope Empedocles Epicurus Gorgias Heraclitus Hypatia Leucippus Parmenides Plato Protagoras Pythagoras Socrates Thales Zeno Authors Aeschylus Aesop Alcaeus Archilochus Aristophanes Bacchylides Euripides Herodotus Hesiod Hipponax Homer Ibycus Lucian Menander Mimnermus Panyassis Philocles Pindar Plutarch Polybius Sappho Simonides Sophocles Stesichorus Theognis Thucydides Timocreon Tyrtaeus Xenophon Others Athenian statesmen Lawgivers Olympic victors Tyrants By culture Ancient Greek tribes Thracian Greeks Ancient Macedonians Society Culture Society Agriculture Calendar Clothing Coinage Cuisine Economy Education Emporium Euergetism Festivals Folklore Homosexuality Law Olympic Games Pederasty Philosophy Prostitution Religion Slavery Warfare Wedding customs Wine Arts and science Architecture Greek Revival architecture Astronomy Literature Mathematics Medicine Music Musical system Pottery Sculpture Technology Theatre Religion Funeral and burial practices Mythology Deities Temple Twelve Olympians Underworld Sacred places Eleusis Delphi Delos Dion Dodona Mount Olympus Olympia Structures Athenian Treasury Lion Gate Long Walls Philippeion Theatre of Dionysus Tunnel of Eupalinos Temples Aphaea Artemis Athena Nike Erechtheion Hephaestus Hera, Olympia Parthenon Samothrace Zeus, Olympia Language Proto-Greek Mycenaean Homeric Dialects Aeolic Arcadocypriot Attic Doric Epirote Ionic Locrian Macedonian Pamphylian Koine Writing Linear A Linear B Cypriot syllabary Greek alphabet Greek numerals Attic numerals Greek colonisation Magna Graecia Mainland Italy Alision Brentesion Caulonia Chone Croton Cumae Elea Heraclea Lucania Hipponion Hydrus Krimisa Laüs Locri Medma Metauros Metapontion Neápolis Pandosia (Lucania) Poseidonia Pixous Rhegion Scylletium Siris Sybaris Sybaris on the Traeis Taras Terina Thurii Sicily Akragas Akrai Akrillai Apollonia Calacte Casmenae Catana Gela Helorus Henna Heraclea Minoa Himera Hybla Gereatis Hybla Heraea Kamarina Leontinoi Megara Hyblaea Messana Naxos Segesta Selinous Syracuse Tauromenion Thermae Tyndaris Aeolian Islands Didyme Euonymos Ereikousa Hycesia Lipara/Meligounis Phoenicusa Strongyle Therassía Cyrenaica Balagrae Barca Berenice Cyrene ( Apollonia ) Ptolemais Iberian Peninsula Akra Leuke Alonis Emporion Helike Hemeroscopion Kalathousa Kypsela Mainake Menestheus's Limin Illicitanus Limin/Portus Illicitanus Rhode Salauris Zacynthos Illyria Aspalathos Apollonia Aulon Epidamnos Epidauros Issa Melaina Korkyra Nymphaion Orikon Pharos Tragurion Thronion Black Sea basin North coast Akra Borysthenes Charax Chersonesus Dioscurias Gorgippia Hermonassa Kalos Limen Kepoi Kerkinitis Kimmerikon Myrmekion Nikonion Nymphaion Olbia Pantikapaion Phanagoria Pityus Tanais Theodosia Tyras Tyritake South coast Abonoteichos Amisos Anchialos Apollonia Athina Bathus Dionysopolis Cotyora Cytorus Eupatoria Heraclea Kerasous Mesambria Odessos Oinòe Phasis Polemonion Rhizos Salmydessus Sesamus Sinope Thèrmae Tium Trapezous Tripolis Zaliche Lists Cities in Epirus People Place names Stoae Temples Theatres Category Portal Outline Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Netherlands Norway Croatia Chile Greece Argentina Sweden Poland Vatican Israel Catalonia People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Protagoras&oldid=1299092598 " Categories : 490s BC births 420s BC deaths 5th-century BC Greek philosophers Abderites Ancient Greek epistemologists Ancient Greek ethicists Ancient Greek rhetoricians Philosophy writers Sophists Rhetoric theorists Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with hCards Articles containing Greek-language text Wikipedia articles needing clarification from June 2025 Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Articles with Internet Encyclopedia of Philosophy links This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 14:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Protagoras 70 languages Add topic

