Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Aims and scope 2 Transportation modes Toggle Transportation modes subsection 2.1 Road transportation 2.2 Maritime transportation 2.3 Rail Transportation 3 Challenges for transportation 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Transport geography 31 languages العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa हिन्दी Hrvatski עברית ქართული Қазақша Magyar 日本語 Polski Português Русский සිංහල Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Spatial interaction in Dhaka Part of a series on Geography Portal Outline History of geography Graeco-Roman Chinese Islamic Age of Discovery History of cartography Historical geography Environmental determinism Regional geography Quantitative revolution Critical geography Human geography Fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical geography Fields Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Geology Geomorphology Glaciology Hydrology / Hydrography Landscape ecology Limnology Pedology Quaternary science Technical geography Fields Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated geography Fields Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Methods Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote Sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Philosophy of geography Behavioral Critical Feminist Marxist Non-representational theory Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Societies Index Geographers v t e Transport geography or transportation geography is a branch of geography that investigates the movement and connections between people, goods and information on the Earth's surface .

Aims and scope [ edit ] Transportation geography detects, describes, and explains the Earth's surface's transportation spaces regarding location, substance, form, function, and genesis. It also investigates the effects of transportation on land use, on the physical material patterns at the surface of the earth known as 'cover patterns', and on other spatial processes such as environmental alterations. Moreover, it contributes to transport , urban, and regional planning .

Transportation is fundamental to the economic activity of exchange. Therefore, transport geography and economic geography are largely interrelated. At the most basic level, humans move and thus interact with each other by walking, but transportation geography typically studies more complex regional or global systems of transportation that include multiple interconnected modes like public transit , personal cars , bicycles , freight railroads , the Internet , airplanes and more. Such systems are increasingly urban in character. Thus, transport and urban geography are closely intertwined.

Cities are very much shaped, indeed created, by the types of exchange and interaction facilitated by movement.

[ 1 ] Increasingly since the 19th century, transportation is seen as a way cities, countries or firms compete with each other in a variety of spaces and contexts.

[ 2 ] Transportation modes [ edit ] In terms of transport modes, the primary forms are air , road , water , and rail .  Each form has its own cost associated with 'speed of movement', which is affected by friction, place of origin, and destination.

Ships are generally used for moving large amounts of goods.  Maritime shipping is able to carry more around the world at a cheaper cost.   For moving people who prefer to minimize travel time and maximize comfort and convenience, road and air are the most common modes in use. A railroad is often used to transport goods in areas away from water. Railroads may also be the source of transportation for people as well.

" Transportation modes are an essential component of transport systems since they are the means by which mobility is supported. Geographers consider a wide range of modes that may be grouped into three broad categories based on the medium they exploit: land, water and air. Each mode has its own requirements and features, and is adapted to serve the specific demands of freight and passenger traffic. This gives rise to marked differences in the ways the modes are deployed and used in different parts of the world. Recently, there is a trend towards integrating the modes through intermodality and linking the modes ever more closely into production and distribution activities. At the same time; however, passenger and freight activity is becoming increasingly separated across most modes." [ 3 ] Beijing traffic jam.

Road transportation [ edit ] Main article: Road transport Road transportation networks are connected with movements on constructed roads; carrying people and goods from one place to another by means of lorries, cars, etc. Transportation may be further categorized by the vehicle used or the purpose for transport itself.

[ citation needed ] Maritime transportation [ edit ] Main article: Maritime transport Water transportation is the slowest form of transportation in the movement of goods and people.
Strategic chokepoints around the world have continued to play significant roles in maritime industry. Although the slowest form of transportation compared to road and rail transport, it is the most cost effective.

[ citation needed ] Rail Transportation [ edit ] Image provided by Michael Gäbler, artist work shared here to express rail transportation for this page.

Rail transportation is the movement of cargo, goods, and passengers on trains as a form of transportation. Transportation by rails has been established as one of the safest modes of transportation over time.

[ 4 ] Challenges for transportation [ edit ] Seattle traffic at I-5 and Yesler Way Transportation availability on existing streets, highways, and rail facilities no longer match the transportation demands created by subsequent population growth and new location patterns of economic activity. Besides an increase in population, another problem is vehicles overloading the network of highways and arterial streets. See Traffic congestion , Transportation network , and Population densities The well-being of poor people and people who live in developing areas can be threatened by systems of transportation that fail to connect them to jobs and medical assistance. For example, areas of Southern California have transportation systems that do not connect the homeless to these necessities.

[ 5 ] See Environmental Justice .

See also [ edit ] Concepts and Techniques in Modern Geography Economics Geographic mobility Human geography Journal of Transport Geography Street reclamation – Changing streets to focus on non-car use Tobler's first law of geography Tobler's second law of geography Transport References [ edit ] ^ Braudel, F. 1949 / 1995 The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World in the Age of Phillip II. Berkeley: University of California Press ^ Graham, S., Marvin, S. 2001. Splintering Urbanism: Networked Infrastructures, Technological Mobilities and the Urban Condition: Networked Infrastructures, Technological Mobilites and the Urban Condition. London: Routledge.

^ Dr.

Jean-Paul Rodrigue , Dept. of Economics & Geography, Hofstra University ^ "Train travel is incredibly safe" . Retrieved 2017-02-27 .

^ Laris, William G. Moseley, Eric Perramond, Holly M. Hapke, & Paul (2014).

An introduction to human-environment geography : local dynamics and global processes . Chichester (West Sussex): Wiley-Blackwell. p. 184.

ISBN 978-1-4051-8931-6 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) Links to related articles v t e Sub-fields of and approaches to human geography Sub-fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Approaches Critical Culture theory Feminist Marxist Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Non-representational theory Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Scientific method Time Universalism Category v t e Geography topics Glossary History Philosophy Geographers Index Outline Branches Human Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Atmospheric science / Meteorology Environmental science Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Geobiology Geophysics / Geodesy Earth system science Geomorphology / Geology Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Soil science ( Pedology / Edaphology ) Quaternary science Technical Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Time geography Techniques and tools Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Institutions, organizations, and societies Geography organizations Geographic data and information organizations Geographical societies Geoscience societies Education Geo-literacy Geographers on Film International Geography Olympiad National Council for Geographic Education Spatial citizenship Publication Geography books Geography journals Geographic magazines Category Portal Commons WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany United States Israel Other Encyclopedia of Modern Ukraine Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐6257v
Cached time: 20250814221933
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.387 seconds
Real time usage: 0.474 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1241/1000000
Revision size: 6969/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 109902/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 25353/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 55726/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.256/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 18226386/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  381.298      1 -total
 21.65%   82.566      1 Template:Geography_sidebar
 21.27%   81.099      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 20.95%   79.873      1 Template:Annotated_link
 19.72%   75.188      1 Template:Reflist
 14.97%   57.079      1 Template:Cite_web
 14.06%   53.606      1 Template:Navboxes
 12.48%   47.573      4 Template:Navbox
 11.74%   44.767      2 Template:Citation_needed
  9.90%   37.757      2 Template:Fix Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:9710174:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814221933 and revision id 1251502485. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Transport_geography&oldid=1251502485 " Categories : Transportation geography Human geography Economic geography Urban geography Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Pages using sidebar with the child parameter All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2017 This page was last edited on 16 October 2024, at 13:42 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Transport geography 31 languages Add topic

