Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types Toggle Types subsection 1.1 Marine ecosystems 1.1.1 Marine coastal ecosystem 1.1.2 Marine surface ecosystem 1.2 Freshwater ecosystems 1.2.1 Lentic ecosystem (lakes) 1.2.2 Lotic ecosystem (rivers) 1.2.3 Wetlands 2 Functions 3 Biotic characteristics (living components) Toggle Biotic characteristics (living components) subsection 3.1 Autotrophic organisms 3.2 Heterotrophic organisms 4 Abiotic characteristics (non-living components) 5 Threats 6 See also 7 References Toggle the table of contents Aquatic ecosystem 24 languages العربية Català Eesti Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia മലയാളം 日本語 Oromoo Português Română Русский සිංහල Slovenščina தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from Aquatic ecology ) Ecosystem in a body of water An aquatic ecosystem is an ecosystem found in and around a body of water , in contrast to land-based terrestrial ecosystems . Aquatic ecosystems contain communities of organisms — aquatic life —that are dependent on each other and on their environment. The two main types of aquatic ecosystems are marine ecosystems and freshwater ecosystems .

[ 1 ] Freshwater ecosystems may be lentic (slow moving water, including pools , ponds , and lakes ); lotic (faster moving water, for example streams and rivers ); and wetlands (areas where the soil is saturated or inundated for at least part of the time).

[ 2 ] Types [ edit ] Marine ecosystems [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Marine ecosystem .

[ edit ] Coral reefs form complex marine ecosystems with tremendous biodiversity .

Marine ecosystems are the largest of Earth 's aquatic ecosystems and exist in waters that have a high salt content. These systems contrast with freshwater ecosystems , which have a lower salt content. Marine waters cover more than 70% of the surface of the Earth and account for more than 97% of Earth's water supply [ 3 ] [ 4 ] and 90% of habitable space on Earth.

[ 5 ] Seawater has an average salinity of 35 parts per thousand of water. Actual salinity varies among different marine ecosystems.

[ 6 ] Marine ecosystems can be divided into many zones depending upon water depth and shoreline features. The oceanic zone is the vast open part of the ocean where animals such as      whales, sharks, and tuna live. The benthic zone consists of substrates below water where many invertebrates live. The intertidal zone is the area between high and low tides. Other near-shore (neritic) zones can include mudflats , seagrass meadows , mangroves , rocky intertidal systems , salt marshes , coral reefs , kelp forests and lagoons . In the deep water, hydrothermal vents may occur where chemosynthetic sulfur bacteria form the base of the food web.

Marine coastal ecosystem [ edit ] This paragraph is an excerpt from Marine coastal ecosystem .

[ edit ] A marine coastal ecosystem is a marine ecosystem which occurs where the land meets the ocean. Worldwide there is about 620,000 kilometres (390,000 mi) of coastline. Coastal habitats extend to the margins of the continental shelves , occupying about 7 percent of the ocean surface area. Marine coastal ecosystems include many very different types of marine habitats , each with their own characteristics and species composition. They are characterized by high levels of biodiversity and productivity.

Marine surface ecosystem [ edit ] This paragraph is an excerpt from Ocean surface ecosystem .

[ edit ] Organisms that live freely at the ocean surface, termed neuston , include keystone organisms like the golden seaweed Sargassum that makes up the Sargasso Sea , floating barnacles , marine snails , nudibranchs , and cnidarians . Many ecologically and economically important fish species live as or rely upon neuston. Species at the surface are not distributed uniformly; the ocean's surface provides habitat for unique neustonic communities and ecoregions found at only certain latitudes and only in specific ocean basins. But the surface is also on the front line of climate change and pollution. Life on the ocean's surface connects worlds. From shallow waters to the deep sea, the open ocean to rivers and lakes, numerous terrestrial and marine species depend on the surface ecosystem and the organisms found there.

[ 7 ] Freshwater ecosystems [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Freshwater ecosystem .

[ edit ] Freshwater ecosystem Freshwater ecosystems are a subset of Earth's aquatic ecosystems that include the biological communities inhabiting freshwater waterbodies such as lakes , ponds , rivers , streams , springs , bogs , and wetlands .

[ 8 ] They can be contrasted with marine ecosystems , which have a much higher salinity . Freshwater habitats can be classified by different factors, including temperature, light penetration, nutrients, and vegetation.

Lentic ecosystem (lakes) [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Lake ecosystem .

[ edit ] A lake ecosystem or lacustrine ecosystem includes biotic (living) plants , animals and micro-organisms , as well as abiotic (non-living) physical and chemical interactions.

[ 9 ] Lake ecosystems are a prime example of lentic ecosystems ( lentic refers to stationary or relatively still freshwater , from the Latin lentus , which means "sluggish"), which include ponds , lakes and wetlands , and much of this article applies to lentic ecosystems in general. Lentic ecosystems can be compared with lotic ecosystems , which involve flowing terrestrial waters such as rivers and streams . Together, these two ecosystems are examples of freshwater ecosystems .

Lotic ecosystem (rivers) [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from River ecosystem .

[ edit ] This stream operating together with its environment can be thought of as forming a river ecosystem.

River ecosystems are flowing waters that drain the landscape, and include the biotic (living) interactions amongst plants, animals and micro-organisms, as well as abiotic (nonliving) physical and chemical interactions of its many parts.

[ 10 ] [ 11 ] River ecosystems are part of larger watershed networks or catchments, where smaller headwater streams drain into mid-size streams, which progressively drain into larger river networks. The major zones in river ecosystems are determined by the river bed's gradient or by the velocity of the current. Faster moving turbulent water typically contains greater concentrations of dissolved oxygen , which supports greater biodiversity than the slow-moving water of pools. These distinctions form the basis for the division of rivers into upland and lowland rivers.

The food base of streams within riparian forests is mostly derived from the trees, but wider streams and those that lack a canopy derive the majority of their food base from algae .

Anadromous fish are also an important source of nutrients . Environmental threats to rivers include loss of water, dams, chemical pollution and introduced species .

[ 12 ] A dam produces negative effects that continue down the watershed. The most important negative effects are the reduction of spring flooding , which damages wetlands , and the retention of sediment , which leads to the loss of deltaic wetlands.

[ 13 ] Wetlands [ edit ] This section is an excerpt from Wetland .

[ edit ] A wetland is a distinct semi-aquatic ecosystem whose groundcovers are flooded or saturated in water , either permanently, for years or decades, or only seasonally.  Flooding results in oxygen -poor ( anoxic ) processes taking place, especially in the soils .

[ 14 ] Wetlands form a transitional zone between waterbodies and dry lands , and are different from other terrestrial or aquatic ecosystems due to their vegetation 's roots having adapted to oxygen-poor waterlogged soils .

[ 15 ] They are considered among the most biologically diverse of all ecosystems, serving as habitats to a wide range of aquatic and semi-aquatic plants and animals , with often improved water quality due to plant removal of excess nutrients such as nitrates and phosphorus .

Functions [ edit ] Further information: ecosystem Aquatic ecosystems perform many important environmental functions. For example, they recycle nutrients , purify water, attenuate floods, recharge ground water and provide habitats for wildlife.

[ 16 ] The biota of an aquatic ecosystem contribute to its self-purification, most notably microorganisms, phytoplankton, higher plants, invertebrates, fish, bacteria, protists, aquatic fungi, and more. These organisms are actively involved in multiple self-purification processes, including organic matter destruction and water filtration. It is crucial that aquatic ecosystems are reliably self-maintained, as they also provide habitats for species that reside in them.

[ 17 ] In addition to environmental functions, aquatic ecosystems are also used for human recreation, and are very important to the tourism industry, especially in coastal regions.

[ 18 ] They are also used for religious purposes, such as the worshipping of the Jordan River by Christians, and educational purposes, such as the usage of lakes for ecological study .

[ 19 ] Biotic characteristics (living components) [ edit ] The biotic characteristics are mainly determined by the organisms that occur.  For example, wetland plants may produce dense canopies that cover large areas of sediment or snails or geese may graze the vegetation leaving large mud flats. Aquatic environments have relatively low oxygen levels, forcing adaptation by the organisms found there.  For example, many wetland plants must produce aerenchyma to carry oxygen to roots. Other biotic characteristics are more subtle and difficult to measure, such as the relative importance of competition, mutualism or predation.

[ 20 ] There are a growing number of cases where predation by coastal herbivores including snails, geese and mammals appears to be a dominant biotic factor.

[ 21 ] Autotrophic organisms [ edit ] Autotrophic organisms are producers that generate organic compounds from inorganic material. Algae use solar energy to generate biomass from carbon dioxide and are possibly the most important autotrophic organisms in aquatic environments.

[ 22 ] The more shallow the water, the greater the biomass contribution from rooted and floating vascular plants. These two sources combine to produce the extraordinary production of estuaries and wetlands, as this autotrophic biomass is converted into fish, birds, amphibians and other aquatic species.

Chemosynthetic bacteria are found in benthic marine ecosystems. These organisms are able to feed on hydrogen sulfide in water that comes from volcanic vents . Great concentrations of animals that feed on these bacteria are found around volcanic vents. For example, there are giant tube worms ( Riftia pachyptila ) 1.5 m in length and clams ( Calyptogena magnifica ) 30 cm long.

[ 23 ] Heterotrophic organisms [ edit ] Heterotrophic organisms consume autotrophic organisms and use the organic compounds in their bodies as energy sources and as raw materials to create their own biomass .

[ 22 ] Euryhaline organisms are salt tolerant and can survive in marine ecosystems, while stenohaline or salt intolerant species can only live in freshwater environments.

[ 24 ] Abiotic characteristics (non-living components) [ edit ] An ecosystem is composed of biotic communities that are structured by biological interactions and abiotic environmental factors. Some of the important abiotic environmental factors of aquatic ecosystems include substrate type, water depth, nutrient levels, temperature, salinity, and flow.

[ 20 ] [ 16 ] It is often difficult to determine the relative importance of these factors without rather large experiments.  There may be complicated feedback loops.  For example, sediment may determine the presence of aquatic plants, but aquatic plants may also trap sediment, and add to the sediment through peat.

The amount of dissolved oxygen in a water body is frequently the key substance in determining the extent and kinds of organic life in the water body. Fish need dissolved oxygen to survive, although their tolerance to low oxygen varies among species; in extreme cases of low oxygen, some fish even resort to air gulping.

[ 25 ] Plants often have to produce aerenchyma , while the shape and size of leaves may also be altered.

[ 26 ] Conversely, oxygen is fatal to many kinds of anaerobic bacteria.

[ 22 ] Nutrient levels are important in controlling the abundance of many species of algae.

[ 27 ] The relative abundance of nitrogen and phosphorus can in effect determine which species of algae come to dominate.

[ 28 ] Algae are a very important source of food for aquatic life, but at the same time, if they become over-abundant, they can cause declines in fish when they decay.

[ 29 ] Similar over-abundance of algae in coastal environments such as the Gulf of Mexico produces, upon decay, a hypoxic region of water known as a dead zone .

[ 30 ] The salinity of the water body is also a determining factor in the kinds of species found in the water body. Organisms in marine ecosystems tolerate salinity, while many freshwater organisms are intolerant of salt. The degree of salinity in an estuary or delta is an important control upon the type of wetland (fresh, intermediate, or brackish), and the associated animal species.  Dams built upstream may reduce spring flooding, and reduce sediment accretion, and may therefore lead to saltwater intrusion in coastal wetlands.

[ 20 ] Freshwater used for irrigation purposes often absorbs levels of salt that are harmful to freshwater organisms.

[ 22 ] Threats [ edit ] Further information: Ecosystem § Human interactions with ecosystems , Freshwater ecosystem § Threats , Marine ecosystem § Threats , and Human impact on marine life The health of an aquatic ecosystem is degraded when the ecosystem's ability to absorb a stress has been exceeded. A stress on an aquatic ecosystem can be a result of physical, chemical or biological alterations to the environment. Physical alterations include changes in water temperature, water flow and light availability. Chemical alterations include changes in the loading rates of biostimulatory nutrients, oxygen-consuming materials, and toxins. Biological alterations include over-harvesting of commercial species and the introduction of exotic species. Human populations can impose excessive stresses on aquatic ecosystems.

[ 16 ] Climate change driven by anthropogenic activities can harm aquatic ecosystems by disrupting current distribution patterns of plants and animals. It has negatively impacted deep sea biodiversity, coastal fish diversity, crustaceans, coral reefs, and other biotic components of these ecosystems.

[ 31 ] Human-made aquatic ecosystems, such as ditches, aquaculture ponds, and irrigation channels, may also cause harm to naturally occurring ecosystems by trading off biodiversity with their intended purposes. For instance, ditches are primarily used for drainage, but their presence also negatively affects biodiversity.

[ 32 ] There are many examples of excessive stresses with negative consequences. The environmental history of the Great Lakes of North America illustrates this problem, particularly how multiple stresses, such as water pollution , over-harvesting and invasive species can combine.

[ 29 ] The Norfolk Broadlands in England illustrate similar decline with pollution and invasive species.

[ 33 ] Lake Pontchartrain along the Gulf of Mexico illustrates the negative effects of different stresses including levee construction, logging of swamps, invasive species and salt water intrusion .

[ 34 ] See also [ edit ] Aquatic plant – Plant that has adapted to living in an aquatic environment Hydrobiology – Science of life and life processes in water Hydrosphere – Total amount of water on a planet Limnology – Science of inland aquatic ecosystems Ocean Stephen Alfred Forbes – American naturalist - one of the founders of aquatic ecosystem science Stream metabolism References [ edit ] ^ Alexander, David E.; Fairbridge, Rhodes W., eds. (1999).

Encyclopedia of Environmental Science . Kluwer Academic Publishers, Springer . p. 27.

ISBN 0-412-74050-8 – via Internet Archive.

^ Vaccari, David A.; Strom, Peter F.; Alleman, James E. (2005).

Environmental Biology for Engineers and Scientists .

Wiley-Interscience .

ISBN 0-471-74178-7 .

[ page needed ] ^ "Oceanic Institute" .

www.oceanicinstitute.org . Archived from the original on 3 January 2019 . Retrieved 1 December 2018 .

^ "Ocean Habitats and Information" . 5 January 2017. Archived from the original on 1 April 2017 . Retrieved 1 December 2018 .

^ "Facts and figures on marine biodiversity | United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization" .

www.unesco.org . Retrieved 1 December 2018 .

^ United States Environmental Protection Agency (2 March 2006).

"Marine Ecosystems" . Archived from the original on 1 August 2012 . Retrieved 25 August 2006 .

^ Helm, Rebecca R. (28 April 2021).

"The mysterious ecosystem at the ocean's surface" .

PLOS Biology .

19 (4). Public Library of Science (PLoS): e3001046.

doi : 10.1371/journal.pbio.3001046 .

ISSN 1545-7885 .

PMC 8081451 .

PMID 33909611 .

Material was copied from this source, which is available under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License .

^ Wetzel, Robert G. (2001).

Limnology : lake and river ecosystems (3rd ed.). San Diego: Academic Press.

ISBN 978-0127447605 .

OCLC 46393244 .

^ Brown, A. L. (1987).

Freshwater Ecology . Heinimann Educational Books, London. p. 163.

ISBN 0435606220 .

^ Angelier, E.  2003.  Ecology of Streams and Rivers.  Science Publishers, Inc., Enfield. Pp. 215.

^ "Biology Concepts & Connections Sixth Edition", Campbell, Neil A. (2009), page 2, 3 and G-9. Retrieved 2010-06-14.

^ Alexander, David E. (1 May 1999).

Encyclopedia of Environmental Science .

Springer .

ISBN 0-412-74050-8 .

^ Keddy, Paul A. (2010).

Wetland Ecology. Principles and Conservation . Cambridge University Press. p. 497.

ISBN 978-0-521-51940-3 .

^ Keddy, P.A. (2010).

Wetland ecology: principles and conservation (2nd ed.). New York: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 978-0521519403 . Archived from the original on 17 March 2023 . Retrieved 3 June 2020 .

^ "Official page of the Ramsar Convention" . Retrieved 25 September 2011 .

^ a b c Loeb, Stanford L. (24 January 1994).

Biological Monitoring of Aquatic Systems .

CRC Press .

ISBN 0-87371-910-7 .

^ Ostroumov, S. A. (2005).

"On the Multifunctional Role of the Biota in the Self-Purification of Aquatic Ecosystems" .

Russian Journal of Ecology .

36 (6): 414– 420.

Bibcode : 2005RuJEc..36..414O .

doi : 10.1007/s11184-005-0095-x .

ISSN 1067-4136 .

S2CID 3172507 .

^ Daily, Gretchen C. (1 February 1997).

Nature's Services .

Island Press .

ISBN 1-55963-476-6 .

^ Rodrigues, João Manuel Garcia (2015), Chicharo, Luis; Müller, Felix; Fohrer, Nicola (eds.), "Cultural Services in Aquatic Ecosystems" , Ecosystem Services and River Basin Ecohydrology , Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands, pp.

35– 56, doi : 10.1007/978-94-017-9846-4_3 , ISBN 978-94-017-9846-4 , retrieved 18 February 2023 ^ a b c Keddy, Paul A. (2010).

Wetland Ecology. Principles and Conservation . Cambridge University Press. p. 497.

ISBN 978-0-521-51940-3 .

^ Silliman, B. R., Grosholz, E. D., and Bertness, M. D. (eds.) (2009). Human Impacts on Salt Marshes: A Global Perspective. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.

^ a b c d Manahan, Stanley E. (1 January 2005).

Environmental Chemistry .

CRC Press .

ISBN 1-56670-633-5 .

^ Chapman, J.L.; Reiss, M.J. (10 December 1998).

Ecology .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 0-521-58802-2 .

^ United States Environmental Protection Agency (2 March 2006).

"Marine Ecosystems" . Archived from the original on 1 August 2012 . Retrieved 25 August 2006 .

^ Graham, J. B. (1997). Air Breathing Fishes. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.

^ Sculthorpe, C. D. (1967). The Biology of Aquatic Vascular Plants. Reprinted 1985 Edward Arnold, by London.

^ Smith, V. H. (1982). The nitrogen and phosphorus dependence of algal biomass in lakes: an empirical and theoretical analysis. Limnology and Oceanography, 27, 1101–12.

^ Smith, V. H. (1983). Low nitrogen to phosphorus ratios favor dominance by bluegreen algae in lake phytoplankton. Science, 221, 669–71.

^ a b Vallentyne, J. R. (1974). The Algal Bowl: Lakes and Man, Miscellaneous Special Publication No. 22. Ottawa, ON: Department of the Environment, Fisheries and Marine Service.

^ Turner, R. E. and Rabelais, N. N. (2003). Linking landscape and water quality in the Mississippi River Basin for 200 years. BioScience, 53, 563–72.

^ Prakash, Sadguru (2021).

"Impact of Climate Change on Aquatic Ecosystem and ITS Biodiversity: An Overview" (PDF) .

International Journal of Biological Innovations .

03 (2).

doi : 10.46505/IJBI.2021.3210 .

S2CID 237639194 .

^ Koschorreck, Matthias; Downing, Andrea S.; Hejzlar, Josef; Marcé, Rafael; Laas, Alo; Arndt, Witold G.; Keller, Philipp S.; Smolders, Alfons J. P.; van Dijk, Gijs; Kosten, Sarian (1 February 2020).

"Hidden treasures: Human-made aquatic ecosystems harbour unexplored opportunities" .

Ambio .

49 (2): 531– 540.

Bibcode : 2020Ambio..49..531K .

doi : 10.1007/s13280-019-01199-6 .

ISSN 1654-7209 .

PMC 6965596 .

PMID 31140158 .

^ Moss, B. (1983). The Norfolk Broadland: experiments in the restoration of a complex wetland. Biological Reviews of the Cambridge Philosophical Society, 58, 521–561.

^ Keddy, P. A., Campbell, D., McFalls T., Shaffer, G., Moreau, R., Dranguet, C., and Heleniak, R. (2007). The wetlands of lakes Pontchartrain and Maurepas: past, present and future. Environmental Reviews, 15, 1–35.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Freshwater ecosystems .

v t e Aquatic ecosystems General components and freshwater ecosystems General Acoustic ecology Algal bloom Anoxic waters Aquatic adaptation Aquatic animal Insect Mammal Water bird Aquatic biomonitoring Aquatic plant Aquatic population dynamics Aquatic predation Aquatic respiration Aquatic science Aquatic toxicology Benthos Bioluminescence Biomass Cascade effect Colored dissolved organic matter Dead zone Ecohydrology Eutrophication Fisheries science Food chain Food web GIS and aquatic science Hydrobiology Hypoxia Macrobenthos Meiobenthos Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial loop Nekton Neuston Particle Pelagic zone Photic zone Phytoplankton Plankton Pleuston Productivity Ramsar Convention Sediment trap Semiaquatic Shoaling and schooling Siltation Spawn Stable isotope analysis in aquatic ecosystems Stream metabolism Substrate Thermal pollution Trophic level Underwater camouflage Water column Zooplankton Freshwater Freshwater biology Freshwater biome Freshwater environmental quality parameters Freshwater fish Hyporheic zone Limnology Lake ecosystem Lake stratification Macrophyte Pond Fish pond Rheotaxis River Ecosystem Stream bed Stream pool Trophic state index Upland and lowland Water garden Wetland Bog Brackish marsh Fen Freshwater marsh Freshwater swamp forest Ecoregions List of freshwater ecoregions (WWF) Africa and Madagascar Latin America and the Caribbean List of marine ecoregions Specific examples Everglades Maharashtra North Pacific Subtropical Gyre San Francisco Estuary Marine ecosystems ( components ) General Deep scattering layer Diel vertical migration f-ratio Iron fertilization Large marine ecosystem Marine biology Marine chemistry Marine food web Marine primary production Marine snow Ocean fertilization Oceanic physical-biological process Ocean turbidity Photophore Thorson's rule Upwelling Viral shunt Whale fall Marine life Census of Marine Life Deep-sea community Deep-water coral Marine fungi Marine invertebrates Marine larval ecology Seagrass Seashore wildlife Wild fisheries Microorganisms Marine bacteriophage Marine prokaryotes Marine protists Marine viruses Paradox of the plankton Vertebrates Marine mammal Marine reptile Saltwater fish Coastal fish Coral reef fish Deep-sea fish Demersal fish Pelagic fish Seabird Marine habitats Bay mud Marine coastal ecosystem Coastal biogeomorphology Cold seep Coral reef Davidson Seamount § Ecology Estuary Intertidal ecology Intertidal wetland Kelp forest Hydrothermal vent Lagoon Mangrove Marine biomes Mudflat Oyster reef Rocky shore Salt marsh Salt pannes and pools Seagrass meadow Sponge ground Sponge reef Tide pool Conservation Coral bleaching Ecological values of mangroves Fisheries and climate change HERMIONE Human impact on marine life Marine conservation activism Marine pollution Marine protected area Lakes portal Oceans portal Category v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Trophic components General Abiotic component Abiotic stress Behaviour Biogeochemical cycle Biomass Biotic component Biotic stress Carrying capacity Competition Ecosystem Ecosystem ecology Ecosystem model Green world hypothesis Keystone species List of feeding behaviours Metabolic theory of ecology Productivity Resource Restoration Producers Autotrophs Chemosynthesis Chemotrophs Foundation species Kinetotrophs Mixotrophs Myco-heterotrophy Mycotroph Organotrophs Photoheterotrophs Photosynthesis Photosynthetic efficiency Phototrophs Primary nutritional groups Primary production Consumers Apex predator Bacterivore Carnivores Chemoorganotroph Foraging Generalist and specialist species Intraguild predation Herbivores Heterotroph Heterotrophic nutrition Insectivore Mesopredators Mesopredator release hypothesis Omnivores Optimal foraging theory Planktivore Predation Prey switching Decomposers Chemoorganoheterotrophy Decomposition Detritivores Detritus Microorganisms Archaea Bacteriophage Lithoautotroph Lithotrophy Marine Microbial cooperation Microbial ecology Microbial food web Microbial intelligence Microbial loop Microbial mat Microbial metabolism Phage ecology Food webs Biomagnification Ecological efficiency Ecological pyramid Energy flow Food chain Trophic level Example webs Lakes Rivers Soil Tritrophic interactions in plant defense Marine food webs cold seeps hydrothermal vents intertidal kelp forests North Pacific Gyre San Francisco Estuary tide pool Processes Ascendency Bioaccumulation Cascade effect Climax community Competitive exclusion principle Consumer–resource interactions Copiotrophs Dominance Ecological network Ecological succession Energy quality Energy systems language f-ratio Feed conversion ratio Feeding frenzy Mesotrophic soil Nutrient cycle Oligotroph Paradox of the plankton Trophic cascade Trophic mutualism Trophic state index Defense, counter Animal coloration Anti-predator adaptations Camouflage Deimatic behaviour Herbivore adaptations to plant defense Mimicry Plant defense against herbivory Predator avoidance in schooling fish v t e Ecology : Modelling ecosystems : Other components Population ecology Abundance Allee effect Consumer-resource model Depensation Ecological yield Effective population size Intraspecific competition Logistic function Malthusian growth model Maximum sustainable yield Overpopulation Overexploitation Population cycle Population dynamics Population modeling Population size Predator–prey (Lotka–Volterra) equations Recruitment Small population size Stability Resilience Resistance Random generalized Lotka–Volterra model Species Biodiversity Density-dependent inhibition Ecological effects of biodiversity Ecological extinction Endemic species Flagship species Gradient analysis Indicator species Introduced species Invasive species / Native species Latitudinal gradients in species diversity Minimum viable population Neutral theory Occupancy–abundance relationship Population viability analysis Priority effect Rapoport's rule Relative abundance distribution Relative species abundance Species diversity Species homogeneity Species richness Species distribution Species–area curve Umbrella species Species interaction Antibiosis Biological interaction Commensalism Community ecology Ecological facilitation Interspecific competition Mutualism Parasitism Storage effect Symbiosis Spatial ecology Biogeography Cross-boundary subsidy Ecocline Ecotone Ecotype Disturbance Edge effects Foster's rule Habitat fragmentation Ideal free distribution Intermediate disturbance hypothesis Insular biogeography Land change modeling Landscape ecology Landscape epidemiology Landscape limnology Metapopulation Patch dynamics r / K selection theory Resource selection function Source–sink dynamics Niche Ecological trap Ecosystem engineer Environmental niche modelling Guild Habitat Marine Semiaquatic Terrestrial Limiting similarity Niche apportionment models Niche construction Niche differentiation Ontogenetic niche shift Other networks Assembly rules Bateman's principle Bioluminescence Ecological collapse Ecological debt Ecological deficit Ecological energetics Ecological indicator Ecological threshold Ecosystem diversity Emergence Extinction debt Kleiber's law Liebig's law of the minimum Marginal value theorem Thorson's rule Xerosere Other Allometry Alternative stable state Balance of nature Biological data visualization Ecological economics Ecological footprint Ecological forecasting Ecological humanities Ecological stoichiometry Ecopath Ecosystem based fisheries Endolith Evolutionary ecology Functional ecology Industrial ecology Macroecology Microecosystem Natural environment Regime shift Sexecology Systems ecology Urban ecology Theoretical ecology Outline of ecology v t e Groups of organisms in aquatic ecosystems Benthos Macrobenthos Meiobenthos Herpon Nekton Neuston Pechton / Pecton / Pekton Plankton Pleuston Plocon Seston Tripton v t e Wetlands Types and landforms Natural Backswamp Bayou Beach meadow Blackwater river Bofedales Bog Blanket bog Cataract bog Coastal bog Kermi bog Plateau bog Polygonal bog Raised bog String bog Upland bog Callows Carr Alder carr Ciénega Clearwater river Cypress dome Dambo Fen Fen-meadow Poor fen Rich fen Flark Flood-meadow Flooded grasslands and savannas Grass valley Guelta Hamun Igapó Ings Interdunal wetland Intertidal wetland Kettle Lagg Marsh Brackish marsh Freshwater marsh Inland salt marsh Salt marsh Tidal marsh High marsh Low marsh Mere Misse Moorland Mudflat Muskeg Oasis Pakihi Palsa Palustrine wetland Peatland, mire, and quagmire Pocosin Pond Pothole Reed bed Salt pannes and pools Slough Swamp Coniferous swamp Freshwater swamp forest Mangrove forest Myristica swamp Peat swamp forest Shrub swamp Wet meadow Várzea forest Vernal pool Whitewater river Yaéré Artificial Bog garden Constructed wetland Converted wetland Swale Water-meadow Life List of wetland plants List of fen plants Sphagnum Soil mechanics Acrotelm Histosol Peat Sapric or muck Tropical peat Hydric soil Marsh gas Ombrotrophic Processes Halosere Hydrosere Paludification Salt marsh dieback Classifications A Directory of Important Wetlands in Australia National Wetlands Inventory Ramsar Classification System for Wetland Type Conservation Clean Water Act Greenhouse gas emissions from wetlands Marsh organ Ramsar Convention Ramsar site List Salt marsh die-off Wetland indicator status Organizations Bangladesh Haor and Wetland Development Board Delta Waterfowl Foundation Ducks Unlimited Irish Peatland Conservation Council Meadowview Biological Research Station Society of Wetland Scientists Wetlands International Wildfowl & Wetlands Trust Related articles Aquatic ecosystem Bog body Bog butter Bog iron Bog-wood List of bogs Drainage basin Estuary Riparian zone River delta Telmatology Turbary Will-o'-the-wisp Wetlands portal Category v t e Ponds , pools, and puddles Ponds Ash pond Balancing lake Ballast pond Beel Cooling pond Detention pond Dew pond Evaporation pond Facultative lagoon Garden pond Ice pond Immersion pond Infiltration basin Kettle pond Log pond Melt pond Mill pond Polishing pond Raceway pond Retention pond Sag pond Salt evaporation pond Sediment pond Settling pond Solar pond Stepwell Stew pond Tailings Tarn Waste pond Waste stabilization pond Pools Anchialine pool Brine pool Infinity pool Natural pool Ocean pool Plunge pool Reflecting pool Spent fuel pool Stream pool Swimming pool Tide pool Vernal pool Puddles Bird bath Coffee ring effect Puddle Puddles on a surface Seep puddle Biome Beaver dam Duck pond Fish pond Goldfish pond Koi pond Ecosystems Aquatic ecosystem Freshwater ecosystem Lake ecosystem Related Aerated lagoon Bakki shower Big fish–little pond Body of water Constructed wetland Full pond Hydric soil Phytotelma Pond of Abundance Pond liner Ponding Puddle (M C Escher) Spring Swimming hole Water aeration Water garden Water Lilies (Monet) Well Authority control databases : National Germany Czech Republic NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐87fb5
Cached time: 20250814225212
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.079 seconds
Real time usage: 1.318 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4109/1000000
Revision size: 15295/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 210472/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 2327/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 19/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 152284/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.774/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15869963/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1110.004      1 -total
 32.33%  358.891      7 Template:Excerpt
 25.32%  281.018      1 Template:Reflist
 12.65%  140.455     12 Template:Cite_book
 11.99%  133.118      6 Template:Annotated_link
  9.94%  110.383      1 Template:Aquatic_ecosystem_topics
  9.62%  106.827      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
  6.07%   67.394      1 Template:Short_description
  4.14%   45.974      1 Template:Page_needed
  4.00%   44.376     10 Template:Navbox Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:1975073:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814225212 and revision id 1298994636. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Aquatic_ecosystem&oldid=1298994636 " Categories : Aquatic ecology Ecosystems Aquatic plants Fisheries science Systems ecology Water Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from November 2022 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2020 Articles with excerpts This page was last edited on 6 July 2025, at 00:21 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Aquatic ecosystem 24 languages Add topic

