Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 History 3 Geography 4 Administration 5 Media sector 6 Transport 7 Sports 8 Notable people 9 See also 10 References 11 Notes 12 Further reading 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Kensington 43 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca تۆرکجه Беларуская Български Català Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge 한국어 हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית کٲشُر Malagasy Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Scots Simple English Suomi Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 51°30′00″N 0°11′24″W ﻿ / ﻿ 51.500°N 0.190°W ﻿ / 51.500; -0.190 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia District within the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea in central London For other uses, see Kensington (disambiguation) .

Not to be confused with Kennington , a similarly named London locality about 10 km away.

Human settlement in England Kensington Kensington High Street Kensington Location within Greater London Population 64,681 [ 1 ] ( 2011 census ) OS grid reference TQ255795 London borough Kensington & Chelsea Ceremonial county Greater London Region London Country England Sovereign state United Kingdom Post town LONDON Postcode district W8, W14 Dialling code 020 Police Metropolitan Fire London Ambulance London UK Parliament Kensington and Bayswater London Assembly West Central List of places UK England London 51°30′00″N 0°11′24″W ﻿ / ﻿ 51.500°N 0.190°W ﻿ / 51.500; -0.190 Kensington is an area of London in the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea , around 2.9 miles (4.6 km) west of Central London .

[ a ] The district's commercial heart is Kensington High Street , running on an east–west axis. The north-east is taken up by Kensington Gardens , containing the Albert Memorial , the Serpentine Gallery and Speke 's monument.

South Kensington and Gloucester Road are home to Imperial College London , the Royal College of Music , the Royal Albert Hall , Natural History Museum , Victoria and Albert Museum , and Science Museum . The area is also home to many embassies and consulates.

Name [ edit ] The manor of Chenesitone is listed in the Domesday Book of 1086, [ 2 ] which in the Anglo-Saxon language means "Chenesi's ton " (homestead/settlement).  One early spelling is Kesyngton , as written in 1396.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] Kensington photographed by scientist Sir Norman Lockyer in 1909 from a helium balloon (This is a mirrored image of Kensington) The manor of Kensington, in the county of Middlesex , was one of several hundred granted by King William the Conqueror (1066–1089) to Geoffrey de Montbray (or Mowbray), Bishop of Coutances in Normandy, one of his inner circle of advisors and one of the wealthiest men in post- Conquest England . He granted the tenancy of Kensington to his follower Aubrey de Vere I , who was holding the manor from him as overlord in 1086, according to the Domesday Book . The bishop's heir, Robert de Mowbray , rebelled against King William II and his vast feudal barony was forfeited to the Crown.

Aubrey de Vere I thus became a tenant-in-chief , holding directly from the king after 1095, which increased his status in feudal England.

[ 4 ] He granted the church and an estate within the manor to Abingdon Abbey in Oxfordshire , at the deathbed request of his eldest son Geoffrey.

[ 5 ] As the de Veres became Earls of Oxford , their principal manor at Kensington came to be known as Earl's Court, as they were not resident in the manor, and their manorial business was not conducted in the great hall of a manor house but in a courthouse. In order to differentiate it, the new sub-manor granted to Abingdon Abbey became known as Abbot's Kensington and the church St Mary Abbots .

The original Kensington Barracks , built at Kensington Gate in the late 18th century, were demolished in 1858 and new barracks were built in Kensington Church Street.

[ 6 ] Geography [ edit ] A map showing the wards of Kensington Metropolitan Borough as they appeared in 1916 The focus of the area is Kensington High Street , a busy commercial centre with many shops, typically upmarket. The street was declared London's second best shopping street in February 2005 due to its wide range and number of shops.

[ 7 ] However, since October 2008 the street has faced competition from the Westfield shopping centre in nearby White City.

[ 8 ] Kensington's second group of commercial buildings is at South Kensington , where several streets of small to medium-sized shops and service businesses are situated close to South Kensington tube station . This is also the southern end of Exhibition Road , the thoroughfare which serves the area's museums and educational institutions.

The boundaries of Kensington are not well-defined; in particular, the southern part of Kensington has conflicting and complex borders with Chelsea (another ancient manor) whether electoral or postal definitions are used, and has similar architecture. To the west, a border is clearly defined by the line of the Counter Creek marked by the West London railway line . To the north, the only obvious border line is Holland Park Avenue, to the north of which is the district of Notting Hill (another ancient manor), usually classed as within "North Kensington".

Kensington Gardens in the summer In the north east is situated the large public Royal Park of Kensington Gardens (contiguous with its eastern neighbour, Hyde Park ). The other main green area in Kensington is Holland Park , on the north side of the eastern end of Kensington High Street. Many residential roads have small communal garden squares , for the exclusive use of the residents.

The sub districts of Kensington: South Kensington and Earl's Court also consist largely of private housing.

North Kensington and West Kensington are largely devoid of features to attract the visitor.

Map of central Kensington ( click to enlarge ) Kensington is, in general, an extremely affluent area, a trait that it shares with Chelsea, its neighbour to the south. The area has some of London's most expensive streets and garden squares, and at about the turn of the 21st century the Holland Park neighbourhood became particularly high-status. In early 2007 houses sold in Upper Phillimore Gardens, immediately east of Holland Park , for over £20 million.

Brompton is another definable area of Kensington.

The Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea forms part of the most densely populated local government district in the United Kingdom. This high density has come about through the subdivision of large mid-rise Georgian and Victorian terraced houses (generally of four to six floors) into flats. The less-affluent northern extremity of Kensington has high-rise residential buildings, while this type of building in the southern part is only represented by the Holiday Inn 's London Kensington Forum Hotel in Cromwell Road , a 27-storey building.

Notable attractions and institutions in Kensington include Kensington Palace in Kensington Gardens, the Royal Albert Hall opposite the Albert Memorial in Hyde Park, the Royal College of Music , the Natural History Museum , the Science Museum , the Victoria and Albert Museum , Heythrop College , Imperial College , the Royal College of Art , and Kensington and Chelsea College . The Olympia Exhibition Hall is just over the western border in West Kensington .

Administration [ edit ] Kensington Town Hall , completed in 1976 Kensington is administered within the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea, and lies within the Kensington parliamentary constituency.

Media sector [ edit ] The head office of newspaper group DMGT is located in Northcliffe House off Kensington High Street [ 9 ] in part of the large Barkers department store building. In addition to housing the offices for the DMGT newspapers Daily Mail , Mail on Sunday and Metro , Northcliffe House also accommodates the offices of the newspapers owned by Evgeny Lebedev : The Independent , The Independent on Sunday , and the Evening Standard .

[ 10 ] The i newspaper, sold to Johnston Press in 2016, [ 11 ] is still produced from offices in Northcliffe House. Most of these titles were for many decades produced and printed in Fleet Street in the City of London .

The building also houses Lebedev's TV channel London Live , with its news studio situated in part of the former department store, using St Mary Abbots church and Kensington Church Street as live backdrop.

Transport [ edit ] High Street Kensington tube station is served by the Circle and District lines .

Kensington is crossed east–west by three main roads, the most important of which is the A4 Cromwell Road which connects it to Central London on the east and to Hounslow and Heathrow Airport on the west. Parallel to the north is Kensington Road (of which Kensington High Street forms the eastern part), linking central London and Hammersmith and Hounslow to the area. To the south is Fulham Road, which connects South Kensington with Fulham to the south-west. North-south connections are not as well-developed and there is no obvious single north–south route through the area.

Kensington is well served by public transport . Most of Kensington is served by three stations in the Travelcard Zone 1 : High Street Kensington , Gloucester Road and South Kensington . All three are served by the Circle line which connects them to London's railway terminals. The District line also serves all three stations, albeit on different branches; it links the latter two to Westminster and the City . The Piccadilly line also links South Kensington and Gloucester Road to the West End in about 10 minutes, and in the other direction to Chiswick , Ealing , Hounslow and Heathrow Airport in around 20–40 minutes, depending on the area of choice. In addition Kensington (Olympia) in Travelcard Zone 2 serves the western part of Kensington, with District line trains to Earl's Court and High Street Kensington. Nearby West Kensington station takes its name from the former boundaries with Hammersmith and is not in the Borough.

A number of local bus services link Kensington into the surrounding districts, and key hubs are Kensington High Street and South Kensington station. These bus services were improved in frequency and spread from 2007 until 2010 when the western extension of the London congestion charge area existed (which required drivers of cars and vans during the charging hours Monday-Friday to pay a daily fee of £8).

In 2020 a temporary cycle lane on Kensington High Street caused a nationwide media stir.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] The temporary cycle lane was installed by the local council in September 2020 with £700,000 in funding from central government grants, but it was removed in December 2020.

[ 14 ] Sports [ edit ] Kensington has one football team, Kensington Borough F.C.

, which currently plays in the Combined Counties Football League .

Notable people [ edit ] George Cohen Daniel Day-Lewis Natasha Hausdorff Freddie Mercury Renée Asherson (1915–2014), actress [ 15 ] Shaun Bailey, Baron Bailey of Paddington (born 1971), politician and former journalist Jeremy Bamber (born 1961), convicted mass murderer Ivan Berlyn (1867–1934), film and stage actor Antonia Bird (1951–2013), film director [ 16 ] Howard Blake (born 1938), composer, conductor and pianist [ 17 ] Betty Boo (born 1970), singer and songwriter Frank Boys (1918–2003), first-class cricketer Les Champelovier (1933–2023), amateur footballer Lady Sarah Chatto (born 1964), member of the British royal family George Cohen (1939–2022), professional footballer Frank Cadogan Cowper (1877–1958), artist Daniel Day-Lewis (born 1957), Academy Award -winning actor Dido (born 1971), singer and songwriter Carmen Ejogo (born 1973), actress and singer Evangeline Florence (1867–1928), soprano Justine Frischmann (born 1969), musician Percival Gale (1865–1940), cricketer Michael Gove (born 1967), Scottish journalist and politician Carey Harrison (born 1944), novelist and dramatist Natasha Hausdorff (born 1989), barrister, international law commentator, and Israel advocate Mary Headlam (1873–1959), artist Tom Holland (born 1996), actor William Leach (1883–1969), first-class cricketer Rotha Lintorn-Orman (1895–1935), fascist activist [ 18 ] Montague MacLean (1870–1951), cricketer Freddie Mercury (1946–1991), frontman of the British rock band Queen Jimmy Page (born 1944), guitarist of the British rock band Led Zeppelin Una-Mary Parker (1930–2019), journalist and novelist Frank de Pass (1887–1914), officer in the British Indian Army, recipient of the Victoria Cross Reginald Popham (1892–1975), cricketer and footballer Sir John Richard Robinson , journalist and editor Christopher Stanger-Leathes (1881–1966), rugby union international Jason Vale (born 1969), lifestyle coach and author Frank Ward (1888–1952), first-class cricketer Frank Westerton (1866–1923), stage and silent-film actor Dennis Wise (born 1966), footballer and manager See also [ edit ] London portal Little Australia Earl's Court Kensington, Brooklyn Kensington, Philadelphia Kensington Roof Gardens Kensington, Saskatoon References [ edit ] ^ "Wards of Brompton, Courtfield, Campden, Earls Court, Holland, Queens Gate and Abingdon" . Archived from the original on 16 June 2017 . Retrieved 15 June 2017 .

^ "DocumentsOnline" .

www.nationalarchives.gov.uk .

^ "CP 40/541; year 1396" , Plea Rolls , Court of Common Pleas —  with county margination "midd". Kesyngton is the place where the trespass (taking animals) occurred (line 3) ^ Victoria County History of England , Middlesex, vol. 1, pp. 116–7 ^ Chronicon Monasterii de Abingdon , vol 2, pp. 55–6 ^ Kensington Barracks , London Picture Archive, archived from the original on 27 September 2016 , retrieved 25 September 2016 ^ "Best shopping street' in London" , BBC News , news.bbc.co.uk, 23 February 2005 , retrieved 23 October 2008 ^ Core Strategy:Putting the neighbourhood first , Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea , retrieved 14 May 2010 ^ " Contacts Archived 9 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine ." Daily Mail and General Trust . Retrieved 6 September 2011. "Northcliffe House 2 Derry Street London W8 5TT Great Britain" ^ Ponsford, Dominic. " Sharing with Mail 'will safeguard future of Independent' ." Press Gazette . 28 November 2008. Retrieved 6 September 2011. "Under a deal signed today, the Independent titles will share back office functions with the Daily Mail, Mail on Sunday, Metro and Evening Standard at Northcliffe House in Kensington." ^ Mackie, Gareth, "Johnston Press agrees £24m deal for i newspaper" , The Scotsman , Johnston Press , retrieved 14 December 2017 ^ "Council to 'revisit' removal of cycle lane on Kensington High Street" .

The Independent . 9 January 2021 . Retrieved 28 May 2021 .

^ "Residents back 'ripped out' cycle lanes, Khan says – The Transport Network" .

www.transport-network.co.uk . Retrieved 28 May 2021 .

^ "Council to scrap £700k Kensington High Street bike lane – The Transport Network" .

www.transport-network.co.uk . Retrieved 28 May 2021 .

^ "Renée Asherson: Actress renowned for her grace and beauty," Independent .

^ "Bird, Antonia Jane," Oxford Dictionary of National Biography .

^ "Meet the Artist – Howard Blake, composer," The Cross-Eyed Pianist .

^ Gottlieb, Julie V. (2008) [2005]. "Orman, Rotha Beryl Lintorn Lintorn".

Oxford Dictionary of National Biography (online ed.). Oxford University Press.

doi : 10.1093/ref:odnb/93720 .

(Subscription, Wikipedia Library access or UK public library membership required.) Notes [ edit ] ^ Measured from Kensington High St, outside the Underground station to Charing Cross , following tradition.

Further reading [ edit ] "Kensington" , Chambers's Encyclopaedia , London, 1901 {{ citation }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) "Kensington" , Encyclopædia Britannica , vol. 15 (11th ed.), 1911, pp.

733– 744 Lysons, Daniel (1792), "Kensington" , Environs of London , vol. 3: County of Middlesex, London: T. Cadell Mitton, Geraldine Edith (1903), Besant, Sir Walter (ed.), The Fascination of London: The Kensington District , London: Adam and Charles Black "London Kensington Market (destroyed)" , geocities.com , 11 February 2008, archived from the original on 11 February 2008 Mary Cathcart Borer , Two Villages: The Story of Chelsea and Kensington . London: W. H. Allen, 1973.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Kensington at Wikimedia Commons The dictionary definition of kensington at Wiktionary v t e Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea Districts Albertopolis Bayswater Belgravia Brompton Chelsea Chelsea Harbour (including Imperial Wharf ) Earl's Court Holland Park Kensal Town Kensington Knightsbridge Ladbroke Grove North Kensington Notting Hill South Kensington West Brompton West Kensington World's End Attractions Cadogan Hall Chelsea Flower Show Chelsea Physic Garden Design Museum Harrods Holland House Kensal Green Cemetery Kensington Palace Leighton House Museum National Army Museum Natural History Museum Olympia Royal Albert Hall Saatchi Gallery Science Museum Victoria and Albert Museum Theatres Chelsea Theatre Coronet Theatre Finborough Theatre Royal Court Theatre Royal Parks Brompton Cemetery Kensington Gardens Street markets Portobello Road Market Constituencies Chelsea and Fulham Kensington and Bayswater Squares and streets Alexander Square Brompton Road Brompton Square Cadogan Square Carlyle Square Cromwell Road Edwardes Square Flood Street Hans Place Kensington High Street Kensington Square King's Road Ladbroke Square Lowndes Square (save E. side) Notting Hill Gate Onslow Square Pavilion Road Pembroke Square Powis Square Redcliffe Square Sloane Square Sloane Street Thurloe Square Victoria Road Bridges Albert Bridge Battersea Bridge Chelsea Bridge Tube and railway stations Earl's Court Gloucester Road High Street Kensington Holland Park Kensington (Olympia) Knightsbridge Imperial Wharf Ladbroke Grove Latimer Road Notting Hill Gate Sloane Square South Kensington West Brompton Westbourne Park Pubs Anglesea Arms Bunch of Grapes Chelsea Potter The Churchill Arms Coleherne The Cross Keys Drayton Arms Elgin Fox and Pheasant Gloucester Arms The Goat The Greyhound The Hansom Cab Hollywood Arms The King's Head and Eight Bells The Phene Prince of Teck Scarsdale Tavern The Shuckburgh Arms Windsor Castle The World's End Zetland Arms former Goat in Boots Markham Arms Other topics Blue plaques Council Listed buildings Grade I Grade II* Parks and open spaces Parks Police People Public art Schools Grenfell Tower and related fire Category Commons Places adjacent to Kensington White City Notting Hill , North Kensington Across Kensington Gardens: Bayswater , Paddington Across Earls Court (within Kensington): Hammersmith Kensington Knightsbridge / Brompton Belgravia , Westminster West Brompton Chelsea Chelsea Authority control databases International VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Geographic MusicBrainz area Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Kensington&oldid=1303402939 " Categories : Kensington Areas of London Districts of the Royal Borough of Kensington and Chelsea Places formerly in Middlesex Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Webarchive template wayback links Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the ODNB Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use British English from December 2012 Use dmy dates from August 2021 Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with OS grid coordinates Coordinates on Wikidata CS1 maint: location missing publisher Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference CS1: long volume value Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 July 2025, at 20:04 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Kensington 43 languages Add topic

