Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Components Toggle Components subsection 1.1 Acceptance rate and admissions 1.2 Research institutes and centers 1.3 Associated organizations 2 Publications 3 List of presidents 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents National Defense University (United States) 22 languages العربية Беларуская Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu مصرى Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål پښتو Português Svenska Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 38°51′58″N 77°00′54″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.866°N 77.015°W ﻿ / 38.866; -77.015 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from National Defense University Press ) Military university in Washington, D.C.

For other national defense universities, see National Defence University (disambiguation) .

This article relies excessively on references to primary sources .

Please improve this article by adding secondary or tertiary sources .

Find sources: "National Defense University" United States – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( August 2018 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) National Defense University Arms of the National Defense University Type Federal staff college Established 1976 Parent institution U.S. Department of Defense Academic affiliation CUWMA President VADM Peter Garvin Provost James Lepse Location Fort Lesley J. McNair , Washington, D.C.

, United States 38°51′58″N 77°00′54″W ﻿ / ﻿ 38.866°N 77.015°W ﻿ / 38.866; -77.015 Website www .ndu .edu The National Defense University ( NDU ) is an institution of higher education in Fort Lesley McNair , Washington, D.C.

, United States. It is funded by the United States Department of Defense aimed at facilitating high-level education, training, and professional development of national security leaders. As a chairman's Controlled Activity, NDU operates under the guidance of the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff (CJCS), with Vice Admiral Peter Garvin, USN, as president. It is located near the White House and the US Congress.

Components [ edit ] National War College, taken 2014 The National Defense University includes: Colleges and schools [ 1 ] Joint Advanced Warfighting School (JAWS) College of International Security Affairs Dwight D. Eisenhower School for National Security and Resource Strategy (The Eisenhower School), formerly the Industrial College of the Armed Forces College of Information and Cyberspace (formerly Information Resources Management College or "iCollege") Joint Forces Staff College National War College Programs CAPSTONE KEYSTONE PINNACLE Research centers Institute for National Strategic Studies Center for Strategic Research Center for the Study of Chinese Military Affairs Center for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction NDU Press Center for Applied Strategic Learning NDU Libraries Acceptance rate and admissions [ edit ] Acceptance rate 65% Admissions requirements Yes, based on entrance examinations and students' past academic records and grades Academic calendar Semesters Enrollment 1,500 Full-time employees 75 Student:staff ratio 20:1 Read More Archived October 19, 2022, at the Wayback Machine Research institutes and centers [ edit ] Institute for National Strategic Studies; Center for Strategic Studies; Center for the Study of Military Affairs of China; Center for the Study of Weapons of Mass Destruction; National Defense University Press (the university publishes 1,300 periodicals)[5]; Center for applied strategic training; Center for joint and strategic logistics.

The university has a scientific and reference library, the resources of which are open to all students and teachers.

Read More Archived October 19, 2022, at the Wayback Machine Associated organizations [ edit ] NDU Board of Visitors National Defense University Foundation United States Institute of Peace Consortium of Universities of the Washington Metropolitan Area Publications [ edit ] The NDU Press supports education, research, and outreach as the university's cross-component, professional military, and academic publishing house. Publications include the journals Joint Force Quarterly (JFQ) and PRISM: The Journal of Complex Operations , books such as Strategic Assessment 2020, case studies, policy briefs, and strategic monographs.

[ 2 ] List of presidents [ edit ] No.

President Term Service branch Portrait Name Took office Left office Term length 1 Vice Admiral Marmaduke G. Bayne (1920–2005) 1976 1977 ~ 1 year, 0 days U.S. Navy 2 Lieutenant General Robert G. Gard Jr.

(born 1928) 1977 July 1981 ~ 4 years, 181 days U.S. Army 3 Lieutenant General John S. Pustay (born 1931) July 1981 October 1983 ~ 2 years, 92 days U.S. Air Force 4 Lieutenant General Richard D. Lawrence (1930–2016) October 1983 September 1986 ~ 2 years, 335 days U.S. Army 5 Lieutenant General Bradley C. Hosmer (born 1937) September 1986 September 1989 ~ 3 years, 0 days U.S. Air Force 6 Vice Admiral John A. Baldwin Jr.

(born 1933) September 1989 August 14, 1992 ~ 2 years, 348 days U.S. Navy 7 Lieutenant General Paul G. Cerjan (1938–2011) August 14, 1992 [ 3 ] September 1994 ~ 2 years, 18 days U.S. Army 8 Lieutenant General Ervin J. Rokke (born 1939) September 1994 1997 ~ 2 years, 122 days U.S. Air Force 9 Lieutenant General Richard A. Chilcoat (1938–2010) 1997 2000 ~ 3 years, 0 days U.S. Army 10 Vice Admiral Paul G. Gaffney II (born 1946) July 7, 2000 July 2, 2003 2 years, 360 days U.S. Navy 11 Lieutenant General Michael M. Dunn (born 1950) July 2, 2003 July 14, 2006 3 years, 12 days U.S. Air Force 12 Lieutenant General Frances C. Wilson (born 1948) July 14, 2006 July 10, 2009 2 years, 361 days U.S. Marine Corps 13 Vice Admiral Ann E. Rondeau (born 1951) July 10, 2009 [ 4 ] April 13, 2012 [ 5 ] 2 years, 278 days U.S. Navy - Nancy McEldowney (born 1958) Acting April 13, 2012 July 11, 2012 89 days Senior Executive Service 14 Major General Gregg F. Martin (born 1956) July 11, 2012 [ 6 ] July 21, 2014 2 years, 10 days U.S. Army - Wanda Nesbitt (born 1956) Acting July 21, 2014 November 18, 2014 120 days Senior Executive Service 15 Major General Frederick M. Padilla (born 1959) November 18, 2014 [ 7 ] September 25, 2017 2 years, 311 days U.S. Marine Corps 16 Vice Admiral Fritz Roegge (born 1958) September 25, 2017 February 3, 2021 3 years, 131 days U.S. Navy 17 Lieutenant General Michael T. Plehn (born 1964) February 3, 2021 October 11, 2024 4 years, 195 days U.S. Air Force 18 Vice Admiral Peter Garvin (born c.

1967 ) October 11, 2024 Incumbent 310 days U.S. Navy See also [ edit ] United States portal Politics portal Air University (United States Air Force) , Alabama Defense Acquisition University , Fort Belvoir, Virginia National Intelligence University , Washington, D.C.

NATO Defense College , Rome, Italy Naval Postgraduate School , Monterey, California Naval War College , Newport, Rhode Island U.S. Army War College , Carlisle, Pennsylvania References [ edit ] ^ "Colleges" .

National Defense University . Retrieved August 3, 2018 .

^ "PRISM: The Journal of Complex Operations" .

National Defense University . Retrieved October 20, 2023 .

^ The United States Institute of Peace Journal, Volume 5, Issue 5 . October 1992. p. 5.

^ "Chairman Welcomes New National Defense University President" .

dvidshub.net . July 10, 2009.

^ Dresbach, Jim (April 13, 2012).

"Grateful Rondeau retires at NDU" .

U.S. Army . Retrieved May 23, 2021 .

^ "Martin Becomes 14th National Defense University President" .

National Defense University .

^ "Padilla Becomes 15th President of National Defense University" .

National Defense University .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to National Defense University .

Official website National Defense University publications on the Internet Archive US National Defense University Location, History, Structure, and acceptance rate Archived October 19, 2022, at the Wayback Machine v t e National Defense University Schools Eisenhower School Industrial College of the Armed Forces College of Information & Cyberspace formerly Information Resources Management College Joint Forces Staff College National War College Facilities Roosevelt Hall v t e United States federal service academies and military colleges Service academies Military Academy (West Point) Naval Academy (Annapolis) Air Force Academy (Colorado Springs) Coast Guard Academy (New London) Merchant Marine Academy (Kings Point) Colleges Air Force Institute of Technology Community College of the Air Force Defense Language Institute Naval Postgraduate School Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences The Judge Advocate General's Legal Center and School Staff colleges Joint Forces Staff College Army Command and General Staff College Army War College Army Warrant Officer Career College Marine Corps University Marine Corps War College National Defense University Naval War College School of Advanced Military Studies Air Command and Staff College Air University USAF Air War College Preparatory Military Academy Preparatory School Naval Academy Preparatory School Air Force Academy Preparatory School Military academy Military education and training v t e Colleges and universities in the District of Columbia Research universities American Catholic George Washington Georgetown Howard Master’s colleges and universities Gallaudet Trinity UDC ( UDC-CC ) Strayer University Specialized colleges Dominican House Institute of World Politics SAIS National Defense Quantic Wesley Theological Seminary Former institutions Benjamin Franklin University Corcoran Dunbarton College of the Holy Cross Frelinghuysen University Human Resources University James Ormond Wilson Normal School Mount Vernon College for Women National Radio Institute National University Normal School for Colored Girls Southeastern University Terrell Law School Washington Theological Union v t e United States Department of Defense Headquarters: The Pentagon Pete Hegseth , Secretary of Defense Steve Feinberg , Deputy Secretary of Defense Office of the Secretary of Defense (including defense agencies and DoD field activities) Deputy Secretary of Defense Deputy's Advisory Working Group Office of Net Assessment Special Access Program Oversight Committee Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller) Defense Contract Audit Agency Defense Finance and Accounting Service Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment Defense Contract Management Agency Defense Logistics Agency Defense Threat Reduction Agency Office of Local Defense Community Cooperation Defense Acquisition University Defense Acquisition Board Defense Microelectronics Activity Under Secretary of Defense for Intelligence and Security Defense Intelligence Agency Defense Counterintelligence and Security Agency Defense Information Systems Agency White House Communications Agency National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency National Reconnaissance Office National Security Agency/Central Security Service Director/Chief Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness Defense Commissary Agency Department of Defense Education Activity Defense Human Resources Activity Defense Activity for Non-Traditional Education Support Defense Equal Opportunity Management Institute Defense Travel Management Office Defense Civilian Personnel Advisory Service Defense Health Agency Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences Under Secretary of Defense for Policy Defense Security Cooperation Agency Defense POW/MIA Accounting Agency Defense Policy Board Advisory Committee Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Public Affairs Defense Media Activity American Forces Network Defense Information School Defense Visual Information Distribution Service Stars and Stripes Under Secretary of Defense for Research and Engineering Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency Defense Innovation Unit Defense Technical Information Center Department of Defense Test Resource Management Center Missile Defense Agency General Counsel of the Department of Defense Defense Legal Services Agency (Office of Military Commissions) Chief Management Officer of the Department of Defense Pentagon Force Protection Agency Washington Headquarters Services ( White House Military Office ) Reports directly Assistant Secretary of Defense for Legislative Affairs Military Departments Department of the Army Secretary of the Army The Secretariat : Under Secretary of the Army Assistant Secretary for Acquisition, Logistics, and Technology Assistant Secretary for Civil Works Assistant Secretary (Financial Management and Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Army for Installations, Energy and Environment Assistant Secretary of the Army for Manpower and Reserve Affairs General Counsel of the Army The Administrative Assistant The Army Staff: Chief of Staff of the Army Vice Chief of Staff of the Army Sergeant Major of the Army Deputy Chief of Staff G-8 Programs Chief of Chaplains Judge Advocate General Provost Marshal General Surgeon General U.S. Army field organizations: see Structure of the United States Army Department of the Navy Secretary of the Navy The Secretariat : Under Secretary of the Navy Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Energy, Installations and Environment) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Financial Management and Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Manpower and Reserve Affairs) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (Research, Development and Acquisition) General Counsel of the Navy Judge Advocate General Naval Criminal Investigative Service Naval Inspector General Headquarters Marine Corps : Commandant of the Marine Corps Assistant Commandant of the Marine Corps Sergeant Major of the Marine Corps Chaplain U.S. Marine Corps field organizations: see Organization of the United States Marine Corps Office of the Chief of Naval Operations : Chief of Naval Operations Vice Chief of Naval Operations Master Chief Petty Officer of the Navy Director of Naval Reactors Chief of Chaplains Chief of Naval Personnel Surgeon General United States Navy field organizations: see Structure of the United States Navy Department of the Air Force Secretary of the Air Force The Secretariat : Under Secretary of the Air Force Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Acquisition, Technology and Logistics) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Financial Management & Comptroller) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Installations, Environment & Energy) Assistant Secretary of the Air Force (Manpower & Reserve Affairs) General Counsel of the Department of the Air Force Air Force Office of Special Investigations The Air Staff : Chief of Staff of the Air Force Vice Chief of Staff of the Air Force Chief Master Sergeant of the Air Force Chief of Chaplains Chief of Safety Chief Scientist Judge Advocate General Surgeon General U.S. Air Force field organizations: Major Commands Direct Reporting Units Field Operating Agencies Space Staff : Chief of Space Operations United States Space Force field organizations Joint Chiefs of Staff Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Vice Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Senior Enlisted Advisor to the Chairman Joint Requirements Oversight Council Director of the Joint Staff Joint Staff National Military Command Center Alternate National Military Command Center National Defense University Joint Personnel Recovery Agency Combatant Commands Africa Command Central Command European Command Northern Command Indo-Pacific Command Southern Command Space Command Cyber Command Special Operations Command Strategic Command Transportation Command National Guard Bureau Chief of the National Guard Bureau Air National Guard Army National Guard Office of the Inspector General Defense Criminal Investigative Service Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National Germany United States France BnF data Australia Czech Republic Norway Latvia Poland Israel Academics CiNii Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=National_Defense_University_(United_States)&oldid=1296701388 " Categories : National Defense University 1976 establishments in Washington, D.C.

Military education and training in the United States Southwest Waterfront Universities and colleges established in 1976 Universities and colleges in Washington, D.C.

Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use American English from October 2024 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from October 2024 Articles lacking reliable references from August 2018 All articles lacking reliable references Coordinates on Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Articles using infobox university Webarchive template wayback links Commons category link is on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 21 June 2025, at 17:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents National Defense University (United States) 22 languages Add topic

