Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Stock offering 2 Other security types 3 Primary and secondary offering 4 United States 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Public offering 10 languages العربية فارسی Français 한국어 עברית नेपाली 日本語 Polski Português 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Offering of securities of a company to the public This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Public offering" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( November 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A public offering is the offering of securities of a company or a similar corporation to the public. Generally, the securities are to be publicly listed. In most jurisdictions, a public offering requires the issuing company to publish a prospectus detailing the terms and rights attached to the offered security, as well as information on the company itself and its finances. Many other regulatory requirements surround any public offering and they vary according to jurisdiction.

The services of an underwriter are often used to conduct a public offering.

Stock offering [ edit ] Initial public offering (IPO) is one type of public offering. Not all public offerings are IPOs. An IPO occurs only when a company offers its shares (not other securities) for the first time for public ownership and trading, an act making it a public company .

However, public offerings are also made by already-listed companies. The company issues additional securities to the public, adding to those currently being traded. For example, a listed company with 8 million shares outstanding can offer to the public another 2 million shares. This is a public offering but not an IPO. Once the transaction is complete, the company will have 10 million shares outstanding. Non-initial public offering of equity is also called seasoned equity offering .

A shelf prospectus is often used by companies in exactly that situation. Instead of drafting one before each public offering, the company can file a single prospectus detailing the terms of many different securities it might offer in the next several years. Shortly before the offering (if any) actually takes place, the company informs the public of material changes in its finances and outlook since the publication of the shelf prospectus.

Other security types [ edit ] Other types of securities, besides shares, can be offered publicly.

Bonds , warrants , capital notes and many other kinds of debt and equity vehicles are offered, issued and traded in public capital markets. A private company , with no shares listed publicly, can still issue other securities to the public and have them traded on an exchange. A public company may also offer and list other securities alongside its shares.

Primary and secondary offering [ edit ] Most public offerings are in the primary market , that is, the issuing company itself is the offerer of securities to the public. The offered securities are then issued (allocated, allotted) to the new owners. If it is an offering of shares, this means that the company's outstanding capital grows. If it is an offering of other securities, this entails the creation or expansion of a series (of bonds, warrants, etc.). However, more rarely, public offerings take place in the secondary market . This is called a secondary market offering : existing security holders offer to sell their stake to other, new owners, through the stock exchange. The offerer is different from the issuer (the company). A secondary market offering is still a public offering with much the same requirements, including a prospectus.

United States [ edit ] In the United States, primary offerings are typically done via Form S-1 filings while secondary offerings often use Form S-3 to issue through a shelf registration.

[ 1 ] See also [ edit ] Public offering without listing References [ edit ] ^ "Chapter 11: Follow-On Offerings and Shelf Registrations" .

Perkins Coie . Retrieved 2021-11-26 .

v t e Corporate finance and investment banking Capital structure Convertible debt Exchangeable debt Mezzanine debt Pari passu Preferred equity Second lien debt Senior debt Senior secured debt Shareholder loan Stock Subordinated debt Warrant Transactions (terms/conditions) Equity offerings At-the-market offering Book building Bookrunner Bought deal Bought out deal Corporate spin-off Direct public offering Equity carve-out Follow-on offering Greenshoe Reverse Initial public offering Pre-IPO Private placement Public offering Rights issue Seasoned equity offering Secondary market offering Underwriting Mergers and acquisitions Buy side Contingent value rights Control premium Demerger Divestment Drag-along right Management due diligence Managerial entrenchment Mandatory offer Minority discount Pitch book Pre-emption right Proxy fight Post-merger integration Sell side Shareholder rights plan Special-purpose entity Special situation Squeeze-out Staggered board of directors Stock swap Supermajority amendment Synergy Tag-along right Takeover Reverse Tender offer Leverage Debt restructuring Debtor-in-possession financing Dividend recapitalization Financial sponsor Leveraged buyout Leveraged recapitalization High-yield debt Private equity Project finance Valuation Accretion/dilution analysis Adjusted present value Associate company Business valuation Conglomerate discount Cost of capital Weighted average Discounted cash flow Economic value added Enterprise value Fairness opinion Financial modeling Free cash flow Free cash flow to equity Market value added Minority interest Mismarking Modigliani–Miller theorem Net present value Pure play Real options Residual income Stock valuation Sum-of-the-parts analysis Tax shield Terminal value Valuation using multiples List of investment banks Outline of finance v t e Financial markets Types of markets Primary market Secondary market Third market Fourth market Types of stocks Common stock Golden share Preferred stock Restricted stock Tracking stock Share capital Authorised capital Issued shares Shares outstanding Treasury stock Participants Broker Floor broker Inter-dealer broker Broker-dealer Market maker Trader Floor trader Proprietary trader Quantitative analyst Investor Hedger Speculator Arbitrager Scalper Regulator Trading venues Exchange List of major stock exchanges Over-the-counter (off-exchange) Alternative trading system (ATS) Multilateral trading facility (MTF) Electronic communication network (ECN) Direct market access (DMA) Straight-through processing (STP) Dark pool (private exchange) Crossing network Liquidity aggregator Stock valuation Alpha Arbitrage pricing theory (APT) Beta Buffett indicator (Cap-to-GDP) Book value (BV) Capital asset pricing model (CAPM) Capital market line (CML) Dividend discount model (DDM) Dividend yield Earnings yield EV/EBITDA Fed model Net asset value (NAV) Security characteristic line Security market line (SML) T-model Trading theories and strategies Algorithmic trading Buy and hold Contrarian investing Dollar cost averaging Efficient-market hypothesis (EMH) Fundamental analysis Growth stock Market timing Modern portfolio theory (MPT) Momentum investing Mosaic theory Pairs trade Post-modern portfolio theory (PMPT) Random walk hypothesis (RMH) Sector rotation Style investing Swing trading Technical analysis Trend following Value averaging Value investing Related terms Bid–ask spread Block trade Cross listing Dividend Dual-listed company DuPont analysis Efficient frontier Financial law Flight-to-quality Government bond Greenspan put Haircut Initial public offering (IPO) Long Mandatory offer Margin Market anomaly Market capitalization Market depth Market manipulation Market trend Mean reversion Momentum Open outcry Order book Position Public float Public offering Rally Returns-based style analysis Reverse stock split Share repurchase Short selling Short squeeze Slippage Speculation Squeeze-out Stock dilution Stock exchange Stock market index Stock split Stock swap Trade Tender offer Uptick rule Volatility Voting interest Yield Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Public_offering&oldid=1232846505 " Categories : Corporate finance Financial markets Public sphere Initial public offering Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from November 2021 All articles needing additional references This page was last edited on 5 July 2024, at 22:34 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Public offering 10 languages Add topic

