Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Content Toggle Content subsection 1.1 Directors' Role 1.2 Missed Report Penalty 2 History 3 'Alternative' annual reports 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Annual report 26 languages العربية বাংলা Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Bahasa Indonesia Italiano Latviešu मराठी Bahasa Melayu Nederlands नेपाली Norsk bokmål Português Română Русский Suomi ไทย Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Yearly report on a company's activities Part of a series on Accounting Constant purchasing power Historical cost Management Tax Major types Audit Budget Cost Forensic Financial Fund Governmental Management Social Tax Key concepts Accounting period Accrual Constant purchasing power Economic entity Fair value Going concern Historical cost Matching principle Materiality Revenue recognition Unit of account Selected accounts Assets Cash Cost of goods sold Depreciation / Amortization (business) Equity Expenses Goodwill Liabilities Profit Revenue Accounting standards Generally-accepted principles Generally-accepted auditing standards Convergence International Financial Reporting Standards International Standards on Auditing Management Accounting Principles Financial statements Annual report Balance sheet Cash-flow Equity Income Management discussion Financial statement analysis Bookkeeping Bank reconciliation Debits and credits Double-entry system FIFO and LIFO Journal Ledger / General ledger Trial balance Auditing Financial Internal Firms Report Sarbanes–Oxley Act People and organizations Accountants Accounting organizations Luca Pacioli Development History Research Positive accounting Sarbanes–Oxley Act Misconduct Creative Earnings management Error account Hollywood Off-balance-sheet Two sets of books v t e An annual report is a comprehensive report on a company's activities throughout the preceding year . Annual reports are intended to give shareholders and other interested people information about the company's activities and financial performance. They may be considered as grey literature . Most jurisdictions require companies to prepare and disclose annual reports, and many require the annual report to be filed at the company's registry. Companies with issued shares publicly listed are also required to report at more frequent intervals (depending upon the rules of the stock exchange involved).

Content [ edit ] Typical annual reports may include: [ 1 ] General corporate information Operating and financial review Director's Report Corporate governance information Chairpersons statement Auditor's report Sustainability and ESG information Green annual report Contents: non- audited information Financial statements , including Balance sheet also known as Statement of Financial Position Income statement also known as profit and loss statement.

Statement of changes in equity Cash flow statement Notes to the financial statements Accounting policies Independent assurance statements Other features Other information deemed relevant to stakeholders may be included, such as a report on operations for manufacturing firms or corporate social responsibility reports for companies with environmentally  or socially sensitive operations. In the case of larger companies, it is usually a sleek, colorful, high-gloss publication.

The details provided in the report are of use to investors to understand the company's financial position and future direction. The financial statements are usually compiled in compliance with IFRS and/or the domestic GAAP , as well as domestic legislation (e.g. the SOX in the U.S.).

In the United States , a more-detailed version of the report, called a Form 10-K , is submitted to the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission .

[ 2 ] A publicly held company may also issue a much more limited version of an annual report, which is known as a "wrap report." A wrap report is a Form 10-K with an annual report cover wrapped around it.

[ 3 ] Directors' Role [ edit ] The examples and perspective in this section may not represent a worldwide view of the subject .

You may improve this section , discuss the issue on the talk page , or create a new section, as appropriate.

( June 2014 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Statement of Directors' responsibilities for the shareholders' financial statements The Directors are responsible for preparing the Annual Report and the financial statements in accordance with applicable Law of the Republic of Ireland , including the accounting standards issued by the Accounting Standards Board and published by The Institute of Chartered Accountants. Irish company law requires the directors to prepare financial statements for each financial period which give a true and fair view of the state of affairs of the company and of the profit or loss of the company for that period.

In preparing these financial statements, the Directors are required to: Select suitable accounting policies and then apply them consistently.

Make judgements and estimates that are reasonable and prudent.

Prepare the financial statements on the going concern basis unless it is inappropriate to presume that the Company will continue in business.

The directors confirm that they have complied with the above requirements in preparing the financial statements. The directors are responsible for keeping proper books of account that disclose with reasonable accuracy at any time the financial position of the company and to enable them to ensure that the financial statements are prepared in accordance with accounting standards generally accepted in Ireland and with Irish statute comprising the Companies Acts 1963 to 2009.

[ citation needed ] Missed Report Penalty [ edit ] Failing to submit an annual report within the designated deadline can result in serious legal and financial consequences for a company. For example, in Estonia, failing to meet this deadline can lead to penalties, including fines and, in more severe cases, the potential removal of the company from the register.

[ 4 ] History [ edit ] This section needs expansion . You can help by adding to it .

( July 2025 ) In 1903, US Steel published an annual report whose financial accuracy was certified by Price, Waterhouse & Co in what is known as the earliest modern corporate annual report.

[ 5 ] 'Alternative' annual reports [ edit ] Certain groups such as The True Cost Of Chevron Network have released 'alternative' annual reports as a way to highlight ongoing environmental destruction and/or human rights abuses committed by a particular company.

[ 6 ] See also [ edit ] Form 10-K , the basic information required by the US Securities and Exchange Commission US corporate law Green annual report Grey literature References [ edit ] ^ Annual Report and Accounts - Contents http://tutor2u.net/business/accounts/annual-report-and-accounts-contents.htm Archived 2020-08-11 at the Wayback Machine ^ Dictionary of Finance and Investment Terms by John Downes and Jordon Elliot Goodman Barron 1995 ISBN 0-8120-9035-7 page 23 ^ "Wrap Report Definition" . AccountingTools. Archived from the original on 2013-04-30 . Retrieved 2013-08-27 .

^ Nikiforov, Ilja.

"Annual Report Submission in Estonia | Price from €150" .

Eesti Firma . Retrieved 2024-10-22 .

^ Wessel D. (2002).

When Standards Are Unacceptable The Wall Street Journal ^ The True Cost Of Chevron, An Alternative Annual Report, May 2011 http://truecostofchevron.com/2011-alternative-annual-report.pdf Retrieved 19 July 2017 External links [ edit ] How to Efficiently Read an Annual Report " How to Read a 10-K Like Warren Buffett " by CNBC Archive of Annual Reports , Internet Archive Authority control databases National Czech Republic Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Annual_report&oldid=1303233689 " Categories : Financial statements Grey literature Annual publications Reports Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with limited geographic scope from June 2014 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from July 2025 Articles to be expanded from July 2025 All articles to be expanded Articles prone to spam from August 2013 This page was last edited on 29 July 2025, at 20:18 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Annual report 26 languages Add topic

