Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Operations 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Social Science Research Network 22 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Català Deutsch Español فارسی Français 한국어 Hausa Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית 日本語 Português Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Українська 中文 Ghanaian Pidgin Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia (Redirected from SSRN (identifier) ) Repository for preprints "SSRN" redirects here. For the submarine, see USS Triton (SSRN-586) .

SSRN Producer Elsevier History 1994–present Languages English Access Cost Mostly fee-free (monetarily gratis) Coverage Disciplines Social sciences , engineering sciences , humanities , life sciences , applied sciences , health sciences , and physical sciences Record depth Index, abstract, and full-text Format coverage Papers Links Website ssrn .com SSRN (Social Science Research Network) is an open access research platform that functions as a repository for sharing early-stage research [ 1 ] and preprints. It facilitates the rapid dissemination of scholarly research in the social sciences , humanities , life sciences , and health sciences , among others. It was formerly called Social Science Research Network, now called SSRN to reflect that it hosts content not only in social sciences but also in a wide range of disciplines including economics, law, business and engineering.

Elsevier bought SSRN from Social Science Electronic Publishing Inc. in May 2016.

[ 2 ] It is not an electronic journal, but rather an electronic library and search engine.

[ 3 ] History [ edit ] SSRN was founded in 1994 by Michael C. Jensen and Wayne Marr, both financial economists .

[ 4 ] In January 2013, SSRN was ranked the largest open-access repository in the world by Ranking Web of Repositories (an initiative of the Cybermetrics Lab , a research group belonging to the Spanish National Research Council ), [ 5 ] measured by number of PDF files, backlinks and Google Scholar results.

[ 6 ] In May 2016, SSRN was bought from Social Science Electronic Publishing Inc. by Elsevier .

[ 2 ] On 17 May 2016, the SSRN founder and chairman Michael C. Jensen wrote a letter to the SSRN community in which he cited SSRN CEO Gregg Gordon's post on the Elsevier Connect [ 7 ] and the "new opportunities" coming from the fusion, [ 8 ] such as a broader global network and the freedom "to upload and download papers" (with more data, more resources, as well as new management tools). While predicting "some conflicts" on the interests alignment of the former competitors, he defined them as "surmountable".

[ 9 ] In July 2016 there were reports of papers being removed from SSRN without notice; revision comments from SSRN indicated this was due to copyright concerns.

[ 10 ] Gordon characterized the issue as a mistake affecting about 20 papers.

[ 11 ] Operations [ edit ] Academic papers in Portable Document Format can be uploaded directly to the SSRN site by authors and are then available around the world for download.

[ 12 ] Users can also subscribe to abstracting emails covering a broad range of research areas and topic specialties. These distributing emails contain abstracts (with links to the full text where applicable) of papers recently submitted to SSRN in the respective field.

SSRN, like other preprint services, circulates publications throughout the scholarly community at an early stage, permitting the author to incorporate comments into the final version of the paper before its publication in a journal. Moreover, even if access to the published paper is restricted, access to the original working paper remains open through SSRN, so long as the author decides to keep the paper up.  Often authors take papers down at the request of publishers, particularly if they are published by commercial or university presses that depend on payment for paper copies or online access.

[ 13 ] As of 2019, download by users is generally subject to registration and/or completion of a ReCAPTCHA challenge and therefore SSRN is not considered by some to be a suitable open access location, [ 14 ] unlike open archives like most institutional repositories . Publishers and institutions can upload papers and charge a fee for readers to download them.

[ 15 ] On SSRN, authors and papers are ranked by their number of downloads, which has become an informal indicator of popularity on prepress and open access sites.

[ 16 ] See also [ edit ] List of academic databases and search engines List of preprint repositories ArXiv Research Papers in Economics SocArXiv References [ edit ] ^ "What is SSRN? - SSRN Support Center" .

service.elsevier.com . Retrieved 2025-05-31 .

^ a b Gordon, Gregg (17 May 2016).

"SSRN—a leading social science and humanities repository and online community—joins Elsevier" .

Elsevier Connect . Elsevier . Retrieved 17 May 2016 .

^ "SSRN Paper Submission Process" (PDF) .

SSRN .

^ Feltner, Kerry (2016-06-03).

"Dutch company acquires firm in Brighton" .

Rochester Business Journal . Retrieved 2020-03-21 .

^ "World" .

Ranking Web of Repositories . Cybermetrics Lab. January 2013. Archived from the original on 2013-06-29 . Retrieved 11 June 2013 .

^ "Methodology" . Archived from the original on 2013-07-01.

^ Elsevier Connect ^ Gregg Gordon (May 17, 2016).

"Photo" [SSRN—the leading social science and humanities repository and online community—joins Elsevier].

^ Michael C. Jensen (May 17, 2016).

"From The Desk of Michael C. Jensen, Chairman" . SSRN.

^ Masnick, Mike (18 July 2016).

"Just as Open Competitor to Elsevier's SSRN Launches, SSRN Accused Of Copyright Crackdown" .

Techdirt . Retrieved 6 August 2016 .

^ Straumsheim, Carl (19 July 2016).

" 'There Isn't Some Big Conspiracy Happening' " .

Inside Higher Ed . Retrieved 6 August 2016 .

^ In case the web page [ formerly ] at https://support.ssrn.com/knowledgebase.php?article=67 is now a "dead link" , please see (instead) this 'extant' web page: "Submit a Paper to SSRN" .

SSRN . 2014-12-03. Archived from the original on June 29, 2016 . Retrieved February 3, 2022 .

(QUOTE:) [...] you upload your PDF ^ Ashish SIngh (2021-07-21).

"Praxis International Journal of Social Science and Literature" . Pijssl.com . Retrieved 2020-03-21 .

^ Richard Orr (2020-12-31).

"What counts as an Open Access location?" .

Unpaywall .

^ Jensen, Michael C.

(2 February 2012).

"About SSRN" . Social Science Research Network . Retrieved 30 December 2013 .

^ Black, Bernard S.; Caron, Paul (2006). "Ranking Law Schools: Using SSRN to Measure Scholarly Performance".

Indiana Law Journal .

81 (Symposium on The Next Generation of Law School Rankings).

SSRN 784764 . U of Texas law, Law and Econ Research Paper No. 52; U of Cincinnati Public Law Research Paper No. 05-14.

External links [ edit ] Wikidata has the properties: SSRN author ID (P3747) (see uses ) SSRN article ID (P893) (see uses ) Official website v t e RELX Elsevier Imprints Academic Press Butterworth-Heinemann Cell Press Churchill Livingstone Masson Medicine Publishing Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Mosby Pergamon Saunders William Andrew Woodhead Publishing Selected journals Biochimica et Biophysica Acta Cell Current Opinion The Journal of Allergy and Clinical Immunology The Lancet Tetrahedron Trends List of Elsevier periodicals Other Bepress Ei Compendex Embase GEOBASE HESI Mendeley Reaxys ScienceDirect Scirus (defunct) Scopus SSRN LexisNexis Legal and Professional CaseMap Law360 Martindale-Hubbell Quicklaw Reed Tech Shepard's Citations Risk Estates Gazette LexisNexis Risk Solutions RX Business conventions Arabian Travel Market Equitana Global Gaming Expo London Book Fair MIPCOM MIPTV Media Market National Hardware Show ReedPop Chicago Comic & Entertainment Expo EGX Emerald City Comic Con Florida Supercon MCM London Comic Con New York Comic Con PAX Star Wars Celebration Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Social_Science_Research_Network&oldid=1302422163 " Categories : Elsevier Engineering literature Eprint archives Medical literature Open-access archives Organizations established in 1994 Social sciences literature Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 25 July 2025, at 08:51 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Social Science Research Network 22 languages Add topic

