Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Name 2 See also 3 References 4 Bibliography 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Mar de Grau 14 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Ilokano Íslenska עברית Kiswahili اردو Tiếng Việt Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Body of water in the Pacific Ocean under Peruvian control Map showing the Grau's Sea (1,140,646 km 2 ) The Mar de Grau ( Spanish : Grau's Sea ) is the official name for the body of water in the Pacific Ocean under the control of the South American country of Peru .

[ 1 ] This body of water extends in length approximately 3,079.50 km , from the parallel of the Boca de Capones in northern Peru to the parallel of the Punto Concordia and the parallel in front of the city of Tacna in southern Peru. In terms of width, the maritime zone extends from the Peruvian coast to 200 nautical miles (370.4 km) into the Pacific Ocean.

Name [ edit ] This maritime domain was officially named on May 24, 1984, in honor of Miguel Grau Seminario , a Peruvian military officer described in Peru and Bolivia as a hero from the War of the Pacific fought against Chile . During the war, Grau led the defense of the Peruvian and Bolivian coasts by holding off the Chilean Navy for six consecutive months, ultimately dying at sea amidst the decisive Battle of Angamos .

See also [ edit ] Chilean–Peruvian maritime dispute Humboldt Current Miguel Grau Seminario Pacific Ocean War of the Pacific References [ edit ] ^ "Repositorio Institucional INGEMMET: Mar de Grau : Develando la geología del fondo marino" . Retrieved June 10, 2020 .

Bibliography [ edit ] El Perú en los tiempos antiguos , Julio R. Villanueva Sotomayor, Empresa Periodística Nacional SAC, Lima, y Quebecor World Perú S.A. 2001.

El Perú en los tiempos modernos , Julio R. Villanueva Sotomayor, Empresa Periodística Nacional SAC, Lima, y Quebecor World Perú S.A. 2002.

Atlas del Perú , Juan Augusto Benavides Estrada, Editorial Escuela Nueva, Lima. 1995.

Historia de la República del Perú [1822-1933] , Jorge Basadre Grohmann, Orbis Ventures SAC, 1939, 2005, Lima.

ISBN 9972-205-62-2 .

Benavides Estrada, Juan (1999).

Geografía del Perú 2do año de Secundaria . Lima: Escuela Nueva.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: publisher location ( link ) External links [ edit ] English Wikisource has original text related to this article: Nota Nº 7-1-SG/005 conteniendo la posición del Perú respecto del límite marítimo Marina de Guerra del Perú Noticiero sobre tratados limítrofes con Chile Parte 1 Noticiero sobre tratados limítrofes con Chile Parte 2 Decreto Supremo Nº 781 del Perú de 1947 La frontera marítima en la región sur del Perú v t e Earth 's oceans and seas Antarctic/Southern Ocean Amundsen Sea Bellingshausen Sea Cooperation Sea Cosmonauts Sea Davis Sea D'Urville Sea King Haakon VII Sea Lazarev Sea Mawson Sea Riiser-Larsen Sea Ross Sea Scotia Sea Somov Sea Weddell Sea Arctic Ocean Amundsen Gulf Barents Sea Beaufort Sea Chukchi Sea East Siberian Sea Greenland Sea Gulf of Boothia Kara Sea Laptev Sea Lincoln Sea Pechora Sea Prince Gustaf Adolf Sea Queen Victoria Sea Wandel Sea White Sea Atlantic Ocean Adriatic Sea Aegean Sea Alboran Sea American Mediterranean Sea Archipelago Sea Argentine Sea Baffin Bay Balearic Sea Baltic Sea Bay of Biscay Bay of Bothnia Bay of Campeche Bay of Fundy Black Sea Bothnian Sea Caribbean Sea Celtic Sea English Channel Foxe Basin Greenland Sea Gulf of Bothnia Gulf of Finland Gulf of Guinea Gulf of Lion Gulf of Maine Gulf of Mexico Gulf of Sidra Gulf of St. Lawrence Gulf of Venezuela Hudson Bay Ionian Sea Irish Sea Irminger Sea James Bay Labrador Sea Levantine Sea Libyan Sea Ligurian Sea Mediterranean Sea Myrtoan Sea North Sea Norwegian Sea Sargasso Sea Sea of Åland Sea of Azov Sea of Crete Sea of the Hebrides Sea of Marmara Thracian Sea Tyrrhenian Sea Wadden Sea Indian Ocean Andaman Sea Arabian Sea Bay of Bengal Flores Sea Great Australian Bight Gulf of Aden Gulf of Aqaba Gulf of Khambhat Gulf of Kutch Gulf of Oman Gulf of Suez Laccadive Sea Mozambique Channel Persian Gulf Red Sea Timor Sea Pacific Ocean Arafura Sea Bali Sea Banda Sea Bering Sea Bismarck Sea Bohai Sea Bohol Sea Camotes Sea Celebes Sea Chilean Sea Coral Sea East China Sea Gulf of Alaska Gulf of Anadyr Gulf of California Gulf of Carpentaria Gulf of Fonseca Gulf of Panama Gulf of Thailand Gulf of Tonkin Halmahera Sea Java Sea Koro Sea Mar de Grau Molucca Sea Moro Gulf Philippine Sea Salish Sea Savu Sea Sea of Japan Sea of Okhotsk Seram Sea Seto Inland Sea Shantar Sea Sibuyan Sea Solomon Sea South China Sea Sulu Sea Tasman Sea Visayan Sea West Philippine Sea Yellow Sea Endorheic basins Aral Sea Caspian Sea Dead Sea Salton Sea Others Ancient oceans Ocean Sea Superocean Oceans portal Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Mar_de_Grau&oldid=1305854776 " Categories : Pacific Ocean Bodies of water of Peru Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles containing Spanish-language text CS1 maint: publisher location Wikisource templates with missing id This page was last edited on 14 August 2025, at 13:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Mar de Grau 14 languages Add topic

