Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Nuclear reaction equations 3 Energy conservation 4 Q -value and energy balance 5 Reaction rates 6 Charged vs. uncharged particles 7 Notable types Toggle Notable types subsection 7.1 Direct reactions 7.1.1 Inelastic scattering 7.1.2 Charge-exchange reactions 7.1.3 Nucleon transfer reactions 7.1.4 Reactions with neutrons 7.2 Compound nuclear reactions 8 See also 9 References 10 Sources Toggle the table of contents Nuclear reaction 69 languages Afrikaans العربية Azərbaycanca বাংলা Беларуская Български Català Чӑвашла Čeština Dansk الدارجة Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia IsiZulu Italiano Jawa ქართული Қазақша Kreyòl ayisyen Latviešu Lietuvių Magyar Македонски Malagasy მარგალური Bahasa Melayu 閩東語 / Mìng-dĕ̤ng-ngṳ̄ Монгол Nederlands नेपाली 日本語 Norsk bokmål Oromoo Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پښتو Polski Português Română Русский Seeltersk සිංහල Simple English Slovenčina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் ไทย Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Transformation of a nuclide to another In this symbolic representing of a nuclear reaction, lithium-6 ( 6 3 Li ) and deuterium ( 2 1 H ) react to form the highly excited intermediate nucleus 8 4 Be which then decays immediately into two alpha particles of helium-4 ( 4 2 He ).

Protons are symbolically represented by red spheres, and neutrons by blue spheres.

Nuclear physics Nucleus Nucleons p n Nuclear matter Nuclear force Nuclear structure Nuclear reaction Models of the nucleus Liquid drop Nuclear shell model Interacting boson model Ab initio Nuclides ' classification Isotopes – equal Z Isobars – equal A Isotones – equal N Isodiaphers – equal N − Z Isomers – equal all the above Mirror nuclei – Z ↔ N Stable Magic Even/odd Halo Borromean Nuclear stability Binding energy p–n ratio Drip line Island of stability Valley of stability Stable nuclide Radioactive decay Alpha α Beta β 2β 0v β + K/L capture Isomeric Gamma γ Internal conversion Spontaneous fission Cluster decay Neutron emission Proton emission Decay energy Decay chain Decay product Radiogenic nuclide Nuclear fission Spontaneous Products pair breaking Photofission Capturing processes electron 2× neutron s r proton p rp High-energy processes Spallation by cosmic ray Photodisintegration Nucleosynthesis and nuclear astrophysics Nuclear fusion Processes: Stellar Big Bang Supernova Nuclides: Primordial Cosmogenic Artificial High-energy nuclear physics Quark–gluon plasma RHIC LHC Scientists Alvarez Becquerel Bethe A. Bohr N. Bohr Chadwick Cockcroft Ir. Curie Fr. Curie Pi. Curie Skłodowska-Curie Davisson Fermi Hahn Jensen Lawrence Mayer Meitner Oliphant Oppenheimer Proca Purcell Rabi Rutherford Soddy Strassmann Świątecki Szilárd Teller Thomson Walton Wigner Physics portal Category v t e In nuclear physics and nuclear chemistry , a nuclear reaction is a process in which two nuclei , or a nucleus and an external subatomic particle , collide to produce one or more new nuclides . Thus, a nuclear reaction must cause a transformation of at least one nuclide to another. If a nucleus interacts with another nucleus or particle, they then separate without changing the nature of any nuclide, the process is simply referred to as a type of nuclear scattering , rather than a nuclear reaction.

In principle, a reaction can involve more than two particles colliding , but because the probability of three or more nuclei to meet at the same time at the same place is much less than for two nuclei, such an event is exceptionally rare (see triple alpha process for an example very close to a three-body nuclear reaction). The term "nuclear reaction" may refer either to a change in a nuclide induced by collision with another particle or to a spontaneous change of a nuclide without collision.

Natural nuclear reactions occur in the interaction between cosmic rays and matter, and nuclear reactions can be employed artificially to obtain nuclear energy, at an adjustable rate, on-demand.

Nuclear chain reactions in fissionable materials produce induced nuclear fission . Various nuclear fusion reactions of light elements power the energy production of the Sun and stars. Most nuclear reactions (fusion and fission) results in transmutation of nuclei (called also nuclear transmutation ).

History [ edit ] In 1919, Ernest Rutherford was able to accomplish transmutation of nitrogen into oxygen at the University of Manchester, using alpha particles directed at nitrogen 14 N + α → 17 O + p.  This was the first observation of an induced nuclear reaction, that is, a reaction in which particles from one decay are used to transform another atomic nucleus. Eventually, in 1932 at Cambridge University, a fully artificial nuclear reaction and nuclear transmutation was achieved by Rutherford's colleagues John Cockcroft and Ernest Walton , who used artificially accelerated protons against lithium-7, to split the nucleus into two alpha particles. The feat was popularly known as "splitting the atom ", although it was not the modern nuclear fission reaction later (in 1938) discovered in heavy elements by the German scientists Otto Hahn , Lise Meitner , and Fritz Strassmann .

[ 1 ] Nuclear reaction equations [ edit ] Nuclear reactions may be shown in a form similar to chemical equations, for which invariant mass must balance for each side of the equation, and in which transformations of particles must follow certain conservation laws, such as conservation of charge and baryon number (total atomic mass number ). An example of this notation follows: 6 3 Li + 2 1 H → 4 2 He + ?.

To balance the equation above for mass, charge and mass number, the second nucleus to the right must have atomic number 2 and mass number 4; it is therefore also helium-4. The complete equation therefore reads: 6 3 Li + 2 1 H → 4 2 He + 4 2 He .

or more simply: 6 3 Li + 2 1 H → 2 4 2 He .

Instead of using the full equations in the style above, in many situations a compact notation is used to describe nuclear reactions. This style of the form A(b,c)D is equivalent to A + b producing c + D. Common light particles are often abbreviated in this shorthand, typically p for proton, n for neutron, d for deuteron , α representing an alpha particle or helium-4 , β for beta particle or electron, γ for gamma photon , etc. The reaction above would be written as 6 Li(d,α)α.

[ 2 ] [ 3 ] Energy conservation [ edit ] Kinetic energy may be released during the course of a reaction ( exothermic reaction ) or kinetic energy may have to be supplied for the reaction to take place ( endothermic reaction ). This can be calculated by reference to a table of very accurate particle rest masses, [ 4 ] as follows: according to the reference tables, the 6 3 Li nucleus has a standard atomic weight of 6.015 daltons (symbol Da), the deuterium has 2.014 Da, and the helium-4 nucleus has 4.0026 Da. Thus: the sum of the rest mass of the individual nuclei = 6.015 Da + 2.014 Da = 8.029 Da; the total rest mass on the two helium-nuclei = 2 × 4.0026 Da = 8.0052 Da; missing rest mass = 8.029 Da − 8.0052 Da = 0.0238 Da.

In a nuclear reaction, the total (relativistic) energy is conserved . The "missing" rest mass must therefore reappear as kinetic energy released in the reaction; its source is the nuclear binding energy . Using Einstein's mass-energy equivalence formula E = mc 2 , the amount of energy released can be determined. We first need the energy equivalent of one dalton : 1 Da c 2 = (1.66054 × 10 −27 kg) × (2.99792 × 10 8 m/s) 2 = 1.49242 × 10 −10 kg (m/s) 2 = 1.49242 × 10 −10 J = 931.49 MeV (1 MeV = 1.602176634×10 −13 J), so 1 Da c 2 = 931.49 MeV.

Hence, the energy released is 0.0238 × 931 MeV = 22.2 MeV .

Expressed differently: the mass is reduced by 0.3%, corresponding to 0.3% of 90 PJ/kg is 270 TJ/kg.

This is a large amount of energy for a nuclear reaction; the amount is so high because the binding energy per nucleon of the helium-4 nucleus is unusually high because the He-4 nucleus is " doubly magic ". (The He-4 nucleus is unusually stable and tightly bound for the same reason that the helium atom is inert: each pair of protons and neutrons in He-4 occupies a filled 1s nuclear orbital in the same way that the pair of electrons in the helium atom occupy a filled 1s electron orbital ). Consequently, alpha particles appear frequently on the right-hand side of nuclear reactions.

The energy released in a nuclear reaction can appear mainly in one of three ways: kinetic energy of the product particles (fraction of the kinetic energy of the charged nuclear reaction products can be directly converted into electrostatic energy); [ 5 ] emission of very high energy photons , called gamma rays ; some energy may remain in the nucleus, as a metastable energy level .

When the product nucleus is metastable, this is indicated by placing an asterisk ("*") next to its atomic number. This energy is eventually released through nuclear decay .

A small amount of energy may also emerge in the form of X-rays . Generally, the product nucleus has a different atomic number, and thus the configuration of its electron shells is wrong. As the electrons rearrange themselves and drop to lower energy levels, internal transition X-rays (X-rays with precisely defined emission lines ) may be emitted.

Q -value and energy balance [ edit ] In writing down the reaction equation, in a way analogous to a chemical equation , one may, in addition, give the reaction energy on the right side: Target nucleus + projectile → Final nucleus + ejectile + Q .

For the particular case discussed above, the reaction energy has already been calculated as Q = 22.2 MeV. Hence: 6 3 Li + 2 1 H → 2 4 2 He + 22.2 MeV .

The reaction energy (the "Q-value") is positive for exothermal reactions and negative for endothermal reactions, opposite to the similar expression in chemistry . On the one hand, it is the difference between the sums of kinetic energies on the final side and on the initial side. But on the other hand, it is also the difference between the nuclear rest masses on the initial side and on the final side (in this way, we have calculated the Q-value above).

Reaction rates [ edit ] If the reaction equation is balanced, that does not mean that the reaction really occurs. The rate at which reactions occur depends on the energy and the flux of the incident particles, and the reaction cross section . An example of a large repository of reaction rates is the REACLIB database, as maintained by the Joint Institute for Nuclear Astrophysics .

Charged vs. uncharged particles [ edit ] In the initial collision which begins the reaction, the particles must approach closely enough so that the short-range strong force can affect them. As most common nuclear particles are positively charged, this means they must overcome considerable electrostatic repulsion before the reaction can begin. Even if the target nucleus is part of a neutral atom , the other particle must penetrate well beyond the electron cloud and closely approach the nucleus, which is positively charged. Thus, such particles must be first accelerated to high energy, for example by: particle accelerators ; nuclear decay (alpha particles are the main type of interest here since beta and gamma rays are rarely involved in nuclear reactions); very high temperatures, on the order of millions of degrees, producing thermonuclear reactions; cosmic rays .

Also, since the force of repulsion is proportional to the product of the two charges, reactions between heavy nuclei are rarer, and require higher initiating energy, than those between a heavy and light nucleus; while reactions between two light nuclei are the most common ones.

Neutrons , on the other hand, have no electric charge to cause repulsion, and are able to initiate a nuclear reaction at very low energies. In fact, at extremely low particle energies (corresponding, say, to thermal equilibrium at room temperature ), the neutron's de Broglie wavelength is greatly increased, possibly greatly increasing its capture cross-section, at energies close to resonances of the nuclei involved. Thus low-energy neutrons may be even more reactive than high-energy neutrons.

Notable types [ edit ] While the number of possible nuclear reactions is immense, there are several types that are more common, or otherwise notable. Some examples include: Fusion reactions – two light nuclei join to form a heavier one, with additional particles (usually protons or neutrons) emitted subsequently.

Spallation – a nucleus is hit by a particle with sufficient energy and momentum to knock out several small fragments or smash it into many fragments.

Induced gamma emission belongs to a class in which only photons were involved in creating and destroying states of nuclear excitation.

Fission reactions – a very heavy nucleus, after absorbing additional light particles (usually neutrons), splits into two or sometimes three pieces. This is an induced nuclear reaction.

Spontaneous fission , which occurs without assistance of a neutron, is usually not considered a nuclear reaction. At most, it is not an induced nuclear reaction.

Direct reactions [ edit ] An intermediate energy projectile transfers energy or picks up or loses nucleons to the nucleus in a single quick (10 −21 second) event. Energy and momentum transfer are relatively small. These are particularly useful in experimental nuclear physics, because the reaction mechanisms are often simple enough to calculate with sufficient accuracy to probe the structure of the target nucleus.

Inelastic scattering [ edit ] Main article: Inelastic scattering Only energy and momentum are transferred.

(p,p') tests differences between nuclear states.

(α,α') measures nuclear surface shapes and sizes. Since α particles that hit the nucleus react more violently, elastic and shallow inelastic α scattering are sensitive to the shapes and sizes of the targets, like light scattered from a small black object.

(e,e') is useful for probing the interior structure. Since electrons interact less strongly than do protons and neutrons, they reach to the centers of the targets and their wave functions are less distorted by passing through the nucleus.

Charge-exchange reactions [ edit ] Energy and charge are transferred between projectile and target. Some examples of this kind of reactions are: (p,n) ( 3 He,t) Nucleon transfer reactions [ edit ] Usually at moderately low energy, one or more nucleons are transferred between the projectile and target. These are useful in studying outer shell structure of nuclei. Transfer reactions can occur: from the projectile to the target - stripping reactions from the target to the projectile - pick-up reactions Examples: (α,n) and (α,p) reactions. Some of the earliest nuclear reactions studied involved an alpha particle produced by alpha decay , knocking a nucleon from a target nucleus.

(d,n) and (d,p) reactions. A deuteron beam impinges on a target; the target nuclei absorb either the neutron or proton from the deuteron. The deuteron is so loosely bound that this is almost the same as proton or neutron capture. A compound nucleus may be formed, leading to additional neutrons being emitted more slowly. (d,n) reactions are used to generate energetic neutrons.

The strangeness exchange reaction ( K , π ) has been used to study hypernuclei .

The reaction 14 N(α,p) 17 O performed by Rutherford in 1917 (reported 1919), is generally regarded as the first nuclear transmutation experiment.

Reactions with neutrons [ edit ] → T → 7 Li → 14 C (n, α ) 6 Li + n → T + α 10 B + n → 7 Li + α 17 O + n → 14 C + α 21 Ne + n → 18 O + α 37 Ar + n → 34 S + α (n,p) 3 He + n → T + p 7 Be + n → 7 Li + p 14 N + n → 14 C + p 22 Na + n → 22 Ne + p (n, γ ) 2 H + n → T + γ 13 C + n → 14 C + γ Reactions with neutrons are important in nuclear reactors and nuclear weapons . While the best-known neutron reactions are neutron scattering , neutron capture , and nuclear fission , for some light nuclei (especially odd-odd nuclei ) the most probable reaction with a thermal neutron is a transfer reaction: Some reactions are only possible with fast neutrons : (n,2n) reactions produce small amounts of protactinium-231 and uranium-232 in the thorium cycle which is otherwise relatively free of highly radioactive actinide products.

9 Be + n → 2α + 2n can contribute some additional neutrons in the beryllium neutron reflector of a nuclear weapon .

7 Li + n → T + α + n unexpectedly contributed additional yield in the Bravo , Romeo and Yankee shots of Operation Castle , the three highest-yield nuclear tests conducted by the U.S.

Compound nuclear reactions [ edit ] Either a low-energy projectile is absorbed or a higher energy particle transfers energy to the nucleus, leaving it with too much energy to be fully bound together. On a time scale of about 10 −19 seconds, particles, usually neutrons, are "boiled" off. That is, it remains together until enough energy happens to be concentrated in one neutron to escape the mutual attraction. The excited quasi-bound nucleus is called a compound nucleus .

Low energy (e, e' xn), (γ, xn) (the xn indicating one or more neutrons), where the gamma or virtual gamma energy is near the giant dipole resonance . These increase the need for radiation shielding around electron accelerators .

See also [ edit ] Look up nuclear reaction in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Acoplanarity Atomic mass Atomic nucleus Atomic number CNO cycle Nuclear chain reaction Oppenheimer–Phillips process Nuclear Power References [ edit ] ^ Cockcroft and Walton split lithium with high energy protons April 1932.

Archived 2012-09-02 at the Wayback Machine ^ The Astrophysics Spectator: Hydrogen Fusion Rates in Stars ^ Tilley, R. J. D. (2004).

Understanding Solids: The Science of Materials .

John Wiley and Sons . p. 495.

ISBN 0-470-85275-5 .

^ Suplee, Curt (23 August 2009).

"Atomic Weights and Isotopic Compositions with Relative Atomic Masses" .

NIST .

^ Shinn, E.; Et., al. (2013). "Nuclear energy conversion with stacks of graphene nanocapacitors".

Complexity .

18 (3): 24– 27.

Bibcode : 2013Cmplx..18c..24S .

doi : 10.1002/cplx.21427 .

Sources [ edit ] Schmitz, Taylor (1973).

Nuclear Physics .

Pergamon Press .

ISBN 0-08-016983-X .

Bertulani, Carlos (2007).

Nuclear Physics in a Nutshell .

Princeton University Press .

ISBN 978-0-691-12505-3 .

v t e Nuclear processes Radioactive decay Alpha Beta Double Gamma radiation Cluster decay Electron capture Double Internal conversion Isomeric transition Neutron emission Positron emission Proton emission Spontaneous fission Stellar nucleosynthesis Deuterium fusion Li burning Proton–proton chain CNO cycle α process Triple-α C burning Ne burning O burning Si burning r -process s -process p-process rp-process Other processes Photodisintegration Photofission Capture Neutron capture Proton capture Exchange (n-p) reaction v t e Energy History Index Outline Fundamental concepts Conservation of energy Energetics Energy Units Energy condition Energy level Energy system Energy transformation Energy transition Mass Negative mass Mass–energy equivalence Power Thermodynamics Enthalpy Entropic force Entropy Exergy Free entropy Heat capacity Heat transfer Irreversible process Isolated system Laws of thermodynamics Negentropy Quantum thermodynamics Thermal equilibrium Thermal reservoir Thermodynamic equilibrium Thermodynamic free energy Thermodynamic potential Thermodynamic state Thermodynamic system Thermodynamic temperature Volume (thermodynamics) Work Types Binding Nuclear Chemical Dark Elastic Electric potential energy Electrical Gravitational Binding Interatomic potential Internal Ionization Kinetic Magnetic Mechanical Negative Phantom Potential Quantum chromodynamics binding energy Quantum fluctuation Quantum potential Quintessence Radiant Rest Sound Surface Thermal Vacuum Zero-point Energy carriers Battery Capacitor Electricity Enthalpy Fuel Fossil Oil Heat Latent heat Hydrogen Hydrogen fuel Mechanical wave Radiation Sound wave Work Primary energy Bioenergy Fossil fuel Coal Natural gas Petroleum Geothermal Gravitational Hydropower Marine Nuclear fuel Natural uranium Radiant Solar Wind Energy system components Biomass Electric power Electricity delivery Energy engineering Fossil fuel power station Cogeneration Integrated gasification combined cycle Geothermal power Hydropower Hydroelectricity Tidal power Wave farm Nuclear power Nuclear power plant Radioisotope thermoelectric generator Oil refinery Solar power Concentrated solar power Photovoltaic system Solar thermal energy Solar furnace Solar power tower Wind power Airborne wind energy Wind farm Use and supply Efficient energy use Agriculture Computing Transport Energy conservation Energy consumption Energy policy Energy development Energy security Energy storage Renewable energy Sustainable energy World energy supply and consumption Africa Asia Australia Canada Europe Mexico South America United States Misc.

Energy in work Carbon footprint Energy democracy Energy recovery Energy recycling Jevons paradox Waste-to-energy Waste-to-energy plant Category Commons Portal WikiProject Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other NARA Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐6cc77c66b8‐hl48r
Cached time: 20250812003927
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.450 seconds
Real time usage: 0.544 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4366/1000000
Revision size: 20641/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 114427/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 8769/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 13/100
Expensive parser function count: 3/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 52247/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.242/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6909695/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  422.198      1 -total
 22.87%   96.538      1 Template:Reflist
 20.29%   85.673      1 Template:Nuclear_physics
 19.90%   84.004      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists
 16.81%   70.987      3 Template:Cite_book
 11.11%   46.914      1 Template:Short_description
 10.10%   42.628     18 Template:Nuclide
  8.18%   34.535      1 Template:Authority_control
  7.85%   33.137      3 Template:Navbox
  7.83%   33.039     18 Template:Physics_particle Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:460322:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250812003927 and revision id 1296595833. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Nuclear_reaction&oldid=1296595833 " Categories : Physical phenomena Nuclear chemistry Nuclear physics Nuclear fission Nuclear fusion Radioactivity Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 21 June 2025, at 00:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Nuclear reaction 69 languages Add topic

