Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Overview 2 Shen Buhai 3 See also 4 References Toggle References subsection 4.1 Citations 4.2 Sources Toggle the table of contents School of Names 24 languages العربية Asturianu 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Català Deutsch Español Français Galego 한국어 עברית Кыргызча Latina 日本語 Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Slovenščina Svenska தமிழ் Українська Tiếng Việt 文言 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Chinese philosophical school School of Names Chinese 名家 Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Míngjiā Bopomofo ㄇㄧㄥˊ ㄐㄧㄚ Wade–Giles Ming 2 -chia 1 Yue: Cantonese Jyutping Ming4 gaa1 Alternative Chinese name Chinese 形名家 Literal meaning School of forms and names Transcriptions Standard Mandarin Hanyu Pinyin Xíngmíngjiā Bopomofo ㄒㄧㄥˊ ㄇㄧㄥˊ ㄐㄧㄚ Wade–Giles Hsing 2 -ming 2 -chia 1 Yue: Cantonese Jyutping Jing4 ming4 gaa1 The School of Names , or School of Forms and Names , [ 1 ] is a school of thought in Chinese philosophy that grew out of Mohist logic. Sometimes termed Logicians , "dialecticians" or sophists modernly, Han scholars used it in reference to figures earlier termed Disputers in the Zhuangzi , as a view seemingly dating back to the Warring States period ( c.

479 – 221 BC). Sometimes treated together with the later Mohists, rather than a unified movement like the Mohists, it represents a social category of early linguistic debaters. Citical arguments in later, more orthodox Mohist texts, with their own logicians, would appear directed at their kind of debates, but likely respected them.

[ 2 ] Figures associated with it include Deng Xi , Yin Wen , Hui Shi , and Gongsun Long .

[ 3 ] A Three Kingdoms era figure, Xu Gan , is relevant for discussions of names and realities, but was more Confucian and less philosophically relativist .

Including figures referenced by the Zhuangzi, [ 2 ] some likely served as a bridge between Mohism and the relativism of Zhuangzi Daoism, which, in contrast to the Daodejing , "clearly reveals exposure" to school of names thinkers.

[ 4 ] Hui Shi is noted for relativism, also " embracing the ten thousand things " (his tenth thesis).

[ 2 ] But he may not have had much connection with Gongsun Long , and includes thinkers with backgrounds ranging from Mohist and Confucian to Daoistic.

Gongsun Long is familiar with both Mohism and Confucianism. Though (other) Confucians may have been critical, arguably he is not a relativist, attempting to support Confucianism when he uses it to defend the White Horse Dialogue .

[ 5 ] [ 2 ] More in line with Confucianism and Mohism, he believed in kindness and duty, and has a rectification of names doctrine aimed at actualities and social order rather than relativism. Willing to argue either side of an issue, they were taken as sophist by their critics, but some arguments were not necessarily intended to be paradoxical.

A contemporary of Confucius and the younger Mozi , Deng Xi, associated with litigation, is taken by Liu Xiang as the originator of the principle of xíngmíng , or ensuring that ministers' deeds ( xing ) harmonized with their words ( ming ).

[ 6 ] A primary concern of the bureaucratically oriented Shen Buhai and Han Fei , some of their administrators would have had a concern for relations in the bureaucracy.

[ 7 ] Another relativist figure in the Zhuangzi, Xun Kuang considered Shen Dao something of a disputer himself, but one "obsessed" with fa (concept) rather than names and realities. With Gongsun Long as example, most were still likely more socially and philosophically oriented than the late, stringent Han Feizi ; it cannot be assumed that many were familiar with Shang Yang .

Birthplaces of notable Zhou-era philosophers belonging to the School of Names are marked by circles in blue.

Overview [ edit ] The earliest literary occurrence for xingming is in the Zhan Guo Ce , in reference to what would become known as the School of Names amongst other more modern terms; Chris Fraser ( Stanford Encyclopedia ) modernly argues "Disputers" a more "appropriate" English label.

The philosophy of the Logicians is often considered to be akin to those of the sophists or of the dialecticians . One of the few surviving lines from the school, "a one-foot stick, every day take away half of it, in a myriad ages it will not be exhausted", resembles Zeno's paradoxes . However, some of their other aphorisms seem contradictory or unclear when taken out of context, for example, "dogs are not hounds".

Joseph Needham notes that their works have been lost, except for the partially preserved oeuvre of Gongsun Long , and the paradoxes of Chapter 33 of the Zhuangzi , considering the disappearance of the greater part of Gongsun Long's work one of the worst losses in the ancient Chinese books, as what remains is said to reach the highest point of ancient Chinese philosophical writing.

[ 8 ] As with the Legalists , Sinologist Kidder Smith highlights the mixed posthumous reception received by the school of names. Already opposed by the Later Mohists (who have also sometimes been termed "logicians") in their own era for their paradoxes, many of them, despite being remembered as sophists, would also have been administrators.

Hui Shi was a prime minister, while Gongsun Long was a diplomat and peace activist, as typical of the Mohists. Although not classed under it, while Shen Buhai may not have been familiar with his contemporary Shang Yang in the remote Qin state , he likely was familiar with central Chinese "school of names" type debates on language and the correlation between the names and realities of things, with language useful in administration.

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] Shen Buhai [ edit ] In the Han dynasty secretaries of government who had charge of the records of decisions in criminal matters would come to be called called xingming . The Han-era scholars Sima Qian ( c.

145 – c.

86 BC ) and Liu Xiang (77–6 BC) attribute the doctrine of Xing-Ming back to Shen Buhai (400 – c.

337 BC ).

[ 11 ] According to the Han Feizi , Shen Buhai actually used the older, more philosophically common equivalent, ming-shi, or name and reality, linking the origination of their administrative method, or "doctrine of names", with the debates of the neo- Mohists and school of names.

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] Such discussions are prominent in the Han Feizi .

[ 14 ] Ming ('name') sometimes has the sense of "speech", so as to compare the statements of an aspiring officer with the reality of his actions—or of "reputation", again compared with real conduct ( xing 'form' or shi 'reality').

[ 15 ] Two anecdotes in the Han Feizi provide examples—member of the School of Names Ni Yue argued that a white horse is not a horse, and defeated all debaters, but was still tolled at the gate. In another, the chief minister of Yan pretended to see a white horse dash out the gate. All of his subordinates denied having seen anything, save one, who ran out after it and returned claiming to have seen it, and was thereby identified as a flatterer.

[ 16 ] Shen Buhai's personnel control, or rectification of names , with "names" representing ministrial claims, thereby worked for "strict performance control", correlating claims, performances and posts.

[ 17 ] It would become a central tenet of both the Han Feizi's statecraft and other so-called ' Huang–Lao ' derivatives. Rather than having to look for "good" men, mingshi or xingming can seek the right man for a particular post, though doing so implies a total organizational knowledge of the regime. More simply though, it can allow ministers to "name" themselves through accounts of specific cost and time frame, leaving their definition to competing ministers. Claims or utterances "bind the speaker to the realization a job". This was the doctrine favoured by Han Fei, with subtle differences. Favoring exactness, the correct articulation of ming or terms is considered crucial to the realization of projects, combatting the tendency to promise too much.

[ 18 ] [ 19 ] See also [ edit ] China portal Philosophy portal History of logic References [ edit ] Citations [ edit ] ^ Needham & Wang 1956 , p. 185.

^ a b c d Fraser 2024 .

^ Fraser 2017 .

^ Hansen 2024 .

^ Hansen 1992 , p. 257.

^ Cua, Antonio S. (2013), Encyclopedia of Chinese Philosophy , Routledge, p. 492, ISBN 978-1-135-36748-0 – via Google Books ^ Smith 2003 ^ Needham & Wang 1956 , p. 185, 697.

^ Van Norden 2011 , p. 111.

^ Smith 2003 ; Fraser 2017 .

^ Creel 1970 , pp. 72, 80, 103–104; Creel 1959 , pp. 199–200; Makeham 1990 , pp. 91–92.

^ Creel 1970 , pp. 82.

^ Makeham 1990 , pp. 87, 89.

^ Csikszentmihalyi, Mark (1997), "Chia I's "Techniques of the Tao" and the Han Confucian Appropriation of Technical Discourse", Asia Major , 10 (1/2): 49– 67, ISSN 0004-4482 , JSTOR 41645528 ^ Creel 1970 , p. 83; Creel 1959 , p. 203; Lewis 1999 , p. 33.

^ Lewis 1999 , p. 33.

^ Hansen 1992 , p. 359.

^ Makeham 1994 , p. 67; Creel 1974 , p. 57.

^ Makeham 1990 , p. 91; Lewis 1999 , p. 33; Goldin 2013 , p. 9.

Sources [ edit ] Creel, Herrlee Glessner (1970), What Is Taoism?: And Other Studies in Chinese Cultural History , University of Chicago Press, ISBN 978-0-226-12047-8 – via Google Books ——— (1959), "The Meaning of Hsing-Ming", in Egerod, Søren; Glahn, Else (eds.), Sinological studies dedicated to Bernhard Karlgren on his seventieth birthday , Copenhagen: Ejnar Munksgaard, OCLC 2172864 ——— (1974), Shen Pu-hai: a Chinese political philosopher of the fourth century B.C.

, University of Chicago Press, ISBN 978-0-226-12027-0 Fraser, Chris. "School of Names". In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Spring 2017 ed.). Stanford University Press.

Fraser, Chris.

"School of Names" . In Zalta, Edward N. (ed.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Fall 2024 ed.). Stanford University Press.

Graham, A. C.

(1993), Disputers of the Tao: Philosophical Argument in Ancient China , La Salle: Open Court, ISBN 978-0-812-69087-3 Goldin, Paul R. (2013), "Han Fei and the Han Feizi ", Dao Companion to the Philosophy of Han Fei (PDF) , Springer, ISBN 978-9-400-74318-2 – via the University of Pennsylvania Lewis, Mark Edward (1999), Writing and authority in early China , Albany: State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0-791-44113-8 Needham, Joseph ; Wang, Ling (1991) [1956], Science and Civilisation in China: History of Scientific Thought , vol. 2, Cambridge University Press, ISBN 978-0-521-05800-1 Hansen, Chad (1992), "The School of Names: Linguistic Analysis in China", A Daoist Theory of Chinese Thought: a Philosophical Interpretation , Oxford University Press, pp.

233– 264, ISBN 978-0-195-13419-3 Hansen, Chad (2024).

"Zhuangzi" . In Zalta, Edward N.

; Nodelman, Uri (eds.).

Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (Summer 2024 ed.) . Retrieved 14 June 2025 .

——— (1990), "The Legalist Concept of Hsing-Ming: an Example of the Contribution of Archaeological Evidence to the Re-Interpretation of Transmitted Texts", Monumenta Serica , 39 : 87– 114, doi : 10.1080/02549948.1990.11731214 , ISSN 0254-9948 , JSTOR 40726902 Makeham, John (1994), Name and Actuality in Early Chinese Thought , State University of New York Press, ISBN 978-0-791-41984-7 – via Google Books Solomon, Bernard S. (2013), On the School of Names in Ancient China , Sankt Augustin: Institut Monumenta Serica, ISBN 978-3-805-00610-1 Reding, Jean-Paul (1985), Les fondements philosophiques de la rhétorique chez les sophistes grecs et chez les sophistes chinois (in French), P. Lang, ISBN 978-3-261-04073-2 Smith, Kidder (2003). "Sima Tan and the Invention of Daoism, "Legalism," et cetera ".

The Journal of Asian Studies .

62 (1): 129– 156.

doi : 10.2307/3096138 .

JSTOR 3096138 .

Van Norden, Bryan W.

(2011), Introduction to Classical Chinese Philosophy , Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, ISBN 978-1-603-84615-8 – via Google Books v t e Philosophy Branches Branches Applied philosophy Logic Metaphilosophy Philosophy of education Philosophy of information Philosophy of language Philosophy of mathematics Philosophy of religion Philosophy of science Political philosophy Practical philosophy Social philosophy Theoretical philosophy Aesthetics Aesthetic response Formalism Institutionalism Epistemology Empiricism Fideism Naturalism Particularism Rationalism Skepticism Solipsism Ethics Consequentialism Deontology Virtue Free will Compatibilism Determinism Hard Incompatibilism Hard Libertarianism Metaphysics Atomism Dualism Idealism Monism Naturalism Realism Mind Behaviorism Eliminativism Emergentism Epiphenomenalism Functionalism Objectivism Subjectivism Normativity Absolutism Particularism Relativism Nihilism Skepticism Universalism Ontology Action Event Process Reality Anti-realism Conceptualism Idealism Materialism Naturalism Nominalism Physicalism Realism By era By era Ancient Western Medieval Renaissance Early modern Modern Contemporary Ancient Chinese Agriculturalism Confucianism Legalism Logicians Mohism Chinese naturalism Taoism Yangism Greco- Roman Presocratic Ionians Pythagoreans Eleatics Atomists Sophists Cyrenaics Cynicism Eretrian school Megarian school Academy Peripatetic school Hellenistic philosophy Pyrrhonism Stoicism Epicureanism Academic Skepticism Middle Platonism School of the Sextii Neopythagoreanism Second Sophistic Neoplatonism Church Fathers Dispositio Indian Hindu Samkhya Nyaya Vaisheshika Yoga Mīmāṃsā Ājīvika Ajñana Cārvāka Jain Anekantavada Syādvāda Buddhist Abhidharma Sarvāstivadā Pudgalavada Sautrāntika Madhyamaka Svatantrika and Prasangika Śūnyatā Yogacara Tibetan Persian Mazdakism Mithraism Zoroastrianism Zurvanism Medieval East Asian Neotaoism Tiantai Huayan Chan Zen Neo-Confucianism Korean Confucianism European Christian Augustinianism Scholasticism Thomism Scotism Occamism Renaissance humanism Indian Vedanta Acintya bheda abheda Advaita Bhedabheda Dvaita Nimbarka Sampradaya Shuddhadvaita Vishishtadvaita Navya-Nyāya Islamic Aristotelianism Averroism Avicennism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Sufi Jewish Judeo-Islamic Modern Anarchism Classical Realism Collectivism Conservatism Determinism Dualism Edo neo-Confucianism Empiricism Existentialism Foundationalism Historicism Holism Humanism Anti- Idealism Absolute British German Objective Subjective Transcendental Individualism Kokugaku Liberalism Materialism Modernism Monism Naturalism Natural law Nihilism New Confucianism Neo-scholasticism Pessimism Pragmatism Phenomenology Positivism Reductionism Rationalism Social contract Socialism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism People Cartesianism Kantianism Neo Kierkegaardianism Krausism Hegelianism Marxism Newtonianism Nietzscheanism Spinozism Contemporary Analytic Applied ethics Analytic feminism Analytical Marxism Communitarianism Consequentialism Critical rationalism Experimental philosophy Falsificationism Foundationalism / Coherentism Internalism and externalism Logical positivism Legal positivism Meta-ethics Moral realism Quinean naturalism Normative ethics Ordinary language philosophy Postanalytic philosophy Quietism Rawlsian Reformed epistemology Systemics Scientism Scientific realism Scientific skepticism Transactionalism Contemporary utilitarianism Vienna Circle Wittgensteinian Continental Critical theory Deconstruction Existentialism Feminist Frankfurt School Hermeneutics Neo-Marxism New Historicism Phenomenology Posthumanism Postmodernism Post-structuralism Social constructionism Structuralism Western Marxism Miscellaneous Kyoto School Objectivism Postcritique Russian cosmism By region By region African Bantu Egyptian Ethiopian Africana Eastern Buddhist Chinese Indian Indonesian Japanese Korean Taiwanese Vietnamese Middle Eastern Iranian Islamic Jewish Pakistani Turkish Western ( Analytic / Continental ) American Australian British Scottish Canada Czech Danish Dutch Finland French German Greek Italian Maltese Polish Slovene Spanish Miscellaneous Amerindian Aztec Romanian Russian Yugoslav Philosophy portal Category v t e Chinese philosophy Schools Agriculturalism Buddhism Confucianism Han learning Neo-Confucianism New Confucianism Huang–Lao Legalism Mohism Marxism School of Diplomacy School of Names Naturalism Taoism Daoxue Xuanxue Yangism Mixed School Nine Schools of Thought Hundred Schools of Thought Philosophers Eastern Zhou Bu Shang Chunyu Kun Confucius Deng Xi Duanmu Ci Gaozi Gongsun Long Guan Zhong Han Fei Hui Shi Laozi Li Kui Li Si Lie Yukou Mencius Mozi Shang Yang Shen Buhai Shen Dao Su Qin Sun Tzu Wu Qi Ximen Bao Xu Xing Xunzi Yang Zhu Yuan Xian Zhang Yi Zhuang Zhou Zichan Zisi Zou Yan Qin Han Ban Zhao Dong Zhongshu Dongfang Shuo Dou Wu Huan Tan Jia Yi Jia Kui Jing Fang Kong Anguo Liu An Lu Jia Liu Xiang Ma Rong Wang Chong Wang Fu Xun Yue Yang Xiong Three Kingdoms Jin Northern and Southern Bao Jingyan Fan Zhen Fan Ye Ge Hong Guo Xiang Fu Xuan He Yan Huiyuan Ji Kang Sengzhao Wang Su Wang Bi Xiahou Xuan Xie Daoyun Xun Can Yan Zhitui Zhi Dun Sui Tang Fu Yi Jizang Wang Tong Zhang Zhihe Han Yu Li Ao Liu Yuxi Liu Zongyuan Linji Yixuan Five Dynasties Ten Kingdoms Song Cheng Hao Cheng Yi Fan Zhongyan Hu Hong Lu Jiuyuan Shao Yong Shen Kuo Su Song Wang Anshi Wang Chongyang Wang Chuyi Ye Shi Zhang Zai Zhou Dunyi Zhu Xi Yuan Ming Chen Jiru Huang Zongxi Hong Zicheng Jiao Hong Jiao Yu Lai Zhide Li Zhi Liu Bowen Liu Zongzhou Luo Rufang Qian Dehong Wang Ji Wang Gen Wang Yangming Wu Cheng Xu Ai Zhan Ruoshui Qing Chen Hongmou Chen Menglei Dai Zhen Fang Bao Fang Lanfen Fang Quan Feng Guifen Gong Zizhen Gu Yanwu Hong Liangji Ji Yun Ma Qixi Lin Zexu Liu Yiming Pan Pingge Tan Sitong Tang Zhen Wang Fuzhi Wei Yuan Yan Yuan Yu Yue Yu Zhengxie Zhang Xuecheng Zhuang Cunyu Zeng Guofan 20th century Cai Yuanpei Carsun Chang P. C. Chang Chen Daqi Chen Duxiu Chung-ying Cheng Ch'ien Mu Chu Anping Fang Keli Feng Youlan Gan Yang Gu Su Gu Zhun He Guanghu Hu Qiaomu Hu Shih Hua Gang Ray Huang Jiang Qing Jin Yuelin Kang Youwei Lee Shui-chuen Li Shicen Li Zehou Liang Qichao Liang Shuming Lin Yutang Liu Xiaofeng Lu Xun Mao Zedong Mou Zongsan Qiu Renzong Sun Yat-sen Tang Chun-i Tang Yijie Tsang Lap Chuen Xiong Shili Xu Fuguan Yang Changji Yin Haiguang Yu Dunkang Zhang Dongsun Zhang Shenfu Zhou Guoping Zhou Zuoren Concepts Tao De Fa Jian'ai Jing Jing zuo Li Confucianism Neo-Confucianism Ming yun Qi Qing Ren Three teachings Shen Si Ti Tian Mandate of Heaven Wu wei Filial piety Xin Human nature Self-cultivation Yi Yin and yang Yong Zhengming Ziran Topics Logic Theology Metaphysics Politics Ethics Role ethics State consequentialism Ink wash Shan shui Society Epistemology Metaphilosophy Legitimacy Authority control databases : National Japan Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=School_of_Names&oldid=1299973656 " Categories : School of Names History of logic Mohism Taoism Confucianism Schools and traditions in ancient Chinese philosophy Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use Oxford spelling from April 2024 Articles containing Chinese-language text CS1 French-language sources (fr) This page was last edited on 11 July 2025, at 14:15 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents School of Names 24 languages Add topic

