Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 What types of things are the humanities?

2 The various humanities Toggle The various humanities subsection 2.1 Social sciences that incorporate humanistic methods 2.2 Interdisciplinary humanities 2.3 Applied humanities 3 General humanities methodologies 4 Humanities by region 5 Politics and the humanities 6 History of the humanities Toggle History of the humanities subsection 6.1 History of humanities fields 6.1.1 History of the humanities that are also social sciences 7 Humanities education Toggle Humanities education subsection 7.1 Some humanities departments 8 Humanities awards 9 Publications in the humanities 10 General humanities organizations 11 People influential in the humanities 12 See also 13 References 14 External links Toggle the table of contents Outline of the humanities 1 language 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of and topical guide to the humanities The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to the humanities: Humanities – academic disciplines that study the human condition , using methods that are primarily analytical , critical , or speculative, as distinguished from the mainly empirical approaches of the natural sciences .

What types of things are the humanities?

[ edit ] The humanities can be described as all of the following: a branch of academic disciplines – an academic discipline is a field of knowledge that is taught and researched at the college or university level. Disciplines are defined (in part), and recognized by the academic journals in which research is published, and the learned societies and academic departments or faculties to which their practitioners belong.

study of the human condition – unique and inescapable features of being human in a social, cultural, and personal context. The study of the humanities (history, philosophy, literature, the arts, etc.) all help understand the nature of the human condition and the broader cultural and social arrangements that make up human lives.

The various humanities [ edit ] Classics ( outline ) – study of the languages, literature, philosophy, history, art, archaeology and all other cultural elements of the ancient Mediterranean world (Bronze Age ca. BC 3000 to Late Antiquity ca. AD 300–600); especially Ancient Greece and Ancient Rome.

Digital classics – application of the tools of digital humanities to the field of classics, or more broadly to the study of the ancient world.

History ( outline ) – study of the past.

Digital history –  use of digital media and tools for historical practice, presentation, analysis, and research. It is a branch of the Digital Humanities and an outgrowth of Quantitative history, Cliometrics, and History and Computing.

Languages – study of individual languages ( Italian language , Japanese language ) or groups of related languages ( Romance languages , Slavic languages ). Not to be confused with Linguistics , the study of the structure and function of language.

Literature ( outline ) – the art of written work, and is not confined to published sources (although, under some circumstances, unpublished sources can also be exempt).

Comparative literature comparative research into literature from more than one language, working with the original languages in which the texts were written Philosophy ( outline ) – study of general and fundamental problems, such as those connected with existence , knowledge , values , reason, mind , and language.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Philosophy is distinguished from other ways of addressing such problems by its critical, generally systematic approach and its reliance on rational argument .

[ 3 ] Religion ( outline ) – a religion is a collection of cultural systems , belief systems , and worldviews that establishes symbols that relate humanity to spirituality and, sometimes, to moral values.

[ 4 ] Many religions have narratives , symbols , traditions and sacred histories that are intended to give meaning to life or to explain the origin of life or the universe . They tend to derive morality , ethics , religious laws or a preferred lifestyle from their ideas about the cosmos and human nature .

Visual arts ( outline ) – art forms that create works which are primarily visual in nature. Examples of visual arts include: Architecture ( outline ) – The art and science of designing and erecting buildings and other physical structures.

Classical architecture ( outline ) – architecture of classical antiquity and later architectural styles influenced by it.

Arts and crafts ( outline ) – recreational activities and hobbies that involve making things with one's hands and skill.

Drawing ( outline ) – visual art that makes use of any number of drawing instruments to mark a two-dimensional medium.

Film ( outline ) – moving pictures.

Painting ( outline ) – practice of applying paint, pigment, color or other medium to a surface with a brush or other object.

Art history Photography ( outline ) – art, science, and practice of creating pictures by recording radiation on a radiation-sensitive medium, such as a photographic film, or electronic image sensors.

Sculpture ( outline ) – three-dimensional artwork created by shaping or combining hard materials - typically stone such as marble - or metal, glass, or wood.

Performing arts ( outline ) – those forms of art that use the artist's own body, face, and presence as a medium.  Examples of performing arts include: Dance ( outline ) – art form of movement of the body, usually rhythmic and to music, [ 5 ] used as a form of expression, social interaction, or presented in a spiritual or performance setting.

Drama study of regional, global, or historical theatre, as well as techniques for acting, directing and choreographing plays Film ( outline ) – moving pictures, the art form that records performances visually.

Installation art – the merging of multiple genres into a coherent three-dimensional, multi-sensory work.

Theatre ( outline ) – collaborative form of fine art that uses live performers to present the experience of a real or imagined event before a live audience in a specific place.

Music ( outline ) – art form the medium of which is sound and silence.

Opera ( outline ) – art form in which singers and musicians perform a dramatic work combining text (called a libretto) and musical score.

[ 6 ] Stagecraft ( outline ) – technical aspects of theatrical, film, and video production. It includes, but is not limited to, constructing and rigging scenery, hanging and focusing of lighting, design and procurement of costumes, makeup, procurement of props, stage management, and recording and mixing of sound.

Social sciences that incorporate humanistic methods [ edit ] Anthropology ( outline ) – study of how humans developed biologically and culturally.

Archaeology research into human history by locating and studying artifacts, structural remains, and other surviving evidence Area studies – interdisciplinary fields of research and scholarship pertaining to particular geographical, national/federal, or cultural regions. The term exists primarily as a general description for what are, in the practice of scholarship, many heterogeneous fields of research, encompassing both the social sciences and the humanities. Typical area studies programs involve history, political science, sociology, cultural studies, languages, geography, literature, and related disciplines. In contrast to cultural studies, area studies often include diaspora and emigration from the area studied.

Communication studies ( outline ) – deals with processes of human communication, commonly defined as the sharing of symbols to create meaning. The discipline encompasses a range of topics, from face-to-face conversation to mass media outlets such as television broadcasting. Communication studies also examines how messages are interpreted through the political, cultural, economic, and social dimensions of their contexts.

Cultural studies ( outline ) – interdisciplinary academic field grounded in critical theory and literary criticism that attempts to understand the political dynamics of contemporary culture, as well as its historical foundations, conflicts, and defining traits. Researchers concentrate on how a particular medium or message relates to ideology , social class , nationality , ethnicity , sexuality and gender rather than investigating a particular culture or area of the world.

[ 7 ] History ( outline ) – study of the past.

Law ( outline ) – set of rules and principles by which a society is governed. (For branches, see Law under Society below).

Interdisciplinary humanities [ edit ] Area studies – interdisciplinary approach to studying a geographic area.

Ecological humanities – interdisciplinary area of research, drawing on the many environmental sub-disciplines that have emerged in the humanities over the past several decades (in particular environmental philosophy, environmental history and environmental anthropology).

Ethno-cultural studies, such as: African-American studies , Latino studies , and other programs that take an interdisciplinary approach to ethno-cultural research Gender studies interdisciplinary investigation of gender roles in culture, economics, business, politics, medicine, fine arts, media, etc.

Library studies Museology Women's studies interdisciplinary study of the roles of women and ways of defining and redefining the feminine identity Applied humanities [ edit ] Applied arts such as fashion design , graphic design , industrial design , interior design Health humanities – application of humanities disciplines to discourse about, expression of, or the promotion of the dimensions of human health and well being.

Medical humanities – is an interdisciplinary field of medicine which includes the humanities and their application to medical education and practice.

General humanities methodologies [ edit ] Digital humanities – area of research, teaching, and creation concerned with the intersection of computing and the disciplines of the humanities. It is focused on the digitization and analysis of materials related to the traditional disciplines of the humanities.

Digital classics – application of the tools of digital humanities to the field of classics, or more broadly to the study of the ancient world.

Digital history –  use of digital media and tools for historical practice, presentation, analysis, and research. It is a branch of the Digital Humanities and an outgrowth of Quantitative history, Cliometrics, and History and Computing.

Humanities by region [ edit ] Humanities in the United States Politics and the humanities [ edit ] Arts and Humanities Research Council – British Research Council and non-departmental public body that provides approximately £102 million from the Government to support research and postgraduate study in the arts and humanities.

Berlin Declaration on Open Access to Knowledge in the Sciences and Humanities – major international statement on open access / access to knowledge. By 24 October 2011, 324 organizations had signed the declaration.

Humanities Colleges – part of the Specialist Schools Programme in the United Kingdom, and a source of extra funding.

National Endowment for the Humanities – independent federal agency of the United States established by the National Foundation on the Arts and the Humanities Act of 1965 dedicated to supporting research, education, preservation, and public programs in the humanities.

President's Committee on the Arts and Humanities – established in Washington, DC in 1982 by an Executive Order from President Ronald Reagan and works with each Administration to incorporate the arts and the humanities into White House objectives.

Public humanities – work of federal, state, nonprofit and community-based cultural organizations that engage the public in conversations, facilitate and present lectures, exhibitions, performances and other programs for the general public on topics such as history, philosophy, popular culture and the arts.

History of the humanities [ edit ] Humanitas List of people considered a founder in a Humanities field Renaissance humanism – movement of cultural and educational reform that focused on study of the studia humanitatis , today known as the humanities.

[ 8 ] History of Humanities – there is only one journal devoted to the history of all humanities disciplines across periods and cultures, published by the University of Chicago Press.

History of humanities fields [ edit ] History of the classics Origins of the classics Ancient Greece ( outline ) – Ancient Rome ( outline ) – Historiography – history of history.

Origin of language History of literature History of philosophy History of religion History of the visual arts History of architecture History of arts and crafts History of drawing History of film History of painting History of photography History of sculpture History of performing arts History of dance History of film History of theatre History of music History of opera History of stagecraft History of the humanities that are also social sciences [ edit ] History of anthropology History of area studies History of communication studies Historiography – history of history.

History of law Humanities education [ edit ] Master of Humanities Public humanities Some humanities departments [ edit ] Humanities Division, University of Oxford MIT School of Humanities, Arts, and Social Sciences Moscow University for the Humanities Stanford University School of Humanities and Sciences University of California Humanities Research Institute – university system-wide research institute headquartered at the UC Irvine campus that promotes collaboration and interdisciplinarity through supporting work by teams of researchers from varying fields both within and outside of the UC system.

Humanities awards [ edit ] National Humanities Medal – given by the National Endowment for the Humanities to honor individuals or groups whose work has deepened the nation's understanding of the humanities, broadened citizens’ engagement with the humanities, or helped preserve and expand Americans’ access to important resources in the humanities.

Publications in the humanities [ edit ] List of humanities journals Arts and Humanities Citation Index British Humanities Index General humanities organizations [ edit ] National Humanities Center Society for Digital Humanities People influential in the humanities [ edit ] List of people considered a founder in a Humanities field See also [ edit ] Humanities reference desk Great Books Great Books programs in Canada Liberal Arts Social sciences Human science The Two Cultures List of academic disciplines "Periodic Table of Human Sciences" in Tinbergen's four questions References [ edit ] ^ Jenny Teichmann and Katherine C. Evans, Philosophy: A Beginner's Guide (Blackwell Publishing, 1999), p. 1: "Philosophy is a study of problems which are ultimate, abstract and very general. These problems are concerned with the nature of existence, knowledge, morality, reason and human purpose." ^ A.C. Grayling , Philosophy 1: A Guide through the Subject (Oxford University Press, 1998), p. 1: "The aim of philosophical inquiry is to gain insight into questions about knowledge, truth, reason, reality, meaning, mind, and value." ^ Anthony Quinton, in T. Honderich (ed.), The Oxford Companion to Philosophy (Oxford University Press, 1995), p. 666: "Philosophy is rationally critical thinking, of a more or less systematic kind about the general nature of the world (metaphysics or theory of existence), the justification of belief (epistemology or theory of knowledge), and the conduct of life (ethics or theory of value). Each of the three elements in this list has a non-philosophical counterpart, from which it is distinguished by its explicitly rational and critical way of proceeding and by its systematic nature. Everyone has some general conception of the nature of the world in which they live and of their place in it. Metaphysics replaces the unargued assumptions embodied in such a conception with a rational and organized body of beliefs about the world as a whole. Everyone has occasion to doubt and question beliefs, their own or those of others, with more or less success and without any theory of what they are doing. Epistemology seeks by argument to make explicit the rules of correct belief formation. Everyone governs their conduct by directing it to desired or valued ends. Ethics, or moral philosophy, in its most inclusive sense, seeks to articulate, in rationally systematic form, the rules or principles involved." ^ While religion is difficult to define, one standard model of religion, used in religious studies courses, was proposed by Clifford Geertz , who simply called it a "cultural system" (Clifford Geertz, Religion as a Cultural System , 1973). A critique of Geertz's model by Talal Asad categorized religion as "an anthropological category." (Talal Asad, The Construction of Religion as an Anthropological Category , 1982.) ^ Britannica.com ^ Some definitions of opera: "dramatic performance or composition of which music is an essential part, branch of art concerned with this" ( Concise Oxford English Dictionary ); "any dramatic work that can be sung (or at times declaimed or spoken) in a place for performance, set to original music for singers (usually in costume) and instrumentalists" (Amanda Holden, Viking Opera Guide ); "musical work for the stage with singing characters, originated in early years of 17th century" ( Pears Cyclopaedia , 1983 ed.).

^ In a loosely related but separate usage, the phrase cultural studies sometimes serves as a rough synonym for area studies , as a general term referring to the academic study of particular cultures in departments and programs such as Islamic studies , Asian studies , African American studies , et al.

. However, strictly speaking, cultural studies programs  are not concerned with specific areas of the world so much as specific cultural practices.

^ Bod, Rens; A New History of the Humanities , Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2014.

External links [ edit ] The humanities at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity The American Academy of Arts and Sciences - USA Humanities Indicators - USA National Humanities Center - USA The Humanities Association - UK National Humanities Alliance National Endowment for the Humanities - USA Australian Academy of the Humanities European Science Foundation - Humanities National Dana Center for the Humanities at Saint Anselm College American Academy Commission on the Humanities and Social Sciences v t e Humanities Disciplines Anthropology Archaeology Classical studies History Language arts Literature Poetry Rhetoric Law Performing arts Dance Music Theatre Philosophy Religious studies Visual arts Filmmaking Painting Sculpture Interdisciplinary fields Digital Environmental Health Medical Public Themes Abductive reasoning Aesthetics Antipositivism The arts Beauty Belles-lettres Bildung Creativity Critical theory Criticism Cultural literacy Culture High Pop General knowledge Hermeneutics Historicism Historism Human condition Humanitas Liberal arts education Trivium Quadrivium Metaphysics Ontology Moral character Self-realization Self-reflection Wisdom Work of art Journals American Journal of Archaeology Daedalus History of Humanities Humanitas Humanities and Social Sciences Communications Journal of Controversial Ideas Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society Leonardo Nova Religio Revue des Études Arméniennes Teaching Philosophy more...

Academia Arts and Humanities Research Council Human science Geisteswissenschaft Humanities, arts, and social sciences Master of Humanities Moscow University for the Humanities National Endowment for the Humanities National Humanities Medal Related Antihumanism Philistinism Criticism of mass culture Educational essentialism Humanities in the United States List of people considered a founder in a humanities field Outline of the humanities Renaissance humanism Studia Humanitatis v t e Wikipedia outlines General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places Health and fitness History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences People and self Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐597b4b5bbd‐n2blv
Cached time: 20250814220142
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.329 seconds
Real time usage: 0.418 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 797/1000000
Revision size: 21613/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 26913/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 613/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 8/100
Expensive parser function count: 0/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 0/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 26034/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.205/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 15835972/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  326.135      1 -total
 29.43%   95.994      1 Template:Lang
 27.14%   88.526      3 Template:Navbox
 24.19%   78.896      1 Template:Humanities
 19.28%   62.863      1 Template:Short_description
 15.30%   49.914      1 Template:Sisterlinks
 10.54%   34.384      2 Template:Pagetype
  5.86%   19.119      4 Template:Main_other
  5.02%   16.360      1 Template:SDcat
  3.98%   12.975      1 Template:Reflist Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:35036752:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814220142 and revision id 1273294980. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Outline_of_the_humanities&oldid=1273294980 " Categories : Humanities Outlines of the humanities Outlines Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Latin-language text Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 1 February 2025, at 17:26 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Outline of the humanities 1 language Add topic

