Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 System capabilities Toggle System capabilities subsection 2.1 Icing observations 2.2 Turbulence observations 3 Forecast models and validation Toggle Forecast models and validation subsection 3.1 Skew-T profiles 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents TAMDAR 2 languages Español 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Weather monitoring system This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This article contains promotional content .

Please help improve it by removing promotional language and inappropriate external links , and by adding encyclopedic text written from a neutral point of view .

( August 2016 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "TAMDAR" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( January 2023 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) TAMDAR ( Tropospheric Airborne Meteorological Data Reporting ) [ 1 ] is a weather monitoring system that consists of an in situ atmospheric sensor mounted on commercial aircraft for data gathering. It collects information similar to that collected by radiosondes carried aloft by weather balloons . It was developed by AirDat LLC, which was acquired by Panasonic Avionics Corporation in April 2013 and was operated until October 2018 under the name Panasonic Weather Solutions . It is now owned by FLYHT Aerospace Solutions Ltd .

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] In response to a governmental aviation safety initiative in the early 2000s, NASA (Daniels, [ 3 ] Tsoucalas [ 4 ] ), in partnership with the FAA , NOAA , and private industry, sponsored the early development and evaluation of a proprietary multifunction in situ atmospheric sensor for aircraft .  The predecessor to Panasonic Weather Solutions, AirDat (formerly ODS of Rapid City, SD ), located in Morrisville, North Carolina and Lakewood, Colorado , was formed in 2003 to develop and deploy the Tropospheric Airborne Meteorological Data Reporting (TAMDAR) system based on requirements provided by the Global Systems Division (GSD) of NOAA's Earth System Research Laboratories (ESRL), the FAA, and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO).

The TAMDAR sensor was originally deployed in December 2004 on a fleet of 63 Saab SF340 aircraft operated by Mesaba Airlines in the Great Lakes region of the United States as a part of the NASA-sponsored Great Lakes Fleet Experiment (GLFE). Over the last twelve years, equipage of the sensors has expanded beyond the continental US to include Alaska , the Caribbean , Mexico , Central America , Europe , and Asia . Airlines flying the system include Icelandair , Horizon ( Alaska Air Group), Chautauqua ( Republic Airways ), Piedmont ( American Airlines ), AeroMéxico , Ravn Alaska , Hageland , PenAir , Silver Airways , and Flybe , as well as a few research aircraft including the UK Met Office BAe-146 FAAM aircraft. Recently, an installation agreement has been reached with a large Southeast Asian airline as well. The TAMDAR system has been in continuous operation since its initial deployment in December 2004.

In 2014, TAMDAR data began being implemented in the national mesonet program consisting of NOAA and its partners.

[ 5 ] In October 2018, Panasonic Weather Solutions was acquired by FLYHT Aerospace Solutions, which has integrated TAMDAR with its AFIRs hardware package for airplanes (providing real-time data transmission via satellite connection).

[ 6 ] System capabilities [ edit ] TAMDAR observations include temperature , pressure , winds aloft, relative humidity , icing , and turbulence information which is critical for both aviation safety , the operational efficiency of the U.S.

National Airspace System (NAS), and other world airspace management systems as well as other weather-dependent operational environments such as maritime, defense, and energy. Additionally, each observation includes GPS-derived horizontal and vertical (altitude) coordinates, as well as a time stamp to the nearest second. With a continuous stream of observations, TAMDAR provides spatial, temporal resolution, and geographic coverage.

Upper air observing systems are normally subject to latency based on the communication networks used and quality assurance protocol. TAMDAR observations are typically received, processed, quality controlled, and available for distribution or model assimilation in less than one minute from the sampling time. The sensor requires no flight crew involvement; it operates automatically and sampling rates and calibration constants can be adjusted by remote command from a US-based operations center. TAMDAR sensors continuously transmit atmospheric observations via a global satellite network in real-time as the aircraft climbs, cruises, and descends.

The system is normally installed on fixed-wing airframes ranging from small, unmanned aerial systems (UAS) to long-range wide-bodies such as the Boeing 777 or Airbus A380 . Upon completion of the installations scheduled for 2015, more than 6,000 daily soundings were be produced in North America, Europe, and Asia at more than 400 locations.

[ citation needed ] Icing observations [ edit ] TAMDAR icing data provides high-volume objective icing data available to the airline industry.

[ 1 ] TAMDAR icing reports provide accurate spatial and temporal distribution of where icing is present. The icing data can be made available in raw observation form, or can be used to improve icing potential model forecasts.

Turbulence observations [ edit ] The TAMDAR sensor provides objective, high-resolution eddy dissipation rate (EDR) turbulence observations. This data is collected for both median and peak turbulence measurements and are capable of being sorted on a 7-point scale which are reported as light, moderate, or severe. The EDR data collection process does not depend on aircraft type or configuration, flight conditions, or load.

This turbulence data can be used to alter flight arrival and departure routes. It can be added into models to improve predictions of turbulence conditions, as well as being used as a verification tool for longer-range numerical weather prediction (NWP) based turbulence forecasts. As with the icing observations, the potential utility of this data in air traffic control decision-making for avoidance of turbulence encounters can be significant for cost and flight time.

Forecast models and validation [ edit ] Third-party studies have been conducted by NOAA-GSD, the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), and various universities and government agencies to verify the accuracy of TAMDAR data against that of weather balloons and aircraft test instrumentation, as well as quantifying the TAMDAR-related impacts on NWP. Ongoing data denial experiments show that the inclusion of TAMDAR data can significantly improve forecast model accuracy with the greatest gains realized during more dynamic and severe weather events.

Upper air observations are the single most important data set driving a forecast model. Fine-scale regional forecast accuracy is dependent on a representation of the mid and upper-level atmospheric flow, moisture, and wave patterns. If these features are properly analyzed during the model initialization period, then an accurate forecast will ensue. TAMDAR data has been shown to increase forecast accuracy over the U.S. on the order of 30 to 50 percent for a monthly average, even for 3D-Var (GSI) models.

[ 7 ] The FAA funded a four-year TAMDAR impact study that was concluded in January 2009. The study was conducted by the Global Systems Division (GSD) of NOAA under an FAA contract to ascertain the potential benefits of including TAMDAR data in the 3D-Var Rapid Update Cycle (RUC) model, which was the current operational aviation-centric model run by National Centers for Environmental Prediction (NCEP). Two parallel versions of the model were run with the control withholding the TAMDAR data. The results of this study concluded that significant gains in forecast skills were achieved with the inclusion of the data despite using 3D-Var assimilation methods. The reduction in 30-day running mean RMS error averaged throughout the contiguous United States within the boundary layer for model state variables were: Up to 50% reduction in RH error 35% reduction in temperature error 15% reduction in wind error This study was conducted using a 3D-Var model on a 13 km (8.1 mi) horizontal grid. Likewise, the nature of the 30-day mean statistics dilutes the actual impact provided by TAMDAR's higher-resolution data during critical weather events. The forecast skill gain during dynamic events is typically much greater than what is expressed in a monthly average covering the Lower 48. In other words, the increase in model accuracy is greatest during dynamic weather events where air traffic and other operational impacts are greatest.

[ 7 ] The Panasonic Weather Solutions RT-FDDA-WRF forecast runs on a North America domain with 4 km (2.5 mi) grid spacing and can include multiple nested 1 km (0.62 mi) domains. A four-year collaborative study with NCAR using the same data as in the studies referenced above has shown that the FDDA/4D-Var assimilation methodology can nearly double the improvement in forecast skill over an identical model running a 3D-Var configuration. Results from this study are summarized below using the same 30-day running mean verification statistics as employed by NOAA. TAMDAR impact using FDDA/4D-Var resulted in: [ 7 ] Reduction in humidity forecast error of 74% Reduction in temperature forecast error of 58% Reduction in wind forecast error of 63% Forecast skill, like the example presented above, is made possible by having (i) an asynoptic in-situ observing system like TAMDAR that streams continuous real-time observations to (ii) a forecast model (deterministic or probabilistic) that has the ability to assimilate asynoptic data in four dimensions.

Skew-T profiles [ edit ] TAMDAR sensors are currently set to sample at 300 feet (91 m) intervals on ascent and descent . This resolution can be adjusted in real-time to whatever interval is desired for the receiving forecasting model. The satellite connection to the sensor is a two-way connection so sampling rates, calibration constants, variables and parameters, and reporting frequencies can all be changed remotely from a ground-based location. The sampling rate in cruise is time-based. The soundings, or vertical profiles, are built as each observation is received. All of the profile-based variable calculations (e.g., CAPE , CIN , etc.) are calculated when an aircraft enters cruise or touches down. When an airport is selected, successive soundings can be displayed within a certain time window. This enables the user to view the evolution of the profile.

See also [ edit ] Aircraft Meteorological Data Relay (AMDAR) References [ edit ] ^ a b LaRC, Katie Lorentz.

"NASA - TAMDAR: A Tiny Instrument Making a Big Impact on Weather Forecasting" .

www.nasa.gov . Archived from the original on 2022-12-25 . Retrieved 2023-01-19 .

^ Zazulia, Nick (October 12, 2018).

"Panasonic Avionics Sells Weather Business to FLYHT" .

Avionics International .

^ Group, SAE Media (2006-03-01).

"Taumi Daniels, TAMDAR Project Lead, NASA's Langley Research Center, Hampton, VA" .

www.techbriefs.com . Retrieved 2024-09-20 .

{{ cite web }} : |last= has generic name ( help ) ^ Tsoucalas, George; Daniels, Taumi S.; Zysko, Jan; Anderson, Mark V.; Mulally, Daniel J. (2010-05-01).

"Tropospheric Airborne Meteorological Data Reporting (TAMDAR) Sensor Validation and Verification on National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Lockheed WP-3D Aircraft" .

Nasa/Tm-2010-216693 .

^ Marshall, Curtis H. (11 Jan 2016).

"The National Mesonet Program" .

22nd Conference on Applied Climatology . New Orleans, LA: American Meteorological Society.

^ "FLYHT Acquires Panasonic Weather Solutions Assets" .

MarketWatch . Retrieved 15 November 2019 .

^ a b c Moninger, William (January 2008).

"NEW TAMDAR FLEETS AND THEIR IMPACT ON RAPID UPDATE CYCLE (RUC) FORECASTS" (PDF) .

Archived (PDF) from the original on 2023-01-19.

External links [ edit ] FLYHT Aerospace Solutions Archived 2020-08-09 at the Wayback Machine v t e Earth-based meteorological observation systems and weather stations General Aircraft report (AIREP) Automated airport weather station Automatic weather station (AWS) Binary Universal Form for the Representation of meteorological data (BUFR) Dropsonde Hurricane Hunters Mesonet Meteorological Aerodrome Report (METAR) Pilot report (PIREP) Weather ship By region Worldwide Aircraft Communication Addressing and Reporting System (ACARS) Aircraft Meteorological Data Relay (AMDAR) Argo Automated Meteorological Data Acquisition System (AMeDAS) Deep-ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis (DART) FluxNet Project (FluxNet) Global Atmosphere Watch (GAW) Global Sea Level Observing System (GLOSS) Prediction and Research Moored Array in the Atlantic (PIRATA) Research Moored Array for African-Asian-Australian Monsoon Analysis and Prediction (RAMA) Tropical Atmosphere Ocean project (TAO/TRITON) Voluntary observing ship program United States Citizen Weather Observer Program (CWOP) Coastal-Marine Automated Network (C-MAN) NEXRAD radar Snow Telemetry (SNOTEL) Remote Automated Weather Station (RAWS) Road Weather Information System (RWIS) Tropospheric Airborne Meteorological Data Reporting (TAMDAR) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=TAMDAR&oldid=1301007031 " Category : Meteorological data and networks Hidden categories: CS1 errors: generic name Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles with a promotional tone from August 2016 All articles with a promotional tone Articles needing additional references from January 2023 All articles needing additional references Articles with multiple maintenance issues All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from March 2024 Webarchive template wayback links This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 16:13 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents TAMDAR 2 languages Add topic

