Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early career 2 Arrest 3 Role in the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 and life in exile 4 Movie 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Anna Kéthly 18 languages Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Беларуская Brezhoneg Deutsch Esperanto Français Հայերեն Magyar Македонски مصرى Polski Русский Suomi Svenska Татарча / tatarça Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hungarian politician (1889–1976) Anna Kéthly Official portrait, 1941 Minister of State of Hungary In office 3 November 1956 – 12 November 1956 Prime Minister Imre Nagy Leader of the Social Democratic Party of Hungary In office 31 October 1956 – November 1956 Preceded by Árpád Szakasits Succeeded by Anna Petrasovits Personal details Born ( 1889-11-16 ) 16 November 1889 Budapest , Kingdom of Hungary , Austria-Hungary Died 7 September 1976 (1976-09-07) (aged 86) Blankenberge , Belgium Political party SZDP Profession politician Anna Kéthly (16 November 1889 –  7 September 1976) was a Hungarian social democratic politician, second female member of the National Assembly of Hungary (1922-1948) and minister during the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 . Her fellow party member Vilmos Böhm called her the " Joan of Arc of Hungarian politics".

Part of a series on Social democracy History Age of Enlightenment Frankfurt Declaration French Revolution Godesberg Program Humanism Internationalist–defencist schism Keynesianism Labor movement Marxism Orthodox Revisionist Nordic model Reformist–revolutionary dispute Socialism Revolutions of 1848 Utopian socialism Welfare capitalism Concepts Civil liberties Critical theory Democracy Economic Industrial Representative Dirigisme Environmentalism Environmental protection Fair trade Gradualism Institutional abuse Internationalism Labor rights Land reform Left-wing nationalism Mixed economy Nationalization Negative and positive rights Progressivism Reformism Left Socialism Revolutionary socialism Secularism Social corporatism Social justice Social market economy Socialist state Capitalism Socialism Structural abuse Structural violence Trade union Tripartism Welfare Welfare state Variants Democratic socialism Ethical socialism Evolutionary socialism Liberal socialism Socialism of the 21st century Third Way People Allende Ardern Attlee Awolowo Batlle y Ordóñez Bebel Ben-Gurion Berger Bernstein Betancourt Bhutto Blanc Bonnell Brandt Branting Brown Bruenig Callaghan Cárdenas Clark Craxi Crosland Corbyn Curtin Daszyński Debs Douglas Drees Ebert Ecevit Engels Erlander Fraser Gaitskell Gandhi Gerhardsen González Goulart Hardie Hilferding Hook Ingerman İnönü Jaurès Jenkins Jumblatt Junmai Katayama Kautsky Kerensky Kéthly Kirk Kulinski Lagos Lassalle Layton Lenin Lévesque Liebknecht (Wilhelm) Liebknecht (Karl) Luxemburg MacDonald Mandela Marx Myrdal (Alva) Myrdal (Gunnar) Nehru Pakman Palme Plekhanov Prodi Russell Radbruch Reich Rustin Sánchez Sanders Savage Scholz Stauning Thomas Den Uyl Vail Webb Whitlam Wilson Wynn Zhordania Organizations International Trade Union Confederation International Union of Socialist Youth Progressive Alliance Socialist International Young European Socialists Network of Social Democracy in Asia Parties CPDS ESDP MLSTP–PSD MSZDP MSZP PES PS Andorra France PSD PSDE PSDSH PSSh S Denmark Latvia SAP SD SDE SDF SDK SDLP SDP Croatia Finland Japan Montenegro SDPI SDSM Smer SOCDEM SocDems SPD SDP BiH SPDS SP SPÖ Related Bevanism Figuerism Kirchnerism Lulism " The Internationale " Economics portal Politics portal Socialism portal v t e Early career [ edit ] She was one of nine children born into a poor family in Budapest , Hungary . At the age of fifteen she started working in a garment factory but soon found more appealing work in the editorial office of a women's magazine and this gave her the chance to further her education. In 1917, she joined the Hungarian Social Democratic Party and became an active Party member. In 1919, Kéthly was elected onto a committee of the Party. In subsequent years she was a frequent contributor to the Party's newspaper Népszava . In 1922 Kéthly was elected to Parliament as a member of the Social Democratic Party, and represented her Party in parliament without a break until the German invasion of Hungary in March 1944. After the German invasion, Kéthly left Budapest and lived in the country with false papers under an assumed identity.

After the Second World War , Kéthly again became politically active and helped to reorganize the Hungarian Social Democratic Party and she was elected to the Party's Political Committee. In April 1945, she was elected a member of the Provisional National Assembly and in the general elections in November of same year , she was re-elected to parliament, this time as head of the Social Democratic faction, and was made Deputy Speaker of Parliament. Kéthly made frequent contributions of articles to Socialist papers and was active in maintaining contact with international socialist Parties in the West. In post-war Hungary, she was a leading opponent of her Party's merger with the Hungarian Communist Party and in the internal power-struggle that ensued, in March 1948, she was dismissed from the Party and soon after she also lost her seat in Parliament and placed under house arrest for two years.

Arrest [ edit ] In June 1950, Kéthly, together with several other members of the Social Democratic Party, was arrested by the Communists, who had in the meantime gained control of Hungary. In January 1954, after more than three years in prison, she was charged with spying and activities directed against the state and sentenced to life imprisonment. Following international pressure from Western socialist parties she was granted a pardon and released, but kept under permanent 'observation'.

Role in the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 and life in exile [ edit ] On 31 October 1956, following the revival of the Hungarian Social Democratic Party during the Revolution , she became president of the Party. On 1 November she attended the Socialist International meeting in Vienna , Austria . The following day, 2 November The Hungarian Government appointed her a delegate to the United Nations General Assembly . On 3 November her Party nominated Kéthly for a ministerial position in the new coalition government of Imre Nagy but at dawn the following day, 4 November 1956, the Soviet Union invaded Hungary and she was advised to fly to New York City and appeal to the U.N. General Assembly on behalf of Hungary. Eventually she settled in London , United Kingdom , where she carried on writing and editing Socialist publications. In 1962 the Hungarian Supreme Court reviewed Kéthly's 1954 pardon and, in absentia , imposed on her a three-year prison sentence for anti-state activities.

Anna Kéthly died on 7 September 1976, in Blankenberge , Belgium .

In October, 1990, her ashes were returned to Hungary and laid to rest. She was fully rehabilitated on 7 July 1994, when the Hungarian Supreme Court annulled the 1962 verdict against her.

Movie [ edit ] A movie about her life, Utolsó jelentés Annáról ("Last Report About Anna") premiered in late 2009. It was directed by Márta Mészáros .

Enikő Eszenyi plays Kéthly.

External links [ edit ] United Nations Report of the Special Committee on the Problem of Hungary, General Assembly, Official Records, 11th session, Supplement No. 18 A/3592), New York. 1957 Anna Kéthly Foundation Official website of the Social Democratic Party (Hungary) (Kéthly's party) Official website of the Hungarian Social Democratic Party (a split of Kéthly's party which claims her legacy) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef SNAC Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Anna_Kéthly&oldid=1304342528 " Categories : 1889 births 1976 deaths Politicians from Budapest Social Democratic Party of Hungary politicians People of the Hungarian Revolution of 1956 20th-century Hungarian women politicians Hungarian exiles Members of the House of Representatives of Hungary (1922–1926) Members of the House of Representatives of Hungary (1926–1931) Members of the House of Representatives of Hungary (1931–1935) Members of the House of Representatives of Hungary (1935–1939) Members of the House of Representatives of Hungary (1939–1944) Members of the National Assembly of Hungary (1945–1947) Members of the National Assembly of Hungary (1947–1949) Hungarian emigrants to Belgium Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 5 August 2025, at 12:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Anna Kéthly 18 languages Add topic

