Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life and career 2 Thought 3 Publications 4 See also 5 References 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Gilles Lipovetsky 13 languages العربية Български Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Euskara Français Italiano Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Português Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia French philosopher, writer and sociologist (born 1944) "Lipovetsky" redirects here. For other uses, see Lipovetsky (disambiguation) .

Gilles Lipovetsky Born ( 1944-09-24 ) 24 September 1944 (age 80) Millau , France Education Alma mater University of Paris Philosophical work Era Contemporary philosophy Region Western philosophy School Continental philosophy Western Marxism (early) Postmodernism (late) Institutions Academy of Grenoble [ fr ] Main interests Cultural criticism Notable ideas Hypermodernity , hyperconsumerism Gilles Lipovetsky ( French: [lipɔvɛtski] ; born 24 September 1944) is a French philosopher , writer, and sociologist .

Life and career [ edit ] Lipovetsky was born in Millau in 1944. He studied philosophy at the University of Paris , and participated in the 1968 student uprising in Paris to change the French educational model. However, he criticizes the model that came from that as producing alienated individuals with fragile personalities prone to emotional disorder due to hedonism and immediate gratification.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] He began his academic career teaching classes with his alma mater. With the success of his first book, he became well-known in many parts of the world and became one of the most important French intellectuals of the latter 20th century.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Along with tenure, he has received two honorary doctorates from the Université de Sherbrooke in Québec (Canada) and from the New Bulgarian University in Sofia , membership in the Conseil d'analyse de la société of the French government, knighthood in the Legion of Honor , membership in the National Council of Programs and is a consultant with the Association of Management Progress.

[ 2 ] [ 5 ] In 2015, 2016 and 2017, he was a member of the Prix Versailles judges panel.

[ 6 ] Thought [ edit ] Lipovetsky began his philosophical career as a Marxist , similar to many others in the 1960s. He joined the Socialisme ou Barbarie group – Lipovetsky wrote "We want the world and we want it now, but not to transform it, but to swallow it up." [ 2 ] [ 7 ] However, since then, his philosophy has changed significantly, including the acceptance of capitalism as "the only legitimate economic model." [ 1 ] When questioned about his change in stance from his Marxist beginning he replies "Only idiots never change opinion." [ 7 ] Lipovetsky's work focuses on the modern world from the latter 20th century to the present. He has divided this period into three periods: "Marxist self-criticism" (1965–1983), post-modern (1983–1991) and the hyper-modern period (from 1991 on). This began with his 1983 book, which declared the world to be post-modern, characterized by extreme individualism and the dissolution of politics based on political parties, turning its back on a strong sense of social duty on which democracy and socialism depend. However, by the end of the 2000s, he proposed that this term had become obsolete and unable to describe the world past 1991. He then proposed "hyper-modern," similar to post-modern but with a superlative and unstoppable meaning, focusing on new technologies, markets, and global culture.

[ 2 ] [ 5 ] From his 1983 book which brought him to prominence, Lipovetsky has continued to write on topics such as modernity , globalization , consumerism , modern culture , markets , feminism , fashion , and media , but they have the common thread of individualism.

[ 3 ] He defines individualism as the desire to break with tradition and the past and to look towards the future and our own pleasure.

[ 8 ] In 1987 he wrote L'Empire de l'éphémère : la mode et son destin dans les sociétés modernes continuing the argument of the 1983 work focusing on fashion as a reflection of individualism and hyper consumerism . It also indicates the desire to be young forever and that only the here-and-now exists.

[ 2 ] In 1992 he published Le Crépuscule du devoir . In this work, he states that the vision of a secular world started with Martin Luther 's revolt against the Catholic Church , leading to the idea that one purpose of God is to define and protect individual rights. In La Troisième femme in 1997 he argues the idea that the women's liberation movement is strongly connected to hyper-consumerism as women are the main customers of luxury goods.

[ 2 ] In Métamorphoses de la culture libérale – Éthique, médias, entreprise in 2002, he examines the paradoxes of hyper-modern democracies, with emphasis both on the individual, regionalization vs. globalization and the collective and a society that is both open and closed, concluding that they are interdependent. The 2003 book Le luxe éternel examines the concept of luxury over human history.

Le bonheur paradoxal. Essai sur la société d'hyperconsommation (2006) examines the multiplication and globalization of major brands and the connection between fashion and luxury which is the basis of hyper-consumerism. In La société de déception (2006) he analyzes the concept of disappointment following the work of Jacques Lacan that desire creates a vacuum and can never be filled. In L'écran global. Culture-médias et cinéma à l'âge hypermoderne (2007) he analyses a "second modern revolution" declaring the end of post-modernism, arguing that paradoxes are multiplying due to the complexity of modern life.

[ 2 ] His 2013 book, L'esthétisation du monde : vivre à l'âge du capitalisme artiste focuses on capitalism and its relationship to art, especially the cinema.

[ 5 ] [ 9 ] Lipovetsky has made provocative statements on modern life and elements related to it, which have been often at odds with intellectual trends of the last decades. He has compared fashion with democracy as unstable, ephemeral and superficial, but states it as a positive and more workable than a more interdependent society .

[ 2 ] [ 10 ] He states that the focus of modern life is the new, which then quickly becomes old and we look for something else, leading to his notion of "hyper" as this need for new becomes faster in the age of Internet and social media , which also breaks down traditional institutions such as nation and family.

[ 3 ] Even "culture" succumbs to this, according to him, as people go to museums more as tourists rather than for education.

[ 4 ] The need for new triggers hyper-consumerism, with people trying to keep up with trends, and creating frustration among the poorer who cannot keep up.

[ 11 ] However, he makes a distinction between hyper-consumerism and consumerism. He does not criticize the latter, which he says has had positives in rising living standards. He believes that consumption should be a means to an end, not an end in itself and believes that concerns such as ecology are not incompatible with capitalism.

[ 1 ] [ 11 ] Lipovetsky does not have a well-defined style of presentation, varying among manners of speaking similar to that of a psychologist or sociologist as well as a philosopher often gesturing emphatically. His methodology varies as well, often dealing with paradoxes . His approach to issues is almost nonexistent epistemologically . There is also a strong influence in his writing from French literature although he does not write fiction.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Publications [ edit ] L'ère du vide : Essais sur l'individualisme contemporain , Gallimard, 1983 L'Empire de l'éphémère : la mode et son destin dans les sociétés modernes , Gallimard, 1987 Le Crépuscule du devoir , Gallimard, 1992 La Troisième femme , Gallimard, 1997 Métamorphoses de la culture libérale – Éthique, médias, entreprise , Montréal, Édition Liber, 2002 Le luxe éternel (with Elyette Roux), éditions Gallimard, 2003 Les temps hypermodernes , éditions Grasset, 2004 Le bonheur paradoxal. Essai sur la société d'hyperconsommation , éditions Gallimard, 2006 La société de déception , éditions Textuel, 2006 L'écran global. Culture-médias et cinéma à l'âge hypermoderne (with Jean Serroy), Seuil, 2007 La Culture-monde. Réponse à une société désorientée , Paris, Odile Jacob, 2008 (with Jean Serroy ) L'Occident mondialisé : Controverse sur la culture planétaire , Paris, Grasset, 2010 (with Hervé Juvin ) See also [ edit ] Homo consumericus References [ edit ] ^ a b c d "Gilles Lipovetsky, defensor del capitalismo" (in Spanish). Guadalajara: El Informador. 31 August 2009 . Retrieved 20 August 2013 .

^ a b c d e f g h i Raul Corral Quintero (October–November 2007).

"Gilles Lipovetsky: Una sociología del presente pos(hiper)moderno" (PDF) .

Casa del Tiempo (in Spanish).

IV (4 pages 41–46). Universidad Autónoma Metropolitana. Archived from the original (PDF) on 15 June 2016 . Retrieved 20 August 2013 .

^ a b c "El exceso domina la sociedad actual; se perdieron los límites" .

La Jornada (in Spanish). Mexico City. 28 March 2012. p. 9 . Retrieved 20 August 2013 .

^ a b Jesus Alejo (23 March 2012).

"Gilles Lipovetsky: vivimos un tiempo en que la cultura no tiene influencia" .

Milenio (in Spanish). Mexico City. Archived from the original on 27 August 2013 . Retrieved 20 August 2013 .

^ a b c "Gilles Lipovetsky volverá a México" .

El Universal (in Spanish). 14 August 2013. Archived from the original on 19 December 2013 . Retrieved 20 August 2013 .

^ Prix Versailles website ^ a b Alberto Sauret.

"Gilles Lipovetsky, el Imperio de lo efímero" (in Spanish). Instituto Tecnologico Autonoma de Mexico. Archived from the original on 20 December 2013 . Retrieved 20 August 2013 .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ Tamés, Enrique (2 September 2016).

"Entrevista a Gilles Lipovetsky" (in Spanish). Mexico: Tec de Monterrey.

^ Tamés, Enrique (8 October 2019).

"Entrevista a Gilles Lipovetsky" .

En-Claves del Pensamiento (México) Num.2 Vol.i (in Spanish). Tec de Monterrey . Retrieved 2 February 2022 .

^ Ellis Cashmore (20 January 1995). "Free style -- The Empire of Fashion by Gilles Lipovetsky and translated by Catherine Porter".

8 (336). New Statesman & Society: 37.

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ a b "Entrevista / Gilles Lipovetsky / No sólo de marcas vive el hombre" (in Spanish). Mexico City: Reforma. 5 October 2008. p. 5.

External links [ edit ] Interview with Gilles Lipovetsky by Denis Failly about his book Le bonheur paradoxal: Essai sur la société d'hyperconsommation , 2006. (in French) Un extrait de Culture-monde: réponse à une société désorientée sur la webtélé de Jacques Languirand: Les repères de Languirand Europe's Times and Unknown Waters, Cluj-Napoca, Braşoveanu, Narcisa (April 2009). "The Narcissistic and the Cynical Attitudes - Two Identitary Masks, Gilles Lipovetsky, L'ère du vide. Essais sur l'individualisme contemporain and Peter Sloterdijk, Kritik der zynischen Vernunft" Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Italy Australia Czech Republic Spain Portugal Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Greece Korea Sweden Poland Israel Catalonia Belgium Academics CiNii Artists FID People Trove DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Gilles_Lipovetsky&oldid=1293666783 " Categories : 1944 births 20th-century atheists 20th-century French essayists 20th-century French male writers 20th-century French philosophers 21st-century atheists 21st-century French essayists 21st-century French male writers 21st-century French non-fiction writers 21st-century French philosophers Atheist philosophers Knights of the Legion of Honour Critical theorists Environmental philosophers Environmental writers French epistemologists Former Marxists French atheists French essayists French male essayists French male non-fiction writers French male writers French people of Russian-Jewish descent French sociologists French writers Hyperreality theorists Living people Mass media theorists Media critics French metaphysicians Ontologists Phenomenologists French philosophers of art French philosophers of culture Philosophers of economics French philosophers of education French philosophers of history French philosophers of religion French philosophers of science Philosophers of sexuality French philosophers of technology French philosophy academics French political philosophers Postmodernists Theorists on Western civilization Writers about activism and social change Writers about globalization Writers about religion and science Hidden categories: CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2024 Articles with hCards Pages with French IPA This page was last edited on 3 June 2025, at 01:49 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Gilles Lipovetsky 13 languages Add topic

