Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 General principles 2 Below the water table Toggle Below the water table subsection 2.1 Equation for calculation 2.2 Measurement methods and standards 3 Above the water table Toggle Above the water table subsection 3.1 Equation for calculation 3.2 Measurement methods and standards 3.2.1 Matric pressure 3.2.2 Pneumatic pressure 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Pore water pressure 10 languages Català Español Қазақша Nederlands Norsk nynorsk Polski Русский Türkçe Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pressure of groundwater held within a soil or rock, in gaps between particles Pore water pressure (sometimes abbreviated to pwp ) refers to the pressure of groundwater held within a soil or rock , in gaps between particles ( pores ). Pore water pressures below the phreatic level of the groundwater are measured with piezometers . The vertical pore water pressure distribution in aquifers can generally be assumed to be close to hydrostatic .

In the unsaturated ("vadose") zone , the pore pressure is determined by capillarity and is also referred to as tension , suction , or matric pressure. Pore water pressures under unsaturated conditions are measured with tensiometers , which operate by allowing the pore water to come into equilibrium with a reference pressure indicator through a permeable ceramic cup placed in contact with the soil.

Pore water pressure is vital in calculating the stress state in the ground soil mechanics , from Terzaghi 's expression for the effective stress of the soil.

General principles [ edit ] Pressure develops due to: [ 1 ] Water elevation difference : water flowing from a higher elevation to a lower elevation and causing a velocity head, or with water flow, as exemplified in Bernoulli's energy equations .

Hydrostatic water pressure : resulting from the weight of material above the point measured.

Osmotic pressure : inhomogeneous aggregation of ion concentrations, which causes a force in water particles as they attract by the molecular laws of attraction.

Absorption pressure : attraction of surrounding soil particles to one another by adsorbed water films.

Matric suction : the defining trait of unsaturated soil, this term corresponds to the pressure dry soil exerts on the surrounding material to equalise the moisture content in the overall block of soil and is defined as the difference between pore air pressure, ( u a ) {\displaystyle (u_{a})} , and pore water pressure, ( u w ) {\displaystyle (u_{w})} .

[ 2 ] Below the water table [ edit ] A vibrating wire piezometer. The vibrating wire converts the fluid pressures into equivalent frequency signals that are then recorded.

The buoyancy effects of water have a large impact on certain soil properties, such as the effective stress present at any point in a soil medium. Consider an arbitrary point five meters below the ground surface. In dry soil, particles at this point experience a total overhead stress equal to the depth underground (5 meters), multiplied by the specific weight of the soil. However, when the local water table height is within said five meters, the total stress felt five meters below the surface is decreased by the product of the height of the water table in to the five meter area, and the specific weight of water, 9.81 kN/m^3. This parameter is called the effective stress of the soil, basically equal to the difference in a soil's total stress and pore water pressure. The pore water pressure is essential in differentiating a soil's total stress from its effective stress. A correct representation of stress in the soil is necessary for accurate field calculations in a variety of engineering trades.

[ 3 ] Equation for calculation [ edit ] When there is no flow, the pore pressure at depth, h w , below the water surface is: [ 4 ] p s = g w h w {\displaystyle p_{s}=g_{w}h_{w}} , where: p s is the saturated pore water pressure (kPa) g w is the unit weight of water (kN/m 3 ), g w = 9.81 k N / m 3 {\displaystyle g_{w}=9.81kN/m^{3}} [ 5 ] h w is the depth below the water table (m), Measurement methods and standards [ edit ] The standard method for measuring pore water pressure below the water table employs a piezometer, which measures the height to which a column of the liquid rises against gravity ; i.e., the static pressure (or piezometric head ) of groundwater at a specific depth.

[ 6 ] Piezometers often employ electronic pressure transducers to provide data. The United States Bureau of Reclamation has a standard for monitoring water pressure in a rock mass with piezometers. It sites ASTM D4750, "Standard Test Method for Determining Subsurface Liquid Levels in a Borehole or Monitoring Well (Observation Well)".

[ 7 ] Above the water table [ edit ] Electronic tensiometer probe: (1) porous cup; (2) water-filled tube; (3) sensor-head; (4) pressure sensor At any point above the water table , in the vadose zone, the effective stress is approximately equal to the total stress, as proven by Terzaghi's principle . Realistically, the effective stress is greater than the total stress, as the pore water pressure in these partially saturated soils is actually negative. This is primarily due to the surface tension of pore water in voids throughout the vadose zone causing a suction effect on surrounding particles, i.e. matric suction. This capillary action is the "upward movement of water through the vadose zone" (Coduto, 266).

[ 8 ] Increased water infiltration, such as that caused by heavy rainfall, brings about a reduction in matric suction, following the relationship described by the soil water characteristic curve (SWCC), resulting in a reduction of the soil's shear strength, and reduced slope stability.

[ 9 ] Capillary effects in soil are more complex than in free water due to the randomly connected void space and particle interference through which to flow; regardless, the height of this zone of capillary rise, where negative pore water pressure is generally peaks, can be closely approximated by a simple equation. The height of capillary rise is inversely proportional to the diameter of void space in contact with water. Therefore, the smaller the void space, the higher water will rise due to tension forces.

Sandy soils consist of more coarse material with more room for voids, and therefore tend to have a much shallower capillary zone than do more cohesive soils, such as clays and silts .

[ 8 ] Equation for calculation [ edit ] If the water table is at depth d w in fine-grained soils, then the pore pressure at the ground surface is: [ 4 ] p g = − − g w d w {\displaystyle p_{g}=-g_{w}d_{w}} , where: p g is the unsaturated pore water pressure (Pa) at ground level, g w is the unit weight of water (kN/m 3 ), g w = 9.81 k N / m 3 {\displaystyle g_{w}=9.81kN/m^{3}} d w is the depth of the water table (m), and the pore pressure at depth, z , below the surface is: p u = g w ( z − − d w ) {\displaystyle p_{u}=g_{w}(z-d_{w})} , where: p u is the unsaturated pore water pressure (Pa) at point, z , below ground level, z is depth below ground level.

Measurement methods and standards [ edit ] A tensiometer is an instrument used to determine the matric water potential ( Ψ Ψ m {\displaystyle \Psi _{m}} ) ( soil moisture tension) in the vadose zone.

[ 10 ] An ISO standard, " Soil quality — Determination of pore water pressure — Tensiometer method", ISO 11276:1995, "describes methods for the determination of pore water pressure (point measurements) in unsaturated and saturated soil using tensiometers. Applicable for in situ measurements in the field and, e. g. soil cores, used in experimental examinations." It defines pore water pressure as "the sum of matric and pneumatic pressures".

[ 11 ] Matric pressure [ edit ] The amount of work that must be done in order to transport reversibly and isothermally an infinitesimal quantity of water, identical in composition to the soil water, from a pool at the elevation and the external gas pressure of the point under consideration, to the soil water at the point under consideration, divided by the volume of water transported.

[ 12 ] Pneumatic pressure [ edit ] The amount of work that must be done in order to transport reversibly and isothermally an infinitesimal quantity of water, identical in composition to the soil water, from a pool at atmospheric pressure and at the elevation of the point under consideration, to a similar pool at an external gas pressure of the point under consideration, divided by the volume of water transported.

[ 12 ] See also [ edit ] Internal erosion Frost weathering Geotechnical engineering Water potential Well engineering References [ edit ] ^ Mitchell, J.K. (1960).

"Components of Pore Water Pressure and their Engineering Significance" (PDF) .

Clays and Clay Minerals .

9 (1): 162– 184.

Bibcode : 1960CCM.....9..162M .

doi : 10.1346/CCMN.1960.0090109 .

S2CID 32375250 . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2019-02-18 . Retrieved 2013-02-17 .

^ Zhang Chao; Lu Ning (2019-02-01).

"Unitary Definition of Matric Suction" .

Journal of Geotechnical and Geoenvironmental Engineering .

145 (2): 02818004.

doi : 10.1061/(ASCE)GT.1943-5606.0002004 .

^ Das, Braja (2011).

Principles of Foundation Engineering . Stamford, CT: Cengage Learning.

ISBN 9780495668107 .

^ a b Wood, David Muir.

"Pore water pressure" .

GeotechniCAL reference package . Bristol University . Retrieved 2014-03-12 .

^ National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying (2005). Fundamentals of Engineering Supplied-Reference Handbook (7th ed.). Clemson: National Council of Examiners for Engineering and Surveying.

ISBN 1-932613-00-5 ^ Dunnicliff, John (1993) [1988].

Geotechnical Instrumentation for Monitoring Field Performance . Wiley-Interscience. p. 117.

ISBN 0-471-00546-0 .

^ Materials Engineering and Research Laboratory.

"Procedure For Using Piezometers to Monitor Water Pressure in a Rock Mass" (PDF) .

USBR 6515 .

U.S. Bureau of Reclamation . Retrieved 2014-03-13 .

^ a b Coduto, Donald; et al. (2011).

Geotechnical Engineering Principles and Practices . NJ: Pearson Higher Education, Inc.

ISBN 9780132368681 .

^ Zhang, Y; et al. (2015).

"Rate effects in inter-granular capillary bridges." .

Unsaturated Soil Mechanics-from Theory to Practice: Proceedings of the 6th Asia Pacific Conference on Unsaturated Soils . CRC Press. pp.

463– 466.

^ Rawls, W.J., Ahuja, L.R., Brakensiek, D.L., and Shirmohammadi, A. 1993.

Infiltration and soil water movement , in Maidment, D.R., Ed., Handbook of hydrology, New York, NY, USA, McGraw-Hill, p. 5.1–5.51.

^ ISO (1995).

"Soil quality -- Determination of pore water pressure -- Tensiometer method" .

ISO 11276:1995 .

International Standards Organization . Retrieved 2014-03-13 .

^ a b BS 7755 1996; Part 5.1 v t e Soil science History Index Main fields Pedology Edaphology Soil biology Soil microbiology Soil zoology Soil ecology Soil physics Soil mechanics Soil chemistry Environmental soil science Agricultural soil science Soil topics Soil Pedosphere Soil morphology Pedodiversity Soil formation Soil erosion Soil contamination Soil retrogression and degradation Soil compaction Soil compaction (agriculture) Soil sealing Soil salinity Alkali soil Soil pH Soil acidification Soil health Soil life Soil biodiversity Soil quality Soil value Soil fertility Soil resilience Soil color Soil texture Soil structure Pore space in soil Pore water pressure Soil crust Soil horizon Soil biomantle Soil carbon Soil gas Soil respiration Soil organic matter Soil moisture Soil water (retention) Soil type v t e Soil classification World Reference Base for Soil Resources (1998–) Acrisols Alisols Andosols Anthrosols Arenosols Calcisols Cambisols Chernozem Cryosols Durisols Ferralsols Fluvisols Gleysols Gypsisols Histosol Kastanozems Leptosols Lixisols Luvisols Nitisols Phaeozems Planosols Plinthosols Podzols Regosols Retisols Solonchaks Solonetz Stagnosol Technosols Umbrisols Vertisols USDA soil taxonomy Alfisols Andisols Aridisols Entisols Gelisols Histosols Inceptisols Mollisols Oxisols Spodosols Ultisols Vertisols Other systems FAO soil classification (1974–1998) Unified Soil Classification System AASHTO Soil Classification System Référentiel pédologique (French classification system) Canadian system of soil classification Australian Soil Classification Polish Soil Classification 1938 USDA soil taxonomy List of U.S. state soils List of vineyard soil types PG-3 (Spanish classification system) Non-systematic soil types Sand Silt Clay Loam Topsoil Subsoil Soil crust Claypan Hardpan Gypcrust Caliche Parent material Pedosphere Laimosphere Rhizosphere Bulk soil Alkali soil Bay mud Blue goo Brickearth Brown earth Calcareous grassland Dark earth Dry quicksand Duplex soil Eluvium Expansive clay Fill dirt Fuller's earth Hydrophobic soil Loess Lunar soil Martian soil Mud Muskeg Paleosol Peat Prime farmland Quicksand Serpentine soil Spodic soil Stagnogley Subaqueous soil Takir Terra preta Terra rossa Tropical peat Yedoma Types of soil Applications Soil conservation Soil management Soil guideline value Soil survey Soil test Soil governance Soil value Soil salinity control Erosion control Agroecology Liming (soil) Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Geomorphology Geotechnical engineering Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Societies, Initiatives Australian Society of Soil Science Incorporated Canadian Society of Soil Science Central Soil Salinity Research Institute (India) German Soil Science Society Indian Institute of Soil Science International Union of Soil Sciences International Year of Soil National Society of Consulting Soil Scientists (US) OPAL Soil Centre (UK) Soil Science Society of Poland Soil and Water Conservation Society (US) Soil Science Society of America World Congress of Soil Science Scientific journals Acta Agriculturae Scandinavica B Journal of Soil and Water Conservation Plant and Soil Pochvovedenie Soil Research Soil Science Society of America Journal See also Land use Land conversion Land management Vegetation Infiltration (hydrology) Groundwater Crust (geology) Impervious surface / Surface runoff Petrichor Wikipedia:WikiProject Soil Category soil Category soil science List of soil scientists v t e Geotechnical engineering Offshore geotechnical engineering Investigation and instrumentation Field ( in situ ) Core drill Cone penetration test Geo-electrical sounding Permeability test Load test Static Dynamic Statnamic Pore pressure measurement Piezometer Well Ram sounding Rock control drilling Rotary-pressure sounding Rotary weight sounding Sample series Screw plate test Deformation monitoring Inclinometer Settlement recordings Shear vane test Simple sounding Standard penetration test Total sounding Trial pit Visible bedrock Nuclear densometer test Exploration geophysics Crosshole sonic logging Pile integrity test Wave equation analysis Laboratory testing Soil classification Atterberg limits California bearing ratio Direct shear test Hydrometer Proctor compaction test R-value Sieve analysis Triaxial shear test Oedometer test Hydraulic conductivity tests Water content tests Soil Types Clay Silt Sand Gravel Peat Loam Loess Properties Hydraulic conductivity Water content Void ratio Bulk density Thixotropy Reynolds' dilatancy Angle of repose Friction angle Cohesion Porosity Permeability Specific storage Shear strength Sensitivity Structures ( Interaction ) Natural features Topography Vegetation Terrain Topsoil Water table Bedrock Subgrade Subsoil Earthworks Shoring structures Retaining walls Gabion Ground freezing Mechanically stabilized earth Pressure grouting Slurry wall Soil nailing Tieback Land development Landfill Excavation Trench Embankment Cut Causeway Terracing Cut-and-cover Cut and fill Fill dirt Grading Land reclamation Track bed Erosion control Earth structure Expanded clay aggregate Crushed stone Geosynthetics Geotextile Geomembrane Geosynthetic clay liner Cellular confinement Infiltration Foundations Shallow Deep Mechanics Forces Effective stress Pore water pressure Lateral earth pressure Overburden pressure Preconsolidation pressure Phenomena/ problems Permafrost Frost heaving Consolidation Compaction Earthquake Response spectrum Seismic hazard Shear wave Landslide analysis Stability analysis Mitigation Classification Sliding criterion Slab stabilisation Bearing capacity * Stress distribution in soil Numerical analysis software SEEP2D STABL SVFlux SVSlope UTEXAS Plaxis Related fields Geology Geochemistry Petrology Earthquake engineering Geomorphology Soil science Hydrology Hydrogeology Biogeography Earth materials Archaeology Agricultural science Agrology Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Pore_water_pressure&oldid=1265816068 " Category : Soil mechanics Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 28 December 2024, at 20:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Pore water pressure 10 languages Add topic

