Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Immediate legacy 2 Historical assessments 3 Opinion polls Toggle Opinion polls subsection 3.1 Russia 3.2 Ukraine 4 Footnotes 5 Bibliography Toggle the table of contents Legacy of Leonid Brezhnev 3 languages ไทย Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of Leonid Brezhnev's influence on the Soviet Union This article is part of a series about Leonid Brezhnev Personal Early life Dnipropetrovsk clan Death and state funeral Brezhnev's trilogy Leader of the Soviet Union Leadership Era of Stagnation Economic reforms 1965 1973 1979 Shadow economy Attempted assassination Bulldozer Exhibition Baikal–Amur Mainline 1977 Constitution Food Programme Opposition Sinyavsky–Daniel trial Moscow Helsinki Group Punitive psychiatry Foreign policy Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia Brezhnev Doctrine Soviet–Afghan War Cold War 1962–1979 1979–1985 Legacy Awards and honours Brezhnevka v t e The full understanding of the history of the late Soviet Union and of its successor, the Russian Federation , requires the assessment of the legacy of Leonid Brezhnev , the third General Secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) and twice Chairman of the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet .

Leonid Brezhnev was the leader of the CPSU from 1964 until his death in 1982, whose eighteen-year tenure has been recognized for developing the most powerful military, [ 1 ] and for social and economic stagnation in the late Soviet Union.

While his rule provided stability to his country and increased the standard of living, [ 2 ] there was also a heritage of political and personal values. When Brezhnev died he left behind a gerontocracy , a group of leaders who were significantly older than most of the adult population. Despite his failures in domestic reforms, his foreign affairs and defence policies consolidated the position of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) as a superpower . His popularity among the citizenry waned during his last years, and the Soviet people's belief in communism and Marxism–Leninism slowly withered away but support still continued to be evident, even on the eve of his death. Following his death, political wrangling led to harsh criticism of both him and his family.

Mikhail Gorbachev , the last Soviet leader , drew support from communists and the Soviet population by criticising Brezhnev's rule, and referred to his rule as the " Era of Stagnation ". Nevertheless, Brezhnev has received consistently high approval ratings in the public polls.

Immediate legacy [ edit ] A Brezhnev plaque mounted on the wall of the University of Dneprodzerzhinsk Further information: Death and funeral of Leonid Brezhnev and Era of Stagnation When Leonid Brezhnev died on 10 November 1982 Yuri Andropov was elected chairman of the committee in charge of managing his funeral. According to Time magazine Brezhnev's death was mourned by the majority of Soviet citizens .

[ 3 ] First World commentators saw this as proof that Andropov would become Brezhnev's successor as general secretary.

[ 4 ] Corruption in the Soviet Union which had grown considerably during Brezhnev's tenure had become a major problem to the Soviet Union's economic development by the 1980s. In response Andropov initiated a nationwide anti-corruption campaign. Andropov believed that the Soviet economy would possibly recover if the Soviet Government was able to increase social discipline amongst workers.

[ 5 ] Brezhnev's regime was also criticised for ideological laxness and self-indulgence.

[ 6 ] The gerontocracy established by Brezhnev was slowly phased out by Andropov, and new recruits were appointed to the Party "centre", such as future Premier Nikolai Ryzhkov and Chief Ideologue Yegor Ligachev .

[ 7 ] Soviet foreign policy had also gone awry during Brezhnev's last years, and by June 1982, just before his death, Ronald Reagan classified the Soviet Union as an " Evil Empire ". This hardline diplomatic stance did not wither away before Mikhail Gorbachev initiated the " New Thinking ".

[ 8 ] Support for Marxism–Leninism continued to be evident amongst the Soviet people , however, its base of support slowly withered during the Brezhnev Era. The Soviet people still remained wary of such concepts as liberal democracy and multi-party systems, and because of it, Marxism–Leninism remained the leading belief in the country.

[ 9 ] Due to the large military buildup of the 1960s the Soviet Union was able to consolidate itself as a superpower during Brezhnev's rule.

[ 10 ] Brezhnev's family, Yuri , Galina and Yuri Churbanov , were investigated and both Yuris were arrested on charges of political corruption during Mikhail Gorbachev 's administration.

[ 11 ] Churbanov, Brezhnev's son-in-law, was sentenced to twelve years in prison on charges of large-scale embezzlement and corruption. By December 1988 Churbanov had been stripped of all state honours, and sent to a labour camp. Galina, along with the rest of Brezhnev's family, lost all their state privileges. The city of Brezhnev reverted to its old name Naberezhnye Chelny, and a group within the Soviet leadership wanted to rename all towns, street, factories and institutions bearing Brezhnev's name.

[ 12 ] This was actually carried through by the authorities in December 1988 when the Soviet Government issued a decree which stated all town, streets, factories, institutions and the like bearing Brezhnev's and Konstantin Chernenko 's were to revert to their former name.

[ 13 ] According to his grandson Andrei Brezhnev, the very name Brezhnev had become a curse for the family, and several family members had been forced out of their jobs and their friends had deserted them.

[ 12 ] Brezhnev, who had inflated his role in World War II , was rescinded the Order of Victory on 21 September 1989 in a Supreme Soviet convocation.

[ 14 ] During the Gorbachev Era, Brezhnev's rule was considered less successful than that of Joseph Stalin ; in an opinion measurement poll only 7 percent chose the Brezhnev Era as good, while 10 percent picked the Stalin Era as good.

[ 15 ] Following the dissolution of the Soviet Union and Boris Yeltsin 's subsequent market reforms, many Russians viewed the Brezhnev era with nostalgia ; they missed the stability of that era which had subsequently been lost during the Gorbachev era.

[ 16 ] Historical assessments [ edit ] Graph of change of life expectancy in the largest republics of USSR under Brezhnev Historians have expressed a range of views for Brezhnev and his rule. The scholarly literature dealing with him is scarce and, with the exception of the period immediately after his death, overwhelmingly negative. Very little has been written about Brezhnev in English , and even Russian . According to Mark Sandle and Edwin Bacon, the authors behind Brezhnev Reconsidered , Brezhnev attracted little attention from the media due to a consensus that came shortly after his death, namely that his rule was primarily one of stagnation. When Mikhail Gorbachev , the last Soviet leader , initiated perestroika he blamed the degradation of the Soviet economic and political system on Brezhnev, and called his rule the " Era of Stagnation ".

[ 17 ] Gorbachev claimed that Brezhnev followed "a fierce neo-Stalinist line", [ 18 ] although in a later statement Gorbachev made assurances that Brezhnev was not as bad as he was made out to be, saying, "Brezhnev was nothing like the cartoon figure that is made of him now".

[ 19 ] British historian Robert Service wrote in his book, Russia: From Tsarism to the Twenty-First Century , that "When he [Brezhnev] succeeded Khrushchev , he was still a vigorous politician who expected to make the Party and government work more effectively. He had not been inactive; he had not been entirely inflexible. But his General Secretaryship had turned into a ceremonial reign that had brought communism into its deepest contempt since 1917." He added that it was "hard to feel very sorry for Brezhnev"; his socio-economic policies had sent the country into an Era of Stagnation from which his successors were never able to fully recover.

[ 20 ] Talal Nizameddin states in his book Russia and the Middle East: Towards A New Foreign Policy that "Brezhnev's legacy, generally unaffected by his weak successors ( Yuri Andropov and Konstantin Chernenko ), was entanglement in Afghanistan , tension with China and Japan , as well as the prospect of a new dimension to the arms race with the United States in the form of the Strategic Defense Initiative (Star Wars)." [ 21 ] According to historian David Dyker in his book The Soviet Union under Gorbachev: Prospects for Reform "Brezhnev left his successors a Soviet Union suffering from a host of domestic and foreign problems". The biggest obstacle, according to Dyker, was the weakness of the economy which had undermined Soviet influence outside its borders considerably during the late Brezhnev due to its relative technological backwardness.

[ 22 ] The author of The Soviet Paradox: External Expansion, Internal Decline Seweryn Bialer has a more mixed assessment of Brezhnev's reign. Bialer notes that the era was a time of "lost opportunities", but admits that the economic growth during Brezhnev's first years weakened "the rationale for radical reform". However, as Bialer notes in his book, even the gerontocracy which Brezhnev himself had created were disillusioned with Brezhnev's leadership when he died in 1982.

[ 23 ] In his book Russia's Transformation: Snapshots of a Crumbling System Robert Vincent Daniels argues that Brezhnev "gave the country stability, if nothing else, even though it was the stability of the police state ", and that his domestic and external policies tried to ensure the " status quo ".

[ 24 ] Daniels believes that Brezhnev's reign can be separated into two parts, the first, starting in 1964 and ending in 1975 conforms to a "status quo leadership, building the economy, pursuing détente , and maintaining political equilibrium at home". The second phase, which began in 1975, was exactly the opposite; the economy stopped growing, the collective leadership ended with Nikolai Podgorny 's removal, Brezhnev developed a cult of personality and the Soviet Union itself started to stagnate.

[ 25 ] Historians Jiří Valenta and Frank Cibulka noted in their book Gorbachev's New Thinking and Third World Conflicts that Brezhnev's legacy was a "mixture of achievements and failures in both domestic and foreign policy". However, they argue that by the time of his death his failures had become severe chronic systematic problems. Brezhnev's main achievements, according to Valenta and Cibulka, was his foreign and defense policies, however, with the economy in decline these achievements were not durable in the long-run. They also note that the Soviet Union was able to consolidate itself as a superpower, which in turn increased their influence in non-communist Third World countries.

[ 26 ] On a positive note, Ian Thatcher argues that "[r]ather than deserving a reputation as the most vilified of all Soviet leaders, Brezhnev should be praised as one of the most successful exponents of the art of Soviet politics." He argues that Brezhnev was a good politician within the framework of the Soviet political system.

[ 27 ] Dmitry Peskov said "Brezhnev wasn't a minus for the history of our country, he was a huge plus, he laid a foundation for the country's economics and agriculture." [ 28 ] Archie Brown wrote in his book, The Rise & Fall of Communism , that "From the point of view of Communist rulers, the Brezhnev era was in many ways successful." Brown adds that the Soviet Union reached "rough parity with the United States" militarily by the early 1970s, and became a superpower in the military sense of the world.

[ 29 ] According to Brown "The Brezhnev era was a time when tens of millions of Soviet citizens lived a peaceful and predictable life than hitherto" and where "Most people did not live in fear of the KGB ." [ 30 ] Donald J Raleigh draws a mixed message, depicting a regime that entered strong and left weak: [ 2 ] Brezhnev came to power in a country eager for stability. Under Brezhnev, the  Soviet people experienced a dramatic rise in their standard of living. They took pride in their country's status as a global superpower and in Brezhnev's role as the architect of détente, a relaxation in cold-war tensions with the United States. The Soviet economy did stagnate during his tenure, however, after he rejected attempts to decentralize it, giving rise not only to episodic shortages of consumer goods but also to deficits in the Soviet “myth economy,” which bred cynicism.

Opinion polls [ edit ] Russia [ edit ] Brezhnev has fared well in Russian opinion polls when compared to his successors and predecessors. However, in the West he is most commonly remembered for starting the economic stagnation which triggered the dissolution of the Soviet Union .

[ 31 ] A 2000 poll by VTsIOM asked various Russians the question "Was a given period more positive or more negative for the country?". 36 percent of the people polled viewed Brezhnev's tenure as more positive than negative. His predecessor, Nikita Khrushchev trailed close behind him, earning 33 percent.

[ 32 ] A poll by the Public Opinion Fund (VTsIOM) in September 1999 similarly chose the Brezhnev period as the time in the 20th century when "ordinary people lived best", having a clear majority of 51 to 10. In a similar poll done in 1994, Brezhnev garnered a majority of only 36 to 16.

[ 33 ] According to a 2006 Public Opinion Fund poll, 61 percent of the Russian people viewed the Brezhnev era as good for the country.

[ 34 ] A poll by the VTsIOM in 2007 showed that the majority of Russians would choose to live during the Brezhnev era over any other period of 20th-century Russian history.

[ 35 ] Researchers have noted a surge in Brezhnev's popularity, along with other communist rulers, during and after the 1998 Russian financial crisis , which is well remembered by many Russians for plunging many into poverty. When comparing these two periods, Brezhnev's USSR is best remembered for stability in prices and income by the Russians and not the socio-economic stagnation for which he is remembered in the West.

[ 31 ] Brezhnev's top-ranked popularity has continued well into the 21st century.  In 2013, 56 percent of respondents expressed positive feelings in a poll by Russia's Levada Center. He scored a bit ahead of Lenin, (55 percent). Stalin (54 percent), Tsar Nicholas II (48 percent), and Khrushchev (45 percent).  Trailing far behind in "positive feelings" were Mikhail Gorbachev (20 percent) and Boris Yeltsin (22 percent).

[ 36 ] Ukraine [ edit ] In a 2018 Rating Sociological Group poll, 47% of respondents had a positive opinion of Brezhnev.

[ 37 ] [ 38 ] Brezhnev narrowly beat the popularity of Peter the Great (43% had a positive attitude towards him).

[ 38 ] Brezhnev's popularity was lagging far behind Bohdan Khmelnytsky (73% of respondents expressed a positive attitude) and Mykhailo Hrushevsky (68% positive attitude).

[ 38 ] Footnotes [ edit ] ^ Shlapentokh, V. (2017).

A Normal Totalitarian Society: How the Soviet Union Functioned and How It Collapsed . Taylor & Francis. p. 118.

ISBN 978-1-315-48272-9 .

^ a b Donald J.  Raleigh, "Russia's Favorite: Reevaluating the Rule of Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev, 1964-82" Russian Studies in History 52.4 (2014): 3-11 at page 4.

^ "The Soviets: Changing the Guard" .

Time . 22 November 1982. p. 3. Archived from the original on November 6, 2012 . Retrieved 23 January 2011 .

^ White 2000 , p. 211.

^ Service 2009 , p. 428.

^ Service 2009 , p. 429.

^ Service 2009 , p. 430.

^ Service 2009 , p. 432.

^ Kort 2010 , p. 357.

^ Bacon & Sandle 2002 , p. 19.

^ Geldern, James von.

"Our Little Father" . Soviethistory.org. Archived from the original on 22 July 2011 . Retrieved 4 February 2011 .

^ a b White 1993 , p. 79.

^ Staar 1991 , p. 42.

^ Chaney 1996 , p. 263.

^ White 1993 , p. 80.

^ Churbanov 2001 , p. 149.

^ Bacon & Sandle 2002 , p. 1.

^ Bacon & Sandle 2002 , p. 2.

^ Bacon & Sandle 2002 , p. 27.

^ Service 2009 , p. 427.

^ Nizameddin 1999 , p. 44.

^ Dyker 1987 , p. 166.

^ Bialer 1986 , pp. 55–56.

^ Daniels 1998 , p. 46.

^ Daniels 1998 , pp. 49–50.

^ Valenta & Cibulka 1990 , pp. 4–5.

^ Bacon & Sandle 2002 , p. 207.

^ Staff writer (5 October 2001).

"Putin's spokesman praises Soviet leader Brezhnev" .

The Guardian . Guardian News and Media . Retrieved 5 July 2012 .

^ Brown 2009 , p. 415.

^ Brown 2009 , p. 416.

^ a b Bacon & Sandle 2002 , p. 6.

^ Bacon & Sandle 2002 , p. 4.

^ Bacon & Sandle 2002 , p. 5.

^ "Russians Satisfied with Brezhnev's Tenure" . Angus-Reid.com. Archived from the original on 18 July 2012 . Retrieved 2 February 2011 .

^ ВЦИОМ: Лучшие лидеры — Брежнев и Путин (in Russian). Rosbalt.ru. 25 April 2007. Archived from the original on 12 November 2007 . Retrieved 2 February 2011 .

^ Raleigh, "Russia's Favorite", p 4.

^ "Survey shows Ukrainians most negatively regard Stalin, Lenin and Gorbachev" .

Kyiv Post . 20 November 2018.

^ a b c (in Ukrainian) Ukrainians have the best attitude among historical figures to Khmelnytsky - opinion poll , Radio Free Europe (20 November 2018) Bibliography [ edit ] Brown, Archie (2009).

The Rise & Fall of Communism .

Bodley Head .

ISBN 978-0061138799 .

Bacon, Edwin; Sandle, Mark (2002).

Brezhnev Reconsidered .

Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 978-0333794630 .

Bialer, Seweryn (1986).

The Soviet Paradox: External Expansion, Internal Decline .

I.B.Tauris .

ASIN B000IX2J6M .

Chaney, Otto Preston (1996).

Zhukov (2 ed.).

University of Oklahoma Press .

ISBN 978-0806128078 .

Churbanov, Alexander (2001).

Russia's Bitter Path to Modernity: A History of the Soviet and post-Soviet Eras .

Continuum International Publishing Group .

ISBN 978-0826413505 .

Daniels, Robert Vincent (1998).

Russia's Transformation: Snapshots of a Crumbling System .

Rowman & Littlefield .

ISBN 978-0847687091 .

Dyker, David (1987).

The Soviet Union under Gorbachev: Prospects for Reform .

Routledge .

ISBN 978-0709945192 .

Fainberg, Dina, et al.

Reconsidering Stagnation in the Brezhnev Era: Ideology and Exchange (2016) Kort, Michael (2010).

The Soviet Colossus: History and Aftermath .

M.E. Sharpe .

ISBN 978-0-7656-2387-4 .

Nizameddin, Talal (1999).

Russia and the Middle East: Towards a new Foreign Policy .

Palgrave Macmillan .

ISBN 978-0312225384 .

Raleigh, Donald J., ed.

Russia's Favorite: Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev, 1964-82 (ME Sharpe, 2014).

Raleigh, Donald J. "Russia's Favorite: Reevaluating the Rule of Leonid Il'ich Brezhnev, 1964-82: Guest Editor's Introduction." Russian Studies in History 52.4 (2014): 3-11.

Dönninghaus, Victor, and Andrei Savin. "Leonid Brezhnev." Russian Studies in History 52#4 (2014), pp 71–93.

Service, Robert (2009).

History of Modern Russia: From Tsarism to the Twenty-first Century (3 ed.).

Penguin Books Ltd .

ISBN 978-0674034938 .

Staar, Richard Felix (1991).

Foreign Policies of the Soviet Union (1 ed.).

Hoover Institution Press .

ISBN 978-0817991029 .

Ward, Christopher J.

Brezhnev's Folly: The Building of BAM and Late Soviet Socialism (2009). the Baikal–Amur Mainline Railway project (BAM) was the most important industrial project of the Brezhnev era. Ward says it was a massive, corrupt failure.

White, Stephen (1993).

After Gorbachev .

Cambridge University Press .

ISBN 978-0521458962 .

White, Stephen (2000).

Russia's New Politics: The Management of a Postcommunist Society .

Cambridge University Press .

ASIN B003QI0DQE .

Valenta, Jiří; Cibulka, Frank (1990).

Gorbachev's New Thinking and Third World Conflicts .

Transaction Publishers .

ISBN 978-0887382123 .

v t e Era of Stagnation Events (1964–1982) Collective leadership Glassboro Summit Conference Six-Day War Prague Spring Invasion of Czechoslovakia 1968 Red Square demonstration Brezhnev Doctrine Brezhnev assassination attempt Sino-Soviet border conflict Détente 1973 oil crisis Fall of Saigon Vladivostok Summit Helsinki Accords 1977 Moscow bombings 1977 Soviet constitution 1978 Georgian demonstrations Cambodian–Vietnamese War Soviet–Afghan War 1980 Summer Olympics Reaction to 1980–1981 Polish crisis Exercise Zapad Death and state funeral of Leonid Brezhnev Legacy of Leonid Brezhnev Events (1982–1985) RYAN Korean Air Lines Flight 007 1983 false nuclear alarm incident Able Archer 83 Uzbek cotton scandal 1984 Summer Olympics boycott Friendship Games Politburo members 22nd 23rd 24th 25th 26th Aliyev Andropov Brezhnev Chebrikov Chernenko Demichev Dolgikh Efremov Gorbachev Grechko Grishin Gromyko Kirilenko Kiselyov Kunaev Kosygin Kulakov Kuznetsov Masherov Mazurov Mikoyan Mzhavanadze Pelše Podgorny Polyansky Ponomarev Rashidov Romanov Shcherbytsky Shelepin Shelest Shevardnadze Shvernik Solomentsev Suslov Tikhonov Ustinov Voronov Vorotnikov Leaders The Troika ( Brezhnev Kosygin Podgorny ) Yuri Andropov Konstantin Chernenko Governments Kosygin's 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th Tikhonov's 1st 2nd National economy Reforms OGAS 1965 1973 1979 Food Programme 1984 Five-year plans 8th plan 9th plan 10th plan 11th plan v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Legacy_of_Leonid_Brezhnev&oldid=1294058342 " Categories : Leonid Brezhnev Politics of the Soviet Union Legacies by person Era of Stagnation Historiography of the Soviet Union Cold War historiography Hidden categories: CS1: unfit URL CS1 uses Russian-language script (ru) CS1 Russian-language sources (ru) Articles with Ukrainian-language sources (uk) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Good articles This page was last edited on 5 June 2025, at 09:25 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Legacy of Leonid Brezhnev 3 languages Add topic

