Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Confusion over identity 2 Legacy 3 Notes 4 Sources Toggle the table of contents Artephius 7 languages العربية Deutsch Español فارسی Français Nederlands Türkçe Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Alchemist Artephius (or Artefius ) (c. 1150) is a writer to whom a number of alchemical texts are ascribed. Although the roots of the texts are unclear and the identity of their author obscure, at least some of them are Arabic in origin. He is named as the author of several books, the Ars sintrillia , Clavis sapientiae or Clavis maioris sapientiae , and Liber secretus .

[ 1 ] Confusion over identity [ edit ] Alchemical pseudepigraphy makes it difficult to identify who the historical Artephius may have been. His identity remains an open question. As The Secret Book of Artephius was respected and mentioned by Roger Bacon many times, Artephius’ writing is dated to around 1150.

[ 2 ] One author, Restoro d'Arezzo , conflated Orpheus with Artephius in his Composizione del Mondo in 1282.

[ 3 ] This mistake was due to a translation error, with the Arabic for Orpheus and Artephius being very similar. This transcription error gave us "Artephius", an alchemist without a historical personality.

[ 4 ] Artephius has also been misidentified as a Jewish convert, [ 5 ] Apollonius of Tyana , Stephanos of Alexandria , Al-Tughrai , [ 3 ] and Ibn Umail .

[ 4 ] The discovery of a 13/14th-century copy of Clavis Sapientia confirms that the text was first written in Arabic by a Muslim author.

[ 4 ] Legacy [ edit ] A Renaissance tradition held that Artephius had been born in the first or second century and died in the twelfth, thanks to having discovered the alchemical elixir that made it possible to prolong life. In his Secret Book , Artephius indeed claims to be more than a thousand years old.

In printed form, works attributed to Artephius became well known in the seventeenth century.  A work Artefii clavis majoris sapientiae was printed in Paris in 1609.  Later it would also appear within Volume IV of Theatrum Chemicum , printed originally in 1613.

[ 6 ] Then in 1624, Eirenaeus Orandus provided an English translation of the 'secret booke'.

[ 7 ] The Latin editions of Clavis Sapentia are highly abridged and lack the original diagrams found in the Arabic text.

[ 4 ] Notes [ edit ] ^ "At the Crossroads of magic and science: John Dee's Archemastrie" by Nicholas H. Clulee.  In: "Occult and Scientific mentalities in the Renaissance" edited by Brian Vickers.

^ Patai, Raphael.

The Jewish alchemists:  A history and source book.

Princeton University Press. 1994. p. 143 ^ a b Austin, H.D. 1937. "Artephius-Orpheus." Speculum 12: 251–54.

^ a b c d Levi della Vida, G. 1938. "Something More about Artefius and His Clavis Sapientiae." Speculum 13: 80–85 ^ Patai, Raphael. ‘‘The Jewish alchemists:  A history and source book.’’ Princeton University Press. 1994. p. 142 ^ "The Alchemy web site on Levity.com" . Levity.com . Retrieved 8 July 2008 .

^ "The Alchemy web site on Levity.com - Secret Book of Artephius" . Levity.com.

Archived from the original on 18 June 2008 . Retrieved 8 July 2008 .

Sources [ edit ] Austin, H.D. 1937. "Artephius-Orpheus." Speculum 12: 251–54.

Levi della Vida, G. 1938. "Something More about Artefius and His Clavis Sapientiae." Speculum 13: 80–85.

v t e Alchemy in the medieval Islamic world Alchemists 8th century pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana 9th century Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) 10th century Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya Maslama al-Qurṭubī Abū Manṣūr al-Muwaffaq al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) 11th century pseudo-Avicenna al-Khawārizmī al-Kāthī al-Muʿizz ibn Bādīs Aḥmad ibn ʿImād al-Dīn Ibn al-Wāfid (pharmacist) 12th century al-Ṭughrāʾī Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Artephius 13th century al-Simāwī Ibn al-Bayṭār (pharmacist) Abū l-ʿAbbās al-Nabātī (pharmacist) Ḥasan al-Rammāḥ (engineer) 14th century al-Jildakī Ibn al-Rassām Abū l-Ashbā ibn Tammām Concepts Takwin Philosopher's stone al-iksīr Alembic Athanor Works Book of Mercy Books of the Balances al-Burhān fī asrār ʿilm al-mīzān Masāʾil Khālid li-Maryānus al-rāhib Emerald Tablet Five Hundred Books al-ʿIlm al-muktasab fī zirāʿat al-dhahab Mifthāḥ al-ḥikma ( Clavis sapientiae ) al-Miṣbāḥ fī ʿilm al-miftāḥ Nabataean Agriculture One Hundred and Twelve Books Seventy Books Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Turba Philosophorum Nihāyat al-rutba fī ṭalab al-ḥisba (al-Nabarawi) v t e Alchemy (general) Alchemists Greco-Egyptian Agathodaemon (legendary) Chymes pseudo-Cleopatra pseudo-Democritus Hermes Trismegistus (legendary) Mary the Jewess pseudo-Moses Ostanes (legendary) Paphnutia the Virgin Zosimos of Panopolis Ancient Chinese Fang (alchemist) Ge Hong Master Geng Wei Boyang Byzantine pseudo-Olympiodorus Stephanus of Alexandria Synesius Arabic-Islamic Abū Bakr al-Rāzī (Rhazes) Alphidius pseudo-Apollonius of Tyana (Balīnūs/Balīnās) Artephius pseudo-Avicenna Ibn Arfaʿ Raʾs Ibn Umayl (Senior Zadith) Ibn Waḥshiyya al-ʿIrāqī Jābir ibn Ḥayyān (Geber) pseudo-Khālid ibn Yazīd (Calid) al-Jildakī Maslama al-Qurṭubī al-Ṭughrāʾī al-Zahrāwī (Abulcasis) Late medieval pseudo-Albertus (pseudo-)Arnaldus de Villa Nova pseudo-Geber George Ripley Guido di Montanor Hugh of Evesham Johann of Laz John Dastin John of Rupescissa (Jean de Roquetaillade) Magister Salernus pseudo-Michael Scot Ortolanus Paul of Taranto Petrus Bonus pseudo-Ramon Llull (pseudo-)Roger Bacon Taddeo Alderotti Thomas Norton Early modern Andreas Libavius Basil Valentine pseudo-Bernard of Treviso George Starkey (Eirenaeus Philalethes) Gerhard Dorn Giovanni da Correggio Heinrich Khunrath Hennig Brand Isaac Newton Jakob Böhme Jan Baptist van Helmont Johann Rudolf Glauber John Dee Michael Maier Michael Sendivogius Paracelsus Pierre-Jean Fabre Robert Boyle Samuel Norton Thomas Vaughan (Eugenius Philalethes) Wilhelm Homberg Modern Carl Jung Eugène Canseliet Frater Albertus Fulcanelli Mary Anne Atwood Writings Major Works Atalanta fugiens Aurora consurgens Liber de compositione alchemiae ( Morienus ) Book of the Silvery Water and the Starry Earth Book of Mercy Books of the Balances Buch der heiligen Dreifaltigkeit Cantong Qi Chymical Wedding of Christian Rosenkreutz Clavis sapientiae ( Miftāḥ al-ḥikma ) De consideratione quintae essentiae Emerald Tablet ( Tabula Smaragdina ) Leyden papyrus X Liber Hermetis de alchemia ( Liber dabessi ) Liber ignium Liber lucis Mappae clavicula Mirror of Alchimy Mutus liber Nabataean Agriculture Ordinal of Alchemy Papyrus Graecus Holmiensis Physika kai mystika Rosary of the Philosophers Rutbat al-ḥakīm ( Step of the Sage ) Seventy Books Sirr al-khalīqa ( Secret of Creation ) Sirr al-Asrar (pseudo-Aristotle) Sirr al-Asrar (al-Rāzī) Splendor solis Summa perfectionis Suspicions about the Hidden Realities of the Air Turba philosophorum Twelve Keys of Basil Valentine Compilations Aureum vellus Bibliotheca chemica curiosa De alchemia Deutsches Theatrum Chemicum Fasciculus chemicus Musaeum Hermeticum Theatrum chemicum Theatrum chemicum Britannicum Tripus aureus Various Alembic Alkahest Athanor Azoth Chrysopoeia Element Digestion Elixir of life Homunculus Iatrochemistry In art/entertainment Magnum opus Ouroboros Pill of Immortality Philosophers' stone Prima materia Rebis Spagyric Takwin Yliaster Processes Substances Symbols ( Unicode , Suns in alchemy ) All articles Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Czech Republic Spain Poland Vatican Israel People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Artephius&oldid=1205878748 " Categories : 12th-century Arabic-language writers 12th-century alchemists Alchemists of the medieval Islamic world Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Year of birth unknown Year of death unknown This page was last edited on 10 February 2024, at 17:22 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Artephius 7 languages Add topic

