Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Bibliography 3 References 4 External links Toggle the table of contents Daniel Johnson (journalist) 2 languages العربية Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia British journalist, commentator and author (born 1957) Daniel Benedict Johnson (born 26 August 1957) is a British journalist and author who was the founding editor of Standpoint magazine.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Since 2018, he has been founding editor of the online journalism platform TheArticle , an associate editor of The Critic magazine and commentator for The Daily Mail , The Mail on Sunday , and The Daily Telegraph .

Biography [ edit ] Daniel Johnson is the son of the author Paul Johnson and brother of Cosmos Johnson, Sophie Johnson-Clark and entrepreneur Luke Johnson .

[ 3 ] After attending Langley Grammar School he graduated with a First in Modern History from Magdalen College, Oxford , and then studied at Peterhouse, Cambridge for three years from 1978 to 1981. Johnson was awarded a Shakespeare Scholarship to Berlin. Returning to English academia as a fellow of Queen Mary, University of London , he served as Director of Publications for the Centre for Policy Studies .

Johnson covered the fall of the Berlin Wall as German correspondent for The Daily Telegraph and has worked as a leader writer for both The Times and The Telegraph , as well as literary editor and associate editor for The Times .

[ 4 ] On 9 November, 1989, Johnson attended an East German Government press conference on loosening of travel restrictions for East Germans, and asked the final question: "What will happen to the Berlin Wall now?" His question and Günter Schabowski 's response is shown nightly in a video displayed every evening to tourists at the Deutsche Bundestag building in Berlin.

[ citation needed ] In 2008, he launched Standpoint magazine as founding editor. He stepped down in December 2018.

[ 5 ] He was also a contributing editor to The New York Sun and a contributor to The Times Literary Supplement , The Literary Review , Prospect , Commentary , and The New Criterion , [ 6 ] as well as The American Spectator and The Weekly Standard .

[ citation needed ] Allegations were published in the January 9, 2008 issue of The New York Sun , written by Johnson about then-presidential candidate Barack Obama and Kenya's candidate (and subsequent Prime Minister) Raila Odinga , based on what was later described as "a patently fallacious story ...

The Sun is attempting to get away with lies about the Democratic presidential candidate, or at the very least to shirk their responsibility to the truth." [ 7 ] [ 8 ] In 2018, Johnson became the founding editor of a new political opinion website, TheArticle .

[ 9 ] In 2013, he participated in an Oxford Union debate arguing that Islam is not a religion of peace .

[ 10 ] He has been criticised for writing in Standpoint in 2015 that "the Islamisation of Europe is no longer a far-right fantasy, but a real possibility", and that an increase in the number of Muslims could create "a new European hell".

[ 11 ] He is Catholic and is married with four children.

Bibliography [ edit ] 1989 German Neo-Liberals and the Social Market Economy 1991 Thomas Mann: Death in Venice and other stories 2007 White King and Red Queen: How the Cold War was Fought on the Chessboard References [ edit ] ^ "About Us" . Standpoint. Archived from the original on 1 June 2008 . Retrieved 8 December 2010 .

^ "Will Standpoint fall at the first hurdle?" .

The Independent . London. 29 December 2008. Archived from the original on 14 May 2011.

^ "Arguing the World: Standpoint, A New British Periodical" .

The New York Sun . 30 June 2008 . Retrieved 8 December 2010 .

^ "Daniel Johnson profile" .

The Guardian . London. 4 June 2008 . Retrieved 8 December 2010 .

^ "After more than ten years, founder of Standpoint magazine Daniel Johnson stands down as Editor" Archived 14 January 2019 at the Wayback Machine , Standpoint website, accessed 13 January 2019 ^ "Daniel Johnson" . The New Criterion . Retrieved 8 December 2010 .

^ Whitney, Joel (16 August 2008).

"The New York Sun's Obama Frame-Up" .

HuffPost .

^ Whitney, Joel.

"Obama and the Kenya Deception" .

Guernica Magazine . Archived from the original on 20 August 2008 . Retrieved 6 August 2008 .

^ "Home" .

thearticle.com .

^ Archived at Ghostarchive and the Wayback Machine : Daniel Johnson | Islam Is Not A Peaceful Religion | Oxford Union .

YouTube .

^ Hughes, Solomon (3 December 2020).

"Standpoint, the Critic and UnHerd: who's their daddies?" .

Morning Star . Retrieved 13 July 2025 .

External links [ edit ] The Daily Telrgraph interview with Johnson and Adrian Bridge of the Independent on Youtube Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Poland Israel Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Daniel_Johnson_(journalist)&oldid=1300533514 " Categories : 1957 births Living people British male journalists British critics of Islam People educated at Langley Grammar School Alumni of Magdalen College, Oxford Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2016 Use British English from September 2016 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2023 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 This page was last edited on 14 July 2025, at 22:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Daniel Johnson (journalist) 2 languages Add topic

