Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Introduction 2 Quantum 3 See also 4 References 5 Bibliography 6 External links Toggle the table of contents Spin model Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Mathematical model used to explain magnetism This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Spin model" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2009 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A spin model is a mathematical model used in physics primarily to explain magnetism . Spin models may either be classical or quantum mechanical in nature. Spin models have been studied in quantum field theory as examples of integrable models . Spin models are also used in quantum information theory and computability theory in theoretical computer science . The theory of spin models is a far reaching and unifying topic that cuts across many fields.

Introduction [ edit ] In ordinary materials, the magnetic dipole moments of individual atoms produce magnetic fields that cancel one another, because each dipole points in a random direction.

Ferromagnetic materials below their Curie temperature , however, exhibit magnetic domains in which the atomic dipole moments are locally aligned, producing a macroscopic, non-zero magnetic field from the domain. These are the ordinary "magnets" with which we are all familiar.

The study of the behavior of such "spin models" is a thriving area of research in condensed matter physics . For instance, the Ising model describes spins (dipoles) that have only two possible states, up and down, whereas in the Heisenberg model the spin vector is allowed to point in any direction. In certain magnets, the magnetic dipoles are only free to rotate in a 2D plane, a system which can be adequately described by the so-called xy-model .

The lack of a unified theory of magnetism [ 1 ] forces scientist to model magnetic systems theoretically with one, or a combination of these spin models in order to understand the intricate behavior of atomic magnetic interactions.

Numerical implementation of these models has led to several interesting results, such as quantitative research in the theory of phase transitions .

Quantum [ edit ] A quantum spin model is a quantum Hamiltonian model that describes a system which consists of spins either interacting or not and are an active area of research in the fields of strongly correlated electron systems, quantum information theory , and quantum computing .

[ 2 ] The physical observables in these quantum models are actually operators in a Hilbert space acting on state vectors as opposed to the physical observables in the corresponding classical spin models - like the Ising model - which are commutative variables.

See also [ edit ] ANNNI model Bethe ansatz Ising model Classical Heisenberg model Quantum Heisenberg model Hubbard model J1 J2 model Kuramoto model Magnetism Majumdar–Ghosh model Potts model t-J model Quantum rotor model Spin Spin stiffness Spin waves XY model Yang–Baxter equation Z N model References [ edit ] ^ Nolting, Wolfgang; Ramakanth, Anupuru (2009).

Quantum Theory of Magnetism . Berlin Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.

ISBN 9783540854159 .

^ Michael Nielsen and Isaac Chuang (2000).

Quantum Computation and Quantum Information . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

ISBN 0-521-63503-9 .

OCLC 174527496 .

Bibliography [ edit ] Bethe, H. (March 1931). "Zur Theorie der Metalle".

Zeitschrift für Physik .

71 ( 3– 4): 205– 226.

Bibcode : 1931ZPhy...71..205B .

doi : 10.1007/BF01341708 .

S2CID 124225487 .

R.J. Baxter, Exactly solved models in statistical mechanics , London, Academic Press, 1982 [1] Archived 2011-04-10 at the Wayback Machine Affleck, Ian ; Marston, J. Brad (1 March 1988). "Large-n limit of the Heisenberg-Hubbard model: Implications for high-Tc superconductors".

Physical Review B .

37 (7): 3774– 3777.

Bibcode : 1988PhRvB..37.3774A .

doi : 10.1103/PhysRevB.37.3774 .

PMID 9944997 .

External links [ edit ] Introduction to classical and Ising Spin Models Quantum Field Theory of Many-Body Systems [ permanent dead link ] Institute of Quantum Information Caltech v t e Statistical mechanics Theory Principle of maximum entropy ergodic theory Statistical thermodynamics Ensembles partition functions equations of state thermodynamic potential : U H F G Maxwell relations Models Ferromagnetism models Ising Potts Heisenberg percolation Particles with force field depletion force Lennard-Jones potential Mathematical approaches Boltzmann equation H-theorem Vlasov equation BBGKY hierarchy stochastic process mean-field theory and conformal field theory Critical phenomena Phase transition Critical exponents correlation length size scaling Entropy Boltzmann Shannon Tsallis Rényi von Neumann Applications Statistical field theory elementary particle superfluidity Condensed matter physics Complex system chaos information theory Boltzmann machine Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Spin_model&oldid=1186698255 " Categories : Magnetism Statistical mechanics Spin models Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2009 All articles needing additional references Webarchive template wayback links All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2020 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 24 November 2023, at 22:53 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Spin model Add languages Add topic

