Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Etymology 2 History 3 Users and institutions Toggle Users and institutions subsection 3.1 Academic 3.2 Business (for profit) 3.3 Government 3.4 Church 3.5 Motion pictures, film, and audio and video tape 3.6 Non-profit 3.7 Web archiving 3.8 Dark archives 3.9 Other 4 Standardization 5 Protection 6 Limitations and alternatives 7 See also 8 References 9 Further reading 10 External links Toggle the table of contents Archive 82 languages Alemannisch العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca 閩南語 / Bân-lâm-gí Башҡортса Беларуская Беларуская (тарашкевіца) Български Bosanski Brezhoneg Català Čeština Cymraeg Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Frysk Gaeilge Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Hrvatski Ido Bahasa Indonesia ᐃᓄᒃᑎᑐᑦ / inuktitut IsiZulu Italiano עברית ಕನ್ನಡ Қазақша Кыргызча Latina Latviešu Lietuvių Limburgs Magyar Македонски മലയാളം मराठी Bahasa Melayu Монгол Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Occitan Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча پنجابی Polski Português Русский Shqip Sicilianu සිංහල Simple English سنڌي Slovenčina Slovenščina کوردی Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska தமிழ் తెలుగు ไทย Тоҷикӣ Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 吴语 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikinews Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Accumulation of historical records "Archived" and "Archiving" redirect here. For other uses, see Archive (disambiguation) .

"Dark archive" redirects here. For the book about books bound in human skin, see Dark Archives .

"Digital archive" redirects here. Not to be confused with Digital library . For other uses, see Digital archiving .

Shelved record boxes of an archive Part of a series on Library and information science Outline Glossary Histories Libraries - Information Focus Archives management - Collections management ( Preservation ) - Data management - Information management ( cataloguing ) - Knowledge management - Library management Curation Data - Metadata - Information - Documents - Artefacts - Knowledge Interdisciplinary fields Archival science - Communication studies - Computer science - Data science - Documentation science - Epistemology - Library science - Information science - Science and technology studies Areas Academic - Archival - Legal - Health - Private - Public - School - Special WikiProject Category v t e An archive is an accumulation of historical records or materials , in any medium, or the physical facility in which they are located.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] Archives contain primary source documents that have accumulated over the course of an individual or organization's lifetime, and are kept to show the history and function of that person or organization.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] Professional archivists and historians generally understand archives to be records that have been naturally and necessarily generated as a product of regular legal, commercial, administrative, or social activities.

[ 5 ] They have been metaphorically defined as "the secretions of an organism", [ 6 ] and are distinguished from documents that have been consciously written or created to communicate a particular message to posterity.

In general, archives consist of records that have been selected for permanent or long-term preservation on the grounds of their enduring cultural, historical, or evidentiary value.

[ 4 ] Archival records are normally unpublished and almost always unique, unlike books or magazines, of which many identical copies may exist. This means that archives are quite distinct from libraries with regard to their functions and organization, although archival collections can often be found within library buildings.

[ 7 ] A person who works in archives is called an archivist . The study and practice of organizing, preserving, and providing access to information and materials in archives is called archival science . The physical place of storage can be referred to as an archive (more usual in the United Kingdom ), an archives (more usual in the United States ), or a repository.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] The computing use of the term "archive" should not be confused with the record-keeping meaning of the term.

Etymology [ edit ] The English word archive / ˈ ɑːr k aɪ v / is derived from the French archives (plural), and in turn from Latin archīum or archīvum , [ 10 ] the romanized form of the Greek ἀρχεῖον ( arkheion ). The Greek term originally referred to the home or dwelling of the Archon , a ruler or chief magistrate , in which important official state documents were filed and interpreted; from there its meaning broadened to encompass such concepts as " town hall " and " public records ".

[ 11 ] The root of the Greek word is ἀρχή ( arkhē ), meaning among other things "magistracy, office, government", [ 12 ] and derived from the verb ἄρχω ( arkhō ), meaning "to begin, rule, govern" (also the root of English words such as "anarchy" and "monarchy").

[ 13 ] The word archive was first attested in English in the early 17th century, and the word archivist in the mid-18th century, although in these periods both terms were usually used only in reference to foreign institutions and personnel. Not until the late 19th century did they begin to be used widely in domestic contexts.

[ 9 ] [ 14 ] The adjective formed from archive is archival .

History [ edit ] The practice of keeping official documents is very old.

[ 15 ] Archaeologists have discovered archives of hundreds (and sometimes thousands) of clay tablets dating back to the third and second millennia BC in sites like Ebla , Mari , Amarna , Hattusas , Ugarit , and Pylos . These discoveries have been fundamental to learning about ancient alphabets, languages, literature, and politics.

[ citation needed ] Oral literature, such as Palestinian hikaye , can also have archival functions for communities.

[ 16 ] Archives were well developed by the ancient Chinese, the ancient Greeks, and the ancient Romans (who called them Tabularia ). The idea that a society would designate a place to preserve records is integral to the Justinian Code (which set Roman law).

[ 17 ] England, after 1066, developed archives and archival access methods.

[ 18 ] The Swiss developed archival systems after 1450.

[ 19 ] The earliest archival manuals: Jacob von Rammingen, Von der Registratur (1571), Baldassarre Bonifacio, De Archivis (1632).

The first predecessors of archival science in the West are Jacob von Rammingen's manuals of 1571.

[ 20 ] and Baldassarre Bonifacio 's De Archivis libris singularis of 1632.

[ 21 ] Modern archival thinking has some roots dating back to the French Revolution . The French National Archives , which possess perhaps the largest archival collection in the world (with records going as far back as 625 A.D.), was created in 1790 during the Revolution from various government, religious, and private archives seized by the revolutionaries.

[ 22 ] In 1883, French archivist Gabriel Richou published the first Western text on archival theory, entitled Traité théorique et pratique des archives publiques ( Treaty of Theory and Practice of the Public Archives ), in which he systematized the archival theory of the respect des fonds , first published by Natalis de Wailly in 1841.

[ 23 ] Users and institutions [ edit ] Reading room of the Österreichisches Staatsarchiv (Austrian State Archive), in the Erdberg district of Vienna (2006) Historians, genealogists , lawyers, demographers , filmmakers, and others conduct research at archives.

[ 24 ] The research process at each archive is unique and depends upon the institution that houses the archive.  While there are many kinds of archives, the most recent census of archivists in the United States identifies five major types: academic , business (for profit) , government , non-profit , and others .

[ 25 ] There are also four main areas of inquiry involved with archives: material technologies, organizing principles, geographic locations, and tangled embodiments of humans and non-humans.  These areas help to further categorize what kind of archive is being created.

Academic [ edit ] See also: Institutional repository Charles Sturt University Regional Archives Archives in colleges, universities, and other educational facilities are typically housed within a library, and duties may be carried out by an archivist .

[ 26 ] [ page needed ] Academic archives exist to preserve institutional history and serve the academic community.

[ 27 ] An academic archive may contain materials such as the institution's administrative records, personal and professional papers of former professors and presidents, memorabilia related to school organizations and activities, and items the academic library wishes to remain in a closed-stack setting, such as rare books or thesis copies. Access to the collections in these archives is usually by prior appointment only; some have posted hours for making inquiries.  Users of academic archives can be undergraduates, graduate students, faculty and staff, scholarly researchers, and the general public.  Many academic archives work closely with alumni relations departments or other campus institutions to help raise funds for their library or school.

[ 28 ] Qualifications for employment may vary.  Entry-level positions usually require an undergraduate diploma, but typically archivists hold graduate degrees in history or library science (preferably certified by a body such as the American Library Association ).

[ 29 ] Subject-area specialization becomes more common in higher-ranking positions.

[ 30 ] Business (for profit) [ edit ] Archives located in for-profit institutions are usually those owned by a private business.  Examples of prominent business archives in the United States include Coca-Cola (which also owns the separate museum World of Coca-Cola ), Procter and Gamble , Motorola Heritage Services and Archives, and Levi Strauss & Co.

These corporate archives maintain historic documents and items related to the history and administration of their companies.

[ 31 ] Business archives serve the purpose of helping corporations maintain control over their brand by retaining memories of the company's past.  Especially in business archives, records management is separate from the historical aspect of archives.  Workers in these types of archives may have any combination of training and degrees, from either a history or library background.  These archives are typically not open to the public and are only used by workers of the owner company, though some allow approved visitors by appointment.

[ 32 ] Business archives are concerned with maintaining the integrity of their company and are therefore selective about how their materials may be used.

[ 33 ] Government [ edit ] Main article: National archives Storage facility at the National Archives and Records Administration , Washington, D.C.

Government archives include those maintained by local and state governments as well as those maintained by the national (or federal) government. Anyone may use a government archive, and frequent users include reporters , genealogists , writers, historians , students, and people seeking information on the history of their home or region. Many government archives are open to the public, and no appointment is required to visit.

[ 34 ] In the United States, the National Archives and Records Administration (NARA) maintains central archival facilities in the District of Columbia and College Park, Maryland , with regional facilities distributed throughout the United States. Some city or local governments may have repositories, but their organization and accessibility vary widely.

[ 35 ] Similar to the library profession, certification requirements and education also varies widely, from state to state.

[ 36 ] Professional associations themselves encourage the need to professionalize.

[ 37 ] NARA offers the Certificate of Federal Records Management Training Program for professional development.

[ 38 ] The majority of state and local archives staff hold a bachelor's degree [ 39 ] —increasingly repositories list advanced degrees (e.g. MA, MLS/MLIS, Ph.D.) and certifications as a position requirement or preference.

[ 29 ] In the UK, the National Archives (formerly known as the Public Record Office) is the government archive for England and Wales . The physical records stored by the National Archives amount to 185 km (115 miles) of shelving, a number that increases every year.

[ 40 ] The English Heritage Archive is the public archive of English Heritage . The National Records of Scotland , located in Edinburgh , serves that country; [ 41 ] while the Public Record Office of Northern Ireland in Belfast is the government archive for Northern Ireland.

[ 42 ] A network of county record offices and other local authority-run archives exists throughout England, Wales, and Scotland and holds many important collections, including local government, landed estates, church, and business records. Many archives have contributed catalogs to the national " Access to Archives " program and online searching across collections is possible.

In France, the French Archives Administration ( Service interministériel des Archives de France ) in the Ministry of Culture supervises the National Archives ( Archives nationales ), which possess 373 km (232 miles) of physical records as of 2020 [update] (the total length of occupied shelves put next to each other), with original records going as far back as A.D. 625, and 74.75 terabytes (74,750 GB ) of electronic archives, as well as the National Overseas Archives (ANOM, 36.5 kilometres (22.7 mi) of physical records), the National Archives of the World of Labour [ fr ] (ANMT, 49.8 kilometres (30.9 mi) of physical records), and all local public archives (departmental archives, or archives départementales , located in the préfectures of each of the 100 départements of France plus the City of Paris, more than 400 municipal archives in the larger towns and cities of France, and 12 newer regional archives) which possess 3,591 km (2,231 miles) of physical records and 225.25 terabytes of electronic archives (as of 2020 [update] ).

[ 43 ] [ 44 ] Put together, the total volume of archives under the supervision of the French Archives Administration is the largest in the world.

The archives of the French Ministry of Armed Forces ( Defence Historical Service , ca. 450 kilometres (280 mi) of physical records) and the archives of the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs ( Diplomatic Archives [ fr ] , ca. 120 kilometres (75 mi) of physical records) are managed separately by their respective ministries and do not fall under the jurisdiction of the Archives of France Administration.

[ 45 ] In India , the National Archives (NAI) are located in New Delhi.

In Taiwan , the National Archives Administration are located in Taipei .

[ 46 ] Most intergovernmental organizations keep their own historical archives. However, a number of European organizations, including the European Commission, choose to deposit their archives with the European University Institute in Florence.

[ 47 ] Church [ edit ] A prominent church archive is the Vatican Apostolic Archive .

[ 48 ] Archdioceses , dioceses , and parishes also have archives in the Roman Catholic and Anglican Churches. Very important are monastery archives because of their antiquity, like the ones of Monte Cassino , Saint Gall , and Fulda . The records in these archives include manuscripts, papal records, local church records, photographs, oral histories, audiovisual materials, and architectural drawings.

Most Protestant denominations have archives as well, including the Presbyterian Historical Society , [ 49 ] the Moravian Church Archives, [ 50 ] the Southern Baptist Historical Library and Archives, [ 51 ] the United Methodist Archives and History Center of the United Methodist Church, [ 52 ] and the Christian Church (Disciples of Christ).

[ 53 ] Motion pictures, film, and audio and video tape [ edit ] Main category: Film archives See also: List of film archives and Cinematheque Film archives collect, restore, investigate and conserve audiovisual content like films, documentaries, tv programs and newsreel footage. Often, a country has its own film archive to preserve its national audiovisual heritage. The International Federation of Film Archives comprises more than 150 institutions in over 77 countries and the Association of European Film Archives and Cinematheques is an affiliation of 49 European national and regional film archives founded in 1991. For a comprehensive look at the history of film preservation and the institutions and organizations that developed various practices, see Penelope Houston 's Keepers of the Frame.

Non-profit [ edit ] Non-profit archives include those in historical societies , not-for-profit businesses such as hospitals, and repositories within foundations .  Such repositories are typically set up with private funds from donors to preserve the papers and histories of specific people or places. These institutions may rely on grant funding from the government as well as private funds.

[ 54 ] Depending on the availability of funds, non-profit archives may be as small as the historical society in a rural town to as big as a state historical society that rivals a government archive. Users of this type of archive may vary as much as the institutions that hold it. Employees of non-profit archives may be professional archivists, paraprofessionals , or volunteers, as the education required for a position at a non-profit archive varies with the demands of the collection's user base.

[ 55 ] Web archiving [ edit ] Main article: Web archive Web archiving is the process of collecting portions of the World Wide Web and ensuring the collection is preserved in an archive, such as an archive site , for future researchers, historians, and the public.  Due to the massive size of the Web, web archivists typically employ web crawlers for automated collection.

Similarly, software code and documentation can be archived on the web, as with the example of CPAN .

Dark archives [ edit ] Archives that are collected and kept in cold storage ie. not openly accessible, are sometimes called dark archives .

[ 56 ] For example in 2025, the academic paper repository arXiv was concerned about trends in the United States and elsewhere that might restrict academic freedoms. They created a dark archive of the website, so it could be reconstituted in another country, if required.

[ 57 ] Dark archive is also used in library science for collections of online publications that are held in reserve in case the publisher no longer makes them available.

[ 56 ] Other [ edit ] Jean-Nickolaus Tretter Collection in Gay, Lesbian, Bisexual and Transgender Studies in May 2013 Some archives defy categorization.  There are tribal archives within the Native American nations in North America, and there are archives that exist within the papers of private individuals.  Many museums keep archives in order to prove the provenance of their pieces.  Any institution or persons wishing to keep their significant papers in an organized fashion that employs the most basic principles of archival science may have an archive.  In the 2004 census of archivists taken in the United States, 2.7% of archivists were employed in institutions that defied categorization.  This was a separate figure from the 1.3% that identified themselves as self-employed.

[ 58 ] Another type of archive is the Public Secrets project.

[ 59 ] This is an interactive testimonial, in which women incarcerated in the California State Prison System describe what happened to them. The archive's mission is to gather stories from women who want to express themselves and want their stories heard. This collection includes transcripts and an audio recording of the women telling their stories.

The archives of an individual may include letters, papers, photographs, computer files, scrapbooks, financial records, or diaries created or collected by the individual, regardless of medium or format. The archives of an organization (such as a corporation or government) tend to contain other types of records, such as administrative files, business records, memos, official correspondence, and meeting minutes. Some archives are made up of a compilation of both types of collections. An example of this type of combined compilation is the Transgender Archives at the University of Victoria , which contain a multitude of collections of donations from both individuals and organizations from all over the world. Many of these donations have yet to be cataloged but are currently in the process of being digitally preserved and made available to the public online.

[ 60 ] The Arctic World Archive is a commercially-run facility for data preservation located in the Svalbard archipelago, Norway, that contains data of historical and cultural interest from several countries as well as all of American multinational company GitHub 's open source code . The data is kept on reels of specially developed film in a steel vault buried deep beneath the permafrost , with the data storage medium expected to last for 500 to 1000 years.

[ 61 ] Standardization [ edit ] The International Council on Archives (ICA) has developed a number of standards on archival description, including the General International Standard Archival Description ISAD(G).

[ 62 ] ISAD (G) is meant to be used in conjunction with national standards or as a basis for nations to build their own standards.

[ 63 ] In the United States, ISAD (G) is implemented through Describing Archives: A Content Standard , popularly known as "DACS".

[ 64 ] In Canada, ISAD (G) is implemented through the Council of Archives [ 65 ] as the Rules for Archival Description , also known as "RAD".

[ 66 ] ISO is currently developing standards.

[ 67 ] [ 68 ] Protection [ edit ] The cultural property stored in archives is threatened by natural disasters, wars, or other emergencies in many countries. International partners for archives are UNESCO and Blue Shield International , in accordance with the Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural Property from 1954 and its 2nd Protocol from 1999. From a national and international perspective, there are many collaborations between archives and local Blue Shield organizations to ensure the sustainable existence of cultural property storage facilities. In addition to working with United Nations peacekeeping in the event of war, the protection of the archives requires the creation of "no-strike lists", the linking of civil and military structures, and the training of local personnel.

[ 69 ] [ 70 ] [ 71 ] [ 72 ] Limitations and alternatives [ edit ] Illustration of the epistemologic changes of the digital humanities : archives organized with network visualization and analysis.

League of Nations archives ( UN Geneva ).

Archives that primarily contain physical artifacts and printed documents are increasingly shifting to digitizing items that did not originate digitally , which are then usually stored away. This allows for greater accessibility when using search tools and databases, as well as an increase in the availability of digitized materials from outside the physical parameters of an archive, but there may be an element of loss or disconnect when there are gaps in what items are made available digitally.

[ 73 ] Both physical and digital archives also generally have specific limitations regarding the types of content that are deemed able to be preserved, categorized, and archived. Conventional institutionalized archive spaces have a tendency to prioritize tangible items over ephemeral experiences, actions, effects, and even bodies.

[ 74 ] [ 75 ] This type of potentially biased prioritization may be seen as a form of privileging particular types of knowledge or interpreting certain experiences as more valid than others, limiting the content available to archive users, leading to barriers in accessing information, and potentially alienating under-represented and/or marginalized populations and their epistemologies and ontologies .

[ 76 ] As Omnia El Shakry shows, dealing with destruction is a challenge central to decolonial historiography.

[ 77 ] When faced with a lack of archival documents, historians resort to different sources and methods. For example, due to the lack of a Palestinian state archive, many historians of Nakba had to rely on sources in the Israeli state's archives.

[ 78 ] As a result of this perceived under-representation, some activists are making efforts to decolonize contemporary archival institutions that may employ hegemonic and white supremacist practices by implementing subversive alternatives such as anarchiving or counter-archiving with the intention of making intersectional accessibility a priority for those who cannot or do not want to access contemporary archival institutions.

[ 79 ] [ 80 ] [ 74 ] An example of this is Morgan M. Page's description of disseminating transgender history directly to trans people through various social media and networking platforms like tumblr , Twitter , and Instagram , as well as via podcast .

[ 80 ] While the majority of archived materials are typically well conserved within their collections, anarchiving's attention to ephemerality also brings to light the inherent impermanence and gradual change of physical objects over time as a result of being handled.

[ 81 ] The concept of counter-archiving brings into question what tends to be considered archivable and what is therefore selected to be preserved within conventional contemporary archives.

[ 80 ] [ 82 ] With the options available through counter-archiving, there is the potential to "challenge traditional conceptions of history" as they are perceived within contemporary archives, which creates space for narratives that are often not present in many archival materials.

[ 83 ] The unconventional nature of counter-archiving practices makes room for the maintenance of ephemeral qualities contained within certain historically significant experiences, performances, and personally or culturally relevant stories that do not typically have a space in conventional archives.

[ 84 ] The practices of anarchiving and counter-archiving are both rooted in social justice work.

[ 85 ] See also [ edit ] Archival informatics Archival research Archival science Archive Fever (book by Jacques Derrida ) Archive file Archivist Archives management Backup BS 5454 Collection (museum) Computer data storage Data proliferation Database Data library Digital preservation Greenstone (software) Historical document Information management Information repository International Council on Archives Internet Archive Knowledge ark Manuscript processing Preservation (library and archival science) Solander box Time capsule Web archiving List of archives and List of national archives References [ edit ] ^ "Glossary of Library and Internet Terms" . University of South Dakota Library. Archived from the original on 10 March 2009 . Retrieved 30 April 2007 .

^ "Definition of ARCHIVE" . Merriam-Webster.

Archived from the original on 1 June 2022 . Retrieved 1 June 2022 .

^ "The OPS Historical Archives - Ophthalmic Photographers' Society" .

www.opsweb.org . Retrieved 24 April 2024 .

^ a b "SAA Dictionary: archives" .

dictionary.archivists.org . Retrieved 24 April 2024 .

^ Manoff, Marlene (January 2004).

"Theories of the Archive from Across the Disciplines" .

Portal: Libraries and the Academy .

4 (1): 9– 25.

doi : 10.1353/pla.2004.0015 .

hdl : 1721.1/35687 .

ISSN 1530-7131 .

^ Galbraith, V. H.

(1948).

Studies in the Public Records . London. p. 3.

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ "A Glossary of Archival and Records Terminology" . Society of American Archivists.

Archived from the original on 15 June 2013 . Retrieved 7 December 2012 .

^ "Glossary of Archival and Records Terminology" . Society of American Archivists.

Archived from the original on 22 October 2013 . Retrieved 21 October 2013 .

^ a b "archive, n." .

Oxford English Dictionary (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press .

(Subscription or participating institution membership required.) ^ archīum Archived 24 September 2015 at the Wayback Machine , Charlton T. Lewis, Charles Short, A Latin Dictionary , on Perseus ^ ἀρχεῖον Archived 9 October 2012 at the Wayback Machine , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus ^ ἀρχή Archived 6 June 2011 at the Wayback Machine , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus ^ ἄρχω Archived 18 June 2013 at the Wayback Machine , Henry George Liddell, Robert Scott, A Greek-English Lexicon , on Perseus ^ Procter, Margaret (2010). "What's an 'archivist'? Some nineteenth-century perspectives".

Journal of the Society of Archivists .

31 (1): 15– 27.

doi : 10.1080/00379811003658476 .

S2CID 144006118 .

^ Yeo Geoffrey. 2021.

Record-Making and Record-Keeping in Early Societies.

Abingdon Oxon: Routledge.

^ "From martial arts to the majlis: Seven Middle Eastern customs listed by Unesco" .

Middle East Eye . Retrieved 22 November 2023 .

^ Duranti, Luciana (1 November 1996).

"Archives as place" .

Archives & Manuscripts : 242– 255.

ISSN 2164-6058 .

^ Michael T. Clanchy, From Memory to Written Record: England 1066–1307 (Blackwell, 1979).

^ Randolph Head, "Knowing Like a State: The Transformation of Political Knowledge in Swiss Archives, 1450–1770", Journal of Modern History , 75 (2003), pp. 745–82.

online Archived 16 December 2018 at the Wayback Machine ^ The earliest predecessors of archival science - Jacob von Rammingen's two manuals of the registry and archival management, printed in 1571, translated by JBLD Strömberg. Lund: Wallin & Dalholm, Lundaboken, 2010 ^ L. Sandri, 'Il "De Archivis" di Baldassare Bonifacio', Notizie delle Archive di Stato , Roma, 1950, p. 95-111.

^ "archive: Definition, Synonyms from" . Answers.com.

Archived from the original on 23 May 2010 . Retrieved 1 June 2010 .

^ F. Hildesheimer, "Les Premières publications des Archives", Histoires de France, historiens de la France , Paris, 1994, p. 280-299.

^ "What Are Archives?" .

National Museum of American History . November 2013.

Archived from the original on 5 September 2014 . Retrieved 2 September 2014 .

^ Walch, Victoria Irons (2006).

"Archival Census and Education Needs Survey in the United States: Part 1: Introduction" (PDF) .

The American Archivist .

69 (2): 294– 309.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 14 March 2007 . Retrieved 30 April 2007 .

^ Maher, William J. (1992).

The Management of College and University Archives . Metuchen, New Jersey: Society of American Archivists and The Scarecrow Press .

OCLC 25630256 .

^ "Welcome to University Archives and Records Management" . Kennesaw State University Archives. Archived from the original on 14 April 2007 . Retrieved 8 May 2007 .

^ "Guidelines for College and University Archives" .

Society of American Archivists .

Archived from the original on 5 September 2014 . Retrieved 2 September 2014 .

^ a b Riggs, Michelle (2005). "The Correlation of Archival Education and Job Requirements Since the Advent of Encoded Archival Description".

Journal of Archival Organization .

3 (1): 61– 79.

doi : 10.1300/J201v03n01_06 .

S2CID 145257839 .

^ "So You Want to Be an Archivist: An Overview of the Archives Profession" .

Society of American Archivists .

Archived from the original on 11 July 2014 . Retrieved 23 July 2014 .

^ "Business Archives Council" . businessarchivescouncil.org.uk.

Archived from the original on 6 June 2007 . Retrieved 8 May 2007 .

^ "Directory of Corporate Archives" . hunterinformation.com.

Archived from the original on 5 April 2007 . Retrieved 8 May 2007 .

^ "Business Archives in North America – Invest in your future: Understand your past" . Society of American Archivists. Archived from the original on 1 October 2006 . Retrieved 8 May 2007 .

^ "Directions for Change" . collectionscanada.ca. Archived from the original on 27 February 2007 . Retrieved 27 October 2016 .

^ "Cyndi's List - United States - U.S. State Level Records Repositories" .

Cyndi's List of Genealogy Sites on the Internet . Retrieved 2 September 2014 .

^ Watkins, Christine. "Chapter Report: The Many Faces of Certification." American Libraries 29, no. 9 (October 1998): 11. (accessed 23 July 2014).

^ Bastian, Jeannette, and Elizabeth Yakel. "'Are We There Yet?' Professionalism and the Development of an Archival Core Curriculum in the United States." Journal of Education for Library & Information Science 46, no. 2 (Spring2005 2005): 95–114. (accessed 23 July 2014) ^ "FAQs About NARA's Certificate of Federal Records Management Training Program" .

Archived from the original on 15 July 2014 . Retrieved 23 July 2014 .

^ "Set 1: Employment, A*CENSUS Data Tabulated by State" .

Society of American Archivists .

Archived from the original on 13 July 2014 . Retrieved 23 July 2014 .

^ "What we have" .

www.nationalarchives.gov.uk .

Archived from the original on 14 May 2022 . Retrieved 14 May 2022 .

^ "What We Do" .

National Records of Scotland . 31 May 2013.

Archived from the original on 2 October 2022 . Retrieved 2 October 2022 .

^ "Public Record Office of Northern Ireland" .

www.nidirect.gov.uk . 4 March 2016.

Archived from the original on 2 October 2022 . Retrieved 2 October 2022 .

^ "Activité des services d'archives en France : données 2020 - Conservation et restauration" (ODS) .

francearchives.fr .

Archived from the original on 16 June 2022 . Retrieved 30 April 2022 .

^ "Activité des services d'archives en France: données 2020 - Services à compétence nationale" (ODS) .

francearchives.fr .

Archived from the original on 1 May 2022 . Retrieved 30 April 2022 .

^ Court of Audit (France) (November 2016).

"Les Archives nationales - Les voies et moyens d'une nouvelle ambition" (PDF) . p. 14.

Archived (PDF) from the original on 20 January 2022 . Retrieved 12 May 2022 .

^ "National Archives Administration" .

National Development Council of Taiwan . Archived from the original on 17 September 2008.

^ "About the Archives" .

European University Institute .

Archived from the original on 6 July 2014 . Retrieved 23 July 2014 .

^ "Vatican Apostolic Archive" .

Archived from the original on 6 January 2022 . Retrieved 23 April 2022 .

^ "Presbyterian Historical Society" .

Archived from the original on 26 April 2011 . Retrieved 31 March 2011 .

^ "Moravian Archives" .

Archived from the original on 29 March 2015.

^ "Southern Baptist Historical Library and Archives" .

Archived from the original on 30 March 2011 . Retrieved 31 March 2011 .

^ "United Methodist Archives Center" .

Archived from the original on 28 August 2008 . Retrieved 31 March 2011 .

^ "Disciples of Christ Historical Society" .

Archived from the original on 25 July 2011 . Retrieved 2 August 2011 .

^ Creigh, Dorothy Weyer; Pizer, Laurence R. (1991).

A Primer for Local Historical Societies (2nd ed.).

American Association for State and Local History . p. 122.

ISBN 9780942063127 .

^ Whitehill, Walter Muir (1962). "Introduction".

Independent Historical Societies: An Enquiry into Their Research and Publication Functions and Their Financial Future . Boston, Massachusetts: Boston Athenaeum. p. 311.

^ a b "Dark archives" .

Dictionary of Archives Terminology .

Society of American Archivists . Retrieved 5 June 2025 .

^ Tobschall, Esther (14 May 2025).

"Dark Archive: Data stored, but not openly accessible" .

TIB-Blog . Retrieved 5 June 2025 .

^ Walch, Victoria Irons (2006).

"A*Census: A Closer Look" .

The American Archivist .

69 (2): 327– 348.

Archived from the original on 5 April 2007 . Retrieved 8 May 2007 .

^ "Public Secrets" .

^ "Transgender Archives - University of Victoria" .

www.uvic.ca .

Archived from the original on 10 February 2021 . Retrieved 6 February 2021 .

^ Byrne, Nate (12 August 2020).

"Buried deep in the ice is the GitHub code vault" .

ABC News . Australian Broadcasting Corporation.

Archived from the original on 15 November 2020 . Retrieved 13 August 2020 .

^ "ICA Standards Page" . Archived from the original on 24 August 2014.

^ [1] Archived 18 August 2010 at the Wayback Machine ^ "Describing Archives: A Content Standard" . Society of American Archivists. Archived from the original on 14 July 2010 . Retrieved 20 August 2010 .

^ "Securus | Blog |" .

www.securus.co.in . Archived from the original on 27 March 2019 . Retrieved 15 January 2022 .

^ Rules for Archival Description . Bureau of Canadian Archivists. 1990.

ISBN 978-0-9690797-3-6 .

Archived from the original on 16 May 2017.

^ International Organization for Standardization .

"ISO/NP TS 21547-1 Health informatics – Secure archiving of electronic health records – Part 1: Principles and requirements" .

Archived from the original on 6 June 2011 . Retrieved 19 July 2008 .

^ International Organization for Standardization .

"ISO/DIS 11506 Document management applications – Archiving of electronic data – Computer output microform (COM) / Computer output laser disc (COLD)" .

Archived from the original on 6 June 2011 . Retrieved 19 July 2008 .

^ O’Keefe, Roger; Péron, Camille; Musayev, Tofig; Ferrari, Gianluca (2016).

Protection of Cultural Property: Military Manual . Paris: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO).

ISBN 978-92-3-100184-0 .

OCLC 1273558194 . Archived from the original on 28 December 2024 . Retrieved 28 February 2025 .

^ Corine Wegener, Marjan Otter "Cultural Property at War: Protecting Heritage during Armed Conflict" in The Getty Conservation Institute, Newsletter 23.1, Spring 2008.

^ Marilyn E. Phelan "Museum Law: A Guide for Officers, Directors, and Counsel" (2014), p 419.

^ Aisling Irwin "A no-strike list may shield Yemen`s ancient treasures from war" in Daily News, 23 January 2017.

^ "Raiders of the lost articles" .

Nature Reviews Microbiology .

8 (9): 610. September 2010.

doi : 10.1038/nrmicro2435 .

ISSN 1740-1526 .

^ a b Springgay, Stephanie; Truman, Anise; MacLean, Sara (13 November 2019).

"Socially Engaged Art, Experimental Pedagogies, and Anarchiving as Research-Creation" .

Qualitative Inquiry .

26 (7): 897– 907.

doi : 10.1177/1077800419884964 .

S2CID 210545023 .

Archived from the original on 19 April 2021 . Retrieved 6 February 2021 .

^ Battaglia, Giulia; Clarke, Jennifer; Siegenthaler, Fiona (2020).

"Bodies of Archives / Archival Bodies: An Introduction" .

Visual Anthropology Review .

36 (1): 8– 16.

doi : 10.1111/var.12203 .

ISSN 1548-7458 .

^ Loeper, Lindsey. "LibGuides: Visiting Special Collections: Silences and bias in archives".

lib.guides.umbc.edu . Retrieved 2021-02-06.

^ Mikdashi, Maya (2022). "The Archive is Burning: Law, Unknowability, and the Curation of History".

Practicing Sectarianism . Stanford University Press. p. 59.

doi : 10.1515/9781503633872-006 .

^ Donnelly, Mark; Norton, Claire.

"Doing History" .

Routledge . p. 135 . Retrieved 12 February 2024 .

^ Caswell, Michelle. “Teaching to Dismantle White Supremacy in Archives.” The Library Quarterly (Chicago) , vol. 87, no. 3, 2017, pp. 222-235.

^ a b c Page, Morgan M. "One from the Vaults: Gossip, Access, and Trans History-Telling." Trap Door: Trans Cultural Production and the Politics of Visibility . By Reina Gossett, Eric A. Stanley, and Johanna Burton. Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2017. 135-46. Print.

^ Hennessy, Kate; Smith, Trudi Lynn (1 June 2018).

"Fugitives: Anarchival Materiality in Archives" .

Public .

29 (57): 128– 144.

doi : 10.1386/public.29.57.128_1 .

S2CID 191506831 .

^ Derrida, Jacques; Prenowitz, Eric (1995).

"Archive Fever: A Freudian Impression" .

Diacritics .

25 (2): 9– 63.

doi : 10.2307/465144 .

ISSN 0300-7162 .

JSTOR 465144 .

Archived from the original on 13 February 2021 . Retrieved 6 February 2021 .

^ Cvetkovich, Ann (2003).

An archive of feelings : trauma, sexuality, and lesbian public cultures . Durham, NC: Duke University Press.

ISBN 0-8223-3076-8 .

OCLC 50478406 .

^ Mohamed, Maandeeq (15 March 2018).

"Somehow I Found You: On Black Archival Practices" .

C Magazine . p. 8.

Archived from the original on 16 April 2023 . Retrieved 19 June 2023 .

^ Ng, Wendy; Ware, Syrus Marcus; Greenberg, Alyssa (3 April 2017).

"Activating Diversity and Inclusion: A Blueprint for Museum Educators as Allies and Change Makers" .

Journal of Museum Education .

42 (2): 142– 154.

doi : 10.1080/10598650.2017.1306664 .

ISSN 1059-8650 .

Further reading [ edit ] Bastian, J. A., & Webber, D. (2008).

Archival internships: a guide for faculty, supervisors, and students . Society of American Archivists.

Chen, A. (2020).

Placing papers: the American literary archives market . University of Massachusetts Press.

Kandiuk, M. (Ed.). (2020).

Archives and special collections as sites of contestation . Library Juice Press.

Mitchell, E., Seiden, P., & Taraba, S. (Eds). (2012).

Past or portal? : enhancing undergraduate learning through special collections and archives . Association of College and Research Libraries, a division of the American Library Association.

Theimer, K. (Ed.). (2014).

Management: Innovative Practices for Archives and Special Collections . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers.

External links [ edit ] Look up archive in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Wikimedia Commons has media related to Archives .

Public Archive library International Council on Archives Archives Hub – search across descriptions of archives held in over 280 institutions across the UK InterPARES Project – international research project on the long-term preservation of authentic digital records Access to Archives (A2A) – the English strand of the UK archives network Online-Guide to Archives around the globe AIM25 – archives within the UK M25 area.

British Cartoon Archive and the UK Philanthropy Archive associated with the University of Kent The Digital Archive of Literacy Narratives Banco di San Giorgio – Genova Italy: Archive (1407–1805): nearly 40,000 books catalogued with full description.  www.giuseppefelloni.it Slavic Archives [ permanent dead link ] Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research (ICPSR) United Nations Archives v t e Historiography Historians list / by area of study History historians historicity history theories of history Historical sources Types Primary sources Secondary sources Tertiary sources Sources Annals Archives Artifacts Archaeological site Chronicles Codices Deeds Facsimiles Features Hieroglyphs Historical documents Logbooks Manuscripts Illuminated Oral tradition Papyri Religious texts Scrolls War diaries Service records Fields of study By scale Big History World history Human history Local history Microhistory By source Archival science / Library and information science ( template ) Books / Writing systems Chorography Chronology dating Diplomatics Encyclopaedistics Epigraphy Genealogy Heraldry Numismatics (Money) Onomastics Oral history preservation Phaleristics Philology Postage stamps Prosopography Sigillography Toponymy Vexillology By topic Anthropology / Paleoanthropology Cultural Ecology / Environment / Geography Economic Business Capitalism Perspectives on capitalism by school of thought Thought Intellectual Geistesgeschichte Linguistics Maritime Medieval churches Military Political Constitutional Diplomatic Social Feminism Gender Indigenous Labour LGBTQ Rural Quantitative Urban Women Methodology Case study Periodization Historical eras Tarikh Three-age system Approaches, schools Annales school History of mentalities Nouvelle histoire Historiometry / Cliometrics Comparative historical research Critical Decoloniality Feminist Historical anthropology Historical determinism Historism Historical-critical method Humanistic Indiscipline of history [ pt ] Leninist Marxist Historical materialism Nationalist Ancestral civilisation Nationalization of history People's history Subaltern Studies Pop history Quantitative history Revisionist Transnational Whig Great Man theory Concepts General Change and continuity Historic preservation Historic recurrence Historical significance Historicity Historiology [ es ] Theory of history [ de ] Philosophy Specific Black legend Coloniality and decolonization of knowledge Dark Ages Historical negationism Historian's fallacy / Presentism Invented tradition Modernisation theory Narratives Paradigm shift Pax list Thirty-year rule Transhistoricity Translatio imperii / Translatio studii Vaticinium ex eventu Periodization of modern history Age of Discovery Age of Enlightenment European Civil War / Second Thirty Years' War Long 18th / 19th century Renaissance Continuity thesis By country or region Africa African historiography Egypt Pyramid construction techniques Black Egypt Thesis [ es ] Ethiopia Morocco Greater Morocco Rwanda Double genocide theory Maafa Americas Canada Metropolitan-hinterland thesis Residential schools Staples thesis Indigenous population history Latin America Argentina May Revolution / Causes Revisionist [ es ] Peru Iquicha Royalism Colonial Spanish America Casta United States African-American history Nadir of American race relations Neoabolitionism Reconstruction era Consensus history Cyclical theory Frontier thesis Political history Eras Progressive-era historians Eurasia Albania Dealbanisation Austria Habsburg myth Balhae Belarus Litvinism Bulgaria Byzantine Empire [ de ] Early [ ru ] Croatia Europe Ancient [ ru ] Medieval [ ru ] New Age [ ru ] Georgia Aryan Kartli Greek Ages of Man Iran 2,500-year celebration Japan Korea Nationalist Goguryeo controversies North Macedonia Philippines Early settlements Portugal [ pt ] Lusotropicalism Romania Great Union Serbia Kosovo Myth Sweden Götaland theory Switzerland Taiwan Ukraine Executed Renaissance Vietnam Nam tiến Trưng sisters Ancient Rome Catilinarian conspiracy Christianization Constantinian shift Expansion Fall of Western Rome Prosopography Succession Byzantine succession Moscow, third Rome Ottoman claim Problem of two emperors China 5000-year civilization assertion Archaeology Wunu School [ zh ] Century of humiliation Conquest dynasty "Chineseness" debate New Qing History Golden ages Hua–Yi distinction Four Barbarians Sinocentrism Self-Strengthening Movement Sprouts of capitalism Tibetan sovereignty debate France Cordon sanitaire Frankish Interregnum [ fr ] Grand Siècle Legendary Saracen [ fr ] Location of Alésia [ fr ] Lyon [ fr ] Historiography of Vichy France Germany Alltagsgeschichte Borussian myth Historikerstreit Sonderweg Strukturgeschichte [ de ] Sybel-Ficker controversy Vergangenheitsbewältigung India Greater Magadha Indocentrism Indigenous Aryanism Ireland Great Famine " More Irish than the Irish themselves " Revisionism Revolutionary period Italy Fascist Italy Fourth Italian War of Independence Historiae Patriae Monumenta Historical Series of the Bank of Italy Italians, the good people Rerum italicarum scriptores Revisionism of Risorgimento Southern question Neo-Bourbonism Poland Golden Liberty Sarmatism Deluge Partitions Polish People's Republic [ pl ] Russia Anti-Normanism Pre-Revolutionary Russia [ ru ] Skeptic School [ ru ] Soviet Union October Revolution Soviet famine of 1930–1933 Causes of the Holodomor Holodomor genocide question Holodomor in modern politics Spain Black legend / White legend Hispanism Carlism in the Francoist era Convivencia Inquisition Limpieza de sangre controversy [ es ] Reconquista Islamic revolution of Spain [ es ] Revisionist Colonies or Provinces Spanish decline [ es ] Ser de España [ es ] Turkey Kemalist Ottoman Empire Ghaza thesis Decline thesis United Kingdom Poor Laws Scotland Kingdom of Alba Westminster Stone Storm over the gentry Suffragette Campaign Tudor myth Ricardians Winter of Discontent British Empire Cambridge School Porter–MacKenzie debate Second colonial occupation Oceania Colonial Australia By war, conflict v t e Military historiography Military history List of military museums Pre-18th century conflicts Albigensian Crusade Catharism debate Crusades Islamic views Eighty Years' War Origins Fall of Babylon Gallic Wars Late Bronze Age collapse Dorian invasion Sea Peoples Peloponnesian War 18th and 19th century conflicts Coalition Wars (1792–1815) French Revolution Causes War in the Vendée Napoleonic era Invasion of Russia Waterloo American Civil War Origins Turning point Franco-Prussian War Causes Paris Commune Great Game Indian Rebellion of 1857 Causes Paraguayan War War of 1812 Origins War of the Pacific Causes World War I Causes ( Color books / Fischer thesis ) Late Ottoman genocides ( Causes of the Armenian genocide ) Patriotic consent Persian famine of 1917–1919 Powder keg of Europe Schlieffen Plan Spirit of 1914 / 1917 Treaty of Brest-Litovsk , Germany imposed this on Russia in 1918 Treaty of Versailles Reparations War guilt question Article 231 Reichstag inquiry Interwar period Burning of Smyrna Polish–Soviet War Causes Spanish Civil War Background World War II Causes "Blitzkrieg" concept Broad vs. narrow front German resistance to Nazism Nazi foreign policy debate Eastern Front Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact Soviet offensive plans Soviets and the Warsaw Uprising Massacres of Poles in Volhynia and Eastern Galicia Winter War Background Spirit The Holocaust Auschwitz bombing debate Awareness in Nazi Germany and German-occupied Europe Functionalism–intentionalism debate In relation to the Armenian genocide / Nakba Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust Pius Wars "Polish death camp" Responsibility Slovakia Uniqueness Pacific War Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki "Battle for Australia" Bengal famine Second Sino-Japanese War Nanjing Massacre Western Front Battle of France Guilty Men Résistancialisme Vichy France Cold War Origins 1948 Palestine war Palestinian expulsion and flight / Ongoing Nakba Zionism as settler colonialism New Historians Malayan Emergency Causes Algerian War Six-Day War Origins Iranian revolution Causes Iran–Iraq War Falklands War Sovereignty dispute Sri Lankan civil war Origins Post-Cold War Russo-Georgian War Background Responsibility Syrian revolution Causes Related Conflict thesis Gunpowder and gun transmission War and genocide Category By person Political leaders Adolf Hitler Alexander the Great Amin al-Husseini Aurangzeb Cato the Younger Che Guevara Chiang Ching-kuo [ zh ] Chiang Kai Shek [ zh ] Constantine the Great Gregory Palamas Horatio Nelson Hypatia Jiang Zemin [ zh ] Joseph Stalin [ ru ] José de San Martín Juan Manuel de Rosas Klemens von Metternich Leonid Brezhnev Louis Riel Mao Zedong [ zh ] Muammar Gaddafi Napoleon Neville Chamberlain Pedro II of Brazil Simon Bolivar Cult of personality [ es ] Bolivarianism Saladin Sun Yat-sen [ zh ] Thomas Aquinas Thomas Jefferson Ulysses S. Grant Warren G. Harding Yuan Shikai [ zh ] Zhou Enlai [ zh ] Zhuge Liang [ zh ] Historical rankings Australia Canada Modern Germany Netherlands United Kingdom United States Others The Beatles Charles Darwin Friedrich Nietzsche H. P. Lovecraft Jane Austen Muhammed Historicity Judaism Medieval Christian Jesus Historicity Resurrection Religious perspectives Christianity Judaism Islam J. R. R. Tolkien The Lord of the Rings Madonna Robert Falcon Scott Socrates Søren Kierkegaard William Shakespeare Other topics Bears in antiquity Crisis of historiography [ pt ] Feudalism Library of Alexandria Nationalism in the Middle Ages Professionalization and institutionalization of history Salons Western European colonialism and colonization Desacralization of knowledge Economics Industrial Revolution Great Recession Great Depression School of Thoughts Historical school of economics English historical school of economics Religion Avestan geography Early Christianity Background Historical reliability of the Gospels Primacy of Peter Opposition to Papal supremacy Proto-orthodox Christianity Early Islam Criticism of the Quran Succession to Muhammad Islamic golden age Kharijites Ecclesiastical history of the Catholic Church Second Vatican Council Hermeneutics of Vatican Council II [ it ] Hesychast controversy Protestant Reformation Proto-Protestantism Criticism of Protestantism Protestant work ethic Jesuit historiography Modern Jewish history Wissenschaft des Judentums Schools of thought Biblical criticism Catholic theology Panbabylonism Urreligion Perennial Religionsgeschichtliche Schule Roman Revisionist school of Islamic studies Science / Technology Merton thesis Protestant Ethic and Capitalism Heroic theory of invention and scientific development Gunpowder and gun transmission Torsion mangonel myth Organizations, publications Heritage registers Historical society ( list ) History institutes History journals template Related Commemorative plaque Documentary film Hagiography Historical fiction Historical realism Historiographic metafiction Historical geographic information system Category Multimedia v t e Libraries and library science Types of library Academic Archive Branch Children's Christian Consortium Digital shadow Hybrid Law Lending Library of things Map Medicine Mobile Music National Presidential U.S.

Prison Private Public Carnegie Research School Learning Resource Centre virtual Special collections Special library Street Subscription Tool Toy Transportation Traveling Types of librarian Distance education E-science Law Music ensemble Periodicals/serials School Information professional Informationist Library and information scientist Library science Five laws Library and information science Education for librarianship Acquisitions Archival science Assessment Cataloging catalog OPAC Circulation Classification Collection development Collective collection Conservation Discovery system Electronic resource management Information literacy Inventory Legal deposit Library history Library instruction Library management Library publishing Preservation Readers' advisory Reference virtual roving Technical services Weeding History History of libraries History of library science Lists Libraries by country by size ancient destroyed medical national Library associations Library schools Librarians women fictional Archivists women Category:Libraries Category:Library science Commons Glossary Outline WikiProject v t e Cultural heritage and historic preservation Topics and issues Agents of deterioration Archival processing Archaeological science Archaeology Archive Bioarchaeology Book Calendar (archives) Conservation and restoration of cultural property Conservation and restoration of immovable cultural property Conservation and restoration of movable cultural property Conservation science (cultural property) Collecting Collection (museum) Collection catalog Collections maintenance Collections management Collections management system Cultural heritage Cultural heritage management Cultural property Cultural property documentation Cultural property exhibition Cultural property imaging Cultural property storage Cultural resource management Database preservation Deaccessioning Digital library Digital photograph restoration Digital preservation Disaster preparedness (cultural property) Film preservation Finding aid Fonds Found in collection Heritage asset Heritage science Historic site Inherent vice Intangible cultural heritage Integrated pest management (cultural property) Inventory (library and archive) Inventory (museums) Media preservation Midden Mold control and prevention (library and archive) Museum Optical media preservation Preservation (library and archive) Preservation metadata Preservation survey Provenance Repatriation Ruins Sustainable preservation Treasure Web archiving Roles and expertise Archivist Art dealer Art handler Auctioneer Collection manager Conservator-restorer Conservation scientist Conservation technician Curator Exhibition designer Mount maker Objects conservator Paintings conservator Photograph conservator Preservationist Registrar (cultural property) Textile conservator Methods and techniques Aging (artwork) Anastylosis Arrested decay Cradling (paintings) Cultural property radiography Detachment of wall paintings Desmet method Display case Digital repository audit method based on risk assessment Historic paint analysis Inpainting Kintsugi Leafcasting Lining of paintings Mass deacidification Overpainting Paleo-inspiration Paper splitting Reconstruction (architecture) Rissverklebung Textile stabilization Transfer of panel paintings UVC-based preservation VisualAudio Conservation and restoration of immovable cultural property by item type Archaeological sites Cultural venues Frescos Heritage railways Historic gardens Outdoor artworks Outdoor bronze objects Outdoor murals Conservation and restoration of movable cultural property by item type Aircraft Ancient Greek pottery Bone, horn, and antler objects Books, manuscripts, documents and ephemera Ceramic objects Clocks Copper-based objects Feathers Film Flags and banners Fur objects Glass objects Herbaria Human remains Illuminated manuscripts Insect specimens Iron and steel objects Ivory objects Judaica Lacquerware Leather objects Lighthouses Metals Musical instruments Neon objects New media art Paintings Painting frames Panel paintings Papyrus Parchment Performance art Photographs Photographic plates Plastic objects Rail vehicles Road vehicles Shipwreck artifacts Silver objects South Asian household shrines Stained glass Taxidermy Textiles Tibetan thangkas Time-based media art Totem poles Vinyl discs Woodblock prints Wooden artifacts Wooden furniture Intangible cultural heritage preservation Ancient music Applied folklore Dance notation Early music Endangered language Ethnochoreology Ethnomusicology Ethnopoetics Family folklore Folklore Folk art Folk dance Folk etymology Folk instrument Folk music Folk process Folk play Foodways Folklore studies Heritage language Heritage language learning Indigenous intellectual property Indigenous culture Indigenous language Language death Language preservation Language revitalization Living history Oral history preservation Preservation of meaning Prehistoric music Tradition preservation Traditional knowledge Traditional medicine Notable projects Conservation issues of Pompeii and Herculaneum Conservation-restoration of Ecce Homo by Elías García Martínez Conservation-restoration of The Gross Clinic by Thomas Eakins Conservation-restoration of Leonardo da Vinci's The Last Supper Pompeian frescoes Conservation-restoration of the Shroud of Turin Conservation-restoration of the Sistine Chapel frescoes Conservation-restoration of the Statue of Liberty Conservation-restoration of the H.L. Hunley Conservation response to flood of Arno, Florence Modern and Contemporary Art Research Initiative Preservation Metadata: Implementation Strategies World Heritage Site Authority control databases International FAST National Germany United States France BnF data Japan Czech Republic Spain Israel Other Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐d49c7db49‐2n9f5
Cached time: 20250814215241
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.278 seconds
Real time usage: 1.544 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 12200/1000000
Revision size: 55748/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 521323/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 13269/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 58/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 298780/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.744/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 24180971/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 1231.609      1 -total
 37.00%  455.638      1 Template:Reflist
 20.54%  252.971     44 Template:Cite_web
 14.32%  176.426      1 Template:Historiography
 14.12%  173.857      1 Template:Navbox_with_collapsible_groups
 13.71%  168.913     18 Template:Navbox
  9.37%  115.342      3 Template:Lang
  7.56%   93.060     38 Template:Ill
  6.56%   80.754      1 Template:LibraryandInformation-TopicSidebar
  6.41%   78.960      1 Template:Sidebar_with_collapsible_lists Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:316723:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250814215241 and revision id 1303995405. Rendering was triggered because: api-parse Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Archive&oldid=1303995405 " Categories : Archives Documents Works about history Storage facilities Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from August 2020 Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from November 2023 Wikipedia articles needing page number citations from September 2014 Articles containing potentially dated statements from 2020 All articles containing potentially dated statements Commons category link is on Wikidata All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from February 2023 Articles with permanently dead external links This page was last edited on 3 August 2025, at 09:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Archive 82 languages Add topic

