Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Theories 3 Application Toggle Application subsection 3.1 Pre-writing tool for students with learning disabilities 3.2 Metacognition tool for second-language (L2) learners 4 Types of organizers 5 Enhancing students' skills 6 Criticism 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Graphic organizer 6 languages العربية Eesti Español Suomi Tagalog 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Pedagogical tool A graphic organizer , also known as a knowledge map , concept map , story map , cognitive organizer , advance organizer , or concept diagram , is a pedagogical tool that uses visual symbols to express knowledge and concepts through relationships between them.

[ 1 ] The main purpose of a graphic organizer is to provide a visual aid to facilitate learning and instruction.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] History [ edit ] Graphic organizers have a history extending to the early 1960s.

David Paul Ausubel was an American psychologist who coined the phrase "advance organizers" to refer to tools which bridge "the gap between what learners already know and what they have to learn at any given moment in their educational careers." [ 3 ] [ 4 ] Ausubel's advance organizers originally took the form of prose to merge the familiar—what students know—with the new or unfamiliar—what they have discovered or are learning. The advance organizer intended to help learners more easily retain verbal information but was written in a higher level of language. Later the advance organizers were represented as paradigms, schematic representations, and diagrams as they took on more geometric shapes.

[ 5 ] In 1969, Richard F. Barron came up with a tree diagram that was referred to as a "structured overview." [ 6 ] The diagram introduced new vocabulary and used spatial characteristics and language written at the same level as the material being learned. In the classroom, this hierarchical organization was used by the teacher as a pre-reading strategy to show relationships among vocabulary. Its use later expanded for not only pre-reading strategies but for supplementary and post-reading activities. It was not until the 1980s that the term graphic organizer was used.

[ 7 ] Theories [ edit ] Various theories have been put forth to undergird the assimilation of knowledge through the use of graphic organizers. According to Ausubel's Subsumption Theory, when a learner connects new information to their own preexisting ideas, they absorb new information.

[ 8 ] By relating new information to prior knowledge, learners reorganize their cognitive structures rather than build an entirely new one from scratch. Educational psychologist Richard E. Mayer reinterpreted Ausubel's subsumption theory within his own theory of assimilation encoding. In applying the use of organizers to the assimilation theory, advance organizers facilitate prior knowledge to working memory as well as its active integration of received information. However, he warned that advance organizers are not beneficial if the tools do not ask the learner to actively incorporate new information or if the preceding teaching methods and materials already are well-defined and well-structured.

[ 7 ] Others find a basis for graphic organizers on schema theory developed by Swiss psychologist Jean Piaget .

[ 7 ] In psychology, schema refers to a cognitive framework or concept that helps to organize and interpret information. The brain uses these patterns of thinking and behavior that are held in long-term memory to help people interpret the world around them. Piaget's theory is that a scheme is both a category of knowledge and the process of acquiring new knowledge. He believed that as people continually adapt to their environments, they take in new information and acquire additional knowledge. Culbert, et al. (1998) posits that by using graphic organizers, prior knowledge is activated, and learners can add new information to their schema and thus improve comprehension of the material.

[ 7 ] Application [ edit ] Pre-writing tool for students with learning disabilities [ edit ] In one study of 21 students on Individualized Education Plans, graphic organizers were used during the pre-writing process to gauge student achievement on the persuasive essay in a 10th grade writing classroom.

[ 9 ] Explicit instruction on how to fill out the organizer along with color coding sections and sufficient class time to fill these out resulted in an 89 percent of students saying they felt graphic organizers were helpful in a post-assignment survey.

[ 9 ] Metacognition tool for second-language (L2) learners [ edit ] One yearlong study of 3rd and 5th grade California dual language classrooms found that through the use of graphic organizers, students increased higher-order thinking skills, enhanced vocabulary acquisition, and developed the academic language of science.

[ 10 ] Types of organizers [ edit ] Graphic organizers take many forms: Ishikawa's cause and effect diagram (fishbone chart) Relational organizers Storyboard Fishbone - Ishikawa diagram Cause and effect web Chart T-Chart Category/classification organizers Concept mapping KWL tables Mind mapping Sequence organizers Chain Ladder - Story map Stairs - Topic map Compare contrast organizers Dashboard Venn diagrams Double bubble map Concept development organizers Story web Word web Circle chart Flow chart Cluster diagram Lotus diagram Star diagram Options and control device organizers Mechanical control panel Graphical user interface Enhancing students' skills [ edit ] A review study concluded that using graphic organizers improves student performance in the following areas: [ 11 ] Retention Students remember information better and can better recall it when it is represented and learned both visually and verbally.

[ 11 ] Reading comprehension The use of graphic organizers helps improving the reading comprehension of students.

[ 11 ] Student achievement Students with and without learning disabilities improve achievement across content areas and grade levels.

[ 11 ] Thinking and learning skills; critical thinking When students develop and use a graphic organizer their  higher order thinking  and critical thinking skills are enhanced.

[ 11 ] Criticism [ edit ] In four studies on the effects of advance organizers on learning tasks, no significant difference was found from the control group who did not use organizers to learn as presented in a paper Richard F. Barron delivered to the Annual Meeting of the National Reading Conference in 1980.

[ 12 ] In that same study, Richard F. Barron did find that student-constructed postorganizers showed more benefits.

[ 12 ] Graphic postorganizers focus on learners finding the relationships of vocabulary terms by manipulating them in a diagram or schematic way after they have already learned these terms.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Diagram Four square writing method KWL table Thinking Maps Visualization (graphic) References [ edit ] ^ a b "What is a Graphic Organizer" . TPR Teaching. 2021-04-21 . Retrieved 2021-01-05 .

^ Compare: "50 Uses of Graphic Organizers and Rubric" .

University of Wisconsin Stout: School of Education . University of Wisconsin. Archived from the original on March 20, 2016 . Retrieved 2016-08-12 .

^ Ausubel, David P. (1960).

"The use of advance organizers in the learning and retention of meaningful verbal material" .

Journal of Educational Psychology .

51 (5): 267– 272.

doi : 10.1037/h0046669 .

ISSN 1939-2176 .

^ Ausubel, David (1986).

Educational psychology : a cognitive view . Werbel & Peck.

ISBN 0-87066-001-2 .

OCLC 18452156 .

^ Ausubel, David Paul (1969).

School learning; an introduction to educational psychology . Floyd G. Robinson. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.

ISBN 0-03-076705-9 .

OCLC 23508 .

^ Barron, R.F. (1969). Herber, H.; Sanders, P.L. (eds.). "The use of vocabulary as an advance organizer".

Research in Reading in the Content Areas: First Year Report .

^ a b c d Culbert, Elizabeth; Flood, Michelle; Windler, Rachel; Work, Debra (1998).

"A qualitative investigation of the use of graphic organizers" (PDF) .

Paper Presented at SUNY-Geneseo Annual Reading and Literacy Symposium – via ERIC.

^ "Applying Ausubel's Subsumption Theory In eLearning" .

TalentLMS Blog . 2015-11-18 . Retrieved 2023-03-21 .

^ a b Brown, Marjorie (2011-12-12).

Effects of Graphic Organizers on Student Achievement in the Writing Process .

^ Mercuri, Sandra P. (2010).

"Graphic Organizers Support Young L2 Writers' Argumentative Skills" (PDF) .

GiST Education and Learning Research Journal .

4 (1): 30– 49.

^ a b c d e Graphic Organizers: A Review of Scientifically Based Research, The Institute for the Advancement of Research in Education at AEL [1] ^ a b Barron, R.F. (1980). "A Systematic Research Procedure, Organizers, and Overviews: An Historical Perspective".

[S.I]: Distributed by ERIC Clearinghouse .

^ Barron, Richard F.; Schwartz, Robert M. (1984-01-01), Holley, Charles D.; Dansereau, Donald F. (eds.), "Chapter 13 - Graphic Postorganizers: A Spatial Learning Strategy" , Spatial Learning Strategies , Academic Press, pp.

275– 289, ISBN 978-0-12-352620-5 , retrieved 2023-03-28 v t e Visualization of technical information Fields Biological data visualization Chemical imaging Crime mapping Data visualization Educational visualization Flow visualization Geovisualization Information visualization Mathematical visualization Medical imaging Molecular graphics Product visualization Scientific visualization Social visualization Software visualization Technical drawing User interface design Visual analytics Visual culture Volume visualization Image types Chart Diagram Engineering drawing Graph of a function Ideogram Map Photograph Pictogram Plot Sankey diagram Schematic Skeletal formula Statistical graphics Table Technical drawings Technical illustration People Pre-19th century Edmond Halley Charles-René de Fourcroy Joseph Priestley Gaspard Monge 19th century Charles Dupin Adolphe Quetelet André-Michel Guerry William Playfair August Kekulé Charles Joseph Minard Francis Amasa Walker John Venn Oliver Byrne Matthew Sankey Charles Booth John Snow Florence Nightingale Karl Wilhelm Pohlke Toussaint Loua Francis Galton Early 20th century Edward Walter Maunder Otto Neurath W. E. B. Du Bois Henry Gantt Arthur Lyon Bowley Howard G. Funkhouser John B. Peddle Ejnar Hertzsprung Henry Norris Russell Max O. Lorenz Fritz Kahn Harry Beck Erwin Raisz Mid 20th century Jacques Bertin Rudolf Modley Arthur H. Robinson John Tukey Mary Eleanor Spear Edgar Anderson Howard T. Fisher Late 20th century Borden Dent Nigel Holmes William S. Cleveland George G. Robertson Bruce H. McCormick Catherine Plaisant Stuart Card Pat Hanrahan Edward Tufte Ben Shneiderman Michael Friendly Howard Wainer Clifford A. Pickover Lawrence J. Rosenblum Thomas A. DeFanti George Furnas Sheelagh Carpendale Cynthia Brewer Jock D. Mackinlay Alan MacEachren David Goodsell Kwan-Liu Ma Michael Maltz Leland Wilkinson Alfred Inselberg Early 21st century Ben Fry Jeffrey Heer Jessica Hullman Daniel A. Keim Gordon Kindlmann Aaron Koblin Christopher R. Johnson Manuel Lima David McCandless Mauro Martino John Maeda Miriah Meyer Tamara Munzner Ade Olufeko Hanspeter Pfister Hans Rosling Claudio Silva Moritz Stefaner Fernanda Viégas Martin Wattenberg Bang Wong Hadley Wickham Related topics Cartography Chartjunk Color coding Computer graphics in computer science CPK coloring Graph drawing Graphic design Graphic organizer Imaging science Information art Information graphics Information science Misleading graph Neuroimaging Patent drawing Scientific modelling Spatial analysis Visual perception Volume cartography Volume rendering Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Graphic_organizer&oldid=1302208969 " Categories : Infographics Educational psychology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 01:46 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Graphic organizer 6 languages Add topic

