Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Emblem and motto 3 Reputation and traditions 4 Alumni magazine 5 Notable residents 6 In fiction 7 Further reading 8 Notes 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Adams House (Harvard College) 1 language Italiano Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°22′18″N 71°06′59″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3717°N 71.1164°W ﻿ / 42.3717; -71.1164 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Residential House of Harvard College Adams House Residential House Harvard University Shield Location 26 Plympton Street Coordinates 42°22′18″N 71°06′59″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.3717°N 71.1164°W ﻿ / 42.3717; -71.1164 Established 1931 Named for John Quincy Adams and the Adams family Sister college Saybrook College Christ's College, Cambridge Freshman dorm Weld Hall Faculty Deans Salmaan Keshavjee and Mercedes Becerra Dean Charles Lockwood Tutors 27 Website adamshouse .harvard .edu Adams House is one of twelve undergraduate residential Houses at Harvard University , located between Harvard Square and the Charles River in Cambridge, Massachusetts . Its name commemorates the services of the Adams family, including John Adams , the second president of the United States, and John Quincy Adams , the sixth president.

History [ edit ] The residential halls of Adams House (Claverly, Randolph, Westmorly and Old Russell) were originally private "Gold Coast" dormitories built from 1893 to 1902 to provide luxurious accommodation for rich Harvard undergraduates. They, along with the white clapboard Apthorp House (1760), one of the most distinguished Colonial residences of Cambridge—and now the Faculty Dean's residence—predate the rest of Harvard's Houses by several decades.

[ 1 ] When the House system was inaugurated in the 1930s, Old Russell was demolished and replaced with New Russell (which houses the C-Entryway suites). A linking structure was also added that contains the upper and lower common rooms, library, conservatory, kitchen, and dining areas; the addition also includes the famous "Gold Room" — Adams' domed, tiled and gilded Mudéjar -inspired entrance hall. Although officially inaugurated in 1931, Adams House was not completed until New Russell's construction in 1932. Because of its centuries-long architectural history, Adams is considered Harvard's most historic undergraduate residence.

[ citation needed ] Surprisingly, given the House's current [ as of?

] appeal [ citation needed ] , Adams was not popular initially; the Victorian era rooms of the Gold Coast buildings seemed dark and "Germanic" to 1930's taste, and many students preferred the entirely up-to-date neo-Colonial structures of Eliot , Winthrop and Dunster Houses.

[ 2 ] Adams' location, however, (it is the closest of all the Houses to Harvard Yard ) and its reputation for good food (it is one of the few Harvard Houses that doesn't share a kitchen) soon overcame any perceived architectural deficiencies. In fact, some of these same "deficiencies" turned out to be quite handy: students in the 1940s and 1950s wishing to avoid the College's strict nightly curfews and parietal rules came to greatly value Adams' multiple and unguarded entries, unlike the central, monitored portals of the newer undergraduate residences. Today, such stringent measures are long gone, and the various buildings that comprise Adams House are considered some of the most interesting and architecturally significant structures in the university system.

[ citation needed ] Adams is also home to one of two Presidential Suite Memorials at Harvard.

Franklin D. Roosevelt lived in Westmorly Court (now B-17) from 1900 to 1904. The Franklin Delano Roosevelt Foundation at Adams House has completely restored the 32nd president's Harvard quarters to their 1904 appearance, as the only memorial to FDR at Harvard, as well as a museum of early-20th-century Harvard student life. The Suite is open by appointment to University members, members of the press, and other accredited guests.

[ 3 ] Emblem and motto [ edit ] A sign above the main entrance to Adams House at 26 Plympton St, commemorating the annual college Housing Day for freshman. It reads, "If you lived in Adams House you'd be home now" and contains the house shield.

Like all the other Houses at Harvard, Adams possesses its own coat of arms: Adams' is derived from an 1838 seal ring of John Quincy Adams .

James Phinney Baxter III , the House's first master, changed the background to gold to symbolize the Gold Coast, and added four additional oak sprigs to the original one to represent the five buildings of Adams House. Its official heraldic designation is: "Or, five sprigs of oak acorned in saltire, Gules." The House motto, " Alteri Seculo ", is taken from Caecilius Statius, as quoted in Cicero's Tusculan Disputations : "He who plants trees labors for the benefit of future generations." (" Serit arbores quae alteri s[a]eculo prosint.

") [ 4 ] (The alternate, late-Latin spelling, 'seculo' in lieu of the more normal 'saeculo' was noted at the House's founding in 1931. A letter to Master Baxter, now in the Adams House Archives, indicates that Adams himself had thus spelled the word in his signet, and therefore this spelling would be maintained for posterity in the House's official motto.) Reputation and traditions [ edit ] Before Harvard College opted to use a system of randomization to assign living quarters to upperclassmen, students were allowed to list housing preferences, which led to the congregation of like-minded individuals at various Houses. At first, in the 1930s, 1940s and 1950s, Adams was the athletic house; then, during the late 1960s, that reputation changed, and Adams became a center for student activism. Later, under the aegis of Masters Bob and Jana Kiely (1972–1999) Adams became an artistic and literary haven; during this period, Adams also became widely regarded as the most gay-friendly house, in an era before equal rights for people of different sexual orientations were even considered a viable alternative at Harvard. Adams, under the Kielys, was also the first Harvard House to become fully co-ed.

[ 5 ] After the Kielys, Adams continued to be an important space for social justice organizing and mobilizing under the guidance of Judy and Sean Palfrey. Adams' avant-garde reputation still remains today, protected and promoted by the House's current Faculty Deans, Mercedes Becerra and Salmaan Keshavjee, and embodied in many of the House's unique facilities, including the Pool Theater, a converted swimming pool (a change lamented by alumni mourning the many late night trysts, water polo matches and other quasi illicit activities that were reputed to have occurred there, like coed nude swimming); the recently restored Coolidge Room (the site of artist Edward Penfield 's famous murals) and the Gold Room, Adams' gilded vestibule to the world. Adams also boasts the Bow and Arrow Printing Press which is located in the former house grille in B entry, and the Adams Arts Space (previously the House's squash courts).

The House has continued to uphold its most beloved traditions, including Drag Night; a Winter Feast, which features a black-tie reading of Winnie-the-Pooh ; house formals; and Masters' Teas that are well known throughout the university. House events, including Carpe Noctem, are coordinated weekly by the Adams House Committee.

Alumni magazine [ edit ] Alone among the Harvard Houses, Adams has its own alumni magazine, called the Gold Coaster.

Published in e-zine format semi-annually, the Gold Coaster features stories on Adams House history, famous residents, alumni profiles, student submissions, and news of upcoming alumni events.

Notable residents [ edit ] Andy Borowitz Robert Frost Buckminster Fuller Seamus Heaney William Randolph Hearst Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

Henry Kissinger John Lithgow Terrence Malick Lisa Randall John Reed Franklin D. Roosevelt Arthur Schlesinger Jr.

Charles Schumer William Weld Tom Cotton E. J. Dionne Fred Gwynne James Fallows Frederik X, King of Denmark Other notable residents include John Brademas , Amy Brenneman , Thomas Lauderdale , Martin Feldstein , Lauren Greenfield , Andre Gregory , Alan Keyes , Bernard Law , Robert Leiken , Donal Logue , Lance Oppenheim , William P. Perry , Alison Rogers , Peter Sellars , Courtney B. Vance , Zaid Al-Rifai , Richard Drayton , William S. Burroughs , Jack Lemmon , Michael Weishan , Claire Saffitz , Jeremy J. Shapiro , John Kerr , and Hudson Yang .

General John Burgoyne was imprisoned in Apthorp during the American Revolution . Additionally, John F. Kennedy (political rival to aforementioned Henry Cabot Lodge Jr.

) met with his senior thesis adviser in the Coolidge Room.

Aaron Copland lived in the House as a guest.

In fiction [ edit ] In the 1981 novel Death in a Tenured Position by Amanda Cross , the book's detective Kate Fansler attends a paper on Browning's Fra Lippo Lippi read at a meeting of the Harvard Iambics in the Adams House SCR to attempt to discover 'the state of the English department' after the murder of one of its number.

Further reading [ edit ] Bainbridge Bunting, Margaret Henderson Floyd, Harvard: An Architectural History , Harvard University Press, 1985.

Shand-Tucci, Douglass, Harvard University: An Architectural Tour , Princeton Architectural Press, 2001 Roosevelt, Franklin D.; Roosevelt, Elliot, ed.

FDR: His Personal Letters (4 vol., 1947); volume one covers Roosevelt's years at Groton and Harvard; pg 371 gives a physical description of FDR's Suite at Adams House, and includes Roosevelt's own drawing of the floor plan; subsequent letters describe the rooms' decor and furnishing.

Notes [ edit ] ^ Garrett, Wendell D. (1960).

Apthorp House, 1760-1960 . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-1258189914 .

{{ cite book }} : ISBN / Date incompatibility ( help ) ^ Shand-Tucci, Douglas (2001).

Harvard University, an Architectural Tour . Princeton Architectural Press.

ISBN 978-1568982809 .

^ "Photographic views of Adams House, 1931-1961" . Harvard University Archives . Retrieved 16 June 2016 .

^ Butterfield, Lyman Henry; Friedlaender, Marc (1963).

Adams Family Correspondence . Harvard University Press.

^ Harvard University Gazette . 17 December 1998.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: untitled periodical ( link ) External links [ edit ] Official website Photographic views of Adams House, 1931-1961 Franklin Delano Roosevelt Suite Restoration Project Franklin Delano Roosevelt Suite Restoration Blog: Where the 19th Century Meets the 21st Boston Globe article on the FDR Suite Restoration NPR's Here and Now chronicles the FDR Suite Harvard Magazine's Portrait of Frank at Harvard Brilliance Twice Recalled - article on Master Judith Palfrey in the Boston Globe Boston Globe article on Adams House teas, 2004 Harvard University Gazette article regarding Adams' history in welcoming women & LGBT students The Gold Coaster The Alumni Magazine of Adams House v t e John Adams 2nd President of the United States (1797–1801) 1st Vice President of the United States (1789–1797) U.S. Minister to the United Kingdom (1785–1788) U.S. Minister to the Netherlands (1782–1788) Delegate to the Second Continental Congress (1775–1778) Delegate to the First Continental Congress (1774) Founding of the United States Braintree Instructions (1765) Boston Massacre defense Continental Association Petition to the King United Colonies Thoughts on Government (1776) Lee Resolution (seconded) Declaration of Independence May 15 preamble Committee of Five Model Treaty Treaty of Amity and Commerce Treaty of Alliance Board of War Chairman of the Marine Committee, 1775–1779 Continental Navy Staten Island Peace Conference Conference House Constitution of Massachusetts (1780) Treaty of Paris, 1783 Diplomacy Elections United States presidential election 1788–1789 1792 1796 1800 Presidency ( timeline ) Inauguration Quasi War with France XYZ Affair United States Department of the Navy Commerce Protection Act United States Marine Corps Convention of 1800 Mississippi Organic Act Alien and Sedition Acts Naturalization Act of 1798 Sick and Disabled Seamen Relief Act Marine Hospital Service Bankruptcy Act of 1800 Indiana Organic Act Slave Trade Act of 1800 District of Columbia Organic Act of 1801 Navy Department Library Treaty of Tellico Treaty of Tripoli Midnight Judges Act Marbury v. Madison State of the Union Address (1797 1798 1799 1800) Presidential transition of Thomas Jefferson Cabinet Federal judiciary appointments Other writings Massachusetts Historical Society holdings Adams Papers Editorial Project A Defence of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of America Letters of Mrs. Adams, the Wife of John Adams Founders Online Gray v. Pitts Life and homes Early life and education Adams National Historical Park John Adams Birthplace Family home and John Quincy Adams birthplace Peacefield Stone Library Massachusetts Hall, Harvard University Presidents House, Philadelphia Co-founder and second president, American Academy of Arts and Sciences United First Parish Church and gravesite Legacy Bibliography List of memorials Adams Memorial (proposed) John Adams Building John Adams Courthouse Jefferson Memorial pediment U.S. Postage stamps Treaty of Paris (1783 painting) USS Adams (1799) USS John Adams (1799) USS Adams (1874) USS President Adams (1941) USS John Adams (1963) Adams House at Harvard University John Adams tree Mount Adams (New Hampshire, Washington) Memorial to the 56 Signers of the Declaration of Independence Popular culture Declaration of Independence (1938 film) Profiles in Courage (1964 series) American Primitive (1969 play) 1776 (1969 musical 1972 film) The Adams Chronicles (1976 miniseries) Liberty!

(1997 documentary series) Liberty's Kids (2002 animated series) John Adams (2001 book 2008 miniseries) John and Abigail Adams (2006 documentary film) Sons of Liberty (2015 miniseries) Franklin (2024 miniseries) Related "Adams and Liberty" campaign song Adams' personal library American Enlightenment Congress Hall Federalist Party Federalist Era First Party System republicanism American Philosophical Society Gazette of the United States The American Museum American Revolution patriots Founding Fathers Adams political family Abigail Adams wife Quincy political family Abigail Adams Smith (daughter) John Quincy Adams son presidency Charles Adams (son) Thomas Boylston Adams (son) George Washington Adams (grandson) Charles Francis Adams Sr.

(grandson) John Adams II (grandson) John Quincy Adams II (great-grandson) Henry Adams (great-grandson) Brooks Adams (great-grandson) John Adams Sr.

(father) Susanna Boylston (mother) Samuel Adams (second cousin) Louisa Adams (daughter-in-law, first lady ) ← George Washington Thomas Jefferson → Thomas Jefferson → Category v t e John Quincy Adams U.S. Representative for MA–8 (1843–1848) U.S. Representative for MA–12 (1833–1843) U.S. Representative for MA–11 (1831–1833) 6th President of the United States (1825–1829) 8th United States Secretary of State (1817–1825) U.S. Minister to the United Kingdom (1814–1817) U.S. Minister to Russia (1809–1814) U.S. Senator from Massachusetts (1803–1808) U.S. Minister to Prussia (1797–1801) U.S. Minister to the Netherlands (1794–1797) Presidency Inauguration American System Internal improvements Tariff of 1828 First Treaty of Prairie du Chien Treaty of Fond du Lac Treaty of Limits United States Naval Observatory State of the Union Address, 1825 1827 1828 Federal judiciary appointments Other events Supreme Court nomination Monroe Doctrine, author Treaty of Ghent Adams–Onís Treaty Treaty of 1818 Tariff of 1832 Smithsonian Institution United States v. The Amistad Mendi Bible President, American Academy of Arts and Sciences President, Columbian Institute for the Promotion of Arts and Sciences Writings Lifelong diary Massachusetts Historical Society holdings Adams Papers Editorial Project Life and homes Early life Abigail Adams Cairn John Quincy Adams and abolitionism Adams National Historical Park Birthplace and family home Peacefield Stone Library United First Parish Church and gravesite Electoral history Senate 1803 1808 Presidential runs 1824 Corrupt Bargain 1828 Legacy Bibliography Adams Memorial Adams House at Harvard University U.S. Postage stamps Monroe Doctrine Centennial half dollar Mount Quincy Adams USS President Adams (1941) USS John Adams (1963) Oyster-Adams Bilingual School Popular culture Profiles in Courage (1957 book) 1965 television series) The Adams Chronicles (1976 miniseries) Mutiny on the Amistad (1987 book) Amistad (1997 film) John Adams (2001 book 2008 miniseries) Adams political family Quincy family Louisa Adams (wife) George Washington Adams (son) Charles Francis Adams Sr.

(son) John Adams II (son) Henry Adams (grandson) Brooks Adams (grandson) John Quincy Adams II (grandson) John Adams father presidency Abigail Adams mother First Lady Quincy political family Abigail Adams Smith (sister) Charles Adams (brother) Thomas Boylston Adams (brother) John Adams Sr.

(grandfather) Susanna Boylston (grandmother) John Quincy (great-grandfather) Related National Republican Party Republicanism Quincy Patriot John Quincy Adams (Bingham) ← James Monroe Andrew Jackson → Category v t e Franklin D. Roosevelt 32nd President of the United States (1933–1945) 44th Governor of New York (1929–1932) Assistant Secretary of the Navy (1913–1920) New York State Senator (1911–1913) Presidency ( timeline ) Transition Inaugurations ( 1st 2nd 3rd 4th) First and second terms Third and fourth terms Foreign policy New Deal overview New Deal coalition First 100 days Second New Deal Federal Emergency Relief Administration Civilian Conservation Corps Agricultural Adjustment Act Emergency Banking Act Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1944 Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act Tennessee Valley Authority National Labor Relations Act of 1935 National Industrial Recovery Act of 1933 Public Works Administration National Recovery Administration Works Progress Administration National Youth Administration Social Security Act Aid to Families with Dependent Children Communications Act of 1934 Federal Communications Commission Securities and Exchange Commission Monetary gold ownership Gold Reserve Act Silver seizure Record on civil rights Defense industry non-discrimination Fair Employment Practice Committee Indian Reorganization Act Executive Orders 9066, 9102 War Relocation Authority Japanese American internment German-American internment Italian-American internment Brownlow Committee Executive Office of the President G.I. Bill of Rights Cullen–Harrison Act Roerich Pact Four Freedoms Four Freedoms Monument Black Cabinet Jefferson's Birthday holiday Jefferson Memorial Judicial Court-Packing Bill Cannabis policy Federal Judicial appointments Supreme Court Harlan F. Stone Supreme Court nomination Wiley Rutledge Supreme Court nomination Cabinet "Brain Trust" March of Dimes Modern Oval Office Official car Criticism Franksgiving Executive Orders Presidential Proclamations Presidential foreign policy Banana Wars U.S. occupation of Nicaragua, 1912–1933 U.S. occupation of Haiti, 1915–1934 Good Neighbor Policy (1933–1945) Montevideo Convention (1933) Second London Naval Treaty (1936) ABCD line (1940) Export Control Act Four Policemen Destroyers-for-bases deal Lend-Lease 1940 Selective Service Act Hull note Atlantic Charter (1941) Military history of the United States during World War II Home front during World War II Combined Munitions Assignments Board War Production Board Declaration by United Nations (1942) Dumbarton Oaks Conference World War II conferences Quebec Agreement Europe first Morgenthau Plan support Presidential speeches 1932 Acceptance speech Commonwealth Club Address Madison Square Garden speech " Four Freedoms " Day of Infamy speech Arsenal of Democracy "...is fear itself" Fireside chats " Look to Norway " Quarantine Speech " The More Abundant Life " State of the Union Address (1934 1938 1939 1940 1941 (Four Freedoms) 1944 (Second Bill of Rights) 1945) Other events Early life, education, career Warm Springs Institute Governorship of New York Business Plot Assassination attempt Elections 1928 New York state election 1930 Democratic National Convention, 1920 1924 1932 1936 1940 1944 1920 United States presidential election 1932 theme song 1936 1940 1944 Life and homes Early life and education Groton School Springwood birthplace, home, and gravesite Adams House FDR Suite Campobello home Paralytic illness New York State Executive Mansion Top Cottage Little White House, Warm Springs, Georgia Ferdinand Magellan railcar Legacy Bibliography Statues Presidential Library and Museum Roosevelt Institute Roosevelt Institute Campus Network Franklin Delano Roosevelt Foundation Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial Roosevelt Island Four Freedoms Park White House Roosevelt Room Roosevelt Institute for American Studies USS Franklin D. Roosevelt USS Roosevelt Four Freedoms Award Four Freedoms paintings Unfinished portrait U.S. Postage stamps Roosevelt dime I'd Rather Be Right 1937 musical Films The Roosevelt Story 1947 Sunrise at Campobello 1960 Eleanor and Franklin 1976, The White House Years 1977 Backstairs at the White House 1979 miniseries World War II: When Lions Roared 1997 miniseries Warm Springs 2005 Hyde Park on Hudson 2012 The Roosevelts 2014 documentary The First Lady 2022 miniseries FDR 2023 miniseries The Six Triple Eight 2024 film Other namesakes Family ( Roosevelt • Delano ) Eleanor Roosevelt (wife) Anna Roosevelt Halsted (daughter) James Roosevelt II (son) Elliott Roosevelt (son) Franklin Delano Roosevelt Jr.

(son) John Aspinwall Roosevelt II (son) James Roosevelt I (father) Sara Ann Delano (mother) James Roosevelt Roosevelt (half-brother) Isaac Roosevelt (grandfather) Warren Delano Jr.

(grandfather) Fala (family dog) Major (family dog) ← Herbert Hoover Harry S. Truman → Category v t e Residential houses of Harvard Adams House Cabot House Currier House Dudley House Dunster House Eliot House Kirkland House Leverett House Lowell House Mather House Pforzheimer House Quincy House Winthrop House v t e Harvard University History John Harvard statue President Alan Garber Board of Overseers President and Fellows Provost John Manning Library Arts and Sciences Dean Hopi Hoekstra College Dean Rakesh Khurana Radcliffe College Freshman dormitories Upperclass houses Adams Cabot Currier Dudley Dunster Eliot Kirkland Leverett Lowell Mather Pforzheimer Quincy Winthrop Undergraduate organizations Hasty Pudding Theatricals The Harvard Advocate The Harvard Crimson The Harvard Independent The Harvard Lampoon Continuing Education Dean Nancy Coleman Extension School Extension School history Summer School Engineering and Applied Sciences Dean David C. Parkes Lyman Laboratory of Physics Graduate School Dean Emma Dench Libraries Cabot Harvard-Yenching Houghton Harvard Review Lamont Pusey Widener Harry Elkins Widener Eleanor Elkins Widener Grossman Centers, institutes, and societies Asia Center Center for African and African American Research Du Bois Institute Center for Astrophysics Center for Chinese Studies Center for European Studies Center for Visual Arts Center for Hellenic Studies Dumbarton Oaks Harvard Forest Rowland Institute Ukrainian Research Institute Business Dean Srikant Datar Baker Library/Bloomberg Center Harvard Business Publishing Harvard Business Review Harvard Business School RFC Spangler Center Design Dean Sarah Whiting Harvard Design Magazine Center for Housing Studies Divinity Dean David N. Hempton Education Dean Bridget Terry Long Government Dean Jeremy M. Weinstein Ash Center Belfer Center Carr Center Center for American Political Studies Center for Ethics Center for Housing Studies Center for Nonprofit Organizations Center for Public Leadership Institute of Politics Rappaport Institute Shorenstein Center The Journalist's Resource Law Dean John F. Manning Berkman Klein Center Civil Rights-Civil Liberties Law Review International Law Journal Journal of Law & Technology Journal on Legislation Law Record Law Review Medicine Dean George Q. Daley Broad Institute Medical Library Anatomical Museum Program in Health Sciences School of Dental Medicine Public Health Dean Michelle Ann Williams Museums and arboretum Arnold Arboretum Harvard Art Museums Archaeology and Ethnology Museum Busch–Reisinger Museum Fogg Museum Sackler Museum Collection of Scientific Instruments Glass Flowers Mineralogical Museum General Artemas Ward House Natural History Museum Comparative Zoology Museum Herbaria Museum of the Ancient Near East Cambridge campus Boylston Hall Bradley Memorial Discobolus Gates of Harvard Yard Graduate Center Harvard Hall Memorial Church Choir Harvard Yard Massachusetts Hall Memorial Hall Night Wall I Peabody Terrace President's House Science Center Smith Campus Center University Hall Centers and institutes Harvard Innovation Labs Computing Center Harvard Radcliffe Institute Schlesinger Library Institute for Advanced Theater Training Nieman Foundation for Journalism Real Colegio Complutense Villa I Tatti Wyss Institute People List of Harvard University people Non-graduate alumni Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Fencing Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse‎ Men's rugby Women's rugby Men's soccer Women's soccer Men's squash Men's volleyball Women's volleyball Venues Bright-Landry Hockey Center Harvard Stadium Jordan Field Lavietes Pavilion Ohiri Field Malkin Athletic Center Newell Boathouse Weld Boathouse Rivalries Cornell (hockey) Yale (football) Miscellaneous Anti-Vietnam War protests Alma mater Commencement traditions Academic regalia Graduate Students Union Heraldry Tercentenary celebration Harvard Magazine Harvard University Press Lionel de Jersey Harvard Math 55 Society of Fellows University Professor Harvard–Adam Dziewonski Observatory Excellence Without a Soul Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Adams_House_(Harvard_College)&oldid=1285573119 " Category : Harvard Houses Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas CS1 errors: ISBN date CS1 maint: untitled periodical Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from May 2024 All articles with vague or ambiguous time Vague or ambiguous time from May 2024 Official website different in Wikidata and Wikipedia This page was last edited on 14 April 2025, at 13:47 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Adams House (Harvard College) 1 language Add topic

