Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 What type of thing is the Moon?

2 Characteristics of the Moon 3 Selenography of the Moon Toggle Selenography of the Moon subsection 3.1 Geographical features on the Moon 4 Appearance and motion of the Moon 5 History 6 Exploration of the Moon 7 Flyby and direct lunar missions 8 Proposed lunar missions 9 See also 10 References 11 External links Toggle the table of contents Outline of the Moon Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Overview of and topical guide to the Moon The following outline is provided as an overview of and topical guide to the Moon: Moon – Earth 's only permanent natural satellite . It is one of the largest natural satellites in the Solar System , and the largest among planetary satellites relative to the size of the planet that it orbits (its primary ). It is the second- densest satellite among those whose densities are known (after Jupiter 's satellite Io ).

What type of thing is the Moon?

[ edit ] The Moon can be described as all of the following: Natural satellite – celestial body that orbits another celestial body of greater mass (e.g. a planet, star, or dwarf planet), called its primary .

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] For example, the Moon is a natural satellite of Earth, and Earth is a natural satellite of the Sun.

Characteristics of the Moon [ edit ] Atmosphere of the Moon Exploration of the Moon Geology of the Moon Lunar soil Lunar water Gravitation of the Moon Internal structure of the Moon Lunar swirls Lunar water Magnetic field of the Moon Moonlight Ray system of the Moon Sodium tail of the Moon Space weathering Topography of the Moon Transient lunar phenomenon Selenography of the Moon [ edit ] Selenography –  study of the surface and physical features of the Moon. Historically, the principal concern of selenographists was the mapping and naming of the lunar maria, craters, mountain ranges, and other various features. This task was largely finished when high resolution images of the near and far sides of the Moon were obtained by orbiting spacecraft during the early space era. Nevertheless, some regions of the Moon remain poorly imaged (especially near the poles) and the exact locations of many features (like crater depths) are uncertain by several kilometers.

Face on the Moon Near side of the Moon Far side of the Moon Geographical features on the Moon [ edit ] Features on the Moon List of lunar features Caldera on the Moon Lunar craters List of craters on the Moon, A-B List of craters on the Moon, C-F List of craters on the Moon, G-K List of craters on the Moon, L-N List of craters on the Moon, O-Q List of craters on the Moon, R-S List of craters on the Moon, T-Z Permanently shadowed craters Lunar mare List of maria on the Moon List of mountains on the Moon Peak of eternal light List of valleys on the Moon Volcanic features of the Moon List of quadrangles on the Moon Lunar poles Lunar north pole Lunar south pole Shackleton (crater) South Pole–Aitken basin Appearance and motion of the Moon [ edit ] Orbit of the Moon Lunar phase History [ edit ] Lunar geologic timescale Giant impact hypothesis Late Heavy Bombardment Exploration of the Moon [ edit ] Apollo program Exploration of the Moon Colonization of the Moon List of lunar probes List of missions to the Moon proposed Moon landing conspiracy theories List of man-made objects on the Moon List of current and future lunar missions Flyby and direct lunar missions [ edit ] Luna programme Luna 1 Luna 2 Luna 3 Luna 5 Luna 6 Luna 7 Luna 8 Luna 9 Luna 10 Luna 11 Luna 12 Luna 13 Luna 14 Luna 15 Luna 16 Luna 17 Luna 18 Luna 19 Luna 20 Luna 21 Luna 22 Luna 23 Luna 24 Luna-Glob Luna 25 Pioneer program Pioneer 4 Ranger program Ranger 4 Ranger 5 Ranger 6 Ranger 7 Ranger 8 Ranger 9 Zond program Zond 3 Zond 4 Zond 5 Zond 6 Zond 7 Zond 8 Surveyor Program Surveyor 2 Surveyor 3 Surveyor 4 Surveyor 5 Surveyor 6 Surveyor 7 Lunar Orbiter program Lunar Orbiter 1 Lunar Orbiter 2 Lunar Orbiter 3 Lunar Orbiter 4 Lunar Orbiter 5 Apollo program Apollo 8 Apollo 10 Apollo 11 Apollo 12 Apollo 13 Apollo 14 Apollo 15 Apollo 16 Apollo 17 Explorer 35 Explorer 49 Lunokhod programme Lunokhod 1 Lunokhod 2 Mariner program Mariner 10 International Cometary Explorer Hiten GEOTAIL Clementine PAS-22 Lunar Prospector Nozomi SMART-1 SELENE Chinese Lunar Exploration Program Chang'e 1 Chang'e 2 Chang'e 3 Chang'e 4 Chang'e 5 Chang'e 6 Chandrayaan programme Chandrayaan-1 Chandrayaan-2 Chandrayaan-3 Moon Impact Probe Lunar Precursor Robotic Program Lunar Reconnaissance Orbiter LCROSS Lunar Atmosphere and Dust Environment Explorer (LADEE) ARTEMIS (THEMIS) Artemis program Artemis 1 Gravity Recovery and Interior Laboratory (GRAIL) DRO A/B Queqiao relay satellites Queqiao-1 Queqiao-2 Tiandu 1 and 2 Proposed lunar missions [ edit ] Google Lunar X Prize Moon Express Astrobotic Technology Chang'e 7 Chandrayaan-4 Luna-Glob Artemis 2 Colonization of the Moon See also [ edit ] Solar System portal Outline of space science Outline of astronomy Outline of space exploration Lunar basalt 70017 Lunar calendar Lunisolar calendar Craters named after people Double planet Lunar effect Man in the Moon Memorials on the Moon Month Lunar month Moon illusion Harvest moon Hunter's moon Moon in art and literature Moon in mythology Hjúki and Bil (Norse legends) Moon is made of green cheese Natural satellite Solar System Supermoon Theia Tourism References [ edit ] ^ "Satellite" .

www.merriam-webster.com . Merriam Webster . Retrieved 16 November 2015 .

^ Stillman, Dan (16 June 2015).

"What Is a Satellite?" .

www.nasa.gov . NASA . Retrieved 16 November 2015 .

External links [ edit ] Moon at Wikipedia's sister projects Definitions from Wiktionary Media from Commons News from Wikinews Quotations from Wikiquote Texts from Wikisource Textbooks from Wikibooks Resources from Wikiversity Lunar shelter ( building a lunar base with 3D printing )* APOD - Video of lunar drive The Moon on Google Maps , a 3-D rendition of the Moon akin to Google Earth Cartographic resources "Consolidated Lunar Atlas" . Lunar and Planetary Institute . Retrieved 26 February 2012 .

Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature (USGS) List of feature names.

"Clementine Lunar Image Browser" . U.S. Navy. 15 October 2003. Archived from the original on 7 April 2007 . Retrieved 12 April 2007 .

3D zoomable globes: "Google Moon" . 2007 . Retrieved 12 April 2007 .

"Moon" .

World Wind Central . NASA. 2007 . Retrieved 12 April 2007 .

Aeschliman, R.

"Lunar Maps" .

Planetary Cartography and Graphics . Archived from the original on 29 May 2015 . Retrieved 12 April 2007 .

Maps and panoramas at Apollo landing sites Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency (JAXA) Kaguya (Selene) images Large image of the Moon's north pole area Observation tools "NASA's SKYCAL—Sky Events Calendar" . NASA Eclipse Home Page. Archived from the original on 20 August 2007 . Retrieved 27 August 2007 .

"Find moonrise, moonset and moonphase for a location" . 2008 . Retrieved 18 February 2008 .

"HMNAO's Moon Watch" . 2005. Archived from the original on 4 February 2009 . Retrieved 24 May 2009 .

See when the next new crescent moon is visible for any location.

v t e Moon Outline Physical properties Internal structure Topography Atmosphere Gravity field Hill sphere Magnetic field Sodium tail Moonlight Earthlight Orbit Orbital elements Distance Perigee and apogee Libration Nodes Nodal period Precession Syzygy New moon Full moon Eclipses Lunar eclipse Total penumbral lunar eclipse Tetrad Solar eclipse Solar eclipses on the Moon Eclipse cycle Supermoon Tide Tidal force Tidal locking Tidal acceleration Tidal range Lunar station Surface and features Selenography Terminator Limb Hemispheres Near side Far side Poles North pole South pole Face Maria List Mountains Peak of eternal light Valleys Volcanic features Domes Calderas Lava tubes Craters List Ray systems Permanently shadowed craters South Pole–Aitken basin Regolith swirls Rilles Wrinkle ridges Rocks Lunar basalt 70017 Changesite-(Y) Water Space weathering Micrometeorite Sputtering Quakes Transient lunar phenomenon Selenographic coordinate system Science Observation Libration Lunar theory Origin Giant-impact hypothesis Theia Lunar magma ocean Geology Timescale Late Heavy Bombardment Lunar meteorites KREEP Volcanism Experiments Lunar laser ranging ALSEP Lunar sample displays Apollo 11 Apollo 17 Lunar seismology Exploration Missions Apollo program Explorers Probes Landing Colonization Moonbase Tourism Lunar resources Time-telling and navigation Lunar calendar Lunisolar calendar Month Lunar month Nodal period Fortnight Sennight Lunar station Lunar distance Phases and names New Full Names Crescent Super and micro Blood Blue Black Dark Wet Tetrad Daily phenomena Moonrise Meridian passage Moonset Related Lunar deities Lunar effect Earth phase Moon illusion Pareidolia Man in the Moon Moon rabbit Craters named after people Artificial objects on the Moon Memorials on the Moon Moon in science fiction list Apollo era futuristic exploration Hollow Moon Moon landing conspiracy theories Moon Treaty " Moon is made of green cheese " Natural satellite Double planet Lilith (hypothetical second moon) Splitting of the Moon Category v t e Wikipedia outlines General reference Culture and the arts Geography and places Health and fitness History and events Mathematics and logic Natural and physical sciences People and self Philosophy and thinking Religion and belief systems Society and social sciences Technology and applied sciences Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Outline_of_the_Moon&oldid=1241820172 " Categories : Moon Outlines of the solar system Outlines Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages using Sister project links with default search This page was last edited on 23 August 2024, at 09:20 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Outline of the Moon Add languages Add topic

