Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Biography 2 Selected literature Toggle Selected literature subsection 2.1 Studies 2.2 Books 2.3 Most prominent articles 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Robert Costanza 10 languages العربية تۆرکجه Deutsch Español Français Italiano مصرى Polski Русский Simple English Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia American economist This article has multiple issues.

Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page .

( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) This biography of a living person needs additional citations for verification .

Please help by adding reliable sources .

Contentious material about living persons that is unsourced or poorly sourced must be removed immediately from the article and its talk page, especially if potentially libelous .

Find sources: "Robert Costanza" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( October 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A major contributor to this article appears to have a close connection with its subject.

It may require cleanup to comply with Wikipedia's content policies, particularly neutral point of view . Please discuss further on the talk page .

( April 2017 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Robert Costanza Born September 14, 1950 ( 1950-09-14 ) (age 74) Pittsburgh , Pennsylvania , U.S.

Nationality United States Alma mater University of Florida Known for Founder of International Society for Ecological Economics & Ecological Economics journal, Founding Editor-in-Chief of The Solutions Journal [ 1 ] Awards Kellogg National Fellow Pew Scholar ISEE Kenneth Boulding Award for Ecological Economics Scientific career Fields Ecological Economics Sustainability Systems Ecology Institutions The Australian National University Portland State University University of Vermont University of Maryland Louisiana State University Doctoral advisor H.T. Odum Website RobertCostanza.com Part of a series on Ecological economics Humanity's economic system viewed as a subsystem of the global environment Concepts Carbon fee and dividend Carrying capacity Ecological market failure Ecological model of competition Ecosystem services Embodied energy Energy accounting Entropy pessimism Index of Sustainable Economic Welfare Natural capital Spaceship Earth Steady-state economy Sustainability, 'weak' vs 'strong' Uneconomic growth People Serhiy Podolynsky Frederick Soddy Karl William Kapp Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen Kenneth E. Boulding E. F. Schumacher Robert Ayres Herman Daly Joan Martinez Alier Richard B. Norgaard Robert Costanza Tim Jackson Clive Spash Jason Hickel Julia Steinberger Giorgos Kallis Organizations: International Society for Ecological Economics Works Wealth, Virtual Wealth and Debt The Entropy Law and the Economic Process The Limits to Growth Small Is Beautiful Prosperity Without Growth Ecological Economics (journal) Related topics Agrowth Degrowth Eco-socialism Ecofeminism Environmental economics Environmental ethics Environmental justice Externality Green politics Planetary boundaries Post-growth Social metabolism Thermodynamics Thermoeconomics Unequal exchange v t e Robert Costanza (born September 14, 1950) is an American/Australian ecological economist and Professor at the UCL Institute for Global Prosperity , University College London . He is a Fellow of the Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia [ 2 ] and a Full Member of the Club of Rome .

[ 3 ] Biography [ edit ] Before joining University College London , he was a professor at the Crawford School of Public Policy at The Australian National University [ 4 ] in 2013 he was a professor at Portland State University in Oregon from 2010 to 2012.

[ 5 ] Costanza was the Gund Professor of Ecological Economics and director of the Gund Institute for Ecological Economics at the University of Vermont . Prior to moving to Vermont in August 2002, Costanza was director of the University of Maryland Institute for Ecological Economics, and a professor at University of Maryland 's Center for Estuarine and Environmental Science, at the Chesapeake Biological Lab on Solomons Island , MD.

He is co-founder and past president of the International Society for Ecological Economics and he was founding chief editor of the society's journal, Ecological Economics from its inception in 1989 until 2002. Costanza is the founding editor-in-chief of Solutions , a hybrid popular/academic journal/magazine.

[ 6 ] He currently serves on the editorial board of eight other international academic journals and is past president of the International Society for Ecosystem Health. He is a senior fellow at the Stockholm Resilience Centre , Stockholm, Sweden; [ 7 ] Affiliate Fellow at the Gund Institute for Environment at the University of Vermont ; and a co-chair of the Ecosystem Services Partnership.

Selected literature [ edit ] Studies [ edit ] 2016, Modelling and measuring sustainable wellbeing in connection with the UN Sustainable Development Goals [ 8 ] Books [ edit ] 2020, with John D. Erickson , Joshua Farley , and Ida Kubiszewski Sustainable Wellbeing Futures: a research and action agenda for Ecological Economics .

2014, with John Cumberland, Herman Daly , Robert Goodland, Richard B. Norgaard , Ida Kubiszewski , and Carol Franco.

An Introduction to Ecological Economics, Second Edition .

2014, with Ida Kubiszewski (eds).

Creating A Sustainable and Desirable Future: Insights from 45 Global Thought Leaders .

2013, with Gar Alperovitz , Herman Daly , Joshua Farley, Carol Franco, Tim Jackson , Ida Kubiszewski , Juliet Schor , and Peter Victor .

Building a Sustainable and Desirable Economy-in-Society-in-Nature .

2007, with Lisa Graumlich and Will Steffen , Sustainability or Collapse? An Integrated History and Future of People on Earth.

2000, with Tom Prugh and Herman Daly, The local politics of global sustainability .

1997, with John Cumberland, Herman Daly, Robert Goodland and Richard Norgaard, An Introduction to Ecological Economics 1996, with Olman Segura and Juan Martinez-Alier, Getting down to earth: practical applications of ecological economics 1992, with Bryan Norton and Ben Haskell, Ecosystem health: new goals for environmental management .

1991, Ecological economics: The science and management of sustainability .

[ 9 ] Most prominent articles [ edit ] 1996, Costanza, R. Ecological economics: reintegrating the study of humans and nature.

Ecological Applications 6:978-990 (1996) 1997, Costanza et al. The value of the world's ecosystem services and natural capital.

Nature 387:253-260 (1997) 1998, Costanza et al. Principles for sustainable governance of the oceans.

Science 281:198-199 (1998) 2008, Costanza, R. Stewardship for a “Full” World.

Current History (January 2008) An excellent six-page (including a concise chart) exposition of ecological economics.

2010, Costanza et al. The perfect spill: solutions for averting the next Deepwater Horizon, The Solutions Journal 2014, Costanza et al. Changes in the global value of ecosystem services, Global Environmental Change 2016, Costanza et al. Modelling and measuring sustainable wellbeing in connection with the UN Sustainable Development Goals, Ecological Economics 2017, Costanza et al. Twenty years of ecosystem services: how far have we come and how far do we still need to go?

Ecosystem Services 2021, Costanza et al. Common asset trusts to effectively steward natural capital and ecosystem services at multiple scales, Journal of Environmental Management See also [ edit ] Club of Rome Balaton Group References [ edit ] ^ Editorial Board The Solutions Journal . Retrieved 27 December 2018.

^ Leading Social Scientists elected as Academy Fellows ^ Club of Rome ^ retrieved 7 January, 2020 ^ Robert Costanza to Lead Sustainability Center at PSU ^ Solutions Magazine ^ Stockholm Resilience Centre ^ Costanza; et al. (2016).

"Modelling and measuring sustainable wellbeing in connection with the UN Sustainable Development Goals" (PDF) .

Ecological Economics .

130 : 350– 355.

doi : 10.1016/j.ecolecon.2016.07.009 .

^ Google Books: Ecological economics: The science and management of sustainability (Columbia University Press, 1992, ISBN 0231513240 ) - Retrieved 2019-02-08 External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Robert Costanza .

Media Release from ANU on Costanza's appointment Faculty page at ANU of Robert Costanza Curriculum vitae of Robert Costanza, 2019 Wellbeing Economy needs to be Primary Goal (2018, at the 50th Anniversary Meeting of the Club of Rome ) Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Czech Republic Netherlands Norway Latvia Croatia Poland Israel Belgium Academics CiNii ORCID ResearcherID Scopus Google Scholar Publons People DDB Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Robert_Costanza&oldid=1261524963 " Categories : 1950 births 21st-century American economists Living people Systems ecologists American systems scientists American sustainability advocates University of Florida alumni University of Vermont faculty Renewable energy economics Ecological economists American academic journal editors Academic staff of the Australian National University Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata BLP articles lacking sources from October 2019 All BLP articles lacking sources Wikipedia articles with possible conflicts of interest from April 2017 Articles with multiple maintenance issues Articles with hCards This page was last edited on 6 December 2024, at 15:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Robert Costanza 10 languages Add topic

