Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Classifications Toggle Classifications subsection 1.1 Intangible 1.2 Tangible 1.3 Other distinctions 2 Personal vis-à-vis private property 3 See also 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Personal property 32 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Башҡортса Dansk Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Հայերեն Bahasa Indonesia עברית Қазақша Magyar Bahasa Melayu 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Oʻzbekcha / ўзбекча Polski Русский Simple English Slovenčina Suomi Svenska తెలుగు Türkçe Українська 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Property which can be moved from one location to another For other uses, see Personal property (disambiguation) .

"Personal effects" redirects here. For the 2008 film, see Personal Effects (film) .

Property law Part of the common law series Types Personal property Community property Real property Unowned property Acquisition Gift Adverse possession Deed Conquest Discovery Accession Lost, mislaid, and abandoned property Treasure trove Bailment License Alienation Estates in land Allodial title Fee simple Fee tail Life estate Defeasible estate Future interest remainder Concurrent estate Leasehold estate Condominiums Real estate Land tenure Conveyancing Bona fide purchaser Torrens title Strata title Deeds registration Estoppel by deed Quitclaim deed Mortgage Equitable conversion Action to quiet title Escheat Future use control Restraint on alienation Rule against perpetuities Rule in Shelley's Case Doctrine of worthier title Nonpossessory interest Lien Easement Profit Usufruct Covenant Equitable servitude Related topics Fixtures Waste Partition Practicing without a license Property rights Mineral rights Water rights prior appropriation riparian Lateral and subjacent support Assignment Nemo dat Quicquid plantatur Conflict of property laws Blackacre Security deposit Other common law areas Contract law Tort law Wills , trusts and estates Criminal law Evidence Higher category: Law and Common law v t e Personal property is property that is movable.

[ 1 ] In common law systems, personal property may also be called chattels or personalty . In civil law systems, personal property is often called movable property or movables —any property that can be moved from one location to another.

Personal property can be understood in comparison to real estate , immovable property or real property (such as land and buildings).

Movable property on land (larger livestock , for example) was not automatically sold with the land, it was "personal" to the owner and moved with the owner.

The word cattle is the Old Norman variant of Old French chatel , chattel (derived from Latin capitalis , "of the head"), which was once synonymous with general movable personal property.

[ 2 ] Classifications [ edit ] Personal property may be classified in a variety of ways.

Intangible [ edit ] Intangible personal property or "intangibles" refers to personal property that cannot actually be moved, touched or felt, but instead represents something of value such as negotiable instruments , securities , service (economics) , and intangible assets including chose in action .

[ 3 ] Tangible [ edit ] Tangible personal property refers to any type of property that can generally be moved (i.e., it is not attached to real property or land), touched or felt. These generally include items such as furniture, clothing, jewelry, sunglasses, eyeglasses, art, writings, or household goods. In some cases, there can be formal title documents that show the ownership and transfer rights of that property after a person's death (for example, motor vehicles, boats, etcetera) In many cases, however, tangible personal property will not be "titled" in an owner's name and is presumed to be whatever property he or she was in possession of at the time of his or her death.

[ 4 ] Other distinctions [ edit ] Accountants distinguish personal property from real property because personal property can be depreciated faster than improvements (while land is not depreciable at all). It is an owner's right to get tax benefits for chattel, and there are businesses that specialize in appraising personal property, or chattel.

The distinction between these types of property is significant for a variety of reasons. Usually, one's rights on movables are more attenuated than one's rights on immovables (or real property). The statutes of limitations or prescriptive periods are usually shorter when dealing with personal or movable property. Real property rights are usually enforceable for a much longer period of time and in most jurisdictions real estate and immovables are registered in government-sanctioned land registers. In some jurisdictions, rights (such as a lien or other security interest) can be registered against personal or movable property.

In common law, it is possible to place a mortgage upon real property. Such a mortgage requires payment, or the owner of the mortgage can seek foreclosure . Personal property can often be secured with a similar kind of device, variously called a chattel mortgage , a trust receipt , or a security interest . In the United States, Article 9 of the Uniform Commercial Code governs the creation and enforcement of security interests in most (but not all) types of personal property.

There is no similar institution to the mortgage in the civil law, however a hypothec is a device to secure real rights against property. These real rights follow the property along with the ownership. In common law a lien also remains on the property, and it is not extinguished by alienation of the property; liens may be real or equitable .

Many jurisdictions levy a personal property tax , an annual tax on the privilege of owning or possessing personal property within the boundaries of the jurisdiction. Automobile and boat registration fees are a subset of this tax. Most household goods are exempt as long as they are kept or used within the household.

The distinction between tangible and intangible personal property is also significant in some of the jurisdictions which impose sales taxes. In Canada, for example, provincial and federal sales taxes were imposed primarily on sales of tangible personal property whereas sales of intangibles tended to be exempt. The move to value added taxes, under which almost all transactions are taxable, has diminished the significance of the distinction.

[ 5 ] Personal vis-à-vis private property [ edit ] Marxists argue that private property is a social relationship between the owner and persons deprived, i.e. not a relationship between person and thing. Private property may include artifacts, factories, mines, dams, infrastructure, natural vegetation, mountains, deserts, and seas – these generate capital for the owner without the owner necessarily having to perform any physical labor. Conversely, those who perform labor using somebody else's private property are considered deprived of the value of their work in Marxist theory, and are instead given a salary that is disjointed from the value generated by the worker.

[ 6 ] Personal property, or possessions , includes "items intended for personal use" (e.g., one's toothbrush , clothes, and vehicles, and rarely, money). The owner has a distributive right to exclude others (i.e., the right to command a "fair share" of personal property).

In anarchist theory, private property typically refers to capital or the means of production, whereas personal property refers to consumer and non-capital goods and services.

[ 7 ] [ 8 ] See also [ edit ] Law portal Chattel house Communal property Jus relictae Secured transaction State property Trespass to chattels References [ edit ] ^ Palgrave, Robert Harry Inglis (1908). "Personal property".

Dictionary of political economy . Vol. 3. p. 96.

^ "Origin of chattel" . Archived from the original on 14 August 2009 . Retrieved August 15, 2009 .

^ "personal property Legal Definition" .

dictionary.lawyerment.com . Retrieved 2023-06-26 .

^ "tangible personal property" .

LII / Legal Information Institute . Retrieved 2023-06-26 .

^ "Understanding Canadian Tax Law | 2022 Guide" .

www.fasken.com . 2021-10-15 . Retrieved 2023-06-26 .

^ "Marx's Theory of Alienation" .

Simply Sociology . 2023-02-26 . Retrieved 2023-06-26 .

^ McKay, Iain, ed. (10 November 2008). "B.3 Why are anarchists against private property?".

An Anarchist FAQ . Vol. 1.

Archived from the original on 14 November 2017 . Retrieved 29 April 2018 – via Anarchist Writers.

^ "End Private Property, Not Kenny Loggins" .

Jacobin .

Archived from the original on 26 October 2017 . Retrieved 29 April 2018 .

External links [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Personal property .

Look up personal property in Wiktionary, the free dictionary.

Australia Personal Property Securities Act 2009 Personal Property Securities Register Australia United States Tax Convention with the Kingdom of Morocco 1977 (PDF) "Chattel" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 6 (11th ed.). 1911. p. 9.

v t e Medium of exchange Commodity money Axe-money (W. Mesoamerica & N. Andes) Cocoa bean (Mesoamerica) Koku (rice) Manilla (W. Africa) Precious metals Quachtli (cotton cloth) Salt (Roman world) Shekel (barley) Shells Trade bead Domestic animals Water buffalo (SE Asia) Cow (Hindu) Camel (Arabia) Yak (Tibet, China) Representative money Bimetallism Gold certificates Demurrage currency Money portal Money ( Fiat / Token ) Bailment Banknote Central bank digital currency Chattel/movable property Cheque Clearing Cheque clearing Clay token Coinage Currency Deposit Deposit account Legal tender Notary Paper money Possession Promissory note Redemption Safekeeping General List of historical currencies Barter Coincidence of wants Bureau de change Central bank Clearinghouse bank Savings bank Depository institution Mint Akkadian standards of measurement ( c.

2150 BC ) Code of Hammurabi ( §100; §122–125 ; c. 1750 BC) Commodity theory of money (Metallism) Credit theory of money Chartalism Quantity theory of money Monetarism Market monetarism Standard of deferred payment Store of value Unit of account Digital currency Cryptocurrency Digital gold currency Virtual currency Local currency Complementary currency Sectoral currency Time-based currency v t e Property By owner Collective Common Communal Community Crown Customary Cooperative Private Public Self Social State Unowned By nature Croft Estate (landed) Intangible Intellectual indigenous Personal Tangible real Commons Common land Common-pool resource Digital Global Information Knowledge Theory Bundle of rights Commodity fictitious commodities Common good (economics) Excludability First possession appropriation homestead principle Free-rider problem Game theory Georgism Gift economy Labor theory of property Law of rent rent-seeking Legal plunder Natural rights Ownership Property rights primogeniture usufruct women's Right to property Rivalry Tragedy of the commons anticommons Applications Acequia (watercourse) Ejido (agrarian land) Estate legal literary real Forest types Huerta Inheritance executor Land tenure Property law alienation easement restraint on alienation real estate title Rights Air Fishing Forest-dwelling (India) Freedom to roam Grazing pannage Hunting Land aboriginal indigenous squatting Littoral Mineral Bergregal Right of way Water prior-appropriation riparian Disposession / redistribution Bioprospecting biopiracy Collectivization Eminent domain Enclosure Eviction Expropriation Farhud Forced migration population transfer repatriation Illegal fishing Illegal logging Land Back Land reform Legal plunder Piracy Poaching Primitive accumulation Privatization Regulatory taking Slavery bride buying human trafficking spousal husband-selling wife selling wage Tax inheritance poll progressive property Theft Scholars ( key work ) Frédéric Bastiat The Law Ronald Coase Friedrich Engels The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State Henry George Progress and Poverty Garrett Hardin David Harvey John Locke Two Treatises of Government Karl Marx Das Kapital Marcel Mauss The Gift John Stuart Mill Elinor Ostrom Karl Polanyi The Great Transformation Pierre-Joseph Proudhon What Is Property?

David Ricardo Murray N. Rothbard The Ethics of Liberty Jean-Jacques Rousseau The Social Contract Adam Smith The Wealth of Nations Categories: Property Property law by country Authority control databases National Czech Republic Israel Other NARA NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐gzd7g
Cached time: 20250817173440
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.454 seconds
Real time usage: 0.582 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 1512/1000000
Revision size: 8984/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 80369/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 1478/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 12/100
Expensive parser function count: 6/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 66772/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.281/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 5842169/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  470.682      1 -total
 27.33%  128.659      1 Template:Reflist
 17.94%   84.421      1 Template:Property_law
 17.44%   82.095      1 Template:Sidebar
 15.55%   73.199      1 Template:Cite_dictionary
 14.05%   66.122      1 Template:Short_description
 12.75%   60.005      4 Template:Navbox
  9.07%   42.671      1 Template:Means_of_Exchange
  8.18%   38.510      1 Template:Authority_control
  7.42%   34.904      2 Template:Pagetype Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:24695:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817173440 and revision id 1306423512. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Personal_property&oldid=1306423512 " Categories : Personal property law Property law Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 17:33 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Personal property 32 languages Add topic

