Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History in painting 2 Perspective 3 Quadratura 4 In other art forms 5 Artists 6 Paintings 7 Murals 8 Sculptures 9 Architecture 10 Use in films 11 See also 12 Notes 13 External links Toggle the table of contents Trompe-l'œil 40 languages Alemannisch العربية Aragonés Български Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Eesti Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Latina Limburgs Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Norsk bokmål Norsk nynorsk Polski Português Română Русский Seeltersk Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Tagalog ไทย Türkçe Українська Tiếng Việt 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article is about the artistic term. For the album by Malajube, see Trompe-l'oeil (album) . For the Westworld episode, see Trompe L'Oeil (Westworld) . For the mural by Maria Bettina Cogliatti, see Trompe-l'œil (mural) .

Art technique of illusory tridimensionality Ceiling of the Treasure Room of the Archaeological Museum of Ferrara , Italy, painted in 1503–1506 Trompe-l'œil ( French for 'deceive the eye'; / t r ɒ m p ˈ l ɔɪ / tromp- LOY ; French: [tʁɔ̃p lœj] ⓘ ) is an artistic term for the highly realistic optical illusion of three-dimensional space and objects on a two-dimensional surface.

Trompe-l'œil , which is most often associated with painting, tricks the viewer into perceiving painted objects or spaces as real.

Forced perspective is a related illusion in architecture, and Op art a modern style mostly dealing with geometric patterns.

History in painting [ edit ] Still life, Pompeii , c. AD 70 The phrase, which can also be spelled without the hyphen and ligature in English as trompe l'oeil , [ 1 ] originates with the artist Louis-Léopold Boilly , who used it as the title of a painting he exhibited in the Paris Salon of 1800 .

[ 2 ] Although the term gained currency only in the early 19th century, the illusionistic technique associated with trompe-l'œil dates much further back.

[ 3 ] It was (and is) often employed in murals . Instances from Greek and Roman times are known, for instance in Pompeii . A typical trompe-l'œil mural might depict a window, door, or hallway, intended to suggest a larger room.

A version of an oft-told ancient Greek story concerns a contest between two renowned painters.

Zeuxis (born around 464 BC) produced a still life painting so convincing that birds flew down to peck at the painted grapes. A rival, Parrhasius , asked Zeuxis to judge one of his paintings that was behind a pair of tattered curtains in his study. Parrhasius asked Zeuxis to pull back the curtains, but when Zeuxis tried, he could not, as the curtains were included in Parrhasius's painting—making Parrhasius the winner.

[ 4 ] Trompe l'œil with Writing Materials by the Dutch painter Evert Collier Perspective [ edit ] A fascination with perspective drawing arose during the Renaissance . But Giotto had begun using perspective at the end of the 13th century with the cycle of Assisi in Saint Francis stories. Many Italian painters of the late Quattrocento , such as Andrea Mantegna (1431–1506) and Melozzo da Forlì (1438–1494), began painting illusionistic ceiling paintings , generally in fresco , that employed perspective and techniques such as foreshortening to create the impression of greater space for the viewer below. This type of trompe-l'œil illusionism as specifically applied to ceiling paintings is known as di sotto in sù , meaning "from below, upward" in Italian. The elements above the viewer are rendered as if viewed from true vanishing point perspective. Well-known examples are the Camera degli Sposi in Mantua and Antonio da Correggio 's (1489–1534) Assumption of the Virgin in the Parma Cathedral .

Similarly, Vittorio Carpaccio (1460–1525) and Jacopo de' Barbari (c. 1440 – before 1516) added small trompe-l'œil features to their paintings, playfully exploring the boundary between image and reality. For example, a painted fly might appear to be sitting on the painting's frame, or a curtain might appear to partly conceal the painting, a piece of paper might appear to be attached to a board, or a person might appear to be climbing out of the painting altogether—all in reference to the contest of Zeuxis and Parrhasius .

Quadratura [ edit ] Escaping Criticism by Pere Borrell del Caso , 1874 Perspective theories in the 17th century allowed a more fully integrated approach to architectural illusion, which when used by painters to "open up" the space of a wall or ceiling is known as quadratura . Examples include Pietro da Cortona 's Allegory of Divine Providence in the Palazzo Barberini and Andrea Pozzo 's Apotheosis of St Ignatius on the ceiling of the Roman church of Sant'Ignazio in Campo Marzio .

The Mannerist and Baroque style interiors of Jesuit churches in the 16th and 17th centuries often included such trompe-l'œil ceiling paintings, which optically "open" the ceiling or dome to the heavens with a depiction of Jesus', Mary 's, or a saint's ascension or assumption. An example of a perfect architectural trompe-l'œil is the illusionistic dome in the Jesuit church, Vienna, by Andrea Pozzo , which is only slightly curved, but gives the impression of true architecture.

Trompe-l'œil paintings became very popular in Flemish and later in Dutch painting in the 17th century arising from the development of still life painting. The Flemish painter Cornelis Norbertus Gysbrechts created a chantourné painting showing an easel holding a painting.

Chantourné literally means 'cutout' and refers to a trompe-l'œil representation designed to stand away from a wall.

[ 5 ] The Dutch painter Samuel Dirksz van Hoogstraten was a master of the trompe-l'œil and theorized on the role of art as the lifelike imitation of nature in his 1678 book, the Introduction to the Academy of Painting, or the Visible World ( Inleyding tot de hooge schoole der schilderkonst: anders de zichtbaere werelt , Rotterdam, 1678).

[ 6 ] [ 7 ] A fanciful form of architectural trompe-l'œil , quodlibet , features realistically rendered paintings of such items as paper knives, playing cards, ribbons, and scissors, apparently accidentally left lying around.

[ 8 ] Trompe-l'œil can also be found painted on tables and other items of furniture, on which, for example, a deck of playing cards might appear to be sitting on the table. A particularly impressive example can be seen at Chatsworth House in Derbyshire , where one of the internal doors appears to have a violin and bow suspended from it, in a trompe-l'œil painted around 1723 by Jan van der Vaart .

[ 9 ] Another example can be found in the Painted Hall at the Old Royal Naval College , Greenwich, London. This Wren building was painted by Sir James Thornhill , the first British born painter to be knighted and is a classic example of the Baroque style popular in the early 18th century. The American 19th-century still-life painter William Harnett specialized in trompe-l'œil .

In the 20th century, from the 1960s on, the American Richard Haas and many others painted large trompe-l'œil murals on the sides of city buildings. From the beginning of the 1980s when German artist Rainer Maria Latzke began to combine classical fresco art with contemporary content, trompe-l'œil became increasingly popular for interior murals. The Spanish painter Salvador Dalí utilized the technique for a number of his paintings.

[ 10 ] In other art forms [ edit ] Trompe-l'œil , in the form of " forced perspective ", has long been used in stage-theater set design , so as to create the illusion of a much deeper space than the existing stage. A famous early example is the Teatro Olimpico in Vicenza , with Vincenzo Scamozzi 's seven forced-perspective "streets" (1585), which appear to recede into the distance.

Fresco with trompe l'œil dome painted on low vaulting, Jesuit Church , Vienna , Austria, by Andrea Pozzo , 1703 Trompe-l'œil is employed in Donald O'Connor 's famous "Running up the wall" scene in the film Singin' in the Rain (1952). During the finale of his "Make 'em Laugh" number he first runs up a real wall. Then he runs towards what appears to be a hallway, but when he runs up this as well we realize that it is a large trompe-l'œil mural. More recently, Roy Andersson has made use of similar techniques in his feature films.

[ 11 ] Matte painting is a variant of trompe-l'œil , and is used in film production with elements of a scene are painted on glass panels mounted in front of the camera.

Elsa Schiaparelli frequently made use of trompe-l'œil in her designs, most famously perhaps in her Bowknot Sweater , which some consider to be the first use of trompe-l'œil in fashion. The Tears Dress , which she did in collaboration with Salvador Dalí , features both appliqué tears on the veil and trompe-l'œil tears on the dress itself.

[ 12 ] Fictional trompe-l'œil appears in many Looney Tunes , such as the Road Runner cartoons, where, for example, Wile E. Coyote paints a tunnel on a rock wall, and Road Runner then races through the fake tunnel. This is usually followed by the coyote's foolishly trying to run through the tunnel after the road runner, only to smash into the hard rock-face. This sight gag was employed in Who Framed Roger Rabbit .

In Chicago 's Near North Side , Richard Haas used a 16-story 1929 apartment hotel converted into a 1981 apartment building for trompe-l'œil murals in homage to Chicago school architecture . One of the building's sides features the Chicago Board of Trade Building , intended as a reflection of the building located two miles south.

[ 13 ] [ 14 ] Several contemporary artists use chalk on pavement or sidewalk to create trompe-l'œil works, a technique called street painting or "pavement art". These creations last only until washed away, and therefore must be photographed to be preserved. Practitioners of this form include Julian Beever , Edgar Mueller , Leon Keer , and Kurt Wenner .

The Palazzo Salis of Tirano , Italy, has over centuries and throughout the palace used trompe-l'œil in place of more expensive real masonry, doors, staircases, balconies, and draperies to create an illusion of sumptuousness and opulence.

[ 15 ] Trompe-l'œil in the form of illusion architecture and Lüftlmalerei is common on façades in the Alpine region.

Trompe-l'œil, in the form of "illusion painting", is also used in contemporary interior design, where illusionary wall paintings experienced a renaissance since around 1980. Significant artists in this field are the German muralist Rainer Maria Latzke , who invented, in the 1990s, a new method of producing illusion paintings, frescography , and the English artist Graham Rust .

OK Go 's music video for " The Writing's on the Wall " uses a number of trompe-l'œil illusions alongside other optical illusions, captured through a one-shot take.

[ 16 ] Trompe-l'œil illusions have been used as gameplay mechanics in video games such as The Witness and Superliminal .

[ 17 ] Japanese filmmaker and animator Isao Takahata regarded achieving a sense of trompe-l'œil to be important for his work, stating that an animated world should feel as if it "existed right there" so that "people believe in a fantasy world and characters that no one has seen in reality." [ 18 ] Tourist attractions employing large-scale illusory art allowing visitors to photograph themselves in fantastic scenes have opened in several Asian countries, such as the Trickeye Museum and Hong Kong 3D Museum .

[ 19 ] [ 20 ] Recently a Trick Art Museum opened in Europe and uses more photographic approaches.

[ 21 ] Artists [ edit ] Trompe-l'œil Still-Life by Samuel Dirksz van Hoogstraten (1627–1678); 1664 A Bachelor's Drawer by John Haberle (1890–1894) Old Masters Cornelis Biltius Jacob Biltius Donato Bramante Petrus Christus Antonio da Correggio Carlo Crivelli Luca Giordano Cornelis Norbertus Gysbrechts Franciscus Gijsbrechts Samuel Dirksz van Hoogstraten Andrea Mantegna Masaccio Jean-Francois de la Motte Charles Willson Peale Jacobus Plasschaert Andrea Pozzo Vincenzo Scamozzi Giovanni Battista Tiepolo 19th century and modern masters Henry Alexander Aaron Bohrod Louis-Léopold Boilly Salvador Dalí Walter Goodman John Haberle William Harnett Claude Raguet Hirst René Magritte John F. Peto Contemporary Ellen Altfest Martin Battersby Julian Beever Daniela Benedini Henri Bol Henri Cadiou Dan Colen Piero Fornasetti Ronald Francis Joanne Gair Frederic Gracia Richard Haas Jonty Hurwitz Lorena Kloosterboer Rainer Maria Latzke Attila Meszlenyi István Orosz ( Utisz ) Os Gêmeos , "The Twins" Jacques Poirier Susan Powers John Pugh Pierre-Marie Rudelle Graham Rust Gavin Turk Anthony Waichulis Kurt Wenner Raymond. A. Whyte Tavar Zawacki Paintings [ edit ] Examples of trompe-l'œil paintings The Annunciation Diptych by Jan van Eyck , detail (c. 1433–1435) Portrait of a Carthusian by Petrus Christus (1446); note the fly near the bottom Still-Life with Partridge and Gauntlets by Jacopo de' Barbari , 1504; the first still-life trompe-l'œil since antiquity Trompe-l'Oeil stem of a Maltese Cross (1561) by Joris Hoefnagel Church interior by Gerard Houckgeest (c. 1654) Trompe l'oeil Studio Wall with Vanitas Still Life , Cornelis Norbertus Gijsbrechts , 1664 The reverse of a framed painting by Cornelis Norbertus Gijsbrechts , 1670 Trompe l'oeil with a bird cage , Cornelis Biltius , 1680s Trompe-l'oeil , Jean-François de Le Motte, 1680–1700 Portrait of François Rivière by Nicola van Houbraken , c. 1700 Trompe l´oeil, 1737 by Carl Hofverberg A 'trompe l'oeil' of a wooden panelling with a painted canvas of a landscape 'capriccio', a pile of prints with a repetition of the painted subject, an almanach, sealed letters and playing cards , Jacobus Plasschaert , 1650s Printed Pages. Trompe l'œil by Nicolaas de Wit, 1740 Trompe l'œil by Henry Fuseli , 1750 Antonio Pérez de Aguilar, Cupboard , c. 1769, National Gallery of Art Trompe l'œil dit aux dessins et aux savoyards by Louis-Léopold Boilly , c. 1804–1807 The Faithful Colt, 1890 by William Michael Harnett Char de la Ville (photographed 2006)—the "sculpture" is a flat cutout Theodor Pištěk , Josef N., (1978), Art Library Project Ceiling piece with birds by Abraham Busschop , 1708 Murals [ edit ] Complete anamorphosis of the frontage of the Saint-Georges Theatre Oculus on the ceiling of the Spouses Chamber, castle of San Giorgio in Mantua , Italy, by Andrea Mantegna Trompe-l'œil cupola in the church of Brivio, Italy Painted windows, Rue de l'Épée/Zwaardstraat, Brussels A trompe-l'œil of a pigeon on a window sill, façade mural, rue Emile Lepeu in the 11th arrondissement of Paris , France Mural in Schwetzingen , Germany (the view "through" the wall at the end) A trompe-l'œil in Lyon , France Bronze Statues trompe-l'œil in Mt. Pleasant, Utah Architectural wall and ceiling trompe-l'œil , Entrance to the library of Chateau Thal, by Rainer Maria Latzke Painted trompe-l'œil mosaic, floor in the Villa Paradou in Nice , France, by Rainer Maria Latzke Los Angeles Plaza Historic District : mural off Alameda Street Conceptual trompe-l'œil mural at California State University, Chico titled "Academe", featuring Doric columns and crumbling walls, by John Pugh Sculptures [ edit ] 19th-century marble bust with apparently transparent veil, Bankfield Museum , Halifax, West Yorkshire .

The same bust seen in profile. The effect is consistent from all angles and from close up.

A modern trompe-l'œil mosaic fountain at Brighton , in the form of a carpet thrown over marble steps.

Tomb of Rudolf Nureyev draped in a mosaic oriental carpet sculpture.

Architecture [ edit ] Architectural trompe-l'œil in the Palazzo Spada , Rome , by Francesco Borromini The interior of the cathedral in Biella ( Italy ) is considered a masterpiece of trompe-l'œil The interior of Santa Maria presso San Satiro , Milan viewed from the nave The trompe-l'œil choir at Santa Maria presso San Satiro, by Donato Bramante , viewed from the side Gallery painted in trompe-l'œil in the Château de Tanlay , France Detail of the forced perspective stage scenery of the Teatro Olimpico , as viewed through the porta reggia of the scaenae frons , Vicenza , northern Italy The Painted Hall at the Old Royal Naval College in Greenwich , London , England, designed by Sir Christopher Wren and Nicholas Hawksmoor . The paintings by Sir James Thornhill comprise architectural trompe-l'œil ; for instance, the Corinthian columns look fluted whilst the far wall depicts pilasters and an entablature . In practice none of these elements exist in three dimensions 19th-century stained-glass window made for the Henry Gurdon Marquand 's mansion in New York Use in films [ edit ] Singin' in the Rain (1952) Willy Wonka & the Chocolate Factory (1971) Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade (1989) Where the Heart Is (1990) Millennium Actress (2001) Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind (2004) Bewitched (2005) Westworld (Season 1, Episode 7) (2016) See also [ edit ] 2.5D —enhancement of 2-dimensional graphics by limited application of some 3D effects to them Accidental viewpoint Anamorphosis Bump mapping , normal mapping and parallax mapping —graphical techniques used to add fake details that enhance 2D representations of 3D objects (in the context of that branch of computer graphics that aims to give a realistic 3D view on the screen) Camouflage Faux painting List of art techniques Marbling Photorealism Notes [ edit ] ^ For example by the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C.

^ Taws, Richard (9 May 2019). "At the National Gallery".

London Review of Books 40 (9): 26–27.

^ "Illusionism". Grove Art Online. (2003).

^ "Parrhasius" .

Oxford Reference . Retrieved 2022-08-26 .

^ 'Illusion, Delusion, Collusion, and Perceptual Paradox', in: Michael Kubovy and Christopher Tyler, Psychology of Perspective and Renaissance Art ^ Merriam, Susan (2012).

Seventeenth-century Flemish Garland Paintings: Still Life, Vision, and the Devotional Image . Surrey, England: Ashgate Publishing .

ISBN 978-1-4094-0305-0 .

OCLC 720899635 .

^ Weststeijn, Thijs (2008).

The Visible World: Samuel Van Hoogstraten's Art Theory and the Legitimation of Painting in the Dutch Golden Age . Amsterdam University Press.

doi : 10.5117/9789089640277 .

ISBN 978-90-8964-027-7 .

^ Curl, James Stevens (2006).

A Dictionary of Architecture and Landscape Architecture (Paperback) (Second ed.). Oxford University Press. pp.

880 pages.

ISBN 0-19-860678-8 .

^ van der Vaardt, Jan.

"Violin and bow hanging from door" .

Devonshire Collection . Chatsworth House, UK: Bridgeman Art Library. Archived from the original (Painting) on 21 February 2014 . Retrieved 15 April 2012 .

^ LaFountain, Marc J. (1997).

Dali and Postmodernism: This Is Not an Essence . Albany, New York: SUNY Press . p.

74 .

ISBN 0-7914-3325-0 . Retrieved 2012-05-14 .

^ Bateman, Conor (11 June 2015).

"A Pigeon Sat on a Branch Reflecting on Existence – An Interview with Cinematographer István Borbás" . 4:3 . Retrieved 22 July 2015 .

^ " "The Tears Dress" by Elsa Schiaparelli and Salvador Dalí" . 17 April 2018.

^ Schlereth, Thomas J. (n.d.).

"The City as Artifact" . Chicago Historical Society.

Archived from the original on 2007-08-24 . Retrieved 2007-08-05 .

^ "Mural, Homage to the Chicago School , by Richard Haas, 1980" . Chicago Historical Society . Retrieved 2007-08-05 .

^ Paull, J. (2015) Tirano's Palace of Trompe L'Oeil: A Photographic Exhibition by John Paull .

Archived 2015-12-08 at the Wayback Machine SlideShare.

^ Plait, Phil (2014-06-17).

"The Writing's on the Wall" .

Slate . Retrieved 2014-06-18 .

^ Shih, Albert (December 10, 2019).

"Perception is Reality: Superliminal Coming to PS4" .

PlayStation Blog . Retrieved January 6, 2020 .

^ Kamen, Matt (March 19, 2015).

"Studio Ghibli's Isao Takahata on animating his final film" .

Wired UK .

Archived from the original on 2018-04-07 . Retrieved April 6, 2018 .

^ "3-D museums: Next big thing for Asia tourism?" .

CNBC . 28 August 2014.

^ Seow, Bei Yi (13 June 2014).

"3-D art wows visitors | the Straits Times" .

The Straits Times .

^ "El museo donde tú eres parte de la obra" .

ABC (in Spanish). 15 December 2021.

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Trompe l'oeil .

Wade, Nicholas J; Hughes, Patrick (September 1999). "Fooling the Eyes: Trompe L'Oeil and Reverse Perspective".

Perception .

28 (9): 1115– 1119.

doi : 10.1068/p281115 .

PMID 10694961 .

S2CID 690634 .

Kaufmann, Thomas DaCosta; Kaufmann, Virginia Roehrig (1991). "The Sanctification of Nature: Observations on the Origins of Trompe l'oeil in Netherlandish Book Painting of the Fifteenth and Sixteenth Centuries".

The J. Paul Getty Museum Journal .

19 : 43– 64.

JSTOR 4166611 .

Nanay, Bence (March 2015). "Trompe l'oeil and the Dorsal/Ventral Account of Picture Perception".

Review of Philosophy and Psychology .

6 (1): 181– 197.

doi : 10.1007/s13164-014-0219-y .

hdl : 10067/1232140151162165141 .

S2CID 256075115 .

Deceptions and Illusions , National Gallery of Art exhibition on Trompe-l'œil paintings Trompe l'œil Tricks: Borges' Baroque Illusionism , essay by Lois Parkinson Zamora comparing trompe-l'œil to the literature of Borges Custom trompe l'œil Paintings , Fresco Blog murals.trompe-l-oeil.info Archived 2011-12-12 at the Wayback Machine , More than 10 000 pictures and 1200 Outdoor murals of France and Europe Paris: Trompe-l'œil , surréalisme urbain?

, Avenue George V (Paris, France). Text and photography by Catherine-Alice Palagret "The Mechanics of the Art World", Vistas: Visual Culture in Spanish America, 1520–1820 Trick Art Museum: Magic World Museum Barcelona v t e Optical illusions ( list ) Illusions Afterimage Ambigram Ambiguous image Ames room Autostereogram Barberpole Bezold Café wall Checker shadow Chubb Cornsweet Delboeuf Ebbinghaus Ehrenstein Flash lag Fraser spiral Gravity hill Grid Hering Impossible trident Irradiation Jastrow Lilac chaser Mach bands McCollough Müller-Lyer Necker cube Oppel-Kundt Orbison Penrose stairs Penrose triangle Peripheral drift Poggendorff Ponzo Rubin vase Sander Schroeder stairs Shepard tables Spinning dancer Ternus Vertical–horizontal White's Wundt Zöllner Popular culture Op art Trompe-l'œil Spectropia (1864 book) Ascending and Descending (1960 drawing) Waterfall (1961 drawing) The dress (2015 photograph) Related Accidental viewpoint Auditory illusions Illusions Tactile illusions Temporal illusion v t e Visual arts Architecture Art Body art Ceramics Comics Computer art Craft pallet crafts Decorative arts Design Drawing Digital art Filmmaking Light art Painting Photography Printmaking Public art Rock art Sculpture Site-specific art Street art List of artistic media v t e Premodern , Modern and Contemporary art movements List of art movements / periods Premodern (Western) Ancient Thracian Dacian Nuragic Aegean Cycladic Minoan Minyan ware Mycenaean Greek Sub-Mycenaean Protogeometric Geometric Orientalizing Archaic Black-figure Red-figure Severe style Classical Kerch style Hellenistic "Baroque" Indo-Greek Greco-Buddhist Neo-Attic Etruscan Scythian Iberian Gaulish Roman Republican Gallo-Roman Julio-Claudian Pompeian Styles Trajanic Severan Medieval Late antique Early Christian Coptic Ethiopian Migration Period Anglo-Saxon Hunnic Insular Lombard Visigothic Donor portrait Pictish Mozarabic Repoblación Viking Byzantine Iconoclast Macedonian Palaeologan Italo-Byzantine Frankish Merovingian Carolingian Pre-Romanesque Ottonian Romanesque Mosan Spanish Norman Norman-Sicilian Opus Anglicanum Gothic Gothic art in Milan International Gothic International Gothic art in Italy Lucchese school Crusades Moscow school Novgorod school Vladimir-Suzdal school Duecento Sienese school Mudéjar Medieval cartography Italian school Majorcan school Mappa mundi Renaissance Italian Renaissance Trecento Proto-Renaissance Florentine school Pittura infamante Quattrocento Ferrarese school Forlivese school Venetian school Cinquecento High Renaissance Bolognese school Mannerism Counter- Maniera Northern Renaissance Early Netherlandish World landscape Ghent–Bruges school Northern Mannerism German Renaissance Cologne school Danube school Dutch and Flemish Renaissance Antwerp Mannerism Romanism Still life English Renaissance Tudor court Cretan school Turquerie Fontainebleau school Art of the late 16th century in Milan 17th century Baroque Baroque in Milan Flemish Baroque Caravaggisti in Utrecht Tenebrism Louis XIII style Lutheran Baroque Stroganov school Animal painting Guild of Romanists Dutch Golden Age Delft school Capriccio Heptanese school Classicism Louis XIV style Poussinists and Rubenists 18th century Rococo Rocaille Louis XV style Frederician Chinoiserie Fête galante Neoclassicism Goût grec Louis XVI style Adam style Directoire style Neoclassical architecture in Milan Picturesque Colonial art Art of the African diaspora African-American Caribbean Haitian Colonial Asian art Arts in the Philippines Letras y figuras Tipos del País Colonial Asian Baroque Company style Latin American art Casta painting Indochristian art Chilote school Cuzco school Quito school Latin American Baroque Art borrowing Western elements Islamic Moorish Manichaean Mughal Qajar Qing handicrafts Western influence in Japan Akita ranga Uki-e Transition to modern (c. 1770 – 1862) Romanticism Fairy painting Danish Golden Age Troubadour style Nazarene movement Purismo Shoreham Ancients Düsseldorf school Pre-Raphaelites Hudson River School American luminism Orientalism Norwich school Empire style Historicism Revivalism Biedermeier Realism Barbizon school Costumbrismo Verismo Macchiaioli Academic art Munich school in Greece Neo-Grec Etching revival Modern (1863–1944) 1863–1899 Neo-romanticism National romanticism Yōga Nihonga Japonisme Anglo-Japanese style Beuron school Hague school Peredvizhniki Impressionism American Hoosier Group Boston school Amsterdam Canadian Heidelberg school Aestheticism Arts and Crafts Art pottery Tonalism Decadent movement Symbolism Romanian Russian Volcano school Incoherents Post-Impressionism Neo-Impressionism Luminism Divisionism Pointillism Pont-Aven School Cloisonnism Synthetism Les Nabis American Barbizon school California tonalism Costumbrismo 1900–1914 Art Nouveau Art Nouveau in Milan Primitivism California Impressionism Secessionism School of Paris Munich Secession Vienna Secession Berlin Secession Sonderbund Pennsylvania Impressionism Mir iskusstva Ten American Painters Fauvism Expressionism Die Brücke Der Blaue Reiter Noucentisme Deutscher Werkbund American Realism Ashcan school Cubism Proto-Cubism Orphism A Nyolcak Neue Künstlervereinigung München Futurism Cubo-Futurism Art Deco Metaphysical Rayonism Productivism Synchromism Vorticism 1915–1944 Sosaku-hanga Suprematism School of Paris Crystal Cubism Constructivism Latin American Universal Constructivism Dada Shin-hanga Neoplasticism De Stijl Purism Return to order Novecento Italiano Figurative Constructivism Stupid Cologne Progressives Arbeitsrat für Kunst November Group Australian tonalism Dresden Secession Social realism Functionalism Bauhaus Kinetic art Anthropophagy Mingei Group of Seven New Objectivity Grosvenor school Neues Sehen Surrealism Iranian Latin American Mexican muralism Neo-Fauvism Precisionism Aeropittura Asso Scuola Romana Cercle et Carré The Group Harlem Renaissance Kapists Regionalism California Scene Painting Heroic realism Socialist realism Nazi art Streamline Moderne Concrete art Abstraction-Création Tiki The Ten Dimensionism Boston Expressionism Leningrad school Contemporary and Postmodern (1945–present) 1945–1959 International Typographic Style Abstract expressionism Washington Color School Visionary art Vienna School of Fantastic Realism Spatialism Color field Lyrical abstraction Tachisme Arte Informale COBRA Nuagisme Generación de la Ruptura Jikken Kōbō Metcalf Chateau Mono-ha Nanyang Style Action painting American Figurative Expressionism in New York New media art New York school Hard-edge painting Bay Area Figurative Movement Les Plasticiens Gutai Art Association Gendai Bijutsu Kondankai Pop art Situationist International Soviet Nonconformist Ukrainian underground Lettrism Letterist International Ultra-Lettrist Florida Highwaymen Cybernetic art Antipodeans 1960–1969 Otra Figuración Afrofuturism Nueva Presencia ZERO Happening Neo-Dada Neo-Dada Organizers Op art Nouveau réalisme Nouvelle tendance Capitalist realism Art & Language Arte Povera Black Arts Movement The Caribbean Artists Movement Chicano art movement Conceptual art Land art Systems art Video art Minimalism Fluxus Generative art Post-painterly abstraction Intermedia Psychedelic art Nut Art Photorealism Environmental art Performance art Process art Institutional critique Light and Space Street art Feminist art movement in the US Saqqakhaneh movement The Stars Art Group Tropicália Yoru no Kai Artificial intelligence visual art 1970–1999 Post-conceptual art Installation art Artscene Postminimalism Endurance art Sots Art Moscow Conceptualists Pattern and Decoration Pliontanism Punk art Neo-expressionism Transavantgarde Saint Soleil school Guerrilla art Lowbrow art Telematic art Appropriation art Neo-conceptual art New European Painting Tunisian collaborative painting Memphis Group Cyberdelic Neue Slowenische Kunst Scratch video Transgressive Retrofuturism Young British Artists Superfiction Taring Padi Superflat New Leipzig school Artist-run initiative Artivism The Designers Republic Grunge design Verdadism Chinese Apartment Art 2000– present Amazonian pop art Altermodern Art for art Art game Art intervention Brandalism Classical Realism Contemporary African art Africanfuturism Contemporary Indigenous Australian art Crypto art Cyborg art Excessivism Fictive art Flat design Corporate Memphis Hypermodernism Hyperrealism Idea art Internet art Post-Internet iPhone art Kitsch movement Lightpainting Massurrealism Modern European ink painting Neo-futurism Neomodern Neosymbolism Passionism Post-YBAs Relational art Skeuomorphism Software art Sound art Stuckism Superflat SoFlo Superflat Superstroke Toyism Unilalianism Vaporwave Walking Artists Network Related topics History of art Abstract art Asemic writing Anti-art Avant-garde Ballets Russes Christian art Art in the Protestant Reformation and Counter-Reformation Catholic art Icon Lutheran art Digital art Fantastic art Folk art Hierarchy of genres Genre painting History painting Illuminated manuscript Illustration Interactive art Jewish art Kitsch Landscape painting Modernism Modern sculpture Late modernism Naïve art Outsider art Portrait Prehistoric European art Queer art Realism Shock art Trompe-l'œil Western painting Category Authority control databases : National Japan Spain Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Trompe-l%27œil&oldid=1304698955 " Categories : Trompe-l'œil Visual arts genres Architectural elements Artistic techniques Painting techniques Optical illusions Decorative arts Composition in visual art Hidden categories: Pages using the Phonos extension Articles containing French-language text Webarchive template wayback links CS1 Spanish-language sources (es) Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Pages with French IPA Pages including recorded pronunciations Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 7 August 2025, at 16:36 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Trompe-l'œil 40 languages Add topic

