Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Early life 2 Career 3 Issue 4 Ancestry 5 See also 6 Notes 7 Sources 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Lorenzo de' Medici, Duke of Urbino 35 languages العربية Беларуская Български Brezhoneg Català Čeština Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano ქართული Latina Magyar Nederlands 日本語 Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Српски / srpski Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Svenska ไทย Türkçe Українська West-Vlams 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikisource Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Italian nobleman (1492–1519) Not to be confused with Lorenzo de' Medici , his grandfather.

This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Lorenzo de' Medici, Duke of Urbino" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( March 2013 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Lorenzo II de' Medici Portrait by Raphael , 1518 [ 1 ] Ruler of Florence Reign 17 March 1516 – 4 May 1519 Predecessor Giuliano de' Medici Successor Giulio de' Medici Born 12 September 1492 Florence , Republic of Florence Died 4 May 1519 (1519-05-04) (aged 26) Careggi , Republic of Florence Noble family Medici Spouse(s) Madeleine de La Tour d'Auvergne ​ ​ ( m.

1518; died 1519) ​ [ 2 ] Issue Catherine, Queen of France Alessandro de' Medici, Duke of Florence (illegitimate) Father Piero the Unfortunate Mother Alfonsina Orsini Lorenzo di Piero de' Medici ( Italian: [loˈrɛntso di ˈpjɛːro de ˈmɛːditʃi] ; 12 September 1492 – 4 May 1519) was the ruler of Florence from 1516 until his death in 1519. He was also Duke of Urbino during the same period. A scion of the Medici , his wealth and power saw his daughter Catherine de' Medici become Queen Consort of France , while his recognised but illegitimate son, Alessandro de' Medici , inherited his estate and became the first Duke of Florence .

Early life [ edit ] Lorenzo was born in Florence on 12 September 1492, a son of Piero di Lorenzo de' Medici and Alfonsina Orsini .

[ 3 ] His paternal grandparents were Lorenzo the Magnificent and Clarice Orsini .

[ 3 ] His maternal grandparents were Roberto Orsini , Count of Tagliacozzo and his wife, Catherine of San Severino .

Career [ edit ] Lorenzo II became lord of Florence in August 1513, after his uncle, Giuliano de' Medici , handed over control of its government. Ambitious by nature, Lorenzo II, despite being appointed Captain of the Florentine militia, lacked patience with Florence's republican system of government and thus, in 1516, convinced his uncle, Pope Leo X to make him Duke of Urbino at the age of 24.

[ 4 ] So began a conflict with the city's previous duke, Francesco Maria I della Rovere . During the protracted War of Urbino , Delle Rovere recaptured the city, only to have Medici — commanding a 10,000-man Papal army — in turn, retake the city. During battle, Lorenzo was wounded, which prompted him to retire to Tuscany. In September 1517, he regained Urbino via treaty; however, it remained under the Medici family's rule for only two years. In 1521 the duchy reverted to the Della Rovere family .

[ 4 ] On 13 June 1518, Lorenzo married Madeleine de La Tour , daughter of the Count of Auvergne .

[ 5 ] The marriage produced a daughter, Catherine, in 1519.

Catherine de' Medici went on to become Queen of France, via a marriage to the future King Henry II of France , arranged by the second Medici Pope, Pope Clement VII .

[ 6 ] Only 21 days after Catherine de' Medici's birth, Lorenzo II died, "worn out by disease and excess." [ 7 ] Thus his daughter Catherine was raised primarily by the Medici Popes, Leo X and Clement VII, and their surrogates.

Lorenzo II's tomb is in the Medici Chapel of Florence's Church of San Lorenzo . There is disagreement over which of the two tombs is Lorenzo II's. The received view is that Lorenzo's tomb that is adorned by Michelangelo 's sculpture Pensieroso , which offers an idealized portrait of Lorenzo II, and that its companion piece, also sculpted by Michelangelo, represents Lorenzo II's uncle Giuliano di Lorenzo de' Medici . But historian Richard Trexler has argued that Lorenzo II, having been Captain of the Florentine militia, must be the figure holding the baton, symbol of military authority conferred by the Republic. Trexler also notes that the "Pensieroso" is holding a mappa, the symbol of military authority in ancient Rome, which would be an appropriate symbol for Giuliano di Lorenzo, who was appointed Captain of Roman forces. In sharing the same name with his illustrious ancestor, Lorenzo the Magnificent , the Duke's tomb is often mistaken for that of his grandfather.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Famously, Niccolò Machiavelli dedicated his political treatise The Prince to Lorenzo to advise him of tactics to use to maintain his authority.

[ 10 ] Issue [ edit ] By his wife, Lorenzo had only a daughter: Caterina de' Medici (1519 – 1589) - she married the French prince Henry and later became Queen of France.

By Simonetta , a servant girl of his mother Alfonsina, he had an illegitimate son: Alessandro de' Medici, Duke of Florence (1510 – 1537) - he was assassinated by his cousin Lorenzaccio and his death caused the title of Duke to pass to Cosimo I de Medici , from the family's junior branch.

Ancestry [ edit ] Ancestors of Lorenzo de' Medici, Duke of Urbino 8.

Piero de' Medici 4.

Lorenzo de' Medici 9.

Lucrezia Tornabuoni 2.

Piero de' Medici 10.

Jacopo Orsini, Lord of Monterotondo 5.

Clarissa Orsini 11.

Maddalena Orsini 1.

Lorenzo de' Medici, Duke of Urbino 12.

Carlo Orsini, Lord of Bracciano 6.

Roberto Orsini, Count of Tagliacozzo 13.

Paola Orsini 3.

Alfonsina Orsini 14.

Amerigo Sanseverino, Count of Capaccio 7.

Caterina Sanseverino 15.

Margherita Sanseverino See also [ edit ] House of Medici Medici Chapel Notes [ edit ] ^ In private collection, on view at the Metropolitan Museum of Art from June 26–October 11, 2021 ^ Maddalena died a week before her husband.

^ a b Stapleford 2013 , p. 12.

^ a b Cavallo & Evangelisti 2016 , p. 74.

^ Fletcher 2016 , p. viii.

^ "BBC - History - Catherine de Medici" .

^ "Lorenzo di Piero de' Medici, duca di Urbino | Italian ruler" . 30 April 2024.

^ Peter Barenboim, Sergey Shiyan, Michelangelo: Mysteries of Medici Chapel , SLOVO, Moscow, 2006 .

ISBN 5-85050-825-2 ^ Barenboim P. D. / Peter Barenboim. (2017).

"The Mouse that Michelangelo Did Carve in the Medici Chapel: An Oriental Comment to the Famous Article of Erwin Panofsky" .

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) ^ "Lorenzo de' Medici, Lord of Florence and Duke of Urbino — the Medici Family" .

Sources [ edit ] Cavallo, Sandra; Evangelisti, Silvia, eds. (2016).

Domestic Institutional Interiors in Early Modern Europe . Routledge.

Fletcher, Catherine (2016).

The Black Prince of Florence: The Spectacular Life and Treacherous World of Alessandro de' Medici . Oxford University Press.

Rothfield, Lawrence (2021).

The Measure of Man: Liberty, Virtue, and Beauty in the Florentine Renaissance.

Rowman & Littlefield.

Stapleford, Richard, ed. (2013).

Lorenzo De' Medici at Home: The Inventory of the Palazzo Medici in 1492 . The Pennsylvania State University Press.

External links [ edit ] Media related to Lorenzo di Piero de' Medici at Wikimedia Commons English Wikisource has original works by or about: Lorenzo II de' Medici The Medici (The Senior or 'Cafaggiolo') Family Line – The Glorious 1400s Lorenzo II de' Medici House of Medici Born: 12 September 1492 Died: 4 May 1519 Italian nobility Preceded by Francesco Maria I della Rovere Duke of Urbino 1516–1519 Succeeded by Francesco Maria I della Rovere v t e House of Medici People Lords of Florence Cosimo "The Elder" Piero "The Gouty" Lorenzo "The Magnificent" Piero "The Brief" Giovanni, Pope Leo X Giuliano Lorenzo II Giulio (Clement VII) Ippolito Alessandro "The Moor" Dukes of Florence Alessandro "The Moor" Cosimo I Grand Dukes of Tuscany Cosimo I Francesco I Ferdinando I Cosimo II Ferdinando II Cosimo III Gian Gastone Queens of France Caterina Maria Popes Leo X Clement VII Leo XI Cardinals male line : Giovanni (Leo X) Giulio (Clement VII) Ippolito Alessandro (Leo XI) Giovanni Ferdinando I Carlo Giovan Carlo Leopoldo Francesco Maria Francesco female line : Luigi de' Rossi Giovanni Salviati Innocenzo Cybo Bernardo Salviati Niccolò Ridolfi Lorenzo Strozzi Ferrante Gonzaga Vincenzo II Gonzaga Bishops and archbishops Filippo Bernardo Antonio Giuliano Zanobi Condottieri Giovanni delle Bande Nere Don Giovanni Mattias Genealogy Genealogical tables of the House of Medici Festina Lente Buildings Villas Cafaggiolo Trebbio Careggi Fiesole La Quiete Collesalvetti Poggio a Caiano Castello Mezzomonte Agnano Spedaletto La Petraia Camugliano Stabbia La Topaia Cerreto Guidi Marignolle Arena Metato Poggio Imperiale Lapeggi L'Ambrogiana La Màgia Liliano Coltano Montevettolini Artimino Buti Seravezza Madama Palaces Casino Mediceo di San Marco Palazzo Medici Riccardi Palazzo Madama Palazzo Pitti Villa Medici Palazzo Medici Tornaquinci Livorno Palazzo delle Vedove Pisa Materdei Palazzo Medici di Ottaviano Fountains and gardens Medici fountain Villa di Pratolino Fortresses Arezzo Grosseto Piombino Pistoia San Piero a Sieve Siena Volterra Chapels Magi Chapel Medici Chapels , San Lorenzo New Sacristy Cappella dei Principi Old Sacristy Patronage Painters, sculptors and architects Bartolomeo Ammannati Sandro Botticelli Filippo Brunelleschi Michelangelo Michelangelo and the Medici Bernardo Buontalenti Leonardo da Vinci Donatello Michelozzo Antonio del Pollaiuolo Jacopo della Quercia Giorgio Vasari Poets and other literary figures Agnolo Poliziano Niccolò Machiavelli Humanists and philosophers Pico della Mirandola Marsilio Ficino Scientists Galileo Galilei Musicians Emilio de' Cavalieri Jacopo Peri Heraldry Medici coat of arms Crown of the Grand Duke of Tuscany Order of Saint Stephen Institutions Medici Bank Art Medici lions Medici porcelain Medici Vase Venus de' Medici Arazzeria Medicea Family tree Princes of Ottajano Related Medici giraffe Galilean moons Stories set to music: "opera" Alberti Albizzi Pazzi conspiracy Savonarola TV series episodes Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF FAST WorldCat National Germany United States Italy Spain Netherlands Sweden Poland Vatican Israel People Italian People Deutsche Biographie DDB Other IdRef SNAC Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lorenzo_de%27_Medici,_Duke_of_Urbino&oldid=1302325857 " Categories : Heads of state of Florence 1492 births 1519 deaths Deaths from syphilis House of Medici 16th-century people from the Republic of Florence Captains General of the Church Dukes of Urbino Burials at San Lorenzo, Florence 16th-century Italian nobility Italian Roman Catholics 16th-century monarchs in Europe Hidden categories: CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles needing additional references from March 2013 All articles needing additional references Pages with Italian IPA Commons category link from Wikidata This page was last edited on 24 July 2025, at 18:27 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lorenzo de' Medici, Duke of Urbino 35 languages Add topic

