Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Types 2 Internet and digital services 3 Tort 4 Medicine 5 Social science research 6 Planning law 7 Sexual activity Toggle Sexual activity subsection 7.1 Affirmative consent 7.2 Critiques of affirmative consent 7.2.1 Neoliberal contractualism and rationalism 7.2.2 Socio-cultural vs legal debate 8 See also 9 References Toggle the table of contents Consent 25 languages العربية বাংলা Català Čeština Dansk Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia ಕನ್ನಡ 日本語 ଓଡ଼ିଆ Polski Português Română Shqip සිංහල Simple English Српски / srpski Svenska Türkçe 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Voluntary agreement to another's proposal This article is about consent in general. For consent to engage in sexual activity, see sexual consent . For other uses, see Consent (disambiguation) .

Part of the common law series Tort law ( Outline ) Trespass to the person Assault Battery False imprisonment Intentional infliction of emotional distress Property torts Trespass land chattels Conversion Dignitary torts Appropriation Defamation Unintentional False light Invasion of privacy Intrusion on seclusion Breach of confidence Abuse of process Malicious prosecution Sexual torts Alienation of affections Criminal conversation Seduction Breach of promise Negligent torts Negligent infliction of emotional distress Employment-related Entrustment Malpractice legal medical Principles of negligence Duty of care Trespassers Licensees Invitees Standard of care Reasonable person Proximate cause Res ipsa loquitur Restitutio ad integrum Rescue doctrine Duty to rescue Comparative responsibility Contributory negligence Attractive nuisance Strict and absolute liability Product liability Ultrahazardous activity Deep pockets Nuisance Public nuisance Rylands v Fletcher Economic torts Conspiracy Restraint of trade Insurance bad faith (American law) Fraud Tortious interference Defences Assumption of risk Consent Necessity Statute of limitations Self-defense Defense of others Defence of property Shopkeeper's privilege Neutral reportage Liability Intentional torts Last clear chance Eggshell skull Vicarious liability Respondeat superior Volenti non fit injuria Ex turpi causa non oritur actio Joint and several liability Market share liability Transferred intent Legal remedy Damages Punitive Special Incidental Injunction Tracing Detinue Replevin Trover Other topics in tort law Tort reform Non-economic damages caps Quasi-tort Delict (term used for torts in some civil and mixed legal systems ) Conflict of tort laws Private attorney general Class action By jurisdiction Australia Canada China England and Wales European Union India Japan Taiwan United States Other common law areas Contracts Criminal law Evidence Property Wills , trusts , and estates Law portal v t e Criminal law Elements Actus reus Mens rea Causation Concurrence Scope of criminal liability Accessory Accomplice Complicity Corporate Mandated reporter Principal Use of force continuum Vicarious Severity of offense Felony (or Indictable offense ) Misdemeanor (or Summary offense ) Infraction (also called violation) Inchoate offenses Attempt Conspiracy Incitement Solicitation Offense against the person Assassination Assault Battery Child abuse Concealment of a corpse Criminal negligence Domestic violence False imprisonment Frameup Harassment Street Home invasion Hate crime Homicide Human trafficking Intimidation Kidnapping Manslaughter ( corporate ) Mayhem Murder felony Homicide Negligent homicide Reckless homicide Robbery Stalking Stabbing Torture Sexual offenses Adultery Bigamy Child sexual abuse Cybersex trafficking Fornication Homosexuality Groping Incest Indecent exposure Masturbation Obscenity Prostitution Rape Pederasty Sex trafficking Sexual assault Sexual harassment Sexual slavery Voyeurism Crimes against property Arson Arms trafficking Blackmail Bribery Burglary Cybercrime Embezzlement Extortion False pretenses Forgery Fraud Gambling Intellectual property violation Larceny Looting Payola Pickpocketing Possessing stolen property Robbery Smuggling Parallel import Tax evasion Theft Trespass to land Vandalism Mischief Crimes against justice Against public justice Justice delayed Compounding Contempt Malfeasance in office Miscarriage of justice Judicial misconduct Misprision Perjury Perverting the course of justice Crimes against the public Apostasy Corruption Censorship violation Dueling Genocide Ethnic cleansing Hostage-taking Illegal immigration People smuggling Insider trading Smuggling Illegal consumption (such as drugs , alcohol , and smoking ) Miscegenation Piracy Political corruption Regicide Terrorism Unreported employment Usurpation War crimes Crimes against animals Cruelty to animals Poaching Wildlife smuggling Bestiality Crimes against the state Lèse-majesté Treason Espionage Secession Sedition Subversion Defenses to liability Actual innocence Automatism Consent Defense of property Diminished responsibility Duress Entrapment Ignorantia juris non excusat Infancy Insanity Intoxication Justification Might makes right Mistake ( of law ) Necessity Possession is nine-tenths of the law Provocation Sanctuary Self-defense Statute of limitations Other common-law areas Contracts Defenses Evidence Property Torts Wills , trusts and estates Portals Law v t e Consent occurs when one person voluntarily agrees to the proposal or desires of another.

[ 1 ] It is a term of common speech, with specific definitions used in such fields as the law , medicine , research , and sexual consent . Consent as understood in specific contexts may differ from its everyday meaning. For example, a person with a mental disorder , a low mental age , or under the legal age of sexual consent may willingly engage in a sexual act that still fails to meet the legal threshold for consent as defined by applicable law.

United Nations agencies and initiatives in sex education programs believe that teaching the topic of consent as part of a comprehensive sexuality education is beneficial.

[ 2 ] Types of consent include implied consent , express consent, informed consent and unanimous consent .

Types [ edit ] An express consent is one that is unmistakably stated, rather than implied. It may be given in writing , e.g.

contract , [ 3 ] by speech (orally), or non-verbally , e.g. by a clear gesture such as a nod. Non-written express consent not evidenced by witnesses or an audio or video recording may be disputed if a party denies that it was given.

Implied consent is consent inferred from a person's actions and the facts and circumstances of a particular situation (or in some cases, by a person's silence or inaction). Examples include unambiguously soliciting or initiating sexual activity or the implied consent to physical contact by participants in a hockey game or being assaulted in a boxing match.

Informed consent in medicine is consent given by a person who has a clear appreciation and understanding of the facts, implications, and future consequences of an action. The term is also used in other contexts, such as in social scientific research, when participants are asked to affirm that they understand the research procedure and consent to it, or in sex, where informed consent means each person engaging in sexual activity is aware of any positive statuses (for sexually transmitted infections and/or diseases) they might expose themselves to.

Unanimous consent , or general consent, by a group of several parties (e.g., an association ) is consent given by all parties.

Substituted consent, or the substituted judgment doctrine, allows a decision maker to attempt to establish the decision an incompetent person would have made if they were competent.

[ 4 ] Advance consent, where consent is given in advance, is generally considered not valid [ 5 ] with certain exceptions depending on jurisdiction for advance healthcare directives , [ 6 ] commercial contracts , [ 7 ] and other.

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] [ 10 ] Consent can be defined according to substantive equality .

[ 5 ] In international law, consent involves states, not individuals. Consent is a crucial principle of international law that necessitates the agreement of all relevant parties for any changes in rules to be legally binding. However, some legal scholars propose that a consensus among states, rather than the explicit consent of each state, may be the standard by which a rule is considered obligatory and enforceable.

[ 11 ] Internet and digital services [ edit ] The concept of end-user given consent plays an important role in digital regulations such as the European General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR).

[ 12 ] [ 13 ] The GDPR (Article 6) defines a set of different legal bases for lawful processing of personal data. End-users' consent is only one of these possible bases. However, as a result of the GDPR enforcement (in 2018) and other legal obligations, data controllers (online service providers) have widely developed consent-obtaining mechanisms in recent years.

[ 12 ] According to the GDPR, end-users' consent should be valid , freely given , specific , informed and active .

[ 12 ] But the lack of enforceability regarding obtaining lawful consents has been a challenge in the digital world. As an example, a 2020 study, showed that the Big Tech , i.e.

Google , Amazon , Facebook , Apple , and Microsoft (GAFAM), use dark patterns in their consent obtaining mechanisms, which raises doubts regarding the lawfulness of the obtained consent.

[ 12 ] Tort [ edit ] Main article: Tort Consent can be either expressed or implied. For example, participation in a contact sport usually implies consent to a degree of contact with other participants, implicitly agreed and often defined by the rules of the sport.

[ 14 ] Another specific example is where a boxer cannot complain of being punched on the nose by an opponent; implied consent will be valid where the violence is ordinarily and reasonably to be contemplated as incidental to the sport in question .

[ 15 ] Express consent exists when there is oral or written agreement, particularly in a contract. For example, businesses may require that persons sign a waiver (called a liability waiver ) acknowledging and accepting the hazards of an activity. This proves express consent, and prevents the person from filing a tort lawsuit for unauthorised actions.

[ citation needed ] In English law , the principle of volenti non fit injuria ( Latin : "to a willing person, injury is not done") applies not only to participants in sport, but also to spectators and to any others who willingly engage in activities where there is a risk of injury. Consent has also been used as a defense in cases involving accidental deaths during sex , which occur during sexual bondage .

Time (May 23, 1988) referred to this latter example, as the " rough-sex defense ". It is not effective in English law in cases of serious injury or death.

As a term of jurisprudence prior provision of consent signifies a possible defence (an excuse or justification) against civil or criminal liability.

Defendants who use this defense are arguing that they should not be held liable for a tort or a crime , since the actions in question took place with the plaintiff or "victim's" prior consent and permission.

[ citation needed ] Medicine [ edit ] See also: Informed consent In medical law, consent is important to protect a medical practitioner from liability for harm to a patient arising from a procedure. There are exemptions , such as when the patient is unable to give consent.

[ 4 ] Also, a medical practitioner must explain the significant risks of a procedure or medication (those that might change the patient's mind about whether or not to proceed with the treatment) before the patient can give a binding consent. This was explored in Australia in Rogers v Whitaker .

[ 16 ] If a practitioner does not explain a material risk that subsequently eventuates, then that is considered negligent.

[ 17 ] These material risks include the loss of chance of a better result if a more experienced surgeon had performed the procedure.

[ 18 ] In the UK , a Supreme Court judgment [ 19 ] modernized the law on consent and introduced a patient-focused test to UK law: allowing the patient rather than the medical professionals to decide upon the level of risk they wish to take in terms of a particular course of action, given all the information available.  This change reflects the Guidance of the General Medical Council on the requirement to consent patients, and removes the rule of medical paternalism.

[ 20 ] Social science research [ edit ] Social scientists are generally required to obtain informed consent from research participants before asking interview questions or conducting an experiment. Federal law governs social science research that involves human subjects , and tasks institutional review boards (IRBs) at universities, federal or state agencies, and tribal organizations to oversee social science research that involves human subjects and to make decisions about whether or not informed consent is necessary for a social scientific study to go forward.

[ 21 ] Informed consent in this context generally means explaining the study's purpose to research participants and obtaining a signed or verbal affirmation that the study participants understand the procedures to be used and to consent to participate in the study.

[ 22 ] : 51–55 Some types of social scientific research, such as psychological experiments, may use deception as part of the study; in these cases, researchers may not fully describe the procedures to participants, and thus participants are not fully informed. However, researchers are required to debrief participants immediately after the experiment is concluded. Certain populations are considered to be vulnerable, and in addition to informed consent, special protections must be made available to them. These include persons who are incarcerated, pregnant women, persons with disabilities, and persons who have a mental disability. Children are considered unable to provide informed consent.

[ 22 ] : 51–55 Planning law [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2019 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) Some countries, such as New Zealand with its Resource Management Act and its Building Act, use the term "consent" for the legal process that provide planning permission for developments like subdivisions, bridges or buildings. Achieving permission results in getting "Resource consent" or "Building consent".

Sexual activity [ edit ] See also: Sexual consent , Rape § Consent , and Sexual consent in law This section may lend undue weight to certain ideas, incidents, or controversies .

Please help improve it by rewriting it to create a more balanced presentation . Discuss and resolve this issue before removing this message.

( August 2019 ) In Canada, "consent means [...] the voluntary agreement of the complainant to engage in sexual activity" without abuse or exploitation of "trust, power or authority", coercion or threats.

[ 23 ] Consent can also be revoked at any moment.

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] The Supreme Court of British Columbia ruled that badgering alone, followed by an agreement, does not meet the threshold of coercion to vitiate consent.

[ 26 ] Sexual consent plays an important role in defining what sexual assault is, since sexual activity without consent by all parties is rape .

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] [ better source needed ] In the late 1980s, academic Lois Pineau argued that we must move towards a more communicative model of sexuality so that consent becomes more explicit and clear, objective and layered, with a more comprehensive model than "no means no" or "yes means yes".

[ 29 ] Many universities have instituted campaigns about consent. Creative campaigns with attention-grabbing slogans and images that market consent can be effective tools to raise awareness of campus sexual assault and related issues.

[ 30 ] Since the late 1990s, new models of sexual consent have been proposed. Specifically, the development of "yes means yes" and affirmative models, such as Hall's definition: "the voluntary approval of what is done or proposed by another; permission; agreement in opinion or sentiment." [ 24 ] Hickman and Muehlenhard state that consent should be "free verbal or nonverbal communication of a feeling of willingness' to engage in sexual activity." [ 31 ] Affirmative consent may still be limited since the underlying, individual circumstances surrounding the consent cannot always be acknowledged in the "yes means yes", or in the "no means no", model.

[ 27 ] Some individuals are unable to give consent.

Minors below a certain age, the age of sexual consent in that jurisdiction , are deemed not able to give valid consent by law to sexual acts. Likewise, persons with Alzheimer's disease or similar disabilities may be unable to give legal consent to sexual relations even with their spouse.

[ 32 ] Within literature, [ vague ] definitions surrounding consent and how it should be communicated have been contradictory, limited or without consensus.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Roffee argued that legal definition needs to be universal, so as to avoid confusion in legal decisions. He also demonstrated how the moral notion of consent does not always align with the legal concept. For example, some adult siblings or other family members may voluntarily enter into a relationship, however the legal system still deems this as incestual, and therefore a crime.

[ 33 ] Roffee argues that the use of particular language in the legislation regarding these familial sexual activities manipulates the reader to view it as immoral and criminal, even if all parties are consenting.

[ 34 ] Similarly, some children under the legal age of consent may knowingly and willingly choose to be in a sexual relationship. However the law does not view this as legitimate. Whilst there is a necessity for an age of consent, it does not allow for varying levels of awareness and maturity. Here it can be seen how a moral and a legal understanding do not always align.

[ 35 ] Initiatives in sex education programs are working towards including and foregrounding topics of and discussions of sexual consent, in primary, high school and college Sex Ed curricula.  In the UK, the Personal Social Health and Economic Education Association (PSHEA) is working to produce and introduce Sex Ed lesson plans in British schools that include lessons on "consensual sexual relationships," "the meaning and importance of consent" as well as " rape myths ".

[ 36 ] In U.S., California-Berkeley University has implemented affirmative and continual consent in education and in the school's policies.

[ 37 ] In Canada, the Ontario government has introduced a revised Sex Ed curriculum to Toronto schools, including new discussions of sex and affirmative consent, healthy relationships and communication.

[ 38 ] Affirmative consent [ edit ] Affirmative consent (enthusiastic yes) is when both parties agree to sexual conduct, either through clear, verbal communication or nonverbal cues or gestures.

[ 37 ] It involves communication and the active participation of people involved. This is the approach endorsed by colleges and universities in the U.S., [ 39 ] which describe consent as an "affirmative, unambiguous, and conscious decision by each participant to engage in mutually agreed-upon sexual activity." According to Yoon-Hendricks, a staff writer for Sex, Etc., "Instead of saying 'no means no,' 'yes means yes' looks at sex as a positive thing." Ongoing consent is sought at all levels of sexual intimacy regardless of the parties' relationship, prior sexual history or current activity ("Grinding on the dance floor is not consent for further sexual activity," a university policy reads).

[ 37 ] By definition, affirmative consent cannot be given if a person is intoxicated, unconscious or asleep.

There are 3 pillars often included in the description of sexual consent, or "the way we let others know what we're up for, be it a good-night kiss or the moments leading up to sex." They are: Knowing exactly what and how much I'm agreeing to Expressing my intent to participate Deciding freely and voluntarily to participate [ 37 ] To obtain affirmative consent, rather than waiting to say or for a partner to say "no", one gives and seeks an explicit "yes". This can come in the form of a smile, a nod or a verbal yes, as long as it is unambiguous, enthusiastic and ongoing. "There's varying language, but the language gets to the core of people having to communicate their affirmation to participate in sexual behavior," said Denice Labertew of the California Coalition Against Sexual Assault.

[ 37 ] "It requires a fundamental shift in how we think about sexual assault. It's requiring us to say women and men should be mutually agreeing and actively participating in sexual behavior." [ 37 ] Critiques of affirmative consent [ edit ] This section needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources in this section. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The above concept of affirmative consent has become more mainstream and promoted in public discourse, institutions and the workplace, especially following the #MeToo scandals. However, feminists from varying political backgrounds have voiced concerns and critiques of affirmative consent as a solution to both sexual assault and creating sexual equality and autonomy between all genders.

[ 40 ] If women, queer people and other marginalized groups are not free to say no, why would they be free to say yes?

[ 41 ] Feminists have been seeking for more transformative alternatives that go beyond a (verbal) agreement between sexual partners, examining the issue as a political question related to power structures, the influence of neoliberal perceptions of the self and the complexity of human desire.

Neoliberal contractualism and rationalism [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( August 2024 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) The common form of affirmative consent assumes that humans act as rational and independent beings who, at any point in any interaction, are fully aware of what they are (not) consenting to, whether they want to and are able to make a conscious, valid decision. Consent, as it is practiced now, thus requires us to rationalize desires and prioritizes thinking over feeling, and reason over emotions. The resulting consent is shaped in a neoliberal form of contractualism which makes a withdrawal of consent or a change in the conditions of the activity at stake rather challenging. This form of consent as a contract is assuming consent to happen between two (or more) individual and rational actors and it does not give room to forms of discomfort, vulnerability or discussion within the practice consented to. Additionally, this contractualism mostly relies on verbal, affirmative consent and overlooks non-verbal or alternative ways of consenting. The latter is rather essentializing signs of affirmation and, due to its reliance on verbal consent in form of understandable words, can be ableist by invalidating non-verbal consent. Furthermore, contractualism assumes consent to be rational by nature and implies that we always know rationally whether or not we want to consent to something. However, especially in the sphere of interpersonal sexual and non-sexual activities, our own needs or desires are not always rational but can rather be ambiguous, contradicting or unclear. Consent in the form of neoliberal contractualism is unable to include and reflect this ambiguity and the lack of rationality.

[ citation needed ] Socio-cultural vs legal debate [ edit ] Arguably, there is a distinction that is rarely made in the debate around consent: the socio-cultural and the legal. While talking about consent, arguments are often informed and talked about in a legal framework: What do we need to be protected in the current legal framework? Which formulations give the best protection to victims of sexual violence? However, when talking about this particular protection there is also a need for protection through prevention, a protection by society rather than the law.

While it is not necessarily a given that affirmative consent provides the best legal protection for victims without taking away their agency, there is another danger in linking the legal debate and our overall understanding of consent. Relying on the legal framework and presenting these as the question of consent takes away the need for change and discussion on the socio-cultural level that has the potential to offer even more complexity, flexibility and room to rethink our sexual and overall encounters beyond the protection against violence. A socio-cultural debate would be one around our needs, attitudes and behaviors and the changes needed, which arguably is a more complex debate to hold and handle.

[ 42 ] With a certain level of protection this complexity is needed though to rethink our encounters beyond the mantras of 'no means no' and 'only yes means yes', something that is not reductionist to be applied in a legal setting and that gives the possibility to imagine interactions beyond the current status quo.

[ 41 ] See also [ edit ] Wikiquote has quotations related to Consent .

Age of consent Assumption of risk Consent of the governed Pacta sunt servanda Saverland v Newton Prenuptial agreement Sex positive Sociocracy (decision-making by consent) Victim blaming Volenti non fit injuria Voluntary taxation Taxation as theft References [ edit ] ^ "consent, n ." (2nd ed.).

Oxford English Dictionary . 1989. Archived from the original on 2022-05-07 . Retrieved 2016-03-24 .

^ International technical guidance on sexuality education: An evidence-informed approach (PDF) . Paris: UNESCO. 2018. p. 56.

ISBN 978-92-3-100259-5 .

^ Barnett, Randy E. (8 March 2021).

"Contracts is Not Promise; Contract is Consent" .

Suffolk University Law Review .

45 : 647 . Retrieved 11 August 2024 .

^ a b Garner, Bryan (2011).

Black's Law Dictionary . West Publishing Co. p. 726.

^ a b Cunliffe, Emma (2012).

"Sexual Assault Cases in the Supreme Court of Canada: Losing Sight of Substantive Equality?" .

Supreme Court Law Review .

SSRN 2111652 . Retrieved 21 July 2024 .

^ Oliver, Jill; Petropanagos, Angel; Chidwick, Paula (9 May 2022).

"Final consent, advance consent and alleviating suffering in frail adults requesting MAiD" .

Canadian Medical Association Journal .

194 (18): E652.

doi : 10.1503/cmaj.81239 .

ISSN 0820-3946 .

PMC 9259404 .

PMID 35534025 .

^ "Choice, Consent, and Cycling: The Hidden Limitations of Consent" .

Mich. L. Rev . Retrieved 21 July 2024 .

^ Koshan, Jennifer (28 December 2016).

"Marriage and Advance Consent to Sex: A Feminist Judgment in R v. JA " .

Oñati Socio-Legal Series .

SSRN 2891024 . Retrieved 21 July 2024 .

^ Boni-Saenz, Alexander A. (8 March 2021).

"Sexual Advance Directives" .

Ala. L. Rev .

68 : 1 . Retrieved 21 July 2024 .

^ Grigorovich, Alisa; Kontos, Pia; Heesters, Ann; Martin, Lori Schindel; Gray, Julia; Tamblyn Watts, Laura (2022).

"Dementia and sexuality in long-term care: Incompatible bedfellows?" .

Dementia .

21 (4): 1077– 1097.

doi : 10.1177/14713012211056253 .

ISSN 1471-3012 .

PMC 9189437 .

PMID 34904897 .

^ Christoph Stumpf, "Consent and the Ethics of International Law Revisiting Grotius's System of States in a Secular Setting." Grotiana 41.1 (2020): 163-176.

^ a b c d Human, Soheil; Cech, Florian (2021).

"A Human-Centric Perspective on Digital Consenting: The Case of GAFAM" (PDF) . In Zimmermann, Alfred; Howlett, Robert J.; Jain, Lakhmi C. (eds.).

Human Centred Intelligent Systems . Smart Innovation, Systems and Technologies. Vol. 189. Singapore: Springer. pp.

139– 159.

doi : 10.1007/978-981-15-5784-2_12 .

ISBN 978-981-15-5784-2 .

S2CID 214699040 .

^ Skiera, Bernd (2022).

The impact of the GDPR on the online advertising market . Klaus Matthias Miller, Yuxi Jin, Lennart Kraft, René Laub, Julia Schmitt. Frankfurt am Main.

ISBN 978-3-9824173-0-1 .

OCLC 1303894344 .

{{ cite book }} :  CS1 maint: location missing publisher ( link ) ^ Example of permitted and regulated contact in sport - BBC Sport: Rugby Union: "... you can tackle an opponent in order to get the ball, as long as you stay within the rules." ^ Pallante v Stadiums Pty Ltd (No 1) [1976] VicRp 29 , [1976] VR 331 at 339, Supreme Court (Vic, Australia).

^ Rogers v Whitaker [1992] HCA 58 , (1992) 175 CLR 479, High Court (Australia).

^ Chester v Afshar [2004] UKHL 41 , [2005] 1 AC 134, House of Lords (UK).

^ Chappel v Hart [1998] HCA 55 , (1998) 195 CLR 232, High Court (Australia).

^ Montgomery v Lanarkshire Health Board [2015] UKSC 11 , [2015] AC 1430, Supreme Court (UK).

^ "Supreme Court decision changes doctor-patient relationship forever - Balfour+Manson" .

www.balfour-manson.co.uk . Archived from the original on 2018-01-18 . Retrieved 2018-01-18 .

^ Protection of Human Subjects, 45 C.F.R. § 46 (2020).

https://www.ecfr.gov/cgi-bin/text-idx?SID=58d96a013d3e34979d7d98ede819e917&mc=true&node=pt45.1.46&rgn=div5 ^ a b Chambliss, Daniel F.; Schutt, Russell K. (2016).

Making sense of the social world: methods of investigation (Fifth ed.). Los Angeles: Sage.

ISBN 9781483380612 .

OCLC 890179806 .

^ "Canadian Criminal Code" .

Canadian Criminal Code . 2015. Archived from the original on 3 April 2015.

Retrieved March 13, 2015.

^ a b Hall, David S. (10 August 1998). "Consent for Sexual Behavior in a College Student Population".

Electronic Journal of Human Sexuality .

1 .

^ "What Is Consent? | CARE Program" .

care.ucr.edu . Retrieved 2025-04-14 .

^ Giaschi, Christopher (6 February 2023).

"R. v. O.V.O" .

Supreme Court of British Columbia Justice Giaschi .

She gave no particulars of how he forced, coerced, or manipulated her. At best, her evidence was that the defendant badgered her to engage in sexual activity and that she eventually relented, gave into, or agreed to such requests.

^ a b c Roffee, James A. (2015). "When Yes Actually Means Yes".

Roffee James A., 'When Yes Actually Means Yes: Confusing Messages and Criminalising Consent' in Rape Justice: Beyond the Criminal Law eds. Powell A., Henry N., and Flynn A., Palgrave, 2015 . pp.

72– 91.

doi : 10.1057/9781137476159_5 .

ISBN 978-1-349-57052-2 .

^ a b Beres. A, Melanie (18 January 2007). " 'Spontaneous' Sexual Consent: An Analysis of Sexual Consent Literature".

Feminism & Psychology .

17 (93): 93.

doi : 10.1177/0959353507072914 .

S2CID 143271570 .

<!—|access-date=28 October 2013–> ^ Pineau, Lois (1989). "Date Rape: A Feminist Analysis".

Law and Philosophy .

8 (217): 217– 243.

doi : 10.1007/BF00160012 .

S2CID 144671456 .

^ Thomas KA, Sorenson SB, Joshi M. "Consent is good, joyous, sexy": A banner campaign to market consent to college students. Journal of American College Health. 2016; 64(8):639-650 ^ Hickman, S.E. and Muehlenhard, C.L. (1999) '"By the Semi-mystical Appearance of a Condom": How Young Women and Men Communicate Sexual Consent in Heterosexual Situations', The Journal of Sex Research 36: 258–72.

^ Pam Belluck (April 22, 2015).

"Iowa Man Found Not Guilty of Sexually Abusing Wife With Alzheimer's" .

The New York Times . Retrieved April 23, 2015 .

^ Roffee, J. A. (2014). "No Consensus on Incest? Criminalisation and Compatibility with the European Convention on Human Rights".

Human Rights Law Review .

14 (3): 541– 572.

doi : 10.1093/hrlr/ngu023 .

^ Roffee, James A. (2014). "The Synthetic Necessary Truth Behind New Labour's Criminalisation of Incest".

Social & Legal Studies .

23 : 113– 130.

doi : 10.1177/0964663913502068 .

S2CID 145292798 .

^ Roffee, James A. (2015). "When Yes Actually Means Yes".

Roffee, James (2015). When Yes Actually Means Yes in Rape Justice. 72 - 91 . pp.

72– 91.

doi : 10.1057/9781137476159_5 .

ISBN 9781137476159 .

^ Rawlinson, Kevin (9 March 2015). "Plans for sexual consent lessons in schools 'do not go far enough' ".

{{ cite journal }} : Cite journal requires |journal= ( help ) Retrieved March 13, 2015.

^ a b c d e f Grinberg, E. (29 September 2014).

"Enthusiastic yes in sex consent education" .

CNN . Retrieved March 10, 2015 .

^ Rushowy, Kristin (25 February 2015).

"In Ontario sex ed, consent the hot issue" .

The Toronto Star .

Retrieved March 10, 2015.

^ "Opinion | Affirmative consent: A primer" .

Washington Post .

ISSN 0190-8286 . Retrieved 2023-05-03 .

^ Sikka, Tina (May 2021).

"What to do about #MeToo? Consent, autonomy, and restorative justice: A case study" .

Sexuality, Gender & Policy .

4 (1): 24– 37.

doi : 10.1002/sgp2.12027 .

ISSN 2639-5355 .

^ a b Harris, Kate Lockwood (2018-03-04).

"Yes means yes and no means no, but both these mantras need to go: communication myths in consent education and anti-rape activism" .

Journal of Applied Communication Research .

46 (2): 155– 178.

doi : 10.1080/00909882.2018.1435900 .

ISSN 0090-9882 .

^ Meadows, Agnes (December 2021).

"Between desire and uncertainty: Tomorrow Sex Will be Good Again by Katherine Angel" .

Critical Quarterly .

63 (4): 126– 131.

doi : 10.1111/criq.12646 .

ISSN 0011-1562 .

v t e Tort law Intentional torts Assault Battery False imprisonment Intentional infliction of emotional distress Concepts Consent Necessity Self defense Property torts Trespass Conversion Detinue Replevin Trover Dignitary torts Defamation Invasion of privacy Breach of confidence Abuse of process Malicious prosecution Alienation of affections Economic torts Fraud Tortious interference Conspiracy Restraint of trade Nuisance Public nuisance Rylands v. Fletcher Negligence Duty of care Standard of care Proximate cause Res ipsa loquitur Calculus of negligence Rescue doctrine Duty to rescue Specific types of negligence Negligent infliction of emotional distress In employment Entrustment Malpractice Duty to visitors Trespassers Licensees Invitees Attractive nuisance Strict liability Product liability Ultrahazardous activity Defenses Comparative and contributory negligence Last clear chance Eggshell skull Small penis rule Vicarious liability Volenti non fit injuria Ex turpi causa non oritur actio Remedies Damages Injunction v t e Ethics Normative Consequentialism Deontology Care Particularism Pragmatic Role Suffering-focused Utilitarianism Virtue Applied Animal Artificial intelligence Bio Business Computer Discourse Economic Engineering Environmental Land Legal Machine Marketing Meat eating Media Medical Nursing Professional Programming Research Sexual Technology Terraforming Uncertain sentience Work Meta Absolutism Axiology Cognitivism Realism Naturalism Non-naturalism Subjectivism Ideal observer theory Divine command theory Constructivism Euthyphro dilemma Intuitionism Nihilism Non-cognitivism Emotivism Expressivism Quasi-realism Universal prescriptivism Rationalism Relativism Skepticism Universalism Value monism – Value pluralism Schools Buddhist Christian Protestant Confucian Epicurean Existentialist Feminist Islamic Jewish Kantian Rousseauian Stoic Tao Concepts Accountability Authority Autonomy Blame Common sense Compassion Conscience Consent Culture of life Desert Dignity Double standard Duty Equality Etiquette Eudaimonia Family values Fidelity Free will Good and evil Good Evil Problem of evil Greed Happiness Honour Ideal Immorality Importance Justice Liberty Loyalty Moral agency Moral courage Moral hierarchy Moral imperative Morality Norm Pacifism Political freedom Precept Punishment Rights Self-discipline Suffering Stewardship Sympathy Theodicy Torture Trust Utility Value Instrumental Intrinsic Japan Western Vice Virtue Vow Wrong Ethicists Confucius Mozi Socrates Plato Aristotle Diogenes Mencius Xunzi Cicero Augustine Valluvar Aquinas Spinoza Butler Hume Smith Kant Hegel Schopenhauer Bentham Mill Kierkegaard Sidgwick Nietzsche Moore Barth Tillich Bonhoeffer Foot Rawls Dewey Williams Mackie Anscombe Frankena MacIntyre Hare Singer Parfit Nagel Adams Taylor Azurmendi Korsgaard Nussbaum Works Nicomachean Ethics (c. 322 BC) Tirukkural (c. 450 CE) Ethics (Spinoza) (1677) Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel (1726) A Treatise of Human Nature (1740) The Theory of Moral Sentiments (1759) An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation (1780) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals (1785) Critique of Practical Reason (1788) Elements of the Philosophy of Right (1820) Either/Or (1843) Utilitarianism (1861) The Methods of Ethics (1874) On the Genealogy of Morality (1887) Principia Ethica (1903) A Theory of Justice (1971) Practical Ethics (1979) After Virtue (1981) Reasons and Persons (1984) Related Axiology Casuistry Descriptive ethics Ethics in religion Evolutionary ethics History of ethics Human rights Ideology Moral psychology Philosophy of law Political philosophy Population ethics Rehabilitation Secular ethics Social philosophy Category Outline Portal WikiProject v t e Worldview Related terms Basic beliefs / Beliefs Collective consciousness / Collective unconscious Conceptual system Context Conventional wisdom Conventions Cultural movement Epic poetry / National epics / World folk-epics Facts and factoids Framing Ideology Life stance Lifestyle Memes / Memeplex Mental model Metanarrative Mindset Norms Paradigm Philosophical theory Point of view Presuppositions Primal world beliefs Reality tunnel Schemata School of thought Set Social reality Theory of everything Umwelt Value system Aspects Biases Academic Attentional Attitude polarization Belief Cognitive list Collective narcissism Confirmation Congruence Cryptomnesia Cultural Ethnocentrism Filter bubble Homophily In-group favoritism Magical thinking Media Observational error Observer-expectancy Selective exposure Selective perception Self-deception Self-fulfilling prophecy Clever Hans effect placebo effect wishful thinking Status quo Stereotyping ethnic Change and maintenance Activism Argument Argumentum ad populum Attitude change Brainwashing Censorship Charisma Circular reporting Cognitive dissonance Critical thinking Crowd manipulation Cultural dissonance Deprogramming Echo chamber Education religious values Euphemism Excommunication Fearmongering Historical revisionism negationism Ideological repression Indoctrination Manipulation (psychology) Media manipulation Media regulation Missionaries Moral entrepreneurship Persuasion Polite fiction Political engineering Propaganda Propaganda model Proselytism Psychological warfare Religious conversion forced Religious persecution Religious uniformity Revolutions Rhetoric Self-censorship Social change Social control Social engineering Social influence Social progress Suppression of dissent Systemic bias Woozle effect Culture Anthropology cultural social Calendars Ceremonies Coronations Cross-cultural psychology Cultural psychology Doctrine Employment / Serfdom / Slavery Families Funerals / Burial Games Holidays Hygiene ritual Identity (philosophy) cultural Institutions Liminality Liturgy Marriage Myth and ritual Oaths Pilgrimages Play Rites of passage secular Rituals Social class / Social status / Caste Symbols Symbolic boundaries Worship Groupthink Abilene paradox Bandwagon effect Collectives Collective behavior animal Collective effervescence Collective intelligence Conformity Consensus theory Crowd psychology Cults Culture-bound syndromes Deindividuation Doublethink Emergence Emotional contagion Entitativity False consensus effect Folie à deux Group action Group cohesiveness Group dynamics Group emotion Group polarization Groupshift Herd behavior Holism Hysterical contagion Information cascade In-group and out-group Invisible hand Lynching Majoritarianism / Mob rule Mass action Mass psychogenic illness Milieu control Mobbing Moral panic Peer pressure Pluralistic ignorance Political correctness Pseudoconsensus Scapegoating Self-organization Social action Social behavior Social emotions Social exclusion Social facilitation animal Social group Social proof Social psychology Sociology Spontaneous order Status quo Stigmergy Swarm behaviour System justification Viral phenomena Knowledge Axioms tacit assumptions Conceptual framework Epistemology outline Evidence anecdotal scientific Explanations Faith fideism Gnosis Intuition Meaning-making Memory Meta-knowledge Methodology Observation Observational learning Perception Reasoning fallacious logic Revelation Testimony Tradition folklore Truth consensus theory criteria World disclosure Metaphysics Ætiology Afterlife Anima mundi Causality Concepts Consciousness mind–body problem Cosmogony Cosmology religious Creation myth Deities existence Destiny Eschatology Everything / Nothing Evolution Existence Fiction / Nonfiction Free will Future History Ideas Idios kosmos Illusions Incarnation Information Intelligence Magic Matter Miracles Mythology comparative National mythoi Nature philosophical Ontology Origin myths political Otherworlds axes mundi Physics natural philosophy Problem of evil Reality Souls Spirit Supernature Teleology Theology Time Unobservables Value Aesthetic taste Aesthetic Almsgiving / Charity Altruism Autonomy Beauty Codes of conduct Comedy Common good Conscience Consent Creativity Disgust Duty Economics Ecstasy emotional religious Elegance Emotions Aesthetic Entertainment Eroticism Ethics Étiquette Family values Food and drink prohibitions unclean animals Golden Rule Guilt / Culpability Happiness Harmony Honour Human rights Judgement Justice Law jurisprudence religious Liberty political freedom Love Magnificence Maxims Meaning of life Morality public Obligations Peace Piety Praxeology Principles Punishment Qualities Repentance Reverence Rights Sexuality ethics Sin Social stigma Stewardship Styles Sublime, The Suffering Sympathy Taboo Theodicy Trust Unspoken rules Virtues and Vices Works of art Wrongdoing Examples Attitudes Misanthropy Optimism Pessimism Reclusion Weltschmerz Economic and political ideologies Anarchism Authoritarianism Capitalism Christian democracy Collectivism Colonialism Communalism Communism Communitarianism Conservatism Constitutionalism Distributism Environmentalism Extremism Fanaticism Fascism Feminism Fundamentalism Globalism Green politics Imperialism Individualism Industrialisation Intellectualism Islamism Liberalism Libertarianism Masculism Militarism Monarchism Nationalism Pacifism Progressivism Radicalism Reformism Republicanism Sentientism Social democracy Socialism Utilitarianism Veganism Religions African traditional religions Baháʼí Buddhism Caodaism Cheondoism Chinese folk religion Christianity Eastern Orthodox Church Ethnic religions Hinduism Hòa Hảo Islam Jainism Judaism Korean shamanism Modern paganism Rastafari Secularity / Irreligion / Agnosticism / Atheism Shinto Sikhism Spiritism Taoism Tenrikyo Unitarian Universalism Zoroastrianism Schools of philosophy Agriculturalism Aristotelianism Atomism Averroism Cartesianism Cārvāka Collectivism Confucianism / New Confucianism Critical theory Cynicism Cyrenaics Determinism Dualism Eleatics Empiricism Epicureanism Eretrian school Existentialism Fatalism Foundationalism Hedonism Hegelianism Hermeneutics Historicism / New historicism Holism Humanism / Renaissance humanism Idealism Illuminationism ʿIlm al-Kalām Individualism Ionian Kantianism / Neo-Kantianism Kokugaku Legalism Logicians Materialism Megarian school Modernism / Postmodernism Mohism Monism Natural law Naturalism (Chinese) Naturalism (Western) Nihilism Peripatetic Phenomenology Platonism / Neoplatonism Pluralism Positivism Pragmatism Pre-Socratic Pyrrhonism Pythagoreanism / Neopythagoreanism Rationalism Reductionism Scholasticism / Neo-scholasticism Sentientism Social constructionism Sophism Spinozism Stoicism Structuralism / Post-structuralism Thomism Transcendentalism Utilitarianism Yangism Authority control databases National Germany 2 United States France BnF data Israel Other NARA İslâm Ansiklopedisi Yale LUX NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐api‐ext.codfw.main‐77f755c49c‐5fll6
Cached time: 20250817223901
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 1.013 seconds
Real time usage: 1.213 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 6173/1000000
Revision size: 33327/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 269115/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6780/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 16/100
Expensive parser function count: 16/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 185656/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.547/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 8139835/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  889.642      1 -total
 38.13%  339.258      1 Template:Reflist
 13.38%  119.059      3 Template:Cite_web
 13.08%  116.358     20 Template:Cite_journal
 10.60%   94.277      1 Template:Tort_law
 10.36%   92.199      1 Template:Sidebar
  8.35%   74.250      4 Template:Navbox
  7.70%   68.537      1 Template:Short_description
  5.48%   48.766      4 Template:Fix
  5.44%   48.432      7 Template:Cite_book Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:215934:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817223901 and revision id 1303517537. Rendering was triggered because: unknown Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Consent&oldid=1303517537 " Categories : Consent Tort law Autonomy Concepts in ethics Medical ethics Defense (legal) Hidden categories: CS1 maint: location missing publisher CS1 errors: missing periodical Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from August 2019 Articles with unsourced statements from May 2009 Articles needing additional references from August 2019 All articles needing additional references Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes from August 2019 All Wikipedia neutral point of view disputes All articles lacking reliable references Articles lacking reliable references from August 2019 All Wikipedia articles needing clarification Wikipedia articles needing clarification from August 2019 Articles needing additional references from August 2024 Articles with unsourced statements from August 2024 This page was last edited on 31 July 2025, at 12:59 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Consent 25 languages Add topic

