Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Location and description 2 Marielandia Antarctic tundra 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents West Antarctica 42 languages العربية Asturianu Azərbaycanca Беларуская Català Čeština Deutsch Ελληνικά Español Esperanto Euskara فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Հայերեն हिन्दी Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית ქართული Latviešu Македонски മലയാളം Nederlands 日本語 Norsk nynorsk Occitan Plattdüütsch Polski Português Română Русский Slovenščina Suomi Svenska Türkçe Українська اردو Tiếng Việt 粵語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikivoyage Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 79°S 100°W ﻿ / ﻿ 79°S 100°W ﻿ / -79; -100 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia 79°S 100°W ﻿ / ﻿ 79°S 100°W ﻿ / -79; -100 Part of Antarctica that lies within the Western Hemisphere Almost blank map of West Antarctica Labeled map of Antarctica, with West Antarctica on the left.

West Antarctica , or Lesser Antarctica , one of the two major regions of Antarctica , is the part of that continent that lies within the Western Hemisphere , and includes the Antarctic Peninsula . It is separated from East Antarctica by the Transantarctic Mountains and is covered by the West Antarctic Ice Sheet . It lies between the Ross Sea (partly covered by the Ross Ice Shelf ), and the Weddell Sea (largely covered by the Filchner-Ronne Ice Shelf ). It may be considered a giant peninsula , stretching from the South Pole towards the tip of South America.

West Antarctica is largely covered by the Antarctic ice sheet , but there have been signs that climate change is having some effect and that this ice sheet may have started to shrink slightly. Over the past 50 years, the west coast of the Antarctic Peninsula has been – and still is – one of the most rapidly warming parts of the planet, [ 1 ] [ 2 ] and the coasts of the Peninsula are the only parts of West Antarctica that become (in summer) ice-free. These constitute the Marielandia Antarctic tundra and have the warmest climate in Antarctica. The rocks are clad in mosses and lichens that can cope with the intense cold of winter and the short growing-season.

Location and description [ edit ] Geographical map of Antarctica Lying on the Pacific Ocean side of the Transantarctic Mountains, West Antarctica comprises the Antarctic Peninsula (with Graham Land and Palmer Land ) and Ellsworth Land , Marie Byrd Land and King Edward VII Land , offshore islands such as Adelaide Island , and ice shelves , notably the Filchner-Ronne Ice Shelf on the Weddell Sea , and the Ross Ice Shelf on the Ross Sea .

West Antarctica was named in the early 20th century.

[ 3 ] That usage became standard following the International Geophysical Year (1957–1958) and explorations which disclosed that the Transantarctic Mountains provide a useful regional border between West Antarctica and East Antarctica . The Advisory Committee on Antarctic Names approved the name in 1962.

West Antarctica is mostly covered by a massive ice sheet referred to as the West Antarctic Ice Sheet .  In recent decades, this ice sheet has shown signs of decreasing mass.

[ 4 ] The geologic history of West Antarctica was summarized in a 2020 publication.

[ 5 ] Marielandia Antarctic tundra [ edit ] The parts of West Antarctica not covered with ice ( Antarctic oasis ), which are the coasts of the Antarctic Peninsula , constitute a biodiversity region known as Marielandia Antarctic tundra (after Marie Byrd Land ).

[ 6 ] This area has the warmest climate in Antarctica and the moss and lichen -covered rocks are free of snow during the summer months, although the weather is still intensely cold and the growing season very short.

See also [ edit ] Tectonic evolution of the Transantarctic Mountains West Antarctic Rift System References [ edit ] This article incorporates public domain material from "West Antarctica" .

Geographic Names Information System .

United States Geological Survey .

^ "Impacts of climate change" .

Discovering Antarctica . Retrieved 2021-11-20 .

^ "WMO verifies one temperature record for Antarctic continent and rejects another" .

public.wmo.int . 2021-06-30 . Retrieved 2021-11-20 .

^ Balch, 1902; Nordenskiöld , 1905) ^ "Antarctic ice sheet is an 'awakened giant' " .

New Scientist . 2 February 2005 . Retrieved 2008-01-26 .

^ Jordan, Tom A.; Riley, Teal R.; Siddoway, Christine S. (2020). "The geological history and evolution of West Antarctica".

Nature Reviews Earth & Environment .

1 (2): 117– 133.

doi : 10.1038/s43017-019-0013-6 .

ISSN 2662-138X .

^ World Wildlife Fund, ed. (2001).

"Marielandia Antarctic tundra" .

WildWorld Ecoregion Profile . National Geographic Society. Archived from the original on 2010-03-08 . Retrieved 2008-01-26 .

v t e West Antarctica Areas Antarctic Peninsula Graham Land Palmer Land Ellsworth Land English Coast Bryan Coast Eights Coast King Edward VII Land Shirase Coast Marie Byrd Land Walgreen Coast Bakutis Coast Hobbs Coast Ruppert Coast Saunders Coast Queen Elizabeth Land Major ice shelves Abbot Ice Shelf Filchner–Ronne Ice Shelf Getz Ice Shelf Larsen Ice Shelf Ross Ice Shelf Sulzberger Ice Shelf Seas and major islands Amundsen Sea Dean Island Grant Island Siple Island Bellingshausen Sea Adelaide Island Alexander Island Latady Island Rothschild Island Sherman Island Smyley Island Spaatz Island Thurston Island Ross Sea Ross Island Scotia Sea Southern Ocean Anvers Island Brabant Island Charcot Island Coronation Island D'Urville Island Elephant Island Joinville Island King George Island Livingston Island Renaud Island Weddell Sea James Ross Island Hearst Island v t e Antarctica Geography South Pole Antarctic sea ice Climate Climate change Heat waves Ice shelves Geology Glaciers Mountains Tundra Volcanoes Regions Biogeographic realm Antarctic Peninsula East Antarctica ice sheet shield Extreme points Floristic kingdom Islands Ridge A South Pole (region) South magnetic pole West Antarctica ice sheet Bodies of water Antarctic/Southern Ocean Lake CECs Lake Mercer Lake Vostok List of rivers McMurdo Sound Ross Sea Weddell Sea Life Flora Microorganisms Wildlife Birds Mammals Krill History Expeditions Heroic Age World War II Colonization COVID-19 pandemic Years Politics Council of Managers of National Antarctic Programs Military activity National programs Territorial claims Treaty System Society Antarctica Day Antarctic English Crime Demographics Economy Field camps Firefighting Flags Food Gateway cities Midwinter Day Protected areas Religion Research stations Telecommunications Time Tourism Transport Women Antarctica Weather Danger Classification Famous explorers Roald Amundsen Richard E. Byrd Douglas Mawson Ui-te-Rangiora (legendary) James Clark Ross Robert Falcon Scott Ernest Shackleton Category Commons Index v t e Earth 's polar regions Antarctic Antarctic Peninsula East Antarctica West Antarctica Eklund Islands Ecozone Extreme points Islands Arctic Arctic Alaska British Arctic Territories Canadian Arctic Archipelago Finnmark Greenland Northern Canada Northwest Territories Nunavik Nunavut Russian Arctic Sakha Sápmi Yukon North American Arctic Authority control databases International VIAF National Germany Czech Republic Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=West_Antarctica&oldid=1249144361 " Categories : West Antarctica Regions of Antarctica Tundra Geography of Antarctica Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Coordinates on Wikidata Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the USGS Geographic Names Information System This page was last edited on 3 October 2024, at 12:45 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents West Antarctica 42 languages Add topic

