Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Sources 2 The End of Days Toggle The End of Days subsection 2.1 War of Gog and Magog 2.2 Events to occur 3 Biblical Sheol 4 World to come Toggle World to come subsection 4.1 Second Temple period 4.2 Medieval rabbinical views 4.3 Rabbinic legends 4.4 Resurrection of the dead 4.5 The last judgment 4.6 In contemporary Judaism 5 Jewish messianism Toggle Jewish messianism subsection 5.1 Early Second Temple period (516 BCE – c.220 BCE) 5.2 Later Second Temple period (c.220 BCE – 70 CE) 5.3 Talmud 5.4 Rabbinic commentaries 5.5 Contemporary views 5.5.1 Orthodox Judaism 5.5.2 Conservative Judaism 5.5.3 Reform Judaism 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Jewish eschatology 16 languages العربية বাংলা Català Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français 한국어 Italiano Malagasy پنجابی Português Русский اردو 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Area of Jewish theology Part of a series on Eschatology Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Christian Biblical texts Book of Revelation Book of Daniel Olivet Discourse Sheep and Goats Major figures Jesus Two witnesses Four Horsemen Antichrist Different views Preterism Idealism Historicism Futurism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Other events Events of Revelation ( Apocalypse ) Rapture Armageddon Seven Seals Second Coming Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Pralaya Shiva Islamic Figures Beast of the Earth Dhul-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Isa Israfil Mahdi Dajjal Muhammad Al-Qa'im Sufyani Yajuj and Majuj Events Swallowing in Bayda Coming of the Mahdi Return of Isa Resurrection Jewish Biblical texts Book of Isaiah Book of Ezekiel Book of Zechariah Book of Daniel Other sources Rabbinic literature ( Mishnah , Talmud , Midrash ) Medieval Jewish scholars Kabbalah Figures Elijah the Prophet , Messiah ( Mashiach Ben David , Mashiach Ben Yosef ), Gog and Magog , Armilus Events and terms Atchalta De'Geulah , Kibbutz Galuyot , Third Temple , War of Gog and Magog , Resurrection of the dead , Olam Haba Norse Figures and items Bound monster Gjallarhorn Líf and Lífþrasir Naglfar Events Fimbulwinter Ragnarök Vígríðr Taoist Li Hong Divine Incantations Scripture Zoroastrian Frashokereti Saoshyant Inter-religious 2012 phenomenon Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Gog and Magog Last Judgment Messianism ( Messiah / Age ) Millenarianism Universal resurrection v t e Part of a series on Judaism Movements Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Modern Conservative Conservadox Reform Karaite Reconstructionist Renewal Humanistic Haymanot Lemba Philosophy Principles of faith Kabbalah Messiah Ethics Chosenness God Names Musar movement Texts Tanakh Torah Nevi'im Ketuvim Ḥumash Siddur Piyutim Zohar Rabbinic Mishnah Talmud Midrash Tosefta Law Mishneh Torah Tur Shulchan Aruch Mishnah Berurah Aruch HaShulchan Kashrut Tzniut Tzedakah Niddah Noahide laws Holy cities / places Jerusalem Safed Hebron Tiberias Synagogue Beth midrash Mikveh Sukkah Chevra kadisha Holy Temple Tabernacle Important figures Abraham Isaac Jacob Moses Aaron David Solomon Sarah Rebecca Rachel Leah Rabbinic sages Chazal Tannaim Amoraim Savoraim Geonim Rishonim Acharonim Religious roles Rabbi Rebbe Posek Hazzan Dayan Rosh yeshiva Mohel Kohen Culture and education Brit Zeved habat Pidyon haben Bar and bat mitzvah Marriage Bereavement Yeshiva Kollel Cheder Ritual objects Sefer Torah Tallit Tefillin Tzitzit Kippah Mezuzah Menorah Shofar Four species Etrog Lulav Hadass Arava Kittel Gartel Prayers Shema Amidah Aleinu Kaddish Minyan Birkat Hamazon Shehecheyanu Hallel Havdalah Tachanun Kol Nidre Selichot (S'lichot) Major holidays Rosh Hashanah Yom Kippur Sukkot Pesach Shavuot Purim Hanukkah Other religions Christianity Hinduism Islam Mormonism Samaritanism Abrahamic religions Judeo-Christian Pluralism Related topics Jews Zionism Israel Criticism Antisemitism Anti-Judaism Holocaust theology Music Jesus Muhammad Judaism portal v t e Part of a series on Jewish philosophy Hellenistic Positions: Hasmonean Sadducean Pharisee Boethusian People: Aristobulus of Alexandria Philo of Alexandria Medieval Influenced by: Brethren of Purity ibn Bajjah (Avempace) Ismaili philosophy Jewish Kalam Kabbalah Rabbinic Judaism Spanish and European: Hasdai ibn Shaprut Ibn Gabirol Abraham bar Hiyya Bahya ibn Paquda Judah Halevi Abraham ibn Daud Joseph ibn Tzaddik Abraham ibn Ezra Maimonides Nachmanides Samuel ibn Tibbon Joseph ben Judah Shem-Tov ibn Falaquera Gersonides Moses of Narbonne Isaac ben Sheshet Hasdai Crescas Joseph Albo Elia del Medigo Judah Minz Isaac Abarbanel Judah Leon Abravanel Yemenite: Natan'el al-Fayyumi Mansur ibn Sulayman al-Ghamari Other: Isaac Israeli Saadia Gaon al-Muqqamaṣ Hibatullah ibn Malka Ibn Kammuna Positions: Maimonidean / Anti-Maimonidean Kabbalist Karaism Talmudic Tosafist Modern Positions: Orthodox Sephardic Chabad Chassidic Conservative Reform Existentialist Reconstructionist Holocaust Renewal Neo-Hasidic Mussar Rambamist People: Francisco Sanches Uriel da Costa Baruch Spinoza Salomon Maimon Joseph Solomon Delmedigo Elijah Ba'al Shem of Chelm Eliezer ben Elijah Ashkenazi Tzvi Ashkenazi Jacob Emden Samuel Hirsch Shneur Zalman of Liadi Simcha Bunim of Peshischa Samson Raphael Hirsch Jacob Abendana Isaac Cardoso David Nieto Isaac Orobio de Castro Moses Mendelssohn Samuel David Luzzatto Elijah Benamozegh Moses Hess Eliezer Berkovits Eliyahu Dessler Monsieur Chouchani Emmanuel Levinas Martin Buber Gershom Scholem Abraham Isaac Kook Joseph Soloveitchik Menachem Mendel Schneerson Topics Anger Chosen people Cosmology Eschatology Ethics Faith God Happiness Holiness Holocaust Messiah Microcosm–macrocosm Righteousness v t e Jewish eschatology is the area of Jewish theology concerned with events that will happen in the end of days and related concepts. This includes the ingathering of the exiled diaspora , the coming of the Jewish Messiah , the afterlife , and the resurrection of the dead . In Judaism , the end times are usually called the "end of days" ( aḥarit ha-yamim , אחרית הימים), a phrase that appears several times in the Tanakh .

These beliefs have evolved over time, and according to some authors there is evidence of Jewish belief in a personal afterlife with reward or punishment referenced in the Torah .

Sources [ edit ] In Judaism , the main textual source for the belief in the end of days and accompanying events is the Tanakh or Hebrew Bible . The roots of Jewish eschatology are to be found in the pre- exile prophets , including Isaiah and Jeremiah , and the exilic prophets Ezekiel and Deutero-Isaiah . The main tenets of Jewish eschatology are the following, in no particular order, elaborated in the Book of Isaiah , the Book of Jeremiah , and the Book of Ezekiel .

[ 1 ] The End of Days [ edit ] War of Gog and Magog [ edit ] Main article: Gog and Magog According to Ezekiel 38 , the "war of Gog and Magog" is a climactic war that will happen at the end of the Jewish exile. According to biblical commentator and rabbi David Kimhi , this war will take place in Jerusalem .

[ 2 ] Events to occur [ edit ] This section does not cite any sources .

Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed .

( April 2021 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) God redeems the Jewish people from their captivity that began with the Babylonian captivity , in a new Exodus ( Kibbutz Galuyot ) God returns the Jewish people to the Land of Israel God restores the kingly House of David and the Temple in Jerusalem God appoints a regent from the House of David (i.e., the Messiah ) to lead the Jewish people and the world and usher in the Messianic Age , which is characterised by justice, righteousness, and peace All the gentile nations recognize Israel's God as the only true God and gather to the Mount Zion God resurrects the dead and judges all souls (and sends some for a year to Gehinnom ) God creates a new Heaven and new Earth Biblical Sheol [ edit ] Main article: Sheol The Hebrew Bible reflects the belief of the Israelites in an arguably Hades -like afterworld, where both the righteous (see Samuel ) and the unrighteous continue to exist in a miserable manner.

World to come [ edit ] See also: World to come The afterlife is known as olam ha-ba ( Hebrew : עולם הבא , lit.

'coming world', 'next world'), [ 3 ] [ 4 ] being related to the concepts of Gan Eden — heavenly " Garden in Eden ", or Paradise —and Gehinnom .

[ 5 ] The phrase " olam ha-ba " itself does not occur in the Hebrew Bible . In Jewish theology, the widely accepted halakha is that it is impossible for living human beings to know what the world to come is like.

[ 6 ] Second Temple period [ edit ] In the late Second Temple period , beliefs about the ultimate fate of individuals were diverse. The Pharisees and Essenes believed in the immortality of the soul , but the Sadducees did not.

[ 7 ] The Dead Sea Scrolls , Jewish pseudepigrapha , and Jewish magical papyri all reflect this variety of opinions.

Medieval rabbinical views [ edit ] While classical rabbinic sources discuss the afterlife, medieval scholars disputed the nature of individuals' continued existence after the Messianic Age . While Maimonides describes an entirely spiritual existence for souls, which he calls "disembodied intellects", Nachmanides proposed a spiritual existence on Earth wherein spirituality and physicality are merged. Both agree that life after death is, as Maimonides describes, the "End of Days". This existence entails a heightened understanding of and connection to the Shekhinah . All classical rabbinic scholars share this latter view.

[ 8 ] According to Maimonides, any non-Jew who lives according to the Seven Laws of Noah is regarded as a righteous gentile and assured a place in the world to come (the final reward of the righteous).

[ 9 ] [ 10 ] There is a great deal of surviving rabbinic material concerning the fate of the soul after death, its experiences, and where it goes. At various points in the afterlife journey, the soul may encounter: hibbut ha-kever , the pains and other experiences of physico-spiritual dissolution or reconfiguration within the grave; Dumah , the angel in charge of funerary matters; Satan , as the angel of death or another equally grim figure; the Kaf ha-Kela , the ensnarement or confinement of the stripped-down soul within ghostly material reallocations, described in chapter 8 of the Tanya , Chabad 's primary philosophical text, [ 11 ] as devised for the cleansing of souls needing punishment not severe enough to warrant Gehinnom ; Gehinnom ; and Gan Eden (a place of heavenly respite or paradise characterized by spiritual purity). Classical rabbinic scholars agree that these concepts are beyond typical human understanding, so these ideas are expressed throughout rabbinic literature as parables and analogies.

[ 8 ] Gehenna is fairly well defined in the rabbinic literature . It is sometimes translated as "hell" but is more similar to Nicene Christianity 's purgatory than to its Hell . Rabbinic thought maintains that souls are not tortured in Gehenna forever; the longest that one can be there is said to be eleven months, with the exception of heretics and the exceedingly sinful.

[ 12 ] This is why Jews mourning for near relatives will not recite mourner's kaddish for more than eleven months after death.

Gehinnom is considered a spiritual forge whereby the soul is purified for its eventual ascent to Gan Eden (Garden of Eden).

Rabbinic legends [ edit ] The rabbinic literature includes many legends about the world to come and the two Gardens of Eden. As compiled by Louis Ginzberg in the book Legends of the Jews , these include the world to come, called Paradise and said to have a double gate made of carbuncle that is guarded by 600,000 shining angels.

[ 13 ] Seven clouds of glory overshadow Paradise, and under them, in the center of Paradise, stands the Tree of Life .

[ 13 ] The Tree of Life overshadows Paradise, too; it has fifteen thousand different tastes and aromas, blown by wind throughout.

[ 13 ] Under the Tree of Life are many pairs of canopies, one of the stars and the other of sun and moon, while a "cloud of glory" separates the two. In each pair of canopies sits a rabbinic scholar who explains the Torah to the soul.

[ 13 ] When one enters Paradise, one is proffered by Michael the archangel to God on the altar of the Temple in the heavenly Jerusalem.

[ 14 ] The soul is transfigured into an angel, with the ugliest person becoming as beautiful and shining as "the grains of a silver pomegranate upon which fall the rays of the sun".

[ 13 ] The angels that guard Paradise's gate adorn the soul in seven clouds of glory, crown it with gems, pearls, and gold, place eight myrtles in its hand, and praise it for being righteous before leading it to a garden of eight hundred roses and myrtles watered by many rivers.

[ 13 ] In the Garden is one's own canopy, its beauty according to one's merit, but each canopy has four rivers—milk, honey, wine, and balsam —flowing out from it, and has a golden vine and thirty shining pearls hanging from it.

[ 13 ] Under each canopy is a table of gems and pearls attended to by sixty angels.

[ 13 ] The light of Paradise is the light of the righteous souls therein.

[ 13 ] Each day in Paradise, one wakes up as a child and goes to bed as an elder, enjoying the pleasures of childhood, youth, adulthood, and old age.

[ 13 ] In each corner of Paradise is a forest of 800,000 trees, the least among these greater than the best herbs and spices, [ 13 ] attended to by 800,000 sweetly singing angels.

[ 13 ] Paradise is divided into seven sub-paradises, each 120,000 miles long and wide.

[ 13 ] Depending on its merit, a soul is assigned to one of these sections of Paradise: the first is made of glass and cedar and is for converts to Judaism ; the second is of silver and cedar and is for penitents; the third is of silver, gold, gems, and pearls, and is for the Patriarchs , Moses and Aaron , the Israelites who fled Egypt and lived in the wilderness, and the kings of Israel; the fourth is of rubies and olive wood and is for the holy and steadfast of faith; the fifth is like the third, except a river flows through it and its bed was woven by Eve and the angels and is for the Messiah and Elijah ; and the sixth and seventh divisions are not described, except that they are respectively for those who died doing pious acts and those who died from illness in expiation for Israel's sins.

[ 13 ] Above this Paradise is the higher Gan Eden , where God is enthroned and explains the Torah to its inhabitants.

[ 13 ] The higher Gan Eden contains 310 worlds and is divided into seven compartments.

[ 13 ] The compartments are not described, though it is implied that each compartment is greater than the previous one and is made open to a soul based on its merit.

[ 13 ] The first compartment is for Jewish martyrs , the second for those who drowned, the third for "Rabban Yohanan ben Zakkai and his disciples", the fourth for those whom the "cloud of glory" carried off, the fifth for penitents, the sixth for youths who never sinned, and the seventh for the poor who lived decently and studied the Torah.

[ 13 ] Resurrection of the dead [ edit ] Resurrection of the dead, fresco from the Dura-Europos synagogue Main article: Resurrection of the dead § Rabbinic and Samaritan Judaism An early explicit mention of resurrection in Hebrew texts is the Vision of the Valley of Dry Bones in the Book of Ezekiel , dated c.

539 BCE. Alan Segal argues that this narrative was intended as a metaphor for national rebirth, promising the Jews' return to Israel and reconstruction of the Temple , not as a description of personal resurrection.

[ 15 ] The Book of Daniel promised literal resurrection to the Jews in concrete detail. Alan Segal interprets Daniel as writing that with the coming of the archangel Michael , misery would beset the world, and only those whose names were written a divine book would be resurrected.

[ 15 ] Moreover, Daniel's promise of resurrection was intended only for the most righteous and the most sinful: the afterlife was a place for righteous individuals to be rewarded and unrighteous individuals to receive eternal punishment.

[ 15 ] Greek and Persian culture influenced early Jewish beliefs of an afterlife between the 6th and 4th centuries BCE, as well.

[ 15 ] The Hebrew Bible , at least its rabbinic interpretation in tractate Sanhedrin , contains frequent references to the resurrection of the dead .

[ 16 ] The Mishnah lists belief in the resurrection of the dead as one of three essential beliefs of Judaism: All Israel have a portion in the world to come, for it is written: 'Thy people are all righteous; they shall inherit the land forever, the branch of my planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified.' But the following have no portion therein: one who maintains that resurrection is not a biblical doctrine, the Torah was not divinely revealed, and an Apikoros ('heretic').

[ 12 ] In the late Second Temple period , the Pharisees and Essenes believed in resurrection , while Sadducees did not.

[ 7 ] During the period of Chazal , signaling the adoption of resurrection into the Jewish canon.

[ 15 ] Jewish liturgy , most notably the Amidah , contains references to the bodily resurrection of the dead.

[ 17 ] In contemporary Judaism, both Orthodox Judaism and Conservative Judaism maintain the traditional references to it in their liturgy.

[ 18 ] However, Conservative Jewish leadership has officially acknowledged metaphorical rather than literal interpretations, too.

[ 19 ] Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism have altered traditional references to the resurrection of the dead in the liturgy, revising "who gives life to the dead" to "who gives life to all" in the second blessing of the Amidah .

The last judgment [ edit ] In Judaism, the day of judgment happens every year on Rosh Hashanah ; therefore, a future "last day" of judgment for all humankind is disputed. Some hold that there will be such a day following the resurrection of the dead. Others maintain that there is no need for that because of Rosh Hashanah. Yet others hold that this accounting and judgment happens when one dies. Others contend that the last judgment only applies to the gentile nations and not the Jewish people.

[ 20 ] In contemporary Judaism [ edit ] Irving Greenberg Irving Greenberg , representing an Open Orthodox viewpoint, describes the afterlife as a central Jewish teaching deriving from the belief in reward and punishment. According to Greenberg, suffering medieval Jews emphasized the world to come as a counterpoint to the difficulties of this life, while early Jewish modernizers portrayed Judaism as interested only in this world as a counterpoint to "otherworldly" Christianity. Greenberg sees each of these views as leading to an undesired extreme—overemphasizing the afterlife leads to asceticism while devaluing the afterlife deprives Jews of the consolation of eternal life and justice—and calls for a synthesis, in which Jews can work to perfect this world, while also recognizing the immortality of the soul.

[ 21 ] Conservative Judaism both affirms belief in the world beyond (as referenced in the Amidah and Maimonides's principles of faith ) while recognizing that human understanding is limited and we cannot know exactly what the world beyond consists of. Reform and Reconstructionist Judaism affirm belief in the afterlife, though they downplay the theological implications in favor of emphasizing the importance of the "here and now" as opposed to reward and punishment. The Union for Reform Judaism believes the righteous of any faith have a place in heaven but does not believe in a concept of hell.

[ 22 ] Jewish messianism [ edit ] Main article: Messiah in Judaism The Hebrew word mashiach (or moshiach ) refers to the Jewish idea of the messiah. In biblical times the title mashiach was awarded to someone in a high position of nobility and greatness. For example, Cohen ha-Mašíaḥ means High Priest . While the name of the Jewish Messiah is considered to be one of the things that precede creation, [ 23 ] he is not considered divine, in contrast to Christianity where Jesus is both divine and the Messiah.

In the Talmudic era the title Mashiach or מלך המשיח, Méleḵ ha-Mašíaḥ literally means "the anointed King". The Messiah is to be a human leader, physically descended from the Davidic line , who will rule and unite the people of Israel [ 24 ] and will usher in the Messianic Age [ 25 ] of global and universal peace.

[ 26 ] Early Second Temple period (516 BCE – c.220 BCE) [ edit ] Main article: Second Temple period Early in the Second Temple period hopes for a better future are described in the Jewish scriptures.

[ 27 ] After the return from the Babylonian exile, Cyrus the Great was called " messiah " in Isaiah, due to his role in the return of the Jews exiles.

[ 27 ] Later Second Temple period (c.220 BCE – 70 CE) [ edit ] Further information: Apocalypticism § Judaism A number of messianic ideas developed during the later Second Temple Period, ranging from this-worldy, political expectations, to apocalyptic expectations of an endtime in which the dead would be resurrected and the Kingdom of Heaven would be established on earth.

[ 27 ] The Messiah might be a kingly " son of David " or a more heavenly " son of man ", but "Messianism became increasingly eschatological, and eschatology was decisively influenced by apocalypticism," while messianic expectations became increasingly focused on the figure of an individual savior.

[ 27 ] According to Zwi Werblowsky , "the Messiah no longer symbolized the coming of the new age, but he was somehow supposed to bring it about. The "Lord's anointed" thus became the "savior and redeemer" and the focus of more intense expectations and doctrines." [ 27 ] Messianic ideas developed both by new interpretations ( pesher , midrash ) of the Jewish scriptures, but also by visionary revelations.

[ 27 ] Talmud [ edit ] A full set of the Babylonian Talmud The Babylonian Talmud (200–500 CE), tractate Sanhedrin , contains a long discussion of the events leading to the coming of the Messiah.

[ note 1 ] Throughout their history Jews have compared these passages (and others) to contemporary events in search of signs of the Messiah's imminent arrival, continuing into present times.

The Talmud tells many stories about the Messiah, some of which represent famous Talmudic rabbis as receiving personal visitations from Elijah the Prophet and the Messiah.

[ note 2 ] Rabbinic commentaries [ edit ] Monument to Maimonides in Córdoba In rabbinic literature , the rabbis elaborated and explained the prophecies that were found in the Hebrew Bible along with the oral law and rabbinic traditions about its meaning.

[ 1 ] Maimonides ' commentary to tractate Sanhedrin stresses a relatively naturalistic interpretation of the Messiah, de-emphasizing miraculous elements. His commentary became widely (although not universally) accepted in the non- or less-mystical branches of Orthodox Judaism .

[ 29 ] [ note 3 ] Contemporary views [ edit ] Orthodox Judaism [ edit ] The belief in a human Messiah of the Davidic line is a universal tenet of faith among Orthodox Jews and one of Maimonides ' thirteen principles of faith .

Some authorities in Orthodox Judaism believe that this era will lead to supernatural events culminating in a bodily resurrection of the dead. Maimonides, on the other hand, holds that the events of the Messianic Era are not specifically connected with the resurrection.

Conservative Judaism [ edit ] Conservative Judaism varies in its teachings. While it retains traditional references to a personal redeemer and prayers for the restoration of the Davidic line in the liturgy, Conservative Jews are more inclined to accept the idea of a Messianic Era: We do not know when the Messiah will come, nor whether he will be a charismatic human figure or is a symbol of the redemption of mankind from the evils of the world. Through the doctrine of a Messianic figure, Judaism teaches us that every individual human being must live as if he or she, individually, has the responsibility to bring about the messianic age. Beyond that, we echo the words of Maimonides based on the prophet Habakkuk (2:3) that though he may tarry, yet do we wait for him each day... ( Emet ve-Emunah: Statement of Principles of Conservative Judaism ) [ 31 ] Reform Judaism [ edit ] Reform Judaism generally concurs with the more liberal Conservative perspective of a future Messianic Era rather than a human Messiah.

[ 32 ] See also [ edit ] Saoshyant Notes [ edit ] ^ For example: "R. Johanan said: When you see a generation ever dwindling, hope for him [the Messiah], as it is written, and the afflicted people thou wilt save. R. Johanan said: When thou seest a generation overwhelmed by many troubles as by a river, await him, as it is written, when the enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him; which is followed by, and the Redeemer shall come to Zion.

R. Johanan also said: The son of David will come only in a generation that is either altogether righteous or altogether wicked. 'In a generation that is altogether righteous,' — as it is written, Thy people also shall be all righteous: they shall inherit the land for ever. 'Or altogether wicked,' — as it is written, And he saw that there was no man, and wondered that there was no intercessor;31 and it is [elsewhere] written, For mine own sake, even for mine own sake, will I do it.

[ 28 ] ^ For example: "R. Joshua b. Levi met Elijah standing by the entrance of R. Simeon b. Yohai's tomb. He asked him: 'Have I a portion in the world to come?' He replied, 'if this Master desires it.' R. Joshua b. Levi said, 'I saw two, but heard the voice of a third.' He then asked him, 'When will the Messiah come?' — 'Go and ask him himself,' was his reply. 'Where is he sitting?' — 'At the entrance.' And by what sign may I recognise him?' — 'He is sitting among the poor lepers: all of them untie [them] all at once, and rebandage them together, whereas he unties and rebandages each separately, [before treating the next], thinking, should I be wanted, [it being time for my appearance as the Messiah] I must not be delayed [through having to bandage a number of sores].' So he went to him and greeted him, saying, 'peace upon thee, Master and Teacher.' 'peace upon thee, O son of Levi,' he replied. 'When wilt thou come Master?' asked he, 'To-day', was his answer. On his returning to Elijah, the latter enquired, 'What did he say to thee?' — 'peace Upon thee, O son of Levi,' he answered. Thereupon he [Elijah] observed, 'He thereby assured thee and thy father of [a portion in] the world to come.' 'He spoke falsely to me,' he rejoined, 'stating that he would come to-day, but has not.' He [Elijah] answered him, 'This is what he said to thee, To-day, if ye will hear his voice ( Psalms 95 ).' [ 28 ] ^ Maimonides: "The Messianic age is when the Jews will regain their independence and all return to the land of Israel . The Messiah will be a very great king, he will achieve great fame, and his reputation among the gentile nations will be even greater than that of King Solomon . His great righteousness and the wonders that he will bring about will cause all peoples to make peace with him and all lands to serve him [....] Nothing will change in the Messianic age, however, except that Jews will regain their independence. Rich and poor, strong and weak, will still exist. However it will be very easy for people to make a living, and with very little effort they will be able to accomplish very much [....] it will be a time when the number of wise men will increase [....] war shall not exist, and nation shall no longer lift up sword against nation.... The Messianic age will be highlighted by a community of the righteous and dominated by goodness and wisdom. It will be ruled by the Messiah, a righteous and honest king, outstanding in wisdom, and close to God. Do not think that the ways of the world or the laws of nature will change, this is not true. The world will continue as it is. The prophet Isaiah predicted "The wolf shall live with the sheep; the leopard shall lie down with the kid." This, however, is merely allegory, meaning that the Jews will live safely, even with the formerly wicked nations. All nations will return to the true religion and will no longer steal or oppress. Note that all prophecies regarding the Messiah are allegorical. Only in the Messianic age will we know the meaning of each allegory and what it comes to teach us. Our sages and prophets did not long for the Messianic age in order that they might rule the world and dominate the gentiles, the only thing they wanted was to be free for Jews to involve themselves with the Torah and its wisdom.

[ 30 ] References [ edit ] ^ a b "Jewish Eschatology" .

Jewish Encyclopedia . Retrieved 1 May 2012 .

^ Radak, commentary to Zechariah 14 ^ Blomberg, Craig L.; Chung, Sung Wook (2009).

A case for historic premillennialism .

In certain sources, Olam Ha-Ba is uniquely associated with teachings about collective redemption and resurrection, but in other places Olam Ha-Ba is conceived of as an afterlife realm for the individual.

^ Ginsburg, Elliot Kiba (1989).

The Sabbath in the classical Kabbalah . p. 145.

More frequently the Rabbis used 'olam ha-ba' with reference to the hereafter.

^ Leo Rosten, The Joys of Yiddish , © 1968; Pocket Books edition, 1970, pp. 124 & 127 " ^ Steinsaltz, Adin Evan-Israel.

Berakhot . Edited by Tvi Hersh Weinreb. Koren Publishers Jerusalem, 2012.  Koren Talmud Bavli.

^ a b ed. Jacob Neusner, Alan Jeffery Avery-Peck Judaism in Late Antiquity: Part Four: Death, Life-After-Death," 2000 Page 187 III. THE DEAD SEA SCROLLS 8. DEATH, RESURRECTION, AND LIFE AFTER DEATH IN THE QUMRAN THE DEAD SEA SCROLLS. chapter by Philip R. Davies University of Sheffield. "In the late Second Temple Period, beliefs about the ultimate fate of the individual were diverse. It is well-known that Josephus, in his description of the four Jewish "sects" (and supported by Matt. ... in the resurrection while the Pharisees did, and the Essenes subscribed to the doctrine of the immortality of the soul (War 2.154: "...although bodies are corruptible and their matter unstable, souls are immortal and live forever...")" ^ a b Simcha Paull Raphael, Summary by Rabbi Dr. Barry Leff.

"Summary of Jewish Views of the Afterlife" (PDF) .

The Neshamah Center . Retrieved 4 January 2014 .

^ Mishneh Torah , Hilkhot M'lakhim 8:14 ^ Encyclopedia Talmudit (Hebrew edition, Israel, 5741/1981, entry Ben Noah , end of article); note the variant reading of Maimonides and the references in the footnote ^ "Likutei Amarim" .

Chapter 8 . 24 August 2010 . Retrieved 17 May 2025 .

^ a b Mishnah Sanhedrin 10:1, Talmud Sanhedrin 90a.

^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n o p q r "Chapter I: The Creation of the World" .

www.sacred-texts.com .

^ "Chapter II: Adam" .

www.sacred-texts.com .

^ a b c d e Segal, Alan (2004).

Life After Death: A History of the Afterlife in the Religions of the West . New York: Doubleday. p.

281 .

ISBN 0-385-42299-7 .

^ Jacob Neusner The Documentary History of Judaism and Its Recent Interpreters 2012 – Page 138 – "... tense in Scripture, proof of the resurrection is drawn from numerous passages: Exodus 15.1; Joshua 8.30; 1 Kings 11.7; Psalm 84.5; Isaiah 52.8; Deuteronomy 33.6; Daniel 12.2 and 12.13. The grave and womb in Proverbs 30.16 are likewise ...

^ Sommer, Benjamin D. "Isaiah" Introduction and Annotations.

The Jewish Study Bible . Ed. Adele Berlin and Marc Zvi Brettler. New York: Oxford University Press, 2004.  780–916.

^ "What Orthodox Jews Believe" .

BeliefNet . Retrieved 4 January 2014 .

^ Emet Ve-Emunah: Statement of Principles of Conservative Judaism.

^ "Will there be trial and judgment after the Resurrection?" .

Askmoses.com . Archived from the original on 13 October 2012 . Retrieved 2 May 2012 .

^ "Do Jews believe in an afterlife? – Free Online Library" .

^ "Do Jews Believe in an Afterlife?" .

Reform Judaism . 25 March 2019 . Retrieved 5 April 2023 .

^ The Personality of Mashiach ; web-look-up: 18-11-2011.

^ Megillah 17b-18a, Taanit 8b ^ Sotah 9a ^ What is the Jewish Belief About Moshiach?

; web-look-up: 03-10-2010.

^ a b c d e f R. J. Zwi Werblowsky (1987), "Messianism: Jewish Messianism" , Encyclopedia of Religion ^ a b B. Talmud Sanhedrin 98a ^ "MOSES BEN MAIMON (RaMBaM; usually called MAIMONIDES)" .

Jewish Encyclopedia . Retrieved 4 January 2014 .

^ Maimonides, Commentary on Mishnah, Sanhedrin 10:1 ^ Emet ve-Emunah: Statement of Principles of Conservative Judaism, The Rabbinical Assembly, NY, pp. 28–32 ^ Jacobs, Louis (2007). "In Modern Jewish Thought". In Berenbaum, Michael ; Skolnik, Fred (eds.).

Encyclopaedia Judaica . Vol. 14 (2nd ed.). Detroit: Macmillan Reference. pp.

110– 115.

ISBN 978-0-02-866097-4 – via Gale Virtual Reference Library.

Available online via Jewish Virtual Library .

External links [ edit ] Wikimedia Commons has media related to Jewish eschatology .

Jewish Encyclopedia: Eschatology The Origin of Jewish Eschatology , by Nathaniel Schmidt v t e Jewish eschatology Sources Tanakh Moses Prophets in Judaism Ezekiel 38 Book of Daniel Ladder of Jacob 2 Esdras Isaiah 7:14 Shiloh (biblical figure) Oral Torah Mishnah Midrash Apocalypse Gabriel's revelation Apocalypse of Zerubbabel The Secrets of Rabbi Simon ben Yohai The Messiah at the Gates of Rome Pseudepigrapha 2 Baruch 3 Baruch Death Judgement Day Halakha Sheol Bosom of Abraham Gehenna Tzoah Rotachat Abaddon Dudael Azazel World to come Messiah Four Horns and Four Craftsmen Elijah Righteous Priest Messiah in Judaism The Messiah's Donkey Davidic dynasty in Bible prophecy Davidic line Messiah ben Joseph Year 6000 Messianic Age Messianic prophecy Gathering of Israel Gog and Magog Tehom Tophet Third Temple End-times Kingship and kingdom of God Kingship of God (Judaism) Resurrection of the dead Second death The day of the Lord Tikkun olam Movements The Temple Institute Chabad messianism Temple Mount and Eretz Yisrael Faithful Movement Messianic Judaism v t e Jews and Judaism Outline of Judaism Index of Jewish history-related articles History Timeline Israelites Origins of Judaism Ancient Israel and Judah Second Temple period Synagogal Judaism Rabbinic Judaism Middle Ages Zionism Population Assimilation Atheists Buddhists Israeli Jews Karaites Samaritans Lists of Jews Persecution Antisemitism Xueta Christianity Zionism, race and genetics Gentile Groups claiming affiliation with Israelites Diaspora Ashkenazim Afrikaner-Jode Chuts Galitzianers Lita'im Oberlander Jews Ostjuden Udmurt and Tatar Jews Unterlander Jews Yekkes Beta Israel Beta Abraham Falash Mura Desi Jews Bene Israel Kochinim Dönmeh Gruzínim Italkim Neofiti Kaifeng Jews Karaites Constantinopolitan Karaites Crimean Karaites Kurdish Jews Krymchaks Lemba Maghrebi Berber Jews Mizrahi Afghan Jews Alexandrian Jews Baghdadi Bukharan Jews Egyptian Jews Mountain Jews Palestinian Jews Persian Jews Urfalim Teimanim Adeni Jews Ḥabbanim Hadhrami Jews Saada Jews Mustaʿravim Jewish tribes of Arabia Romaniote Sephardim Eastern Sephardim Livornese Jews North African Sephardim Paradesi Meshuchrarim Sephardic Bnei Anusim Xuetes Languages ( Diasporic ) Hebrew Modern Ashkenazi Sephardi Mizrahi Yemenite Tiberian Samaritan Signed Medieval Mishnaic Biblical Babylonian Palestinian Catalanic Judeo-Amazigh Judeo-Arabic Yahudic Judeo-Baghdadi Judeo-Moroccan Judeo-Tripolitanian Judeo-Tunisian Judeo-Yemeni Judaeo-Aramaic Targum Barzani Betanure Hulaulá Lishana Deni Lishán Didán Lishanid Noshan Biblical Talmudic Palestinian Galilean Judeo-Aragonese Jewish English Yeshivish Yinglish Heblish Judeo-Gascon Judaeo-Greek Judeo-Italian Judaeo-Piedmontese Judeo-Latin Judeo-Malay Judeo-Malayalam Judeo-Marathi Judaeo-Occitan Judeo-Persian Bukhori Judeo-Borujerdi Judeo-Golpaygani Judeo-Hamedani Judeo-Shirazi Juhuri Judaeo-Portuguese Judeo-Urdu Karaim Kayliñña Kivruli Knaanic Koiné Greek Krymchak Lachoudisch Ladino Haketia Tetuani Lotegorisch Qwareña Shassagh Shassi Shuadit Yiddish dialects Eastern Galitzish Litvish Poylish Klezmer-loshn Western Judeo-Alsatian Lachoudisch Scots-Yiddish Zarphatic Philosophy Beliefs Mitzvah Rabbinic authority Chosen people Conversion Eschatology Messiah Ethics Holiness God Names of God Halakha Haskalah Kabbalah Sefirot Land of Israel Who is a Jew?

Branches Religious movements Orthodox Haredi Hasidic Litvaks Modern Conservative Reform Reconstructionist Humanistic Neo-Hasidism Renewal Neolog relations Haymanot Hellenistic Karaite Samaritanism Science Secularism Schisms Literature Sifrei Kodesh Tanakh /Hebrew Bible Torah Nevi'im Ketuvim Rabbinic Mishnah Talmud Tosefta Midrash Kabbalah texts Hekhalot literature Pardes Rimonim Sefer HaBahir Sefer HaEtz Chaim Sefer Raziel HaMalakh Sefer Yetzirah Zohar Shulchan Aruch Siddur Hebrew literature Culture Astrology perspectives Monen Astronomy Calendar Holidays Cuisine Kashrut Education Leadership Rabbi Rebbe Marriage Divorce Music Mythology Names Politics Prayer Synagogue Hazzan Symbolism Studies Center for Jewish History American Jewish Historical Society American Sephardi Federation Leo Baeck Institute New York Yeshiva University Museum YIVO Institute for Jewish Research Center of Contemporary Jewish Documentation Encyclopaedia Judaica Genetics Jew (word) Jewish Encyclopedia Jewish Virtual Library National Library of Israel YIVO Encyclopedia United States Holocaust Memorial Museum Encyclopedia of the Holocaust Holocaust Encyclopedia Relations with other religions Christian Anabaptism Catholicism Mormonism Protestantism Jews and Christmas Jews and Halloween non-Christian Buddhism Islam Hinduism Italics indicate extinct languages Category Judaism portal v t e Global catastrophic risks Future of the Earth Future of an expanding universe Ultimate fate of the universe Human extinction risk estimates Technological Chemical warfare Cyberattack Cyberwarfare Cyberterrorism Cybergeddon Ransomware Gray goo Nanoweapons Kinetic bombardment Kinetic energy weapon Nuclear warfare Mutual assured destruction Dead Hand Doomsday Clock Doomsday device Antimatter weapon Electromagnetic pulse (EMP) Safety of high-energy particle collision experiments Micro black hole Strangelet Synthetic intelligence / Artificial intelligence AI takeover Existential risk from artificial intelligence Technological singularity Transhumanism Sociological Anthropogenic hazard Collapsology Doomsday argument Self-indication assumption doomsday argument rebuttal Self-referencing doomsday argument rebuttal Economic collapse Malthusian catastrophe New World Order (conspiracy theory) Nuclear holocaust cobalt famine winter Riots Social crisis Societal collapse State collapse World War III Ecological Climate change Anoxic event Biodiversity loss Mass mortality event Cascade effect Cataclysmic pole shift hypothesis Deforestation Desertification Plant or animal species extinctions Civilizational collapse Tipping points Climate sensitivity Flood basalt Global dimming Global terrestrial stilling Global warming Hypercane Ice age Ecocide Ecological collapse Environmental degradation Habitat destruction Human impact on the environment coral reefs on marine life Land degradation Land consumption Land surface effects on climate Ocean acidification Ozone depletion Resource depletion Sea level rise Supervolcano winter Verneshot Water pollution Water scarcity Earth Overshoot Day Overexploitation Overpopulation Human overpopulation Biological Extinction Extinction event Holocene extinction Human extinction List of extinction events Genetic erosion Genetic pollution Others Biodiversity loss Decline in amphibian populations Decline in insect populations Biotechnology risk Biological agent Biological warfare Bioterrorism Colony collapse disorder Defaunation Dysgenics Interplanetary contamination Pandemic Pollinator decline Overfishing Astronomical Big Crunch Big Rip Coronal mass ejection Cosmological phase transition Geomagnetic storm False vacuum decay Gamma-ray burst Heat death of the universe Proton decay Virtual black hole Impact event Asteroid impact avoidance Asteroid impact prediction Potentially hazardous object Near-Earth object winter Rogue planet Rogue star Near-Earth supernova Hypernova Micronova Solar flare Stellar collision Eschatological Buddhist Maitreya Three Ages Hindu Kalki Kali Yuga Last Judgement Second Coming 1 Enoch Daniel Abomination of desolation Prophecy of Seventy Weeks Messiah Christian Futurism Historicism Interpretations of Revelation Idealism Preterism 2 Esdras 2 Thessalonians Man of sin Katechon Antichrist Book of Revelation Events Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse Seven bowls Seven seals The Beast Two witnesses War in Heaven Whore of Babylon Great Apostasy New Earth New Jerusalem Olivet Discourse Great Tribulation Son of perdition Sheep and Goats Islamic Al-Qa'im Beast of the Earth Dhu al-Qarnayn Dhul-Suwayqatayn Dajjal Israfil Mahdi Sufyani Jewish Messiah War of Gog and Magog Third Temple Norse Zoroastrian Saoshyant Others 2011 end times prediction 2012 phenomenon Apocalypse Apocalyptic literature Apocalypticism Armageddon Blood moon prophecy Earth Changes End time Gog and Magog List of dates predicted for apocalyptic events Messianism Messianic Age Millenarianism Millennialism Premillennialism Amillennialism Postmillennialism Nemesis (hypothetical star) Nibiru cataclysm Rapture Prewrath Posttribulation rapture Resurrection of the dead Vulnerable world hypothesis World to come Fictional Alien invasion Apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic and post-apocalyptic fiction List of apocalyptic films Climate fiction Disaster films List of disaster films Zombie apocalypse Zombie Organizations Centre for the Study of Existential Risk Future of Humanity Institute Future of Life Institute Nuclear Threat Initiative General Disaster Depression Financial crisis Survivalism World portal Categories Apocalypticism Future problems Hazards Risk analysis Doomsday scenarios v t e Theology Conceptions of God Theism Forms Deism Dystheism Henotheism Hermeticism Kathenotheism Nontheism Monolatry Monotheism Urmonotheismus Mysticism Panentheism Pandeism Pantheism Polydeism Polytheism Spiritualism Theistic finitism Theopanism Concepts Deity Divinity Gender of God and gods Goddess Numen Singular god theologies By faith Abrahamic religions Baháʼí Faith Judaism Christianity Islam Buddhism Hinduism Jainism Sikhism Tenrikyo Zoroastrianism Concepts Absolute Brahman Emanationism Logos Supreme Being God as Time Good ( Ahura Mazda , Father of Greatness ) Trinitarianism Athanasian Creed Comma Johanneum Consubstantiality Homoousian Homoiousian Hypostasis Perichoresis Shield of the Trinity Trinitarian formula Trinity Trinity of the Church Fathers Trinitarian universalism Eschatology Afterlife Apocalypticism Fate of the unlearned Fitra Heaven / Hell By religion Buddhist Christian Hindu Islamic Jewish Taoist Zoroastrian Feminist Buddhism Christianity Hinduism Islam Judaism Mormonism Goddesses Other concepts Attributes of God in Christianity / in Islam Binitarianism Demiurge Divine simplicity Divine presence Egotheism Exotheology Hermeneutics Holocaust Godhead in Christianity Latter Day Saints Great Architect of the Universe Great Spirit Apophatic theology Olelbis Open theism Personal god Phenomenological definition Philo's view Process Tian Unmoved mover Names of God in Christianity Hinduism Islam Jainism Judaism By faith Christian History Outline Biblical canon Glossary Paterology Christology Pneumatology Cosmology Ecclesiology Eschatology Ethics Hamartiology Messianism Philosophy Political Practical Public Sophiology Soteriology Hindu Ayyavazhi theology Krishnology Islamic Oneness of God Prophets Holy Scriptures Angels Predestination Last Judgment Jewish Abrahamic prophecy Aggadah Denominations Kabbalah Philosophy Pagan Slavic Native Faith Wiccan East Asian Tenrikyo Religion portal Authority control databases National United States France BnF data Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Jewish_eschatology&oldid=1305484522 " Category : Jewish eschatology Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Use dmy dates from June 2022 Articles needing additional references from April 2021 All articles needing additional references Articles containing Hebrew-language text Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 12 August 2025, at 09:28 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Jewish eschatology 16 languages Add topic

