Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Life 2 Writings 3 Sayings 4 References 5 Sources Toggle Sources subsection 5.1 Attribution 6 Further reading Toggle the table of contents Lyco of Troas 15 languages Català Deutsch Español Français Italiano Magyar مصرى Nederlands Norsk bokmål Polski Português Русский Српски / srpski Suomi 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Ancient Greek philosopher Lyco of Troas, depicted as a medieval scholar in the Nuremberg Chronicle Lyco of Troas ( / ˈ l aɪ k oʊ / ; Ancient Greek : Λύκων , romanized : Lýkōn , gen .: Λύκωνος ; c. 299 – c. 225 BC), [ 1 ] son of Astyanax, was a Peripatetic philosopher and the disciple of Strato , whom he succeeded as the head of the Peripatetic school , c. 269 BC; [ 1 ] he held that post for more than forty-four years. He is also said to have studied under Panthoides the dialectician.

[ 2 ] Life [ edit ] Lyco resided at Pergamon , under the patronage of Eumenes I and Attalus I , from whom Antiochus II Theos in vain sought to entice him.

[ 3 ] On several occasions, his counsel was of great service to the Athenians.

[ 4 ] He was celebrated for his eloquence.

[ 5 ] According to Diogenes Laertius , Antigonus of Carystus stated that the beauty of his sayings were bound to him, just as the beauty and sweetness of an apple are bound to it, without the possibility of being transferred to anything else.

[ 6 ] He was also a recognized educator of boys, a facet of his approach is demonstrated in his saying that "it was fit for boys to be harnessed with modesty and rivalry, as much as for horses to be equipped with a spur and a bridle".

[ 7 ] Hermippus is said to have noted him for his neatness of dress and delicacy of garments.

[ 8 ] He paid great attention to the body as well as to the mind, and, constantly practicing athletic exercises and competing in athletic events, was exceedingly healthy and robust. Nevertheless, he died of gout at the age of 74. He was a bitter rival of the Peripatetic philosopher Hieronymus of Rhodes .

[ 9 ] Lyco's most notable student in the Peripatetic school was Aristo of Ceos who may have succeeded him as head of the school.

Writings [ edit ] Among the writings of Lyco was probably a work On Characters (similar to the work of Theophrastus ), a fragment of which is preserved by Rutilius Lupus , [ 10 ] though the title of the book is not mentioned by any ancient writer. It appears from Cicero [ 11 ] and Clement of Alexandria , [ 12 ] that he wrote on the boundaries of good and evil ( Latin : De Finibus ).

Apuleius suggests that he wrote a work on the nature of animals.

[ 13 ] Additionally, Lyco's will was claimed to have been found by Laertius and is quoted by him in its entirety.

[ 14 ] Sayings [ edit ] Diogenes Laertius attributed an additional number of sayings to Lyco of Troas by which his aforementioned eloquence was demonstrated: [ 15 ] “A damsel, who, for want of a dowry, goes beyond the seasonable age, is a heavy burden to her father.” "They were accusing themselves, showing by a prayer which could not possibly be accomplished, their misplaced repentance for their idleness." (About those who regret that they had not learnt when they had the opportunity, and who now wished that they had done so).

"Those who deliberated without coming to a right conclusion, erred in their calculations, like men who investigate a correct nature by an incorrect standard, or who look at a face in disturbed water, or a distorted mirror." "Many men go in pursuit of the crown to be won in the forum, but few or none seek to attain the one to be gained at the Olympic games." References [ edit ] ^ a b Dorandi 1999 , p. 53.

^ Diogenes Laërtius, The Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers, Book 5, Life of Lycon, 68.

^ Laërtius 1925 , § 67.

^ Laërtius 1925 , § 66.

^ comp. Cicero, de Finibus , v. 5 ^ Diogenes Laërtius, The Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers, Book 5, Life of Lycon, 65.

^ Diogenes Laërtius, The Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers, Book 5, Life of Lycon, 66.

^ Diogenes Laërtius, The Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers, Book 5, Life of Lycon, 68.

^ Laërtius 1925 , § 68.

^ Rutilius Lupus, de Figuris , ii. 7 ^ Cicero, Tusculanae Quaestiones , iii. 32 ^ Clement of Alexandria, Stromata , ii.

^ Apuleius, Apologia , 36 ^ Diogenes Laërtius, The Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers, Book 5, Life of Lycon, 69-74.

^ Diogenes Laërtius, The Lives and Opinions of Eminent Philosophers, Book 5, Life of Lycon, 65-67.

Sources [ edit ] Dorandi, Tiziano (1999). "Chapter 2: Chronology". In Algra, Keimpe; et al. (eds.).

The Cambridge History of Hellenistic Philosophy . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. p. 53.

ISBN 9780521250283 .

Laërtius, Diogenes .

"The Peripatetics: Lyco" .

Lives of the Eminent Philosophers . Vol. 1:5. Translated by Hicks, Robert Drew (Two volume ed.). Loeb Classical Library.

Attribution [ edit ] This article incorporates text from a publication now in the public domain : Smith, William , ed. (1870).

Dictionary of Greek and Roman Biography and Mythology .

{{ cite encyclopedia }} : Missing or empty |title= ( help ) Further reading [ edit ] Fortenbaugh, W.; White, S. (2004).

Lyco of Troas and Hieronymus of Rhodes: Text, Translation and Discussion . Transaction Publishers.

ISBN 0-7658-0253-8 .

v t e Peripatetic philosophers Greek era Aristotle Eudemus Theophrastus Aristoxenus Chamaeleon Echecratides Phaenias Praxiphanes Neleus of Scepsis Dicaearchus Nicomachus Demetrius of Phalerum Strato of Lampsacus Clearchus Archestratus (music theorist) Hieronymus of Rhodes Lyco of Troas Aristo of Ceos Satyrus Critolaus Calliphon Diodorus of Tyre Erymneus Roman era Xenarchus of Seleucia Cratippus Apellicon of Teos Andronicus of Rhodes Aristo of Alexandria Boethus of Sidon Athenaeus Mechanicus Ammonius of Athens Alexander of Aegae Aristocles of Messene Aristocles of Pergamon Aristoxenus of Cyrene Aspasius Aristotle of Mytilene Adrastus Herminus Sosigenes Alexander of Aphrodisias Ptolemy-el-Garib Themistius Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 FAST WorldCat National Germany United States France BnF data Italy Netherlands Norway Israel Academics CiNii People Deutsche Biographie Other IdRef Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Lyco_of_Troas&oldid=1291120244 " Categories : Hellenistic-era philosophers from Anatolia Peripatetic philosophers 3rd-century BC Greek philosophers 290s BC births 220s BC deaths Hellenistic-era philosophers in Athens Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Articles containing Ancient Greek (to 1453)-language text Articles containing Latin-language text Wikipedia articles incorporating the template Lives of the Eminent Philosophers CS1 errors: missing title Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the DGRBM with no wstitle or title parameter Wikipedia articles incorporating text from the DGRBM This page was last edited on 19 May 2025, at 06:09 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Lyco of Troas 15 languages Add topic

