Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Definition (marine biology), context, extra terminology 2 Physical characteristics 3 Life forms 4 Definition (physical oceanography) 5 See also 6 References Toggle the table of contents Neritic zone 28 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Беларуская Български Bosanski Català Dansk Deutsch Eesti Ελληνικά Español Esperanto فارسی Français Gaeilge Հայերեն Hrvatski Bahasa Indonesia Latviešu Polski Português Română Русский Simple English Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Suomi Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Relatively shallow part of the ocean above the drop-off of the continental shelf Sargassum seaweed drifting in the neritic zone provides food and shelter for small epipelagic fish As highlighted in light green, the neritic zone coincides with the relative shallows of the continental shelves.

Marine habitats Coastal habitats Littoral zone Intertidal zone Estuaries Mangrove forests Seagrass meadows Kelp forests Coral reefs Continental shelf Neritic zone Ocean surface Surface microlayer Epipelagic zone Open ocean Pelagic zone Oceanic zone Sea floor Seamounts Hydrothermal vents Cold seeps Demersal zone Benthic zone Marine sediment v t e The neritic zone (or sublittoral zone ) is the relatively shallow part of the ocean above the drop-off of the continental shelf , approximately 200 meters (660 ft) in depth.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] From the point of view of marine biology it forms a relatively stable and well-illuminated environment for marine life , from plankton up to large fish and corals , while physical oceanography sees it as where the oceanic system interacts with the coast.

Definition (marine biology), context, extra terminology [ edit ] In marine biology , the neritic zone , also called coastal waters , the coastal ocean or the sublittoral zone , [ 3 ] refers to the zone of the ocean where sunlight reaches the ocean floor , that is where the water is never so deep as to take it out of the photic zone .

It extends from the low tide mark to the edge of the continental shelf , with a relatively shallow depth extending to about 200 meters (660 feet).
Above the neritic zone lie the intertidal (or eulittoral) and supralittoral zones; below it the continental slope begins, descending from the continental shelf to the abyssal plain and the pelagic zone .

Within the neritic, marine biologists also identify: [ citation needed ] The infralittoral zone is the algal -dominated zone down to around five metres below the low water mark.

The circalittoral zone is the region beyond the infralittoral, which is dominated by sessile animals such as oysters .

The subtidal zone is the region of the neritic zone which is below the intertidal zone, therefore never exposed to the atmosphere.

Physical characteristics [ edit ] The neritic zone is covered with generally well- oxygenated water, receives plenty of sunlight , is relatively stable temperature , has low water pressure and stable salinity levels, making it highly suitable for photosynthetic life.
There are several different areas or zones in the ocean. The area along the bottom of any body of water from the shore to the deepest abyss is called the benthic zone . It is where decomposed organic debris (also known as ocean 'snow') has settled to form a sediment layer. All photosynthetic life needs light to grow and how far out into the ocean light can still penetrate through the water column to the floor or benthic zone is what defines the neritic zone. That photic zone , or area where light can penetrate through the water column, is usually above ~100 meters (~328 feet). Some coastal areas have a long area of shallow water that extends far out beyond the landmass into the water and others, for example islands that have formed from ancient volcanos where the 'shelf' or edge of the land mass is very steep, have a very short neritic zone.

Life forms [ edit ] The above characteristics make the neritic zone the location of the majority of sea life.

[ 4 ] The result is high primary production by photosynthetic life such as phytoplankton and floating sargassum ; zooplankton , free-floating creatures ranging from microscopic foraminiferans to small fish and shrimp , feed on the phytoplankton (and one another);
both trophic levels in turn form the base of the food chain (or, more properly, web ) which supports most of the world's great wild fisheries .

Corals are also mostly found in the neritic zone, where they are more common than in the intertidal zone as they have less change with which to deal.

Definition (physical oceanography) [ edit ] In physical oceanography , the sublittoral zone [ or "neritic"?

clarification needed ] refers to coastal regions with significant tidal flows and energy dissipation , including non-linear flows, internal waves , river outflows and ocean fronts .

[ citation needed ] As in marine biology, the zone typically extends to the edge of the continental shelf .

See also [ edit ] Coastal fish References [ edit ] ^ anon. (n.d). Ocean Regions: Blue Water – Characteristics. Available: "Ocean Regions: Blue Water - Characteristics" . Archived from the original on 13 December 2007 . Retrieved 20 January 2012 .

. Last accessed 15 May 2014.

^ Rizk, F. (n.d). MARINE ENVIRONMENT AND PRIMARY PRODUCTIVITY. Available: "Primary Productivity" . Archived from the original on 9 November 2014 . Retrieved 15 May 2014 .

. Last accessed 15 May 2014.

^ Experts, A. Team Of (January 2000).

Advanced Learner S Dictionary Botany . Anmol Publications Pvt.

ISBN 9788126104611 . Retrieved 10 February 2016 .

^ Office of Naval Research Archived 13 December 2007 at the Wayback Machine v t e Biogeographic regions Biomes Terrestrial biomes Polar/montane Tundra Taiga Montane grasslands and shrublands Alpine tundra Temperate Coniferous forests Broadleaf and mixed forests Deciduous forests Grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Tropical and subtropical Coniferous forests Cloud forest Moist broadleaf forests list Dry broadleaf forests Grasslands, savannas, and shrublands Dry Mediterranean forests, woodlands, and scrub Deserts and xeric shrublands Steppe Wet Flooded grasslands and savannas Riparian Wetland Mangroves Aquatic biomes Pond Littoral Intertidal Kelp forests Coral reefs Neritic zone Pelagic zone Benthic zone Hydrothermal vents Cold seeps Demersal zone Other biomes Endolithic zone Biogeographic realms Terrestrial Afrotropical Antarctic Australasian Holarctic Nearctic Palearctic Indomalayan Neotropical Oceanian Marine Antarctic/Southern Ocean Arctic Central Indo-Pacific Eastern Indo-Pacific Temperate Australasia Temperate Northern Atlantic Temperate Northern Pacific Temperate South America Temperate Southern Africa Tropical Atlantic Tropical Eastern Pacific Western Indo-Pacific Subdivisions Biogeographic provinces Bioregions Ecoregions Lists of ecoregions Global 200 ecoregions See also Altitudinal zonation Ecological classification Floristic kingdoms Vegetation classifications Wallace Line Zoogeography Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Neritic_zone&oldid=1300928823 " Categories : Aquatic ecology Fisheries science Physical oceanography Aquatic biomes Oceanographical terminology Hidden categories: Webarchive template wayback links Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from July 2019 All articles with unsourced statements Articles with unsourced statements from January 2014 Wikipedia articles needing clarification from January 2014 This page was last edited on 17 July 2025, at 05:10 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Neritic zone 28 languages Add topic

