Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Academic programs Toggle Academic programs subsection 2.1 Politics departmental track 2.2 Undergraduate Fellows Forum 2.3 James Madison Society 3 Reception Toggle Reception subsection 3.1 Conservatism 3.2 Religion 3.3 Engaging with opposing views 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents James Madison Program in American Ideals and Institutions Add languages Add links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 40°20′56.3″N 74°38′58.2″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.348972°N 74.649500°W ﻿ / 40.348972; -74.649500 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia James Madison Program in American Ideals and Institutions Bobst Hall, Home of the James Madison Program Abbreviation James Madison Program Named after James Madison Formation 2000 Type Academic Program Headquarters Bobst Hall, Princeton University Location 83 Prospect Ave., Princeton, New Jersey Director Robert P. George Executive Director Bradford P. Wilson Website https://jmp.princeton.edu The James Madison Program in American Ideals and Institutions , often called simply the James Madison Program (abbreviated JMP ) or the Madison Program , is a scholarly institute within the Department of Politics at Princeton University espousing a dedication "to exploring enduring questions of American constitutional law and Western political thought ." [ 1 ] The Madison Program was founded in 2000 and is directed by Robert P. George , the McCormick Professor of Jurisprudence at Princeton University.

[ 2 ] While the James Madison Program states it is welcoming of all ideological tendencies, it is widely considered a conservative institute that "exists to further conservative viewpoints on campus." [ 3 ] [ 4 ] [ 5 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] [ 8 ] [ 9 ] Commentators tend to point to its predominantly conservative donors and fellows, and platforming of " far-right and extremist individuals." [ 3 ] [ 5 ] [ 7 ] History [ edit ] The Madison Program was founded in the summer of 2000 via a charter with the Department of Politics at Princeton University .

[ 10 ] Early funders included Steve Forbes , the John M. Olin Foundation , and the Bradley Foundation .

[ 11 ] Early speakers included liberal scholars James E. Fleming of Fordham University and Stanley N. Katz of Princeton University , and conservative ones, including Robert Bork ; Christopher DeMuth , then-president of the American Enterprise Institute ; Lynne Cheney , chairwoman of the National Endowment for the Humanities in the first Bush administration; and William Kristol , then-editor of The Weekly Standard .

[ 11 ] The Program celebrated its 10th anniversary in 2010 with a lecture from columnist George Will .

[ 12 ] Summer 2020 marked the 20th anniversary of the Program.

Academic programs [ edit ] Politics departmental track [ edit ] The Program sponsors the track in "American Ideas and Institutions" for undergraduates concentrating in Politics at Princeton . The track includes courses from American politics , political theory , and public law to allow students to "further and demonstrate their understandings of the three branches of the federal government and the values, ideas, and theories that underlie them and are animated by their workings." [ 13 ] Undergraduate Fellows Forum [ edit ] The Program is host to the Undergraduate Fellows Forum, a program for Princeton undergraduates to engage with fellow students on American political institutions and constitutionalism.

[ 14 ] Undergraduate Fellows have included conservative as well as some liberal and socialist students, and founded such programs at Princeton as a podcast called "Woke Wednesdays" [ 15 ] and the third undergraduate chapter of the Federalist Society .

[ 16 ] James Madison Society [ edit ] The Madison Program is host to several Visiting and Postdoctoral Fellows at Princeton every year and past Visiting Fellows become part of the James Madison Society. It consists predominantly of conservative academics, but also includes some liberal and socialist public figures.

Notable members of the James Madison Society [ 17 ] Name Institution John Agresto St. John's College William B. Allen Michigan State University Hadley P. Arkes Amherst College Stephen Balch Texas Tech University Mark Bauerlein Emory University Francis J. Beckwith Baylor University Paul O. Carrese Arizona State University Angelo Codevilla (d. 2021) Boston University David G. Dalin Brandeis University Patrick Deneen University of Notre Dame John J. DiIulio Jr.

University of Pennsylvania Donald L. Drakeman University of Notre Dame Daniel Dreisbach American University Jean Bethke Elshtain (d. 2013) University of Chicago John Finnis University of Notre Dame ; University of Oxford Michael Gerhardt University of North Carolina Mary Ann Glendon Harvard University Jack Goldsmith Harvard University Christopher R. Green University of Mississippi Allen C. Guelzo Gettysburg College Philip Hamburger Columbia University Anne Hendershott Franciscan University of Steubenville Matthew S. Holland Utah Valley University Leon Kass University of Chicago ; American Enterprise Institute Charles R. Kesler Claremont McKenna College Harvey Klehr Emory University Robert C. Koons University of Texas at Austin Alan Charles Kors University of Pennsylvania Michael I. Krauss George Mason University Peter Lawler (d. 2017) Berry College Yuval Levin Ethics and Public Policy Center ; National Affairs Joyce Lee Malcolm George Mason University Harvey Mansfield Harvard University Wilfred M. McClay Hillsdale College Lawrence Mead New York University Kenneth P. Miller Claremont McKenna College Vincent Phillip Muñoz University of Notre Dame Michael New Catholic University of America David Novak University of Toronto Marvin Olasky Patrick Henry College Daniel N. Robinson (d. 2018) Georgetown University ; University of Oxford Charles T. Rubin Duquesne University Diana Schaub Loyola University Maryland Gabriel Schoenfeld Hudson Institute Roger Scruton (d. 2020) Oxford University ; Ethics and Public Policy Center James Reist Stoner Jr.

Louisiana State University Carol M. Swain Vanderbilt University (retired) Carl Trueman Grove City College Michael Uhlmann Claremont Graduate University Bradley C.S. Watson Saint Vincent College Cornel West Harvard University ; Princeton University Thomas G. West Hillsdale College W. Bradford Wilcox University of Virginia James Q. Wilson (d. 2012) Harvard University ; Princeton University Michael Zuckert University of Notre Dame Reception [ edit ] This article is part of a series on Conservatism in the United States Schools Compassionate Fiscal Fusion Liberal Classical Libertarian Moderate Movement Nationalist Christian Neo- Paleo- Postliberal Populist Progressive Social Straussian Traditionalist Ultra- Principles American exceptionalism Anti-communism Christian Zionism Communitarianism Constitutionalism Familialism Family values Federalism States' rights Subsidiarity Gender essentialism Judeo-Christian values Individualism Law and order Limited government Meritocracy Natural aristocracy Militarism Peace through strength Moral absolutism Natalism Pro-life Natural law Ordered liberty Patriotism Property rights Republicanism Right to bear arms Rule of law Supply-side economics Tradition History Loyalists Federalist Era Southern chivalry Redeemers Boston Brahmins Solid South New Humanism Dunning School Southern Agrarians Old Right Conservative Manifesto Conservative coalition America First Committee McCarthyism Goldwater campaign New Right Reagan era Reagan Doctrine Reaganomics Republican Revolution W. Bush presidency Tea Party movement Neo- vs. paleoconservatism Trump era First term Second term Agenda 47 Intellectuals Adams Anton Babbitt Bacevich Bell Bellow Bloom Boorstin Bradford Buckley Burgess Burnham Calhoun Chambers Conquest Deneen Eliot Francis Genovese Gottfried Hanson Hardin Hazony Himmelfarb Hoppe Hurston Jaffa Kimball Kirk Kirkpatrick Kreeft Kristol Kuehnelt-Leddihn Lind Lovecraft Loury Lukacs Luntz Mansfield Mencken Meyer Molnar Murray Nisbet Pangle Ransom Reno Rieff Santayana Schaeffer Sowell Strauss Vermeule Viereck Voegelin Wattenberg Weaver Wolfe Politicians Abbott Adams Boehner Bolton Buchanan Bush (George H. W.) Bush (George W.) Calhoun Clay Cheney Cleveland Coolidge Cruz DeSantis Dirksen Dole Eisenhower Gingrich Goldwater Harding Hamilton Helms Hoover (Herbert) Huckabee Johnson Kissinger Lodge Luce Madison McCain McCarthy (Joseph) McCarthy (Kevin) McConnell McKinley Meese Nixon Palin Paul (Rand) Paul (Ron) Pence Pierce Randolph Reagan Romney Rubio Rumsfeld Ryan Sessions Sherman Taft (Robert) Taft (William) Thurmond Trump Vance Wallace Wolfowitz Jurists Alito Barrett Bork Burger Colson Field Frelinghuysen Fuller George Goldsmith Gorsuch Harlan Kavanaugh Kennedy Luttig O'Connor Parker Rehnquist Roberts (John) Sanford Scalia Sessions Sutherland Taft (William) Thomas (Clarence) Whittaker Commentators Beck Bongino Breitbart Buchanan (Pat) Buckley Caldwell Carlson Cass Chodorov Coulter D'Souza Derbyshire Dreher Elder Goldberg Grant Griffin Van den Haag Hannity Hart Herberg Hoover (Margaret) Ingraham Jones Kelly Knowles Krauthammer Lahren Levin Limbaugh Mac Donald Neuhaus Ngo North Novak O'Reilly Owens Podhoretz Pool Portnoy Possony Prager Robertson Shapiro Shlaes Sullivan Walsh Watters Weyl Will Wintrich Woods Activists Abramoff Agostinelli Andreessen Atwater Bannon Bennett Bezmenov Bozell Cohn Dans Dobson Drudge Falwell Feulner Flynn Gabriel Hegseth Horowitz Kirk Krikorian Kristol LaHaye Lindell Lindbergh Leo McEntee Mercer (Rebekah) Mercer (Robert) Miller Murdoch Musk political views O'Keefe Park Phillips Posobiec Powell Raichik Reed Regnery Roberts (Kevin) Rove Rufo Scaife Schlafly (Andrew) Schlafly (Phyllis) Stone Thiel Thomas (Ginni) Weyrich Wiles Wood Literature The Federalist Papers (1788) Democracy in America (1835–1840) Notes on Democracy (1926) I'll Take My Stand (1930) Our Enemy, the State (1935) The Managerial Revolution (1941) Ideas Have Consequences (1948) God and Man at Yale (1951) The Conservative Mind (1953) The Conscience of a Conservative (1960) A Choice Not an Echo (1964) A Conflict of Visions (1987) The Closing of the American Mind (1987) The Death of the West (2001) Hillbilly Elegy (2016) The Benedict Option (2017) Why Liberalism Failed (2018) The Age of Entitlement (2020) Parties Active American Party American Independent Party Conservative Party NY state Constitution Party Republican Party Defunct Anti-Masonic Party Constitutional Union Party Democratic Party ( historically, factions ) Boll weevils Bourbon Democrats Conservative Democrats Dixiecrats Reagan Democrats Southern Democrats Rhode Island Suffrage Party Federalist Party National Republican Party Native American Party Whig Party Think tanks Acton Institute AdTI AEI AFP CSP CfNI Claremont Institute CEI CSPC EPPC FRI Gatestone Institute Heartland Institute The Heritage Foundation Heritage Action Mandate for Leadership Project Esther Project 2025 Hoover Institution Hudson Institute ISI James Madison Program Leadership Institute Manhattan Institute Mises Institute PRI PNAC (Defunct) Ripon Society R Street Institute Rockford Institute SPN Sutherland Institute Tax Foundation Witherspoon Institute Media Newspapers Chicago Tribune The Epoch Times New Hampshire Union Leader The Jewish Voice The New York Observer New York Post The Remnant The Wall Street Journal (editorial board) The Washington Times Journals American Affairs The American Conservative The American Spectator American Thinker City Journal Claremont Review of Books Commentary Compact Chronicles The Dispatch First Things The Imaginative Conservative Jewish World Review Modern Age National Affairs The National Interest National Review The New American The New Atlantis The New Criterion Policy Review (defunct) Public Discourse Southern Partisan Spectator USA Tablet Taki's Magazine Telos Washington Examiner The Weekly Standard (defunct) TV channels CBN Fox Business Fox News Newsmax TV One America News Network Real America's Voice VOZ Websites 1819 News Babylon Bee Breitbart News The Bulwark Campus Reform The Center Square Conservative Review Daily Caller Daily Signal Daily Wire Discover the Networks The Federalist FrontPage Magazine Front Porch Republic Gateway Pundit Hot Air Human Events Independent Journal Review InfoWars Jihad Watch LifeZette NewsBusters PJ Media Rare RedState The Dispatch Townhall Twitchy Washington Examiner The Washington Free Beacon The Western Journal WorldNetDaily Other Blaze Media Encounter Books Evie Magazine The First Imprimis The Political Cesspool Passage Publishing PragerU RealClearPolitics Red Scare Regnery Publishing RSBN The Rubin Report Sinclair Broadcast Group Other organizations Congressional caucuses Second Amendment Caucus RSC Liberty Caucus Freedom Caucus Republican Main Street Partnership Republican Governance Group Blue Dog Coalition Economics ATR Club for Growth FreedomWorks (defunct) NFIB NTU Tea Party Patriots USCC Gun rights GOA NAGR NRA Identity politics ACT!

CWA Council of Conservative Citizens GAG IWF LCR Moms for Liberty Nativist CIS FAIR Immigration Restriction League NumbersUSA Patriot Prayer Proud Boys Oath Keepers Three Percenters Religion ADF Court cases ACLJ AFA The American TFP Chalcedon Foundation CCA Christian Voice Eagle Forum FCR The Fellowship FFC Focus on the Family Foundation for Moral Law Liberty Counsel Moral Majority (defunct) NOM NRLC PTMC Susan B. Anthony Pro-Life America Thomas More Law Center Watchdog groups AIM Econ Journal Watch Franklin News Foundation JW MRC O'Keefe Media Group Project Veritas Youth/student groups NJC TPUSA Young Americans for Freedom Young America's Foundation YAL Social media Gab Gettr Parler The Right Stuff Miscellaneous The 85 Fund AHI ACU AFPAC Bradley Foundation TCC CNP CPAC Hillsdale College IFF JBS John M. Olin Foundation (defunct) Liberty Fund LU NAS Philadelphia Society Regent University Russell Kirk Center for Cultural Renewal TPPF Other AFL Atlas Network CN ConservAmerica Donors Trust FedSoc NCPAC PJI Turning Point Action SACR YRNF Ziklag Movements Asian and Pacific Islander Black Christian right Reconstructionism Classical education movement Paideia Dark Enlightenment Election denial movement 2020 election disputes Female Green Hispanic and Latino LGBTQ Libertarian republicans Militia movement Monarchism Mormon White Horse Prophecy Theodemocracy New Apostolic Reformation Parental rights movement Fathers' rights Patriot movement Christian Radical right Reactionary feminism Right-libertarianism Paleolibertarianism Secessionism Neo-Confederates in Texas Trumpism Never Trump Related Barstool conservatism Bibliography of US conservatism Conservative talk radio GOP factions List of American conservatives NatCon Timeline of modern American conservatism Conservatism portal United States portal v t e Conservatism [ edit ] In 2006, Max Blumenthal wrote in The Nation that the Madison Program is not like the Center for Human Values at Princeton or the Remarque Institute at New York University , but rather serves as "a vehicle for conservative interests." Blumenthal writes that the Madison Program uses "funding from a shadowy, cultlike Catholic group and right-wing foundations" to support right-wing politics at Princeton University, even becoming "the blueprint for the right's strategy to extend and consolidate power within the university system." [ 5 ] Similar institutions at Georgetown University, New York University, and Williams College have used the Madison Program as a template for their operations.

[ 18 ] In 2017, the North Carolina–based think tank NC Policy Watch reported that the James Madison Program is funded and operated by conservative philanthropists and academics to promote conservatism in higher education, and that the University of North Carolina Board of Governors considered the Madison Program a "model." [ 7 ] In 2016, Jane Mayer wrote for The Chronicle of Higher Education noting that the Madison Program was founded with funds from the conservative John M. Olin Foundation and that the program's founding serves as part of a broader strategy for conservative billionaires to infiltrate higher education in the United States .

[ 19 ] Her piece was cited by Greenpeace as demonstrative of dark money being used to deceptively promote conservative perspectives and downplay the fossil fuel industry's role in climate change .

[ 20 ] In 2019, journalist Emma Green wrote in The Atlantic that the James Madison Program serves as a conservative hub for right-wing students and academics within the "largely apolitical or vaguely liberal" politics of the Princeton University community.

[ 4 ] In 2023, Jewish Currents writers Dahlia Krutkovich and Sarah Rosen noted that the James Madison Program "is known for bringing right-wing figures to campus" and criticized its invitation of Ronen Shoval , who founded the ultranationalist Im Tirtzu , which has been described as being involved in campaigns against political progressives , academics, and anti-Zionists and having similarities to fascist groups.

[ 6 ] Krutkovich and Rosen also criticized the arrival of Shoval due to his fabrication of his academic background and his calls to curtail academic freedom and freedom of speech in Israel .

[ 6 ] Princeton University students and others in the Jewish community protested Shoval's arrival as well as the 2023 Israeli judicial reforms at the Center for Jewish Life on campus.

[ 6 ] [ 21 ] Student publications at Princeton University such as The Daily Princetonian , Nassau Weekly , and The Princeton Progressive have described the James Madison Program as a conservative institute that "exists to further conservative viewpoints on campus" and where "Princeton's conservatives can receive cues about the status of their movement." [ 3 ] [ 9 ] [ 8 ] Similarly to other journalistic outlets, student journalists have pointed to its predominantly conservative donors and fellows, and platforming of " far-right and extremist individuals." [ 3 ] However, The Princeton Tory has claimed that the program "promotes political discussion and scholarship without favoring any political ideology." [ 22 ] Director Robert P. George claims the Program is not conservative, but rather "seeks to bring competing points of view together to lift the intellectual debate on campus." [ 23 ] Religion [ edit ] In the 2007 book Faith in the Halls of Power , D. Michael Lindsay praised the Madison Program for enabling cooperation between Catholic and Evangelical Christians .

[ 24 ] Engaging with opposing views [ edit ] On March 14, 2017, Robert P. George and Cornel West issued a joint statement via the Madison Program to encourage citizens to engage with people of opposing views. The statement was opened to signatories from the public; as of March 2019, there were more than 4,000 signatories.

[ 25 ] Outlets noted its significance due to the juxtaposition of George's Christian conservative views with West's democratic socialist and radical democratic views.

[ 26 ] References [ edit ] ^ "Home - James Madison Program" .

web.princeton.edu .

[ permanent dead link ] ^ Kirkpatrick, David D.

"Robert P. George, the Conservative-Christian Big Thinker" .

^ a b c d Rahin, Rooya; Shapiro, Dylan (May 18, 2023).

"What you need to know about Princeton's James Madison Program" .

The Daily Princetonian . Retrieved 2023-08-30 .

^ a b Green, Emma (2019-12-29).

"It's a Weird Time to Be Young and Conservative" .

The Atlantic . Retrieved 2023-08-30 .

Instead, students at Princeton who lean to the right have helped build a robust suite of conservative groups, most prominently the James Madison Program in American Ideals and Institutions, an expansive academic center overseen by the prominent scholar Robert P. George.

^ a b c Blumenthal, Max (2006-02-23).

"Princeton Tilts Right" .

The Nation .

ISSN 0027-8378 . Retrieved 2023-08-30 .

George has brought his conservatism to bear at Princeton through the James Madison Program in American Ideals and Institutions, an academic center he founded in 2000 "to sustain America's experiment in ordered liberty." On the surface, the program appears modeled after institutions like Princeton's Center for Human Values and New York University's Remarque Institute. However, it functions in many ways as a vehicle for conservative interests, using funding from a shadowy, cultlike Catholic group and right-wing foundations to support gatherings of movement activists, fellowships for ideologically correct visiting professors and a cadre of conservative students. George's program has become the blueprint for the right's strategy to extend and consolidate power within the university system.

^ a b c d Krutkovich, Dahlia; Rosen, Sarah (June 8, 2023).

"The Israeli Far Right's Man in Princeton" .

Jewish Currents . Retrieved 2023-08-30 .

Shoval wrapped up a yearlong appointment as a lecturer in politics at Princeton last month, and will hold the role of associate research scholar at the university's James Madison Program for American Ideals and Institutions—which is devoted to the study and promotion of conservative ideas—through the summer.

^ a b c Killian, Joe (December 18, 2017).

"A look at the conservative origins of the UNC Board of Governors' "model" for a new academic center" .

NC Newsline . Retrieved 2023-08-30 .

If your interest was piqued by the UNC Board of Governors' reception of Professor Robert George last week – and their affection for his conservative James Madison program at Princeton – you may want to read up on the program, its funders and the movement to create more conservative centers across the country.

^ a b Glover, Austin (2022-12-19).

"The State of Conservatism at Princeton" .

The Princeton Progressive . Retrieved 2023-08-30 .

indeed, conservatism is alive and well at Princeton University. Instead of appearing in the classroom, however, it manifests itself online, through student groups like the Tory , and in print, via posters put up by the James Madison Program advertising its public lectures.

^ a b Barkhorn, Eleanor (2004-10-14).

"The Lonely Conservative" .

Nassau Weekly . Retrieved 2023-08-30 .

^ Nieli, Russ (2005). "Enhancing Intellectual Diversity on Campus--The James Madison Program at Princeton".

Academic Questions .

18 (20): 27.

doi : 10.1007/s12129-005-1003-3 .

^ a b Merritt, J.I. (8 October 2003).

"Heretic in the Temple" . Princeton Alumni Weekly . Retrieved 22 March 2019 .

^ Princeton Alumni Weekly (8 December 2010).

"Madison Program marks 10th anniversary" . Retrieved 21 March 2019 .

^ "Program in American Ideas and Institutions" .

Princeton University Department of Politics . Princeton University . Retrieved 21 March 2019 .

^ "Undergraduate Fellows Forum | James Madison Program" .

jmp.princeton.edu . Retrieved 2018-12-26 .

^ Sterenfeld, Ethan (2017-12-03).

"Nothing Recycled" .

Nassau Weekly . Retrieved 2018-12-26 .

^ "Students, faculty create Federalist Society chapter at the University" .

The Princetonian . Retrieved 2018-12-26 .

^ "James Madison Society | James Madison Program" .

jmp.princeton.edu . Retrieved 2018-12-26 .

^ Kirkpatrick, David D. (2009-12-16).

"Robert P. George, the Conservative-Christian Big Thinker" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2019-07-31 .

^ Mayer, Jane (2016-02-12).

"How Right-Wing Billionaires Infiltrated Higher Education" .

The Chronicle of Higher Education .

ISSN 0009-5982 . Retrieved 2018-12-26 .

^ "Dark Money: To Charles Koch, Professors Are Lobbyists" .

Greenpeace USA . 2016-01-28 . Retrieved 2023-08-30 .

^ Eng, Janny; Rupertus, Annie (March 29, 2023).

"Protestors flock to Princeton to oppose Israeli judicial reform as controversial lecturer speaks" .

The Daily Princetonian . Retrieved 2023-08-30 .

^ Byler, David (2010-12-02).

"Conservative Groups on Campus | The Princeton Tory" .

The Princeton Tory . Retrieved 2023-08-30 .

^ "Conservative Princeton professor promotes civil discourse at UNC" .

newsobserver . Retrieved 2018-12-26 .

^ Faith in the halls of power: how evangelicals joined the American elite, D. Michael Lindsay, Oxford University Press US, 2007, p. 86 ^ "Sign the Statement: Truth Seeking, Democracy, and Freedom of Thought and Expression - A Statement by Robert P. George and Cornel West" .

James Madison Program . Retrieved 21 March 2019 .

^ Flaherty, Colleen.

"Rejecting 'Campus Illiberalism' " .

Inside Higher Ed . Retrieved 2023-08-30 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Princeton University History Trustees Academics Schools Graduate School Architecture Engineering Public and International Affairs Department of Economics Mathematics Physics Psychology Centers Bendheim Center for Finance Center for Information Technology Policy Julis-Rabinowitz Center for Public Policy and Finance James Madison Program Liechtenstein Institute on Self-Determination Princeton Neuroscience Institute Princeton Institute for International and Regional Studies Office of Population Research Labs Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory Dining Eating clubs Cannon Club Cap and Gown Club Charter Club Cloister Inn Colonial Club Cottage Club Ivy Club Quadrangle Club Terrace Club Tiger Inn Tower Club former: Campus Club Campus Alexander Hall Art Museum Chapel Cleveland Tower Frist Campus Center Joseph Henry House Maclean House Lake Carnegie Library McCarter Theatre Nassau Hall Princeton Branch (The Dinky) Tiger Transit Prospect House Putnam Collection of Sculpture Residential Colleges Butler Forbes Mathey Rockefeller Whitman New College West Yeh Graduate future: Hobson former: First The Hedgehog and the Fox Walter Lowrie House Washington Road Elm Allée People Lists of people American Whig-Clisophic Society Nobel laureates Presidents FitzRandolph Gate Newman Day " Old Nassau " Reunions Jane Eliza Procter Fellowship former: Evelyn College for Women Princeton Club of New York Princeton Club of Philadelphia Princeton Law School Presidents Dickinson Burr Edwards Davies Finley Witherspoon Smith Green Carnahan Maclean McCosh Patton Wilson Hibben Dodds Goheen Bowen Shapiro Tilghman Eisgruber Acting Cowell Green Blair Lindsley Stewart Duffield Publications The Daily Princetonian The Princeton Tory The Nassau Weekly The Princeton Progressive Princeton Alumni Weekly Princeton Tiger Magazine Princeton University Press Groups AlumniCorps American Whig-Cliosophic Society Footnotes Orchestra Glee Club Katzenjammers Nassoons Theatre Intime Tigertones Triangle Club Two Dickinson Street Co-op WPRB Athletics Teams Baseball Men's basketball Women's basketball Football Men's ice hockey Women's ice hockey Men's lacrosse Women's lacrosse Rugby Men's soccer Men's squash Facilities Hobey Baker Rink Bill Clarke Field Class of 1952 Stadium Dillon Gymnasium Jadwin Gymnasium Powers Field at Princeton Stadium Roberts Stadium Shea Rowing Center former: University Field Palmer Stadium Games Rutgers (football, 1869) Rutgers (Cannon War) Chicago (football, 1922) Culture Big Three Canon Song The First Game University Band Winged football helmet Category Commons 40°20′56.3″N 74°38′58.2″W ﻿ / ﻿ 40.348972°N 74.649500°W ﻿ / 40.348972; -74.649500 NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw‐web.codfw.main‐7c956d68b4‐br9vb
Cached time: 20250817200421
Cache expiry: 2592000
Reduced expiry: false
Complications: [vary‐revision‐sha1, show‐toc]
CPU time usage: 0.645 seconds
Real time usage: 0.773 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 4462/1000000
Revision size: 21221/2097152 bytes
Post‐expand include size: 188191/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 6124/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 17/100
Expensive parser function count: 4/500
Unstrip recursion depth: 1/20
Unstrip post‐expand size: 118091/5000000 bytes
Lua time usage: 0.330/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6963644/52428800 bytes
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1/500 Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00%  537.639      1 -total
 41.16%  221.279      1 Template:Reflist
 27.52%  147.955     19 Template:Cite_web
 19.67%  105.763      1 Template:Conservatism_US
 18.51%   99.514      1 Template:Infobox_organization
 17.01%   91.454      1 Template:Infobox
 13.58%   73.018      5 Template:Navbox
 12.30%   66.151      1 Template:Princeton
  4.20%   22.581      5 Template:Cite_news
  4.18%   22.451      1 Template:Dead_link Saved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:25524558:|#|:idhash:canonical and timestamp 20250817200421 and revision id 1306443253. Rendering was triggered because: page-view Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=James_Madison_Program_in_American_Ideals_and_Institutions&oldid=1306443253 " Categories : Princeton University 2000 establishments in New Jersey Educational institutions established in 2000 Organizations established in 2000 John M. Olin Foundation Hidden categories: All articles with dead external links Articles with dead external links from August 2025 Articles with permanently dead external links Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 17 August 2025, at 20:03 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents James Madison Program in American Ideals and Institutions Add languages Add topic

