Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Origin 2 Concept 3 Examples in literature 4 Psychology 5 Criticisms 6 See also 7 References 8 External links Toggle the table of contents Suspension of disbelief 22 languages العربية Azərbaycanca Čeština Deutsch Español Esperanto فارسی Français Galego 한국어 Bahasa Indonesia Italiano עברית Bahasa Melayu Nederlands 日本語 Português Русский Simple English ไทย Українська 粵語 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Allowing imagination when reading or viewing a fictional story Samuel Taylor Coleridge , a philosopher and poet known for his influence on English literature , coined the turn-of-phrase and elaborated upon it.

Suspension of disbelief is the avoidance—often described as willing—of critical thinking and logic in understanding something that is unreal or impossible in reality, such as something in a work of speculative fiction , in order to believe it for the sake of enjoying its narrative.

[ 1 ] Historically, the concept originates in the Greco-Roman principles of theatre , wherein the audience ignores the unreality of fiction to experience catharsis from the actions and experiences of characters.

[ 2 ] The phrase was coined and elaborated upon by the English poet and philosopher Samuel Taylor Coleridge in his 1817 work Biographia Literaria : "that willing suspension of disbelief for the moment, which constitutes poetic
faith".

[ 3 ] Origin [ edit ] The phrase first appeared in English poet and aesthetic philosopher Samuel Taylor Coleridge 's Biographia Literaria , where he suggested that if an author could infuse a "human interest and a semblance of truth" into a story with implausible elements, the reader would willingly suspend judgement concerning the implausibility of the narrative.

[ 4 ] Coleridge was interested in returning fantastic elements to poetry and developed the concept to support how a modern, enlightened audience would continue to enjoy such types of literature. Coleridge suggested that his work, such as Lyrical Ballads , his collaboration with William Wordsworth , essentially involved attempting to explain supernatural characters and events in plausible terms so that implausible characters and events of the imagination can seem to be truthful and present a greater contrast between fiction and reality.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] Coleridge also referred to this concept as "poetic faith", citing the concept as a feeling analogous to the supernatural, which stimulates the mind's faculties regardless of the irrationality of what is being understood.

[ 7 ] Coleridge recalled: It was agreed, that my endeavours should be directed to persons and characters supernatural, or at least romantic, yet so as to transfer from our inward nature a human interest and a semblance of truth sufficient to procure for these shadows of imagination that willing suspension of disbelief for the moment, which constitutes poetic faith. Mr. Wordsworth on the other hand was to propose to himself as his object, to give the charm of novelty to things of every day, and to excite a feeling analogous to the supernatural, by awakening the mind's attention from the lethargy of custom, and directing it to the loveliness and the wonders of the world before us.

[ 4 ] This concept had previously been understood in antiquity, particularly in the Roman theoretical concerns of Horace and Cicero who wrote in a time of increasing skepticism about the supernatural. In Horace's Ars Poetica , he used the quotation Ut pictura poesis , meaning "as is painting so is poetry". According to David Chandler, Coleridge also originally drew his notion from Johann Jakob Brucker 's Historia Critica Philosophiae which cited the phrase " assensus suspensione " ("suspension of assent"); [ 5 ] Brucker's phrase was itself a modernization of the phrase " adsensionis retentio " ("a holding back of assent") used by Cicero in his Academica .

[ 8 ] [ 9 ] Concept [ edit ] The traditional concept of the suspension of disbelief as proposed by Coleridge is not about suspending disbelief in the reality of fictional characters or events, but the suspension of disbelief in phenomena that is regarded as implausible.

[ 10 ] This can be demonstrated in the way a reader suspends disbelief in supernatural phenomena itself—simulating the feelings of a character that is experiencing the phenomena in the narrative of a story—rather than simply the implausibility of the phenomena in a story.

The phrase "suspension of disbelief" came to be used more loosely in the later 20th century, often used to imply that the burden was on the reader, rather than the writer, to achieve it. This might be used to refer to the willingness of the audience to overlook the limitations of a medium, so that these do not interfere with the acceptance of those premises. These premises may also lend to the engagement of the mind and perhaps proposition of thoughts, ideas, art and theories.

[ 11 ] With a film, for instance, the viewer has to ignore the reality that they are viewing a staged performance and temporarily accept it as their reality in order to be entertained.  Early black-and-white films are an example of visual media that require the audience to suspend their disbelief for this reason.

[ 12 ] Cognitive estrangement in fiction involves using a person's ignorance to promote suspension of disbelief.

[ 13 ] Examples in literature [ edit ] See also: Dramatic convention Suspension of disbelief is sometimes said to be an essential component of live theater, where it was recognized by Shakespeare , who refers to it in the Prologue to Henry V : "make imaginary puissance [...] 'tis your thoughts that now must deck our kings [...] turning the accomplishment of many years into an hourglass". Poetry and fiction involving the supernatural had gone out of fashion to a large extent in the 18th century, in part due to the declining belief in witches and other supernatural agents among the educated classes, who embraced the rational approach to the world offered by the new science.

Alexander Pope , notably, felt the need to explain and justify his use of elemental spirits in The Rape of the Lock , one of the few English poems of the century that invoked the supernatural.

[ 14 ] Psychology [ edit ] American psychological critic Norman N. Holland provided a neuroscientific theory of suspension of disbelief.

[ 15 ] Neurally, when a person engages with a narrative in a work of fiction, the brain goes wholly into a perceiving mode, engaging less intensely with the faculties for acting or planning to act; "poetic faith" is a willing act that is supported by the value of a narrative that is being engaged with. When the person stops perceiving to think about what has been seen or heard, its "truth-value" is assessed.

[ 12 ] Criticisms [ edit ] Aesthetic philosophers generally reject claims that a "suspension of disbelief" can accurately characterize the relationship between people and "fictions". American philosopher Kendall Walton noted that if viewers were to truly suspend disbelief when viewing a horror movie and accept its images as absolute fact, they would have a true-to-life set of reactions that are impractical and contradict the safety of the leisure of viewing the movie. For instance, if this logic generally applied, then audience members would try to help endangered on-screen characters, or call authorities when witnessing on-screen murders.

[ 16 ] Not all authors believe that "suspension of disbelief" adequately characterizes the audience's relationship to imaginative works of art.

J. R. R. Tolkien challenged this concept in " On Fairy-Stories ", choosing instead the paradigm of secondary belief based on inner consistency of reality: in order for the narrative to work, the reader must believe that what they read is true within the secondary reality of the fictional world . By focusing on creating an internally consistent fictional world , the author makes secondary belief possible. Tolkien argued that suspension of disbelief is only necessary when the work has failed to create secondary belief, saying that from that point on, the reader ceases to be immersed in the story and so must make a conscious effort to suspend their disbelief or else give up on it entirely.

[ 17 ] See also [ edit ] Aesthetic distance Compartmentalization (psychology) Deus ex machina Distancing effect Fourth wall Kayfabe Soap opera effect Paradox of fiction The Real Sense of wonder Suspension of judgment Tommy Westphall universe hypothesis Verisimilitude (fiction) References [ edit ] ^ "suspend disbelief (phrase)" .

Oxford Dictionaries (Online ed.).

Oxford University Press . 2018.

OCLC 656668849 . Archived from the original on 29 July 2018 . Retrieved 29 July 2018 .

^ Safire, William (7 October 2007).

"William Safire - On Language" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 28 October 2019 .

^ "Suspension of disbelief" .

Oxford Reference . Oxford University Press . Retrieved 30 October 2023 .

^ a b Coleridge, Samuel Taylor (13 March 2020).

"from Biographia Literaria , Chapter XIV" .

Poetry Foundation .

^ a b Ferri, Anthony J. (2007).

Willing Suspension of Disbelief: Poetic Faith in Film . Lanham, MD: Lexington Books. pp. 6, 7.

ISBN 9780739117781 .

^ Safire, William.

On Language; Suspension of Disbelief . New York Times. 7 October 2007.

^ Coleridge, Samuel Taylor (1834).

Biographia Literaria: Or, Biographical Sketches of My Literary Life and Opinions . New York: Leavitt, Lord & Company. p. 175.

^ Chandler, David (1 March 1996).

"Coleridge's 'suspension of disbelief' and Jacob Brucker's 'assensus suspensione.' " .

Notes and Queries .

43 (1): 39– 41.

doi : 10.1093/nq/43.1.39 .

^ Cicero, Academica Book II (Lucullus), Section XVIII (59) ^ Kivy, Peter (2011).

Once-Told Tales: An Essay in Literary Aesthetics . West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons. p. 100.

ISBN 9780470657676 .

^ Welkos, Robert W. (15 April 1993).

"From 'King Kong' to 'Indecent Proposal,' audiences have been asked to buy a premise that can make – or break – a film" .

Los Angeles Times . Retrieved 24 October 2010 .

^ a b Holland, Norman.

"Literature and the Brain" .

Literatureandthebrain.com . PsyArt . Retrieved 28 April 2014 .

^ Buchanan, Ian (2010).

A Dictionary of Critical Theory . Oxford: Oxford University Press.

ISBN 9780199532919 .

^ Deutsch, Helen (1996).

Resemblance & Disgrace: Alexander Pope and the Deformation of Culture . Harvard University Press.

ISBN 978-0-674-76489-7 .

^ Holland, Norman (2008).

"Spiderman? Sure! The Neuroscience of Disbelief" .

Interdisciplinary Science Reviews .

33 (4): 312– 320.

doi : 10.1179/174327908X392870 .

S2CID 144494455 . Retrieved 28 April 2014 .

^ " Fearing Fictions ", Kendall L. Walton, JSTOR ( The Journal of Philosophy , Vol. 75, No. 1 (01-1978), pp. 5–27). Retrieved 3 January 2007.

^ Tolkien, J. R. R. "On Fairy-Stories" in The Monsters and the Critics and Other Essays , George Allen & Unwin Press, 1983, pp. 109–61.

External links [ edit ] Coleridge's Biographia Literaria , Chapter XIV, containing the term v t e Narrative Character Antagonist Archenemy Character arc Character flaw Characterization Confidant Deuteragonist False protagonist Focal character Foil Gothic double Hamartia Hero Anti Byronic Tragic Narrator Protagonist Stock character Straight man Supporting character Title character Tritagonist Villain Plot Ab ovo Action Backstory Origin story Chekhov's gun Cliché Cliffhanger Conflict Deus ex machina Dialogue Dramatic structure Eucatastrophe Foreshadowing Flashback Flashforward Frame story In medias res Kishōtenketsu MacGuffin Pace Plot device Plot twist Poetic justice Red herring Reveal Self-insertion Shaggy dog story Stereotype Story arc Story within a story Subplot Suspense Trope Setting Alternate history Backstory Crossover Dreamworld Dystopia Fictional location city country universe parallel Utopia Worldbuilding Theme Irony Leitmotif Metaphor Moral Moral development Motif Deal with the Devil Conflict between good and evil Self-fulfilling prophecy Time travel Style Allegory Bathos Comic relief Diction Figure of speech Imagery Mode Mood Narration Narrative techniques Hook Show, don't tell Stylistic device Suspension of disbelief Symbolism Tone Structure Act Act structure Three-act structure Freytag's Pyramid Exposition / Protasis Rising action/Epitasis Climax / Peripeteia Falling action/Catastasis Denouement/Catastrophe Linear narrative Nonlinear narrative films television series Premise Types of fiction with multiple endings Form Drama Fabliau Flash fiction Folklore Fable Fairy tale Legend Myth Tall tale Gamebook Narrative art Narrative poetry Epic poetry Novel Novella Parable Short story Vignette Genre ( List ) Fiction Action fiction Adventure Comic Crime Docu Epistolary Ergodic Erotic Historical Western Mystery Nautical Paranoid Philosophical Picaresque Political Pop culture Psychological Religious Rogue Romance Chivalric Prose Saga Satire Speculative fiction Fantasy Gothic Southern Horror Magic realism Science Hard Utopian and dystopian Underwater Superhero Theological Thriller Urban Nonfiction Autobiography Biography Novel Creative Narration Diegesis First-person Second-person Third-person Third-person omniscient narrative Subjectivity Unreliable narrator Multiple narrators Stream of consciousness Stream of unconsciousness Tense Past Present Future Related Dominant narrative Fiction writing Continuity Canon Reboot Retcon Parallel novel Prequel / Sequel Genre List Literary science Literary theory Narrative identity Narrative paradigm Narrative therapy Narratology Metafiction Political narrative Rhetoric Glossary Screenwriting Series of works Storytelling Tellability Verisimilitude v t e Samuel Taylor Coleridge List of poems Topics Early life Opium use Albatross metaphor Lake Poets Pantisocracy Person on business from Porlock Coleridge's theory of life Organic form Romantic epistemology Suspension of disbelief Early poetry " The Destruction of the Bastile " " Dura Navis " " Easter Holidays " " Monody on the Death of Chatterton " " On Quitting School " " Pain: Composed in Sickness " " Songs of the Pixies " " The Ballad of the Dark Ladié " Love ( Introduction to the Tale of the Dark Ladie ) Plays The Fall of Robespierre Remorse (Osorio) Zapolya Cambridge and Bristol poetry The Destiny of Nations Lines on an Autumnal Evening Lines Written at Shurton Bars On Receiving an Account Ode on the Departing Year Poems on Various Subjects Sibylline Leaves Religious Musings To a Young Ass To Fortune To the River Otter " Lewti " Eminent Characters " To Erskine " " To Burke " " To Priestley " " To Fayette " " To Kosciusko " " To Pitt " " To Bowles " " To Mrs Siddons " " To Godwin " " To Southey " " To Sheridan " " To Lord Stanhope " Conversation poems Dejection: An Ode The Eolian Harp Fears in Solitude Frost at Midnight The Nightingale: A Conversation Poem Reflections on Having Left a Place of Retirement This Lime-Tree Bower My Prison To William Wordsworth Late poetry and Lyrical Ballads Christabel " France: An Ode " " Hymn Before Sunrise " Kubla Khan The Rime of the Ancient Mariner " The Devil's Thoughts " " Time, Real And Imaginary " " The Knight's Tomb " Biographical and other works Biographia Literaria The Watchman Notebooks Family Sara Coleridge (daughter) Derwent Coleridge (son) Hartley Coleridge (son) Christabel Rose Coleridge (granddaughter) Ernest Hartley Coleridge (grandson) Herbert Coleridge (grandson) James Coleridge (brother) Henry Nelson Coleridge (nephew and son-in-law) Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Suspension_of_disbelief&oldid=1292006904 " Categories : Plot (narrative) 1817 introductions 1810s neologisms 1810s quotations Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use dmy dates from September 2020 This page was last edited on 24 May 2025, at 17:44 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Suspension of disbelief 22 languages Add topic

