Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Characteristics 2 Controversy and objections 3 Examples Toggle Examples subsection 3.1 Sex and sexuality 3.2 Politics 3.3 Religion 3.4 Race, ethnicity, and nationality 3.5 Disability 3.6 Art movements 3.7 Feminism 3.8 Others 4 See also 5 References Toggle the table of contents Reappropriation 11 languages العربية Català Deutsch Ελληνικά Español עברית Nederlands Polski Português Русский 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Valuing a formerly pejorative term in esteem Not to be confused with Cultural appropriation .

"Reclaiming" redirects here. For the neopagan organization of this name, see Reclaiming (neopaganism) . For other uses, see Reclaim .

Claude Monet 's Impression, soleil levant was ridiculed as "Impression-ist" in 1872, but the term then became the name of the art movement, " impressionism ", and painters began to self-identify as "impressionist".

Part of a series on Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race or ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk v t e In linguistics , reappropriation , reclamation , or resignification [ 1 ] is the cultural process by which a group reclaims words or artifacts that were previously used in a way disparaging of that group. It is a specific form of a semantic change (i.e., change in a word's meaning). Linguistic reclamation can have wider implications in the fields of discourse and has been described in terms of personal or sociopolitical empowerment .

Characteristics [ edit ] A reclaimed or reappropriated word is a word that was at one time pejorative but has been brought back into acceptable usage, usually starting within its original target, i.e. the communities that were pejoratively described by that word, and later spreading to the general populace as well.

[ 1 ] [ 2 ] [ 3 ] Some of the terms being reclaimed have originated as non-pejorative terms that over time became pejorative. Reclaiming them can be seen as restoring their original intent. This, however, does not apply to all such words as some were used in a derogatory fashion from the very beginning.

[ 1 ] In terms of linguistic theory , reappropriation can be seen as a specific case of a type of a semantic change , namely, of amelioration – a process through which a word's meaning becomes more positive over time.

[ 4 ] Robin Brontsema suggested that there are at least three mutually exclusive goals of reclamation: [ 1 ] Value reversal Neutralization Stigma exploitation Value reversal refers to changing the meaning from pejorative to positive, while neutralization refers to changing the meaning from pejorative to neutral. Stigma exploitation, finally, refers to retaining the derogatory nature of such terms as a reminder that a given group has been subject to unfair treatment.

Reclamation can be seen as both a psychological, individual process and as a sociological, society-wide process.

[ 5 ] [ 6 ] In terms of a personal process, it has been discussed in the context of empowerment that comes from "disarming the power of a dominant group to control one's own and others' views of oneself", and gaining control over the way one is described, and hence, one's self-image , self-control and self-understanding .

[ 6 ] [ 3 ] Brontsema wrote that "At the heart of linguistic reclamation is the right of self-definition , of forging and naming one's own existence." [ 1 ] Other scholars have connected this concept to that of self-labelling .

[ 3 ] The empowerment process, and the denial of language as a tool of oppression as abuse of power, has also been stressed by scholars such as Judith Butler and Michel Foucault , the latter who also referred to it as a " reverse discourse ".

[ 7 ] In terms of the wider socio-political empowerment process, reclamation process has also been credited with promoting social justice , [ 8 ] and building group solidarity ; [ 7 ] activist groups that engage in this process have been argued to be more likely to be seen as representative of their groups and see those groups as raising in power and status in their society.

[ 3 ] Scholars have argued that those who use such terms to describe themselves in the act of reappropriation "will feel powerful and therefore see his or her group label as less stigmatizing. Observers will infer that the group has power and will therefore see the label as less saturated in negativity".

[ 3 ] Although those terms are most often used in the context of language, this concept has also been used in relation to other cultural concepts, for example in the discussion of reappropriation of stereotypes , [ 9 ] reappropriation of popular culture (e.g., the reappropriation of science fiction literature into elite, high literature [ 10 ] ), or reappropriation of traditions.

[ 11 ] Controversy and objections [ edit ] Reclaimed words often remain controversial for a time, due to their original pejorative nature. For some terms, even "reclaimed" usage by members of the community concerned is a subject of controversy.

[ 1 ] Often, not all members of a given community support the idea that a particular slur should be reclaimed at all.

[ 1 ] In other cases, a word can be seen as acceptable when used by the members of the community that has reclaimed it (in-group usage), but its use by outside parties (out-group usage) can still be seen as derogatory and thus controversial.

[ 7 ] For example, Brontsema noted in 2003 in his discussion of the reclaimed terms that while "[the term nigger (sometimes nigga )] may be acceptable for black people to use it freely, it is off-limits to whites, whose usage of nigger cannot be the same, given its history and the general history of racial oppression and racial relations in the United States." [ 1 ] A similar argument has been made in 2009 for words associated with the LGBT movement like queer or dyke .

[ 12 ] A related discourse occurred with regards to the Washington Redskins name controversy , with the Native American community divided on whether the term has been reclaimed or not.

[ 7 ] Those opposed to the reclamation of terms have argued that such terms are irredeemable and are forever connected to their derogatory meaning, and their usage will continue to hurt those who remember its original intent [ 1 ] and even reinforce the existing stigma.

[ 3 ] The supporters of reclamation argue, in turn, that many such words had non-derogatory meanings that are simply being restored and that in either case, reclaiming such a word denies it to those who would want to use it to oppress others and represents a form of moral victory for the group that reclaimed it.

[ 1 ] In 2017, the US Supreme Court heard arguments for Matal v. Tam . In that case, the US Patent and Trademark Office refused a trademark registration for an Asian American band, The Slants , because it deemed the term disparaging. However, the court ruled unanimously in the band's favor.

Washington University in St. Louis conducted an extensive study on reappropriation based on the band name and found that reclaimed words could be an effective tool for neutralizing disparaging words: "Reappropriation does seem to work in the sense of defusing insults, rendering them less disparaging and harmful." [ 13 ] For example the word " queer " in the sense of "homosexual" was originally strongly offensive, echoing the negative connotations of the word's older meanings, included "strange" and "odd". Since the 1980s, this term was reclaimed by some gay people as a self-reference. From nowadays, because of this reason, this term is still considered offensive by some, especially when used by a person whose sexual identity is not queer.

[ 1 ] [ 7 ] Examples [ edit ] Sex and sexuality [ edit ] There are many recent examples of linguistic re-appropriation in the areas of human sexuality , gender roles , sexual orientation , etc. Among these are: dyke [ 14 ] [ 1 ] [ 7 ] faggot [ 15 ] [ 16 ] hermaphrodite [ 17 ] queer [ 1 ] [ 7 ] Politics [ edit ] In England, Cavalier was a derogatory nickname reappropriated as self-identification, [ 18 ] in contrast to the term Roundhead which, despite being used by the Royalists for the supporters of the Parliamentary cause, remained a derisory word up to the point of it being a punishable offense if used to refer to a soldier of the New Model Army .

[ 19 ] Tory (originally from the Middle Irish word for 'pursuer' tóraidhe ), Whig (from whiggamore ; see the Whiggamore Raid ) and Suffragette are other British examples.

In the American colonies, British officers used Yankee , a term originated in reference to Dutch settlers, as a derogatory term against the colonists. British officers created the early versions of the song " Yankee Doodle ", as a criticism of the uncultured colonists, but during the Revolution, as the colonists began to reappropriate the label Yankee as a point of pride, they likewise reappropriated the song, altering verses, and turning it into a patriotic anthem.

[ 20 ] In the 1850s in the United States, a secretive political party was derisively dubbed the Know Nothing party, based on their penchant for saying "I know nothing" when asked for details by outsiders; this became the common name for the party. It eventually became a popular name, sufficiently so that consumer products like tea, candy, and even a freighter were branded with the name.

[ 21 ] Anarchism was mostly a derogatory term used by opponents of collectivist forms of socialism, until it was adopted by the anarchist movement in the late 1800s.

[ 22 ] During the 2016 United States presidential election , Hillary Clinton referred to some Trump supporters as a " Basket of deplorables ". Many Trump supporters endorsed the phrase.

[ 23 ] Donald Trump also played the song " Do You Hear the People Sing?

" from the musical Les Misérables as an introduction to one of his rallies, using a graphic captioned "Les Deplorables".

[ 24 ] [ 25 ] Subsequently, Trump called Clinton a " nasty woman " during the final presidential debate, resulting in that expression being described as a "rallying cry" for women.

[ 26 ] It was soon featured on merchandise and used by Clinton's campaign surrogates.

[ 27 ] [ 28 ] Religion [ edit ] Rafida , an early derogatory term for those who rejected the Caliphate in favor of the Imamate , [ 29 ] was reappropriated in Twelver Shiism , via sayings attributed to Shia Imams , that reframe this term favorably as those who reject oppression and injustice. In one such oral tradition, Rafida are identified as a small group among the people of Pharaoh who rejected his rule, undaunted by his threats of punishment. This tradition is a reference to verses 7:120–126 and 20:70–75 of the Quran . According to some Twelver traditions, the term Rafida appeared also in the Tawrat .

[ 30 ] A later example of successful reclaiming is the term Jesuit to refer to members of the Society of Jesus . This was originally a derogatory term referring to people who too readily invoked the name of Jesus in their politics, but that members of the Society adopted over time for themselves, so that the word came to refer exclusively to them, and generally in a positive or neutral sense, [ 31 ] even though the term "Jesuitical" is derived from the Society of Jesus and is used to mean things like: manipulative, conspiring, treacherous, capable of intellectually justifying anything by convoluted reasoning.

[ 32 ] [ 33 ] [ 34 ] [ 35 ] Other examples can be found in the origins of Methodism ; early members were originally mocked for their "methodical" and rule-driven religious devotion, founder John Wesley embraced the term for his movement.

[ 36 ] Members of the Religious Society of Friends were termed Quakers as an epithet, but took up the term themselves. Similarly, the term Protestant was originally a derogatory term, and more recently the term pagan has been subject to a similar change in meaning.

[ 7 ] Race, ethnicity, and nationality [ edit ] To a lesser extent, and more controversially among the groups referred to, many racial, ethnic, and class terms have been reappropriated: Baster , the name is derived from bastaard, the Dutch word for "bastard". They are a Southern African ethnic group descended from White European men and Black African women. The Basters reappropriated it as a "proud name", claiming their ancestry and history.

[ 37 ] Black , Negro , nigga , or nigger by African Americans [ 2 ] [ 38 ] Curry, used a derogatory term for South Asians (often in conjunction with muncher or slurper), reappropriated by some members of the South Asian expatriate or American-Born Confused Desi community.

[ 39 ] Jew by the Jewish people (the word used to be seen as pejorative in English).

[ 40 ] [ 41 ] [ 42 ] That process is still not complete in some Slavic languages, where the word Zhyd (Cyrillic: жид) can still be seen as pejorative.

[ 43 ] Kugel , playful South African English slang for a materialistic young woman, originally was a derogatory term used by the elder generation of South African Jews for a young Jewish woman who forsook traditional Jewish dress values for those of the ostentatiously wealthy and became overly materialistic and over-groomed. The term was then reclaimed by those women.

[ 44 ] Peckerwood , originally black slang in the Southern United States for poor white people, reclaimed by white prison gangs [ 45 ] [ 46 ] [ 47 ] Smoggie , originally a derogatory term for people from the North East England town of Middlesbrough , in reference to the town's notorious industrial pollution , now commonly used in self-identification.

[ 48 ] White trash , a classist slur referring to poor white people, reappropriated by some in the Southern states of the United States of America as a cultural symbol and badge of pride [ 49 ] [ 50 ] - however this re-appropriation has not been as evident in mainstream British English syntax where it is used in a more condescending or sarcastic manner.

Wog by Australians of Greek , Italian , Arab or Turkish descent.

[ 51 ] Ukrop, originally an ethnic slur for Ukrainians . Literally " dill ", a pun: Ukrainian = ukrop.

[ 52 ] The slur was reappropriated by Ukrainians during the war in Donbas [ 53 ] and later adopted by the UKROP party.

Disability [ edit ] Cripple , crip , gimp by people with disabilities.

[ 54 ] Mad by people with mental health conditions.

Fat by people who are overweight or obese, particularly by the body positivity and fat acceptance movements Art movements [ edit ] Impressionists In 1874 during their first independent art show, critic Louis Leroy penned a hostile review of the show in Le Charivari newspaper under the title "The Exhibition of the Impression-ists". In particular he used the painting Impression, soleil levant by Claude Monet to ridicule the painters for their lack of seriousness preferring to paint "fleeting impressions of the moment" rather than allegorical or ultra-realist themes.

[ 55 ] [ 56 ] Stuckism is an international art movement founded in 1999; its members produce figurative art .

Tracey Emin , one of the Young British Artists known for their conceptual art , accused her then-boyfriend of lack of imagination or reach, of being "stuck". He took on the term.

[ 57 ] Shoegaze is a genre of music characterized by traits such as heavily distorted guitars. The term "shoegaze" was initially a pejorative label, criticizing performers for tending to stand still and closely watch their effects pedals during concerts; however, critics and artists later began to embrace the name.

[ 58 ] Feminism [ edit ] Words some feminist activists have argued should be reclaimed include: bitch [ 3 ] cunt [ 1 ] slut [ 59 ] lady [ 60 ] Others [ edit ] Nerd and geek by those with technical or obscure interests Brat by the children of military members Ham Radio by Amateur radio operators Zef by Die Antwoord and Jack Parow Bastard by people who are adopted, orphaned, or are uncertain about who their biological parents are Pervert and freak by people with sexual fetishes or a proclivity for BDSM See also [ edit ] Détournement , a similar strategy used for images Dysphemism treadmill , the process by which offensive terms can become acceptable without deliberate intervention Gaysper , reappropriated LGBT symbol Geographical renaming , which can include reclaiming an earlier pre-colonial name References [ edit ] ^ a b c d e f g h i j k l m n Brontsema, Robin (2004-06-01).

"A Queer Revolution: Reconceptualizing the Debate Over Linguistic Reclamation" .

Colorado Research in Linguistics .

17 (1).

doi : 10.25810/dky3-zq57 .

ISSN 1937-7029 . Archived from the original on 2021-07-18.

Linguistic reclamation, also known as linguistic resignification or reappropriation, refers to the appropriation of a pejorative epithet by its target(s).

^ a b Croom, A.M. (2011). "Slurs".

Language Sciences .

33 (3): 343– 358.

doi : 10.1016/j.langsci.2010.11.005 .

...that slurs are in certain cases felicitously used to mean something non-derogatory (e.g. in an appropriative manner) is now a well documented linguistic phenomenon.. For instance Russell Simmons, founder of Def Jam Records, reports from the perspective of hip-hop culture that "When we say 'nigger' now, it's very positive. Now all white kids who buy into hip-hop culture call each other 'nigger' because they have no history with the word other than something positive..." ^ a b c d e f g Groom, Carla; Bodenhausen, Galen V; Galinsky, Adam D; Hugenberg, Kurt (2003-01-01), "The reappropriation of stigmatizing labels: implications for social identity", Identity Issues in Groups , Research on Managing Groups and Teams, vol. 5, Emerald Group Publishing Limited, pp.

221– 256, doi : 10.1016/s1534-0856(02)05009-0 , ISBN 0-7623-0951-2 , reappropriation, the process of taking possession of a slur previously used exclusively by dominant groups to reinforce a stigmatized group's lesser status ^ Curzan, Anne (8 May 2014).

Fixing English: Prescriptivism and Language History . Cambridge University Press. pp.

146– 148.

ISBN 978-1-107-02075-7 .

^ Godrej, Farah (2011). "Spaces for Counter-Narratives: The Phenomenology of Reclamation".

Frontiers: A Journal of Women Studies .

32 (3): 111– 133.

doi : 10.5250/fronjwomestud.32.3.0111 .

ISSN 0160-9009 .

JSTOR 10.5250/fronjwomestud.32.3.0111 .

PMID 22299194 .

S2CID 28011738 .

^ a b Godrej, Farah (April 3, 2003).

"Spaces for Counter-Narratives: The Phenomenology of Reclamation" (PDF) .

Paper prepared for the Midwest Political Science Association Meeting . University of Indiana. Archived from the original (PDF) on 2005-10-25 . Retrieved July 25, 2011 .

Citing Patricia Hill Collins, Black Feminist Thought: Knowledge, Consciousness and the Politics of Empowerment (New York: Routledge, 1991) ^ a b c d e f g h Coles, Gregory (2016). "EMERGING VOICES: The exorcism of language: Reclaimed derogatory terms and their limits".

College English .

78 (5): 424– 446.

doi : 10.58680/co201628524 .

ProQuest 1787109531 .

^ Herbert, Cassie (2015-11-01). "Precarious projects: the performative structure of reclamation".

Language Sciences . Slurs.

52 : 131– 138.

doi : 10.1016/j.langsci.2015.05.002 .

ISSN 0388-0001 .

^ Reyes, Angela Rosario (2003-01-01).

" "The other Asian": Linguistic, ethnic and cultural stereotypes at an after -school Asian American teen videomaking project" .

Dissertations Available from ProQuest : 1– 347.

^ Tamás, Bényei (2001). "Leakings: Reappropriating Science Fiction—The Case of Kurt Vonnegut".

Journal of the Fantastic in the Arts .

11 (4 (44)): 432– 453.

ISSN 0897-0521 .

JSTOR 43308479 .

^ Meilicke, Christine A. (2005).

Jerome Rothenberg's Experimental Poetry and Jewish Tradition . Lehigh University Press. pp. 23–.

ISBN 978-0-934223-76-8 .

^ Mallon, Gerald P. (2 June 2009).

Social Work Practice with Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender People . Routledge. p. 388.

ISBN 978-1-135-26686-8 .

^ "Toward a more civil discourse | The Source | Washington University in St. Louis" .

The Source . 2019-11-14 . Retrieved 2019-12-06 .

^ "Trademark Office says no to Dykes on Bikes" . National Center for Lesbian Rights. Archived from the original on 2011-07-18.

^ Cheves, Alexander (2017-08-02).

"21 Words the Queer Community Has Reclaimed (and Some We Haven't)" .

The Advocate . Retrieved 22 June 2021 .

^ Ellis, Philip (6 July 2019).

"Reclaiming the word 'faggot' is a tricky business" .

GQ . Condé Nast. Archived from the original on 16 October 2022 . Retrieved 22 June 2021 .

^ Abbie E. Goldberg; Genny Beemyn (2021).

The SAGE Encyclopedia of Trans Studies . SAGE Publications. p. 953.

ISBN 978-1-5443-9384-1 .

^ Anonymous (1911).

"Cavalier" .

Encyclopædia Britannica . Vol. 5 (11th ed.).

^ Worden, Blair (2009).

The English Civil Wars 1640–1660 . London: Penguin Books. p. 2.

ISBN 978-0-14-100694-9 .

^ Okrent, Arika (5 Nov 2013).

"Mystery Solved: The Etymology of Dude" .

Slate . The Slate Group . Retrieved 10 Aug 2015 .

^ William E. Gienapp. "Salmon P. Chase, Nativism, and the Formation of the Republican Party in Ohio", pp. 22, 24.

Ohio History , p. 93.

^ Baker, Zoe (2023). "Means And Ends: The Revolutionary Practice of Anarchism In Europe And The United States". AK Press. p. 30 ^ " 'Deplorable' and proud: Some Trump supporters embrace the label" .

USA Today .

^ "Trump walks onstage to theme of 'Les Miserables,' greets 'deplorables' at his Miami rally" .

Business Insider .

^ "Donald Trump Enters Stage to 'Les Mis' Theme, Welcomes 'Deplorables' " .

Entertainment Weekly .

^ "Women Reclaim 'Nasty Woman' as Their Own Rallying Cry" .

Global Citizen . 21 October 2016. Archived from the original on 2021-08-17 . Retrieved 2020-12-15 .

^ Hatch, Jenavieve (2016-10-20).

"18 Perfect Pieces Of Merch For The Nasty Woman In All Of Us" .

HuffPost . Retrieved 2020-12-15 .

^ "Clinton seizes upon 'nasty woman' as Trump takes verbal self-destruction to new heights" .

The Washington Times . Retrieved 2020-12-15 .

^ Kohlberg 2012 .

sfn error: no target: CITEREFKohlberg2012 ( help ) ^ Kohlberg 1979 , p. 677.

sfn error: no target: CITEREFKohlberg1979 ( help ) ^ Pollen, John Hungerford (1912).

"Society of Jesus" .

Catholic Encyclopedia . Vol. 14.

^ Peschier, D. (21 June 2005).

Nineteenth-Century Anti-Catholic Discourses: The Case of Charlotte Brontë . New York, NY: Palgrave Macmillan. p. 49.

ISBN 978-0-230-50502-5 .

^ Stevenson, Angus (19 August 2010).

Oxford Dictionary of English . Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. p. 940.

ISBN 978-0-19-957112-3 .

^ Aikio, Annukka; Vornanen, Rauni (1982).

Uusi sivistyssanakirja (in Finnish). Otava.

^ March, Francis Andrew (1906).

A Thesaurus Dictionary of the English Language Designed to Suggest Immediately Any Desired Word Needed to Express Exactly a Given Idea . Philadelphia, PA: Historical Publishing Company. p.

1089 .

Jesuitical.

^ Atkins, Martyn (2010).

Discipleship... and the people called Methodists (PDF) . The Methodist Church in Britain. p. 9.

ASIN B006OA0XRU . Archived from the original (PDF) on 2015-03-15.

...to be a 'Methodist' was originally a term of ridicule because of the zeal and rigour with which they pursued a life of holiness and sought to be the best disciples of Christ they could.

^ Lang, Hartmut (1998). "The Population Development of the Rehoboth Basters".

Anthropos .

93 (4./6): 381– 391.

JSTOR 40464838 .

^ Kennedy, Randall (18 December 2008).

Nigger: The Strange Career of a Troublesome Word . Knopf Doubleday Publishing Group. p. xvii.

ISBN 978-0-307-53891-8 .

OCLC 838223786 . Retrieved 16 January 2018 .

^ Kwai, Isabella (2018-12-11).

"How 'Subtle Asian Traits' Became a Global Hit" .

The New York Times .

ISSN 0362-4331 . Retrieved 2019-10-23 .

^ Stephen Paul Miller; Morris, Daniel (2010).

Radical Poetics and Secular Jewish Culture . University of Alabama Press. p. 153.

ISBN 978-0-8173-5563-0 .

^ M. Lynn Weiss (1998).

Gertrude Stein and Richard Wright: The Poetics and Politics of Modernism . Univ. Press of Mississippi. p. 66.

ISBN 978-1-60473-188-0 .

^ Jewish Language Review . Association for the Study of Jewish Languages. 1988. p. 416.

^ Winer, Stuart. 19 December 2012. " Ukraine okays 'zhyd' slur for Jews ." The Times of Israel .

^ Sarah Britten (2006).

The Art of the South African Insult . 30 degrees South Publishers. pp.

198– 199.

ISBN 978-1920143053 . Retrieved July 2, 2013 .

^ Allen, Irving L. (1983).

The Language of Ethnic Conflict: Social Organization and Lexical Culture . Columbia University Press. p.

127 .

ISBN 978-0-231-05557-4 .

OCLC 469875261 . Retrieved 16 January 2018 .

^ Carceral, K.C.; Bernard, Thomas J (2006).

Prison, Inc: A Convict Exposes Life Inside a Private Prison . Alternative criminology series. New York: NYU Press. p. 118.

ISBN 978-0-8147-9954-3 .

OCLC 748855316 . Retrieved 16 January 2018 .

^ "Peckerwood | Hate Symbols Database | ADL" .

ADL . Anti-Defamation League . Retrieved 16 January 2018 .

^ McKeown, Sarah (22 June 2009).

"Ich bin ein Smoggy: reclaiming regional pride" . Macmillan Dictionary Blog . Retrieved 30 September 2013 .

^ Griffin, Larry J.; Hargis, Peggy G.; Wilson, Charles Reagan (1 July 2012).

The New Encyclopedia of Southern Culture . Vol. 20: Social Class. Univ of North Carolina Press. p. 370.

ISBN 978-0-8078-8254-2 .

OCLC 852835385 . Retrieved 16 January 2018 .

^ Galinsky, Adam; Schweitzer, Maurice (29 September 2015).

Friend & Foe: When to Cooperate, When to Compete, and How to Succeed at Both . New York: Crown Publishing Group. p. 129.

ISBN 978-0-307-72025-2 .

OCLC 919338995 . Retrieved 16 January 2018 .

In a movie ( 8 Mile ), Eminem declares, 'I'm a piece of white trash; I say it proudly.' ^ Clark, Andrew (12 October 2005).

"A bad word made good" .

The Guardian .

^ Sukhov, Oleg (2014-12-18).

"Putin unapologetic, uncompromising on war against Ukraine - Dec. 18, 2014" .

Kyiv Post . Retrieved 2024-02-10 .

^ Стельмах, Ірина (2014-08-07).

"Як українці стають «Укропами»" .

Радіо Свобода (in Ukrainian) . Retrieved 2024-02-10 .

^ Baglieri, Susan; Shapiro, Arthur (2012).

Disability Studies and the Inclusive Classroom: Critical Practices for Creating Least Restrictive Attitudes . Vol. New York.

Routledge . p. 49.

ISBN 978-0-415-99372-2 .

OCLC 768335668 . Retrieved 16 January 2018 .

^ Cigainero, Jake (October 29, 2014).

"Dating a Seminal Painting Paris Exhibition Traces Origins of Monet's 'Impression, Sunrise' " .

The New York Times . Archived from the original on 2014-11-15 . Retrieved 2015-12-28 .

^ Asselin, Olivier; Lamoureux, Johanne; Ross, Christine (21 July 2008).

Precarious Visualities: New Perspectives on Identification in Contemporary Art and Visual Culture . McGill-Queen's Press – MQUP. pp. 356–.

ISBN 978-0-7735-7439-7 .

^ Thomson, Charles (August 2004), "A Stuckist on Stuckism: Stella Vine", from: Ed. Frank Milner (2004), The Stuckists Punk Victorian , pp. 7–9, National Museums Liverpool , ISBN 1-902700-27-9 . Available online at "The Two Starts of Stuckism" and "The Virtual Stuckists" on stuckism.com.

^ The evolution of the term shoegaze and its connotations has been discussed by Slowdive 's Simon Scott .

Gourlay, Dom (23 April 2009).

"Shoegaze Week: DIS Talks To Simon Scott About His Time In Slowdive" . DrownedInSound. Archived from the original on 6 September 2015 . Retrieved 10 September 2015 .

^ Candy, Brooke (2013). " Das Me ". "You say that I'm a slut, It ain't your business who I'm fucking with, A dude could fuck 3 bitches and they'd say that he's the man, But I get it in with twins, she's a whore, That's what they saying, It's time to take the word back 'Slut' is now a compliment, A sexy-ass female who running shit and confident, Lady who on top of it, a female with a sex drive." ^ Reid Boyd, Elizabeth (2012).

"Lady: A Feminist Four Letter Word?" .

Women and Language .

35 (2): 35– 52.

v t e Discrimination Forms Institutional Reverse Structural Statistical Systemic Taste-based Attributes Age Caste Class Disability Economic Genetic Hair texture Height Language Dialect Looks Mental disorder Nationality or citizenship Race / Ethnicity Reverse Skin color Scientific racism Rank Sex Reverse Sexual orientation Species Size Viewpoint Social Arophobia Anti-albinism Acephobia Adultism Anti-altruistic Anti-autism Anti-homelessness Anti-drug addicts Anti-intellectualism Anti-intersex Anti-left handedness Anti-Masonry Aporophobia Audism Biphobia Clannism Elitism Endophobia Ephebiphobia Health mental in poverty Fatphobia Gayphobia Gerontophobia Heterosexism HIV/AIDS stigma Hypergamy Homophobia In-group Leprosy stigma Lesbophobia Against men Misandry Misogyny Misogynoir Nepotism Outgroup Perpetual foreigner Pregnancy Sectarianism Supremacism Aryanism Black Hutu Chauvinism Han Female Human Nordicism Male Ultranationalism White Transphobia Non-binary Transmisogyny Trans men Vegaphobia Xenophilia Xenophobia Religious Religious exemption Persecution of non-believers Atheism Blasphemy law Religious censorship In Islam Apostasy Religious police Jizya Religious persecution In China Exclusivism Baháʼí Faith Buddhism Christianity Persecution Catholicism Eastern Orthodoxy Coptic Christianity Jehovah's Witnesses LDS or Mormon Protestantism Tewahedo Orthodoxy post–Cold War era Falun Gong Hinduism Persecution Untouchability Islam Persecution Ahmadiyya Shi'ism Sufism Sunnism minority Muslim Judaism Persecution Neopaganism Rastafari Serers Sikhism Yazidism Zoroastrianism Race / Ethnicity Afghan Pashtun Hazara African Fulani Igbo Serers Albanian Arab Armenian Asian France South Africa United States Assyrian Austrian Azerbaijani Black people African American China South Africa Bengali Catalan Chechen Chinese Han people Colombian Croat Dutch English Estonian Filipino French Finnish Georgian German Greek Haitian Hungarian Indian Indonesian Indigenous people Australia Canada United States Iranian Irish Israeli Italian Japanese Jewish Eliminationist New Religious Anti-Yiddish Zionist Khmer Korean Kurdish Lithuanian Malay Māori Mexican Middle Eastern Mongolian Montenegrin Nigerian Pakistani Palestinian Pashtun Polish Portuguese Quebec Romani Romanian Russian Scottish Serb Slavic Somali Spanish Taiwanese Tatar Thai Tibetan Turkish Ukrainian Uyghur Venezuelan Vietnamese Welsh White people Manifestations Algorithmic bias Anti-LGBTQ rhetoric SPLC-designated list of anti-LGBTQ hate groups Blood libel Bullying Cancel culture Capital punishment for homosexuality Carnism Compulsory sterilization Corrective rape Counter-jihad Cultural genocide Defamation Democide Dog whistle Domicide Economic Education Academic In curricula Sexism Eliminationism Eliminationist antisemitism Employment Enemy of the people Environmental racism Ethnic cleansing Ethnic conflict Ethnic hatred Ethnic joke Ethnocide Excellence Gender-based dress codes Cosmetics policy High heel policy Forced conversion Freak show Gay bashing Gendercide Transgender genocide Genital modification and mutilation Circumcision Female genital mutilation Intersex medical interventions Genocide examples Glass ceiling Hate crime Disability hate crime Violence against LGBTQ people Violence against transgender people Hate group Hate speech Institutional discrimination Institutional racism Homeless dumping Housing Hypergamy Age disparity Indian rolling International inequality Kill Haole Day Lavender scare LGBTQ+ grooming conspiracy theory Linguicide Lynching Media bias Minority stress Moral exclusion Mortgage Native American mascots Braves Blackhawks Chiefs Occupational Apartheid Inequality Injustice Segregation Opposition to immigration Paper genocide Persecution Pogrom Political Political repression Ideological repression Purge Racialization Religious persecution Religious terrorism Religious violence Religious war Scapegoating Selective enforcement Selective prosecution Sentencing disparity Sexual harassment Sex-selective abortion Slut-shaming Structural abuse Structural discrimination Structural evil Structural inequality Structural violence Untermensch Trans bashing Victimisation Violence against women White flight White genocide conspiracy theory Wife selling Witch hunt Discriminatory policies Algorithmic wage discrimination Age of candidacy Apartheid in South Africa in Israel Blood purity Blood quantum Breadwinner model Conscription and sexism Disabilities Catholic Jewish Disparate impact Fagging Gender pay gap Gender roles Protecting Women's Private Spaces Act Gerontocracy Gerrymandering Ghetto benches Internment Jewish quota Opposition to LGBTQ rights MSM blood donation restrictions No kid zone Numerus clausus (as religious or racial quota) One-drop rule Racial quota Racial steering Redlining Same-sex marriage (laws and issues prohibiting) Segregation age racial Jim Crow laws Nuremberg Laws Segregation academy religious sexual in Islam Social exclusion Sodomy law State atheism State religion Ugly law Voter suppression White Australia policy Countermeasures Affirmative action Anti-discrimination law Anti-racism Audit study Autism rights movement Gender-blind Blind audition Constitutional colorblindness Cross-sex friendship Cultural assimilation Cultural pluralism Diversity, equity, and inclusion Diversity training Empowerment Fat acceptance movement Feminism Fighting Discrimination Golden Rule Hate speech laws by country Human rights Intersex human rights Korenizatsiia LGBTQ rights Mad pride Music in the movement against apartheid Racial integration Reappropriation Rock Against Sexism Self-determination Social integration Stop Murder Music Toleration Transgender rights movement Universal suffrage Women's rights Related topics Allophilia Amatonormativity Bias Capital punishment for homosexuality Cisnormativity Civil liberties Criminalization of homosexuality Dehumanization Diseases of despair Ethnic penalty Figleaf Heteronormativity Historical eugenics Internalized oppression Intersectionality Masculism Oikophobia Oppression Police brutality Polyculturalism Power distance Prejudice Prisoner abuse Racial bias in criminal news in the United States Racism by country Racial color blindness Religious intolerance Second-generation gender bias Snobbery Social equity Social exclusion Social model of disability Social privilege Christian male white Social stigma Speciesism Stereotype The talk Category Commons Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Reappropriation&oldid=1306225935 " Categories : Sociolinguistics Historical linguistics Stereotypes Semantics Political terminology Linguistic controversies Hidden categories: Wikipedia articles incorporating a citation from the 1911 Encyclopaedia Britannica with Wikisource reference Harv and Sfn no-target errors Articles incorporating a citation from the 1913 Catholic Encyclopedia with Wikisource reference CS1 Finnish-language sources (fi) CS1: long volume value CS1 Ukrainian-language sources (uk) Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Articles with excerpts Articles containing Middle Irish (900-1200)-language text This page was last edited on 16 August 2025, at 16:23 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Reappropriation 11 languages Add topic

