Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 History 2 Clinical Services 3 Research 4 References 5 External links Toggle the table of contents Joslin Diabetes Center 6 languages Deutsch فارسی مصرى 日本語 Norsk bokmål 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide Coordinates : 42°20′21″N 71°06′30″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.339101°N 71.108440°W ﻿ / 42.339101; -71.108440 From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Hospital in Massachusetts, United States Joslin Diabetes Center Beth Israel Lahey Health Joslin Diabetes Center (at the right) Geography Location 1 Joslin Pl, Boston , Massachusetts , United States Organization Type Specialist Affiliated university Harvard Medical School Services Speciality Diabetes History Opened 1952 Links Website www .joslin .org Lists Hospitals in Massachusetts Joslin Diabetes Center is the world's largest diabetes research center, diabetes clinic, and provider of diabetes education. It is located in the Longwood Medical and Academic Area in Boston , Massachusetts , United States.  Among the Harvard Medical School affiliated institutions, Joslin is unique in its sole focus on diabetes. Joslin has the world's largest team of board-certified physicians treating diabetes and its complications, as well as the largest staff of Certified Diabetes Educators anywhere in the world. Joslin also supports the world's largest diabetes research team with more than 40 faculty investigators and more than 300 researchers.

[ 1 ] Roberta Herman, M.D., is currently Joslin's President and CEO.

[ 2 ] History [ edit ] Joslin has helped revolutionize the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of diabetes, most notably by improving the survival rate of babies born to women with diabetes, developing sight-saving laser surgery , devising treatments to reduce amputation, and uncovering ways to predict who will develop diabetes. It was named after Elliott P. Joslin , an American doctor and pioneer in the study of diabetes.

Some notable historic milestones include: 1949: Priscilla White, M.D.

, a founding member of Joslin Clinic, introduces the White Classification of Diabetic Pregnancies. This pioneering concept classifies patients according to their level of risk and tailors their treatment protocol accordingly. When Dr. Priscilla White joined Joslin's practice in 1924, only 56 percent of babies born to diabetic mothers survived; 50 years later when she retired, that rate had jumped to more than 90 percent.

[ 3 ] 1967: A laser treatment (Ruby laser photocoagulation) is developed by William Beetham, M.D., and Lloyd M. Aiello, M.D., which within the next five years revolutionizes the care of diabetic retinopathy, a potentially blinding complication of diabetes.

[ 4 ] 1976: Joslin researchers perfect the A1C test, paving the way for this blood test to assess blood glucose control over a two- to three-month period.

1980s: Basic research at Joslin shows that type 1 diabetes evolves over a period of years, presenting hope that a means may be found to prevent autoimmune destruction of the pancreas’ beta cells before they stop producing insulin.

1980s: C. Ronald Kahn and his team defines the molecular mechanism of insulin action and how it is altered in insulin-resistant states such as type 2 diabetes and obesity.

1989: George King, M.D.

, and colleagues demonstrate that high blood glucose levels activate protein kinase C (PKC), part of a major signaling pathway that causes cellular changes in the eye, kidney and arteries that lead to diabetic complications.

[ 5 ] 1996: A molecular pathway (called NF-κB ) is identified in fat and the liver that is activated by obesity (and a fatty diet) and causes the insulin resistance that can lead to type 2 diabetes (Steven E. Shoelson, M.D., Ph.D.).

1998: Joslin Vision Network—a telemedicine technology developed at Joslin—found to produce images of the retina just as accurately as standard equipment, but without having to dilate the pupil. Remote sites across the United States can now access Joslin's expertise in diabetic eye disease diagnosis and treatment.

2002: The Diabetes Prevention Program (DPP) study shows people with elevated blood glucose levels who are at risk for developing type 2 diabetes can reduce their risk by 58 percent through sustained modest weight loss and increased moderate-intensity exercise, such as walking 30 minutes daily.

[ 6 ] 2003: Researchers discover that early signs of kidney disease (microalbuminuria) can be reversed back to normal with proper medical screening and diabetes control.

[ 7 ] 2006: Joslin researchers find that specific genes can determine both obesity and body-fat distribution in humans.

[ 8 ] 2009: Researchers in the lab of C. Ronald Kahn discover that brown fat is present in some adults, providing a new target for the treatment of obesity.

[ 9 ] Clinical Services [ edit ] Some of the clinical programs at Joslin include: Beetham Eye Institute: The Beetham uses advanced diagnostics, laser treatment , cataract and retinal surgery, vision rehabilitation , and novel therapies to help preserve the eyesight of diabetic patients.

Adult Clinic Care Joslin has a reputation for pioneering care and support of pediatric patients with diabetes and their families.  The pediatric staff includes board-certified endocrinologists , pediatric diabetes nurse educators, pediatric nutritionists, child psychologists, a social worker, and a child life specialist.

Pediatric Clinic Care Joslin has a reputation for pioneering care and support of pediatric patients with diabetes and their families.  The pediatric staff includes board-certified endocrinologists , pediatric diabetes nurse educators, pediatric nutritionists, child psychologists, a social worker, and a child life specialist.

Multicultural Health Clinics: In response to the fact that Latinos and Asian Americans develop diabetes at a much higher rate, Joslin established clinics for these patient populations. They offer culturally sensitive care and bilingual staff.

Patient Education Joslin has the largest staff of Certified Diabetes Educators anywhere in the world. Specialists work with patients one-on-one, or through a variety of programs and classes. Educators work as part of the diabetes care team to provide coordinated, sequenced learning activities.

Nephrology Section: Joslin provides the educational, medical, and emotional support needed to manage all forms of kidney disease, which impacts a significant number of people with diabetes. The goal is to detect, delay, and potentially reverse the effects of diabetes on the kidneys as early as possible.

Joslin also offers specialty programs in cardiovascular disease , mental health and counseling services, peripheral neuropathy , obesity, insulin pump therapy, diabetes and pregnancy , diabetes and aging , hypoglycemia , sexual function and disorders of the feet.

Joslin has a number of initiatives aimed at developing and providing culturally-competent diabetes education , such as the Latino Diabetes Initiative [ 10 ] and the Asian American Diabetes Initiative.

[ 11 ] Research [ edit ] Many important improvements in diabetes care were developed at Joslin. These include recognition that tight blood glucose control can slow or prevent diabetes complications, creation of treatment protocols to enable women with diabetes to have healthy babies, the identification of markers for pre-diabetes, and pioneering laser surgery for diabetic eye disease. Joslin researchers have won awards and recognition from the National Academy of Sciences , the National Academy of Medicine , and the American Diabetes Association , among many others.

References [ edit ] ^ "Research" .

Joslin Diabetes Center . Retrieved February 4, 2020 .

^ "President & CEO" .

Joslin Diabetes Center . Retrieved February 4, 2020 .

^ Dunn, PM.  Dr Priscilla White (1900-1989) of Boston and pregnancy diabetes. Arch Dis Child Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2004 May;89(3):F276-8.

^ Beetham WP, Aiello LM, Balodimos MC, Koncz L.  Ruby-laser photocoagulation of early diabetic neovascular retinopathy: preliminary report of a long-term controlled study. Trans Am Ophthalmol Soc. 1969;67:39-67.

^ Lee TS, Saltsman KA, Ohashi H, King GL. Activation of protein kinase C by elevation of glucose concentration: proposal for a mechanism in the development of diabetic vascular complications. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1989 Jul;86(13):5141-5. Erratum in: Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 1991 Nov 1;88(21):9907.

^ Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. Reduction in the incidence of type 2 diabetes with lifestyle intervention or metformin. N Engl J Med. 2002 Feb 7;346(6):393-403.

^ Perkins BA, Ficociello LH, Silva KH, Finkelstein DM, Warram JH, Krolewski AS. Regression of microalbuminuria in type 1 diabetes. N Engl J Med. 2003 Jun 5;348(23):2285-93.

^ Gesta S, Blüher M, Yamamoto Y, Norris AW, Berndt J, Kralisch S, Boucher J, Lewis C, Kahn CR. Evidence for a role of developmental genes in the origin of obesity and body fat distribution. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Apr 25;103(17):6676-81.

^ Cypess AM, Lehman S, Williams G, Tal I, Rodman D, Goldfine AB, Kuo FC, Palmer EL, Tseng YH, Doria A, Kolodny GM, Kahn CR. Identification and importance of brown adipose tissue in adult humans. N Engl J Med. 2009 Apr 9;360(15):1509-17.

^ "Latino Diabetes Initiative" .

Joslin Diabetes Center . Retrieved February 4, 2020 .

^ "Home" .

aadi.joslin.org . Retrieved February 4, 2020 .

External links [ edit ] Official website v t e Massachusetts hospitals Active Barnstable County Cape Cod Hospital Falmouth Hospital Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital Cape Cod Berkshire County Austen Riggs Center Berkshire Medical Center Fairview Hospital VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Bristol County Arbour-Fuller Hospital Morton Hospital and Medical Center St. Luke's Hospital Taunton State Hospital Dukes County Martha's Vineyard Hospital Essex County Lawrence General Hospital Salem Hospital Franklin County VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Hampden County Baystate Health Holyoke Medical Center Mercy Medical Center Providence Behavioral Health Hospital Soldiers' Home in Holyoke VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Hampshire County Cooley Dickinson Hospital Northampton Veterans Affairs Medical Center Middlesex County Bedford Veterans Affairs Medical Center Cambridge Hospital CHA Everett Hospital Emerson Hospital Lahey Hospital & Medical Center Lowell General Hospital McLean Hospital MelroseWakefield Hospital MetroWest Medical Center Mount Auburn Hospital Newton-Wellesley Hospital Saints Medical Center Somerville Hospital Tewksbury Hospital Winchester Hospital Nantucket County Nantucket Cottage Hospital Norfolk County Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital - Milton Norwood Hospital South Shore Hospital Wrentham State School Plymouth County Beth Israel Deaconess Hospital-Plymouth Boston Medical Center – South Bridgewater State Hospital Brockton Hospital VA Boston Healthcare System Suffolk County Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center Boston Children's Hospital Boston Medical Center Boston Medical Center – Brighton Brigham and Women's Faulkner Hospital Brigham and Women's Hospital Dana–Farber Cancer Institute Floating Hospital for Children Franciscan Children's Joslin Diabetes Center Lemuel Shattuck Hospital Massachusetts Eye and Ear Massachusetts General Hospital New England Baptist Hospital Spaulding Rehabilitation Hospital Tufts Medical Center VA Boston Healthcare System Worcester County Adcare Hospital Athol Memorial Hospital Federal Medical Center, Devens Hahnemann Hospital Jewish Healthcare Center Milford Regional Medical Center Memorial Hospital Saint Vincent Hospital 2021 strike UMass Memorial Health Care VA Central Western Massachusetts Healthcare System Worcester Recovery Center and Hospital Defunct Barnstable County 551st United States Air Force Hospital Barnstable County Hospital Berkshire County North Adams Regional Hospital Bristol County Lovering Colony State Hospital Paul A. Dever State School Truesdale Hospital Dukes County Penikese Island Leper Hospital Essex County Benjamin Stickney Cable Memorial Hospital Children's Island Sanitarium Danvers State Hospital Essex Hospital Saugus General Hospital Hampden County Monson Developmental Center Hampshire County Belchertown State School Northampton State Hospital Westover Air Force Base Hospital Middlesex County Boston Regional Medical Center Community Memorial Hospital Gaebler Children's Center Lovell General Hospital Metropolitan State Hospital Middlesex County Hospital Murphy Army Hospital Nashoba Valley Medical Center Walter E. Fernald Developmental Center Norfolk County Foxborough State Hospital Medfield State Hospital New England Sinai Hospital Pondville State Hospital Quincy Medical Center Plymouth County Cranberry Specialty Hospital Lakeville Hospital Suffolk County Adams-Nervine Asylum Boston City Hospital Boston Consumptives Hospital Boston Emergency and General Hospital Boston Psychopathic Hospital Boston State Hospital Carney Hospital Dimock Community Health Center Complex Massachusetts Homeopathic Hospital Naval Hospital Boston New England Hospital for Women and Children Worcester County Dale General Hospital Gardner State Hospital Grafton State Hospital Lyman School for Boys Rutland Heights State Hospital State Reform School for Boys Templeton Developmental Center Westborough State Hospital Worcester City Hospital Worcester County Hospital Worcester State Hospital Authority control databases International ISNI VIAF National United States Czech Republic 2 Israel Other Yale LUX 42°20′21″N 71°06′30″W ﻿ / ﻿ 42.339101°N 71.108440°W ﻿ / 42.339101; -71.108440 Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Joslin_Diabetes_Center&oldid=1303840199 " Categories : Diabetes organizations Companies based in Boston Harvard Medical School Hospitals in Boston Hidden categories: Pages using gadget WikiMiniAtlas Use American English from August 2025 All Wikipedia articles written in American English Use mdy dates from January 2025 Articles with short description Short description matches Wikidata Infobox mapframe without OSM relation ID on Wikidata Coordinates on Wikidata Pages using the Kartographer extension This page was last edited on 2 August 2025, at 10:35 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Joslin Diabetes Center 6 languages Add topic

