Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Solutions 2 Gallery 3 See also 4 References Toggle the table of contents Colour cast 7 languages Català Dansk Deutsch Español Lëtzebuergesch Nederlands Svenska Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia This article needs additional citations for verification .

Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.

Find sources: "Colour cast" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR ( July 2020 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) A colour cast is a tint of a particular colour, usually unwanted, that evenly affects a photographic image in whole or in part.

[ 1 ] Certain types of light can cause film and digital cameras to render a colour cast. Illuminating a subject with light sources of different colour temperatures will usually cause colour cast problems in the shadows. The human eye generally does not notice the unnatural colour, because our eyes and brains adjust and compensate for different types of light in ways that cameras cannot.

In film, colour casts can also be caused by problems in photo development . Improper timing or imbalanced chemical mixtures can cause unwanted casts.

Colour casts can also occur in old photographs due to fading of dyes, particularly under the action of ultraviolet light.  These may be correctable on a scanned version of the photograph with image editing techniques.

[ 2 ] Solutions [ edit ] Example of a photo with a uniformly green colour cast due to differential absorption of light before reaching certain depths at sea.

The same photo with the colour cast corrected Most digital cameras try to automatically detect and compensate colour cast and usually have a selection of manually set white balance settings to choose from. Otherwise, photo editing programs, such as Photoshop , often have built in colour correction facilities. For film, blue filters and amber filters are used to counter casts. Amber filters are used to reduce the blueish tint caused by daylight. Blue filters reduce the orange colour caused by incandescent light.

A variety of coloured filters in varying degrees of intensity are available.

Kodak 's amber filters, for example, vary from palest yellow ("81C") to deepest amber ("85B"). A photographer chooses which filter to use based on the quality of the ambient light.

Colour temperature meters can read the temperature of the existing lighting conditions and guide the selection of the filter. Clouded sky, for example, requires a paler amber than clear blue sky. If a filter is unavailable, using a flash is an alternative solution which usually provides enough neutral white light to counter the cast.

In the case of film, if photographs all contain the same cast, it is usually indicative of improper chemical development. If the film itself does not contain any cast, it can be reused to create another set of photographs in proper chemical conditions. If the film contains a cast, filters can be used during photo processing to correct it.

Gallery [ edit ] See also [ edit ] Colour balance Colour temperature References [ edit ] ^ "Color cast" .

Adobe . 25 February 2017 . Retrieved 28 September 2020 .

^ "What are color casts and how to avoid them" .

Clickin Moms blog: Helping you take better pictures one day at a time . 2017-09-04 . Retrieved 2020-09-29 .

v t e Color topics Color science Color physics Electromagnetic spectrum Light Rainbow Visible Spectral colors Chromophore Structural coloration Animal coloration Color of chemicals Water Spectral power distribution Colorimetry Color perception Chromesthesia Sonochromatism Color blindness Achromatopsia Dichromacy Color calibration Color constancy Color task Color code Color temperature Color vision test Evolution of color vision Impossible colors Metamerism Opponent process Afterimage Unique hues Tetrachromacy The dress Color psychology Color symbolism Color preferences Lüscher color test Kruithof curve Political color National colors Chromophobia Chromotherapy Color reproduction Color photography Color balance Color cast Digital image processing Color management Color printing Multi-primary color display Quattron Color model additive RGB subtractive CMYK Color space Color mapping Color philosophy Color scheme Color tool Monochromatic colors Black-and-white Grisaille Complementary colors Analogous colors Achromatic colors (Neutral) Polychromatic colors Light-on-dark Web colors Tinctures in heraldry Color theory Color mixing Primary color Secondary color Chromaticity Color solid Color wheel Color triangle Color analysis (fashion) Color realism (art style) On Vision and Colours (Schopenhauer) Theory of Colours (Goethe) Color terms Basic English terms Red Orange Yellow Green Blue Purple Pink Brown White Gray Black Cultural differences Linguistic relativity and the color naming debate Blue–green distinction in language Color history Black-and-white dualism Blue in culture Color in Chinese culture Traditional colors of Japan Human skin color Color dimensions Hue Dichromatism Colorfulness Pastel colors Luminance Lightness Darkness Brightness Iridescence Fluorescence Grayscale Tint, shade and tone Color organizations Pantone Color Marketing Group Color Association of the United States International Colour Authority International Commission on Illumination (CIE) International Color Consortium International Colour Association Names Lists List of colors: A–F List of colors: G–M List of colors: N–Z List of colors (compact) List of colors by shade List of color palettes List of color spaces List of Crayola crayon colors history Color chart List of RAL colors List of web colors Shades of: Red Orange Yellow Green Cyan Blue Violet Purple Magenta Pink Brown White Gray Black Related Vision Contrast Qualia Lighting Category Index This photography-related article is a stub . You can help Wikipedia by expanding it .

v t e Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Colour_cast&oldid=1272808273 " Categories : Image defects Color Photography stubs Hidden categories: Articles needing additional references from July 2020 All articles needing additional references All stub articles This page was last edited on 30 January 2025, at 07:54 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Colour cast 7 languages Add topic

