Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Research traditions 2 Sacred places 3 Community and identity 4 New geographies of religion 5 Geopolitics 6 See also 7 Notes 8 References 9 External links Toggle the table of contents Religion and geography 18 languages العربية বাংলা Čeština Deutsch Eesti Español Français 한국어 हिन्दी Hrvatski Қазақша Magyar 日本語 Polski Português Srpskohrvatski / српскохрватски Українська 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikimedia Commons Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Parts of this article (those related to need to discuss cross-culturally the 'spatial diffusion' of faith-bearing communities in (before, during, and following) exodus and migration, etc. – e.g. Mormons, Israel, – bearing on embedded scriptures and documents and 'group memoray') need to be updated .

Please help update this article to reflect recent events or newly available information.

( October 2020 ) Part of a series on Geography Portal Outline History of geography Graeco-Roman Chinese Islamic Age of Discovery History of cartography Historical geography Environmental determinism Regional geography Quantitative revolution Critical geography Human geography Fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical geography Fields Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Geology Geomorphology Glaciology Hydrology / Hydrography Landscape ecology Limnology Pedology Quaternary science Technical geography Fields Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated geography Fields Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Methods Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote Sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Philosophy of geography Behavioral Critical Feminist Marxist Non-representational theory Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Societies Index Geographers v t e Religion and geography is the study of the impact of geography, i.e. place and space, on religious belief .

[ 1 ] Another aspect of the relationship between religion and geography is religious geography , in which geographical ideas are influenced by religion, such as early map-making, and the biblical geography that developed in the 16th century to identify places from the Bible .

[ 2 ] Research traditions [ edit ] Traditionally, the relationship between geography and religion can clearly be seen by the influences of religion in shaping cosmological understandings of the world. From the 16th and 17th centuries, the study of geography and religion mainly focused on mapping the spread of Christianity ( ecclesiastical geography ), though in the later half of the 17th century, the influences and spread of other religions were also taken into account.

[ 2 ] Other traditional approaches to the study of the relationship between geography and religion involved the theological explorations of the workings of nature – a highly environmentally deterministic approach which identified the role of geographical environments in determining the nature and evolution of different religious traditions.

[ 2 ] Thus, geographers are less concerned about religion per se , but are more sensitive to how religion as a cultural feature affects social, cultural, political and environmental systems. The point of focus is not the specifics of religious beliefs and practices, but how these religious beliefs and practices are internalised by adherents, and how these processes of internalisation influence, and is influenced by, social systems.

Sacred places [ edit ] Traditional cultural geographical approaches to the study of religion mainly seek to determine religion's impact on the landscape. A more contemporary approach to the study of the intersections of geography and religion not only highlights the role of religion in affecting landscape changes and in assigning sacred meanings to specific places, but also acknowledges how in turn, religious ideology and practice at specific spaces are guided and transformed by their location.

[ 2 ] Religious experiences and the belief in religious meanings transforms physical spaces into sacred spaces. These perceptions and imaginings influence the way such spaces are used, and the personal, spiritual meanings developed in using such sacred spaces. These religiously significant spaces go beyond officially religious/spiritual spaces (such as places of worship) to include non-official religious spaces such as homes, schools and even bodies.

[ 3 ] [ 4 ] These works have focused on both material aspects of spaces (such as architectural distinctiveness) and socially constructed spaces (such as rituals and demarcation of sacred spaces) to present religious meaning and significance.

A key focus in the study of sacred places is the politics of identity, belonging and meaning that are ascribed to sacred sites, and the constant negotiations for power and legitimacy. Particularly in multicultural settings, the contestation for legitimacy, public approval, and negotiations for use of particular spaces are at the heart of determining how communities understand, internalise and struggle to compete for the right to practice their religious traditions in public spaces.

[ 2 ] Community and identity [ edit ] Religion may be a starting point to examine issues of ethnic identity formation and the construction of ethnic identity [ 5 ] Geographers studying the negotiations of religious identity within various communities are often concerned with the overt articulation of religious identity, for example, how adherents in different locations establish their distinctive (religious and cultural) identities through their own understandings of the religion, and how they externally present their religious adherence (in terms of religious practice, ritual and behaviour). As an overarching theme, the articulation of religious identity is concerned with material aspects of symbolizing religious identity (such as architecture and the establishment of a physical presence), with negotiations and struggles in asserting religious identity in the face of persecution and exclusion and with personal practices of religious ritual and behaviour that re-establishes one's religious identity [ 3 ] [ 6 ] [ 7 ] New geographies of religion [ edit ] As research on geography and religion has grown, one of the new focuses of geographical research examines the rise of religious fundamentalism, and the resulting impact this has on the geographical contexts in which it develops.

[ 8 ] In addition, migration processes have resulted in the development of religious pluralism in numerous countries, and the landscape changes that accompany the movement and settlement of communities defined by religion is a key focus in the study of geography and religion.

[ 9 ] More work needs to be done to examine the intersections and collisions that occur due to the movement of communities (for example, the migration of Muslim communities to western countries) and highlight how these communities negotiate their religious experiences in new spaces.

[ 5 ] Recent research in this area has been published by Barry A. Vann who analyzes Muslim population shifts in the Western world and the theological factors that play into these demographic trends.

[ 10 ] Another new area of interest in the study of geography and religion explores different sites of religious practice beyond the ‘officially sacred’ – sites such as religious schools, media spaces, banking and financial practices (for example, Islamic banking ) and home spaces are just some of the different avenues that take into account informal, everyday spaces that intersect with religious practice and meaning.

[ 9 ] Geopolitics [ edit ] The geographical distinctiveness of religion has also been discussed by scholars in the past.

Environmental determinists developed racial justifications for the relationship between regional habitats, climates, and religions around the beginning of the 20th century.

[ 11 ] Geographical approaches to religion in the past have subsequently studied the intersections between history, place, and religion, condemning and rejecting these studies' simplistic emphasis on the influence of the environment on cultural behaviors .

[ 12 ] Many have evaluated how regional differences in religious doctrine , practice, and theologies are influenced by local social, cultural, and political settings.

[ 13 ] See also [ edit ] Mythology portal Ethnic religion Religion by country Religious demographics Notes [ edit ] ^ Park, Chris (2004). "Religion and geography". In Hinnells, J (ed.).

Routledge Companion to the Study of Religion . Routledge.

^ a b c d e Kong, Lily (1990).

"Geography and religion: trends and prospects" .

Progress in Human Geography .

14 (3): 355– 371.

doi : 10.1177/030913259001400302 .

S2CID 143924950 .

^ a b Kong, Lily (2005).

"Religious schools: for spirit, (f)or nation" .

Environment and Planning D: Society and Space .

23 (4): 615– 631.

doi : 10.1068/d394 .

S2CID 144337164 .

^ Kong, Lily (2002).

"In Search of Permanent Homes: Singapore's House Churches and the Politics of Space" .

Urban Studies .

39 (9): 1573– 1586.

doi : 10.1080/00420980220151664 .

S2CID 145593102 .

^ a b Peach, Ceri (2002). "Social Geography: New Religions and Ethnoburbs – Contrasts with Cultural Geography".

Progress in Human Geography .

26 (2): 252– 260.

doi : 10.1191/0309132502ph368pr .

S2CID 144930147 .

^ Chivallon, Christine (2001). "Religion as Space for the Expression of Caribbean Identity in the United Kingdom".

Environment and Planning D: Society and Space .

19 (4): 461– 483.

doi : 10.1068/d2341 .

S2CID 55545278 .

^ Gale, Richard (2007). "The Place of Islam in the Geography of Religion: Trends and Intersections".

Geography Compass .

1 (5): 1015– 1036.

doi : 10.1111/j.1749-8198.2007.00054.x .

^ Stump, Roger (2000).

Boundaries of Faith: Geographical Perspectives on Religious Fundamentalism . Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, Inc.

^ a b Kong, Lily (2010).

"Global shifts, theoretical shifts: Changing geographies of religion" .

Progress in Human Geography .

34 (6): 755– 776.

doi : 10.1177/0309132510362602 .

S2CID 146475959 .

^ Barry A. Vann (2011), Puritan Islam: The Geoexpansion of the Muslim World . Prometheus Books.

^ Meyerhoff, Howard A.; Huntington, Ellsworth (1947).

"Mainsprings of Civilization" .

Political Science Quarterly .

62 (1): 114.

doi : 10.2307/2144155 .

JSTOR 2144155 .

^ Walsh, J. D. (1975).

"Elie Halévy and the Birth of Methodism" .

Transactions of the Royal Historical Society .

25 : 1– 20.

doi : 10.2307/3679083 .

ISSN 0080-4401 .

JSTOR 3679083 .

^ Slatter, Ruth (2023).

"Geographical approaches to religion in the past" .

Geography Compass .

17 (4).

doi : 10.1111/gec3.12682 .

ISSN 1749-8198 .

References [ edit ] Douglas, H. Paul. (1926) 1000 City Churches Phases of Adaptation to Urban Environment ;  in United States.

online free Knott, Kim (2005).

The location of religion: a spatial analysis . Equinox Publishing Ltd.

ISBN 9781904768753 .

Park, Chris (1994).

Sacred worlds: an introduction to geography and religion . Routledge.

ISBN 9780415090124 .

External links [ edit ] Media related to Geography of religion at Wikimedia Commons Maps of religious belief in the US Links to related articles v t e Religion and ...

( Some topic...

) and religion Anarchism Astronomy Cannabis Disability Fertility Gender Homosexuality Hittite mythology Intersex people Law Magic Marxism Morality Slavery Subud Transgender people Vaccination Vegetarianism Women World War I Religion and ( some topic ) abortion agriculture AIDS alcohol animal rights authoritarianism birth control business capital punishment child marriage children climate change communism coping with trauma coronavirus corruption crime death penalty disability divorce domestic violence drugs education in Pakistan environmentalism ethics ethnicity executions gambling gender geography government happiness health HIV/AIDS human migration identity intelligence the internet LGBTQ people mental health mental illness schizophrenia morality mythology negotiations pacifism peacebuilding personality politics in the United States ritual sexuality adolescent bestiality heterosexuality polygamy polygyny pornography superstition terror torture vaccination video games violence warfare Category:... and religion Adoption African Americans Cannabis Economics Economy Environment Evolution Films about LGBTQ Freemasonry Gender Hellenistic philosophy LGBTQ Liberalism Marriage Mythology Aztec Maya Mesoamerican Mixtec Muisca Olmec Pre-Columbian Nature Psychedelics Sexual abstinence Sexuality Slavery Tamils Tobacco Transgender topics Vegetarianism Water Wealth Women Category:Religion and ...

the arts abortion alcohol atheism capital punishment children death drugs education euthanasia the French Revolution geography government health mental health HIV/AIDS law medicine music peace race science society by country in France in the United States spirituality podcasts sports suicide technology v t e Sub-fields of and approaches to human geography Sub-fields Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Approaches Critical Culture theory Feminist Marxist Modernism Structuralism Semiotics Non-representational theory Postmodernism Post-structuralism Deconstruction Scientific method Time Universalism Category v t e Geography topics Glossary History Philosophy Geographers Index Outline Branches Human Behavioral Cognitive Critical Cultural Animal Children's Economic Agricultural Cyber Development Financial Histo-economic Labor Marketing Retail Theoretical economic Transport Language Linguistics Music Vernacular Moral Psychological Emotional Neo Sexuality Religion Food Health Historical Palaeo Imagined Internet Political Critical geopolitics Electoral Geopolitics Strategic Military Population Settlement Regional Urban Music Transport Social Tourism Tropical Physical Biogeography Ecology Phytogeography Zoogeography Coastal geography / Oceanography Earth science Atmospheric science / Meteorology Environmental science Climatology / Paleoclimatology / Palaeogeography Geobiology Geophysics / Geodesy Earth system science Geomorphology / Geology Glaciology Hydrology / Limnology Soil science ( Pedology / Edaphology ) Quaternary science Technical Geodesign Geodesy Geoinformatics Geographic information science Geomatics Statistical geography Spatial analysis Integrated Environmental social science Environmental studies Landscape architecture Landscape ecology Time geography Techniques and tools Quantitative Cartography Computer cartography Web mapping Geochronology Geographic information system Distributed GIS Internet GIS Web GIS Geologic modelling Geomathematics Geostatistics Geovisualization Global Positioning System Hydrography Map algebra Participant observation Photogrammetry Remote sensing Statistical survey Surveying Land change modeling Qualitative Ethnography Geopoetics Interview (research) Survey (human research) Institutions, organizations, and societies Geography organizations Geographic data and information organizations Geographical societies Geoscience societies Education Geo-literacy Geographers on Film International Geography Olympiad National Council for Geographic Education Spatial citizenship Publication Geography books Geography journals Geographic magazines Category Portal Commons WikiProject Authority control databases National Germany United States Czech Republic Israel Other Yale LUX Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Religion_and_geography&oldid=1298061399 " Categories : Religion and geography Religious belief and doctrine Hidden categories: Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata Use British English from November 2022 Wikipedia articles in need of updating from October 2020 All Wikipedia articles in need of updating Pages using sidebar with the child parameter Commons category link is on Wikidata This page was last edited on 30 June 2025, at 08:07 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Religion and geography 18 languages Add topic

