Jump to content Main menu Main menu move to sidebar hide Navigation Main page Contents Current events Random article About Wikipedia Contact us Contribute Help Learn to edit Community portal Recent changes Upload file Special pages Search Search Appearance Donate Create account Log in Personal tools Donate Create account Log in Pages for logged out editors learn more Contributions Talk CentralNotice Contents move to sidebar hide (Top) 1 Difference from risk aversion 2 Causes Toggle Causes subsection 2.1 Maxmin expected utility 2.2 Choquet expected utility 2.3 Compound lotteries 3 Gender difference 4 A framework that allows for ambiguity preferences 5 Experiments testing ambiguity in games 6 Ambiguity and learning 7 See also 8 References Toggle the table of contents Ambiguity aversion 2 languages 日本語 中文 Edit links Article Talk English Read Edit View history Tools Tools move to sidebar hide Actions Read Edit View history General What links here Related changes Upload file Permanent link Page information Cite this page Get shortened URL Download QR code Print/export Download as PDF Printable version In other projects Wikiquote Wikidata item Appearance move to sidebar hide From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia Preference of known risks to unknown risks This article is about the concept that relates to individuals. For the similar societal concept, see Uncertainty avoidance .

In decision theory and economics , ambiguity aversion (also known as uncertainty aversion ) is a preference for known risks over unknown risks. An ambiguity-averse individual would rather choose an alternative where the probability distribution of the outcomes is known over one where the probabilities are unknown. This behavior was first introduced through the Ellsberg paradox (people prefer to bet on the outcome of an urn with 50 red and 50 black balls rather than to bet on one with 100 total balls but for which the number of black or red balls is unknown).

There are two categories of imperfectly predictable events between which choices must be made: risky and ambiguous events (also known as Knightian uncertainty ). Risky events have a known probability distribution over outcomes while in ambiguous events the probability distribution is not known.  The reaction is behavioral and still being formalized. Ambiguity aversion can be used to explain incomplete contracts, volatility in stock markets, and selective abstention in elections (Ghirardato & Marinacci, 2001).

The concept is expressed in the English proverb: "Better the devil you know than the devil you don't." Difference from risk aversion [ edit ] The distinction between ambiguity aversion and risk aversion is important but subtle. Risk aversion comes from a situation where a probability can be assigned to each possible outcome of a situation and it is defined by the preference between a risky alternative and its expected value . Ambiguity aversion applies to a situation when the probabilities of outcomes are unknown (Epstein 1999) and it is defined through the preference between risky and ambiguous alternatives, after controlling for preferences over risk.

Using the traditional two-urn Ellsberg choice, urn A contains 50 red balls and 50 blue balls while urn B contains 100 total balls (either red or blue) but the number of each is unknown. An individual who prefers a certain payoff strictly smaller than $10 over a bet that pays $20 if the color of a ball drawn from urn A is guessed correctly and $0 otherwise is said to be risk averse but nothing can be said about her preferences over ambiguity. On the other hand, an individual who strictly prefers that same bet if the ball is drawn from urn A over the case where the ball is drawn from urn B is said to be ambiguity averse but not necessarily risk averse.

A real world consequence of increased ambiguity aversion is the increased demand for insurance because the general public are averse to the unknown events that will affect their lives and property  (Alary, Treich, and Gollier 2010).

Causes [ edit ] Unlike risk aversion, which is primarily attributed to decreasing marginal utility , there is no widely accepted main cause for ambiguity aversion. The many possible explanations include different choice mechanisms, behavioral biases and differential treatment of compound lotteries; this in turn explains the lack of a widespread measure of ambiguity aversion.

Maxmin expected utility [ edit ] In their 1989 paper, Gilboa and Schmeidler [ 1 ] propose an axiomatic representation of preferences that rationalizes ambiguity aversion. An individual that behaves according to these axioms would act as if having multiple prior subjective probability distributions over the set of outcomes and chooses the alternative that maximizes the minimum expected utility over these distributions.
In the Ellsberg example, if an individual has a set of subjective prior probabilities of a ball drawn from urn B being red ranging between, for example, 0.4 and 0.6, and applies a maxmin choice rule, she will strictly prefer a bet on urn A over a bet on urn B since the expected utility she assigns to urn A (based on an assumed 50% probability of the predicted color) is greater than the one she assigns to urn B (based on the worst-case 40% probability of the predicted color).

Choquet expected utility [ edit ] David Schmeidler [ 2 ] also developed the Choquet expected utility model. Its axiomatization allows for non-additive probabilities and the expected utility of an act is defined using a Choquet integral . This representation also rationalizes ambiguity aversion and has the maxmin expected utility as a particular case.

Compound lotteries [ edit ] In Halevy (2007) [ 3 ] the experimental results show that ambiguity aversion is related to violations of the Reduction of Compound Lotteries axiom (ROCL). This suggests that the effects attributed to ambiguity aversion may be partially explained by an inability to reduce compound lotteries to their corresponding simple lotteries or some behavioral violation of this axiom.

Gender difference [ edit ] Men are less risk-averse than women [ 4 ] .One potential explanation for gender differences is that risk and ambiguity are related to cognitive and noncognitive traits on which men and women differ. Women initially respond to ambiguity much more favorably than men, but as ambiguity increases, men and women show similar marginal valuations of ambiguity. Psychological traits are strongly associated with risk but not to ambiguity. Adjusting for psychological traits explains why a gender difference exists within risk aversion and why these differences are not a part of ambiguity aversion. Since psychological measures are related to risk but not to ambiguity, risk aversion and ambiguity aversion are distinct traits because they depend on different variables.

[ 4 ] A framework that allows for ambiguity preferences [ edit ] Smooth ambiguity preferences are represented as: s ∈ S set of contingencies or states πθ is a probability distribution over S f is an "act" yielding state contingent payoffs f (s) u is a von Neumann-Morgenstern utility function and represents risk attitude φ maps expected utilities and represents ambiguity attitude Ambiguity attitude is summarized using measure similar to absolute risk aversion , only absolute ambiguity aversion: μ is a subjective probability over θ ∈ Θ; Represents the ambiguous belief – it summarizes the decision-maker's subjective uncertainty about the "true" πθ, probability distribution over contingencies. (Collar, 2008) Experiments testing ambiguity in games [ edit ] Battle of the Sexes Game with Ambiguity Player 2 Player 1 Left Middle Right Top 0 0 100 300 x 50 Bottom 300 100 0 0 x 55 Kelsey and le Roux (2015) [ 5 ] report an experimental test of the influence of ambiguity on behaviour in a Battle of Sexes game which has an added safe strategy, R, available for Player 2 (see Table). The paper studies the behaviour of subjects in the presence of ambiguity and attempts to determine whether subjects playing the Battle of Sexes game prefer to choose an ambiguity safe option.

The value of x, which is the safe option available to Player 2, varies in the range 60-260. For some values of x, the safe strategy (option R) is dominated by a mixed strategy of L and M, and thus would not be played in a Nash equilibrium . For some higher values of x the game is dominance solvable . The effect of ambiguity-aversion is to make R (the ambiguity-safe option) attractive for Player 2. R is never chosen in Nash equilibrium for the parameter values considered. However it may be chosen when there is ambiguity. Moreover, for some values of x, the games are dominance solvable and R is not part of the equilibrium strategy.

[ 6 ] During the experiment, the Battle of Sexes games were alternated with decision problems based on the 3-ball Ellsberg urn . In these rounds, subjects were presented with an urn containing 90 balls, of which 30 were Red, and the remainder an unknown proportion of Blue or Yellow, and asked to pick a colour to bet on. The payoff attached to Red was varied in order to obtain an ambiguity threshold. Alternating experiments on urns and games had the dual aim of erasing the short term memory of subjects, and providing an independent measure of subjects' ambiguity-attitudes.

It was found that R is chosen quite frequently by subjects. While the Row Player randomises 50:50 between her strategies, the Column Player shows a marked preference for avoiding ambiguity and choosing his ambiguity-safe strategy. Thus, the results provide evidence that ambiguity influences behaviour in the games.

One surprising feature of the results was that the links between choices in the single person decision and those in the games was not strong. Subjects appeared to perceive a greater level of ambiguity in a two-person coordination game, than a single person decision problem. More generally the results suggested that perceptions of ambiguity and even attitudes to ambiguity depend on context. Hence it may not be possible to measure ambiguity-attitude in one context and use it to predict behaviour in another.

Ambiguity and learning [ edit ] Given the salience of ambiguity in economic and financial research, it is natural to wonder about its relation with learning and its persistence over time. The long-run persistence of ambiguity clearly depends on the way the inter-temporal ambiguity is modeled. If the decision-maker incorporate new information according to a natural generalization of Bayes' rule entailing a set of priors (rather than a unique prior) on a given prior support; then Massari-Newton (2020) [ 7 ] and Massari-Marinacci (2019) [ 8 ] show that long-run ambiguity is not a possible outcome of the multiple prior-learning models with convex prior support (i.e., positive Lebegue measure) and provide sufficient conditions for ambiguity to fade away when the prior support is not convex, respectively.

See also [ edit ] Ambiguity effect Ambiguity tolerance Choquet expected utility David Schmeidler Knightian uncertainty Precautionary principle Simplicity Uncertainty Uncertainty avoidance References [ edit ] ^ Gilboa, I.; Schmeidler, D. (1989).

"Maxmin expected utility with non-unique prior" (PDF) .

Journal of Mathematical Economics .

18 (2): 141– 153.

doi : 10.1016/0304-4068(89)90018-9 .

^ Schmeidler, D. (1989). Subjective probability and expected utility without additivity. Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 571-587.

^ Halevy, Y. (2007).

"Ellsberg revisited: An experimental study" .

Econometrica .

75 (2): 503– 536.

doi : 10.1111/j.1468-0262.2006.00755.x .

JSTOR 4501998 .

^ a b Borghans, Lex; Golsteyn, Bart H. H.; Heckman, James Joseph; Meijers, Huub (2009).

"Gender differences in risk aversion and ambiguity aversion" (PDF) .

EconStor : 20.

{{ cite journal }} :  CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list ( link ) ^ David Kelsey; Sara le Roux (11 January 2015).

"An Experimental Study on the Effect of Ambiguity in a Coordination Game" (PDF) .

Saraleroux.weebly.com . Retrieved 7 March 2022 .

^ Kelsey, David; Le Roux, Sara (2015).

"An experimental study on the effect of ambiguity in a coordination game" (PDF) .

Theory and Decision .

79 (4): 667– 688.

doi : 10.1007/s11238-015-9483-2 .

hdl : 10871/16743 .

S2CID 56396384 .

^ Massari, Filippo; Newton, Jonathan (2020-09-01).

"When does ambiguity fade away?" .

Economics Letters .

194 : 109404.

doi : 10.1016/j.econlet.2020.109404 .

hdl : 11585/847657 .

ISSN 0165-1765 .

^ Marinacci, Massimo; Massari, Filippo (2019-10-01).

"Learning from ambiguous and misspecified models" .

Journal of Mathematical Economics .

84 : 144– 149.

doi : 10.1016/j.jmateco.2019.07.012 .

ISSN 0304-4068 .

Schmeidler, David (May 1989). "Subjective Probability and Expected Utility without Additivity".

Econometrica .

57 (3): 571– 587.

CiteSeerX 10.1.1.295.4096 .

doi : 10.2307/1911053 .

JSTOR 1911053 .

Epstein, Larry G. (July 1999). "A Definition of Uncertainty Aversion".

The Review of Economic Studies .

66 (3): 579– 608.

doi : 10.1111/1467-937X.00099 .

\\ Alary, D., Gollier, C. G., & Treich, N. (2010, March 15). The effect of ambiguity aversion on risk reduction and insurance demand. Retrieved from http://www.economics.unsw.edu.au/contribute2/Economics/news/documents/NicolasApri10.pdf Borghanst, L., Golstey, B. H. H., Heckman, J. J., & Meijer, H. (2009, January). Gender differences  in risk aversion and ambiguity aversion. Retrieved from http://ftp.iza.org/dp3985.pdf Ghirardato, Paolo; Marinacci, Massimo (2001). "Risk, Ambiguity, and the Separation of Utility and Beliefs".

Mathematics of Operations Research .

26 (4): 864– 890.

doi : 10.1287/moor.26.4.864.10002 .

JSTOR 3690687 .

v t e Decision theory Core concepts Ambiguity aversion Bounded rationality Choice architecture Expected utility Expected value Hyperbolic discounting Leximin Loss aversion Multi-attribute utility Path dependence Principle of indifference Prospect theory Rational choice theory Risk aversion Risk-seeking Satisficing Strategic dominance Subjective expected utility Sure-thing Utility theorem Decision models Anscombe-Aumann framework Causal decision Decision field theory Emotional choice Evidential decision Fuzzy-trace theory Intertemporal choice Naturalistic decision Normative model Quantum cognition Recognition-primed decision Rubicon model Savage's subjective expected utility model Decision analysis tools Analytic hierarchy process Analytic network process Cost–benefit analysis Cost-effectiveness analysis Cost–utility analysis Decision conferencing Decision curve analysis Decision rule Decision support system Decision table Decision tree Decision matrix Decisional balance sheet Gittins index Influence diagram Minimax MCDA Scoring rule Value of information perfect sample uncertainty Paradoxes and biases Allais paradox Certainty effect Cognitive bias Decoy effect Disposition effect Ellsberg paradox Endowment effect Framing effect Heuristics Newcomb's paradox Pseudocertainty effect Reference dependence Regret St. Petersburg paradox Status quo bias Sunk cost Uncertainty and risk Deep uncertainty Exploration–exploitation Info-gap Pignistic probability Robust decision-making Related fields Behavioral economics Game theory Operations research Social choice theory Utility theory Key people David Blackwell Bruno de Finetti Morris H. DeGroot Peter C. Fishburn Gerd Gigerenzer Itzhak Gilboa Daniel Kahneman R. Duncan Luce Oskar Morgenstern Howard Raiffa Leonard J. Savage David Schmeidler Herbert Simon Amos Tversky John von Neumann Category v t e Game theory Glossary Game theorists Games Traditional game theory Definitions Asynchrony Bayesian regret Best response Bounded rationality Cheap talk Coalition Complete contract Complete information Complete mixing Confrontation analysis Conjectural variation Contingent cooperator Coopetition Cooperative game theory Dynamic inconsistency Escalation of commitment Farsightedness Game semantics Hierarchy of beliefs Imperfect information Incomplete information Information set Move by nature Mutual knowledge Non-cooperative game theory Non-credible threat Outcome Perfect information Perfect recall Ply Preference Rationality Sequential game Simultaneous action selection Spite Strategic complements Strategic dominance Strategic form Strategic interaction Strategic move Strategy Subgame Succinct game Topological game Tragedy of the commons Uncorrelated asymmetry Equilibrium concepts Backward induction Bayes correlated equilibrium Bayesian efficiency Bayesian game Bayesian Nash equilibrium Berge equilibrium Bertrand–Edgeworth model Coalition-proof Nash equilibrium Core Correlated equilibrium Cursed equilibrium Edgeworth price cycle Epsilon-equilibrium Gibbs equilibrium Incomplete contracts Inequity aversion Individual rationality Iterated elimination of dominated strategies Markov perfect equilibrium Mertens-stable equilibrium Nash equilibrium Open-loop model Pareto efficiency Payoff dominance Perfect Bayesian equilibrium Price of anarchy Program equilibrium Proper equilibrium Quantal response equilibrium Quasi-perfect equilibrium Rational agent Rationalizability Rationalizable strategy Satisfaction equilibrium Self-confirming equilibrium Sequential equilibrium Shapley value Strong Nash equilibrium Subgame perfect equilibrium Trembling hand equilibrium Strategies Appeasement Bid shading Cheap talk Collusion Commitment device De-escalation Deterrence Escalation Fictitious play Focal point Grim trigger Hobbesian trap Markov strategy Max-dominated strategy Mixed strategy Pure strategy Tit for tat Win–stay, lose–switch Games All-pay auction Battle of the sexes Nash bargaining game Bertrand competition Blotto game Centipede game Coordination game Cournot competition Deadlock Dictator game Trust game Diner's dilemma Dollar auction El Farol Bar problem Electronic mail game Gift-exchange game Guess 2/3 of the average Keynesian beauty contest Kuhn poker Lewis signaling game Matching pennies Obligationes Optional prisoner's dilemma Pirate game Prisoner's dilemma Public goods game Rendezvous problem Rock paper scissors Stackelberg competition Stag hunt Traveler's dilemma Ultimatum game Volunteer's dilemma War of attrition Theorems Arrow's impossibility theorem Aumann's agreement theorem Brouwer fixed-point theorem Competitive altruism Folk theorem Gibbard–Satterthwaite theorem Gibbs lemma Glicksberg's theorem Kakutani fixed-point theorem Kuhn's theorem One-shot deviation principle Prim–Read theory Rational ignorance Rational irrationality Sperner's lemma Zermelo's theorem Subfields Algorithmic game theory Behavioral game theory Behavioral strategy Compositional game theory Contract theory Drama theory Graphical game theory Heresthetic Mean-field game theory Negotiation theory Quantum game theory Social software Key people Albert W. Tucker Alvin E. Roth Amos Tversky Antoine Augustin Cournot Ariel Rubinstein David Gale David K. Levine David M. Kreps Donald B. Gillies Drew Fudenberg Eric Maskin Harold W. Kuhn Herbert Simon Herbert Scarf Hervé Moulin Jean Tirole Jean-François Mertens Jennifer Tour Chayes Ken Binmore Kenneth Arrow Leonid Hurwicz Lloyd Shapley Martin Shubik Melvin Dresher Merrill M. Flood Olga Bondareva Oskar Morgenstern Paul Milgrom Peyton Young Reinhard Selten Robert Aumann Robert Axelrod Robert B. Wilson Roger Myerson Samuel Bowles Suzanne Scotchmer Thomas Schelling William Vickrey Combinatorial game theory Core concepts Combinatorial explosion Determinacy Disjunctive sum First-player and second-player win Game complexity Game tree Impartial game Misère Partisan game Solved game Sprague–Grundy theorem Strategy-stealing argument Zugzwang Games Chess Chomp Clobber Cram Domineering Hackenbush Nim Notakto Subtract a square Sylver coinage Toads and Frogs Mathematical tools Mex Nimber On Numbers and Games Star Surreal number Winning Ways for Your Mathematical Plays Search algorithms Alpha–beta pruning Expectiminimax Minimax Monte Carlo tree search Negamax Paranoid algorithm Principal variation search Key people Claude Shannon John Conway John von Neumann Evolutionary game theory Core concepts Bishop–Cannings theorem Evolution and the Theory of Games Evolutionarily stable set Evolutionarily stable state Evolutionarily stable strategy Replicator equation Risk dominance Stochastically stable equilibrium Weak evolutionarily stable strategy Games Chicken Stag hunt Applications Cultural group selection Fisher's principle Mobbing Terminal investment hypothesis Key people John Maynard Smith Robert Axelrod Mechanism design Core concepts Algorithmic mechanism design Bayesian-optimal mechanism Incentive compatibility Market design Monotonicity Participation constraint Revelation principle Strategyproofness Vickrey–Clarke–Groves mechanism Theorems Myerson–Satterthwaite theorem Revenue equivalence Applications Digital goods auction Knapsack auction Truthful cake-cutting Other topics Bertrand paradox Chainstore paradox Computational complexity of games Helly metric Multi-agent system PPAD-complete Mathematics portal Commons WikiProject Category Retrieved from " https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Ambiguity_aversion&oldid=1292180050 " Categories : Game theory Expected utility Hidden categories: CS1 maint: multiple names: authors list Articles with short description Short description is different from Wikidata This page was last edited on 25 May 2025, at 16:29 (UTC) .

Text is available under the Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 License ;
additional terms may apply. By using this site, you agree to the Terms of Use and Privacy Policy . Wikipedia® is a registered trademark of the Wikimedia Foundation, Inc.

, a non-profit organization.

Privacy policy About Wikipedia Disclaimers Contact Wikipedia Code of Conduct Developers Statistics Cookie statement Mobile view Search Search Toggle the table of contents Ambiguity aversion 2 languages Add topic

